Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop Management  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty 
Agriculture and Food Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Week 1  
Lecture 01  
General Overview of ML and DL Applications in Agriculture 
Welcome friends to this NPTEL O nline Certification Course of Machine Learning  for Soil 
and Crop Management. And today, we are going to start our first week of lectures and today 
will be our first lecture and in this lecture, we are going to talk about the general overview  of 
Machine Learning  and D eep L earning A pplication in A griculture.  
(Refer Slide Time:  00:52)  
 
So, in this week 1, we are going to cover these following concepts. First of all, we are going 
to discuss about the Big Data  and its storage aspects. Then, we ar e going to talk about 
Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence in brief and D eep Learning and what are the 
interconnection between these 3 terms ; Machine Learning,  Artificial Intelligence and D eep 
Learning and then, we are also going to touch some aspects  of Artificial Intelligence, their 
advantages and some disadvantages.  
Also, we are going to talk about some traditional uses of Machine Learning , where we 
generally use Machine Learning?  Some sectors where we use Machine Learning and then we 
will start the  different types of Machine Learning  approaches . We are going to talk about , we 
are going to basically give the overview of supervised method of Machine Learning  and then 
we are going to talk about the unsupervised method of Machine Learning . Then, we are going to talk about the semi -supervised areas of Machine Learning and also , we 
are going to discuss the r einforcement learning. Also, when we come when we complete 
these discussion or overview of these supervised, unsupervised, semi -supervised and 
reinforc ed learning, we are going to talk about the application why the application of 
Machine Learning  in agriculture is , is a necessity, we are going to discuss that . 
Then we are going to define what is precision agriculture ? What are the different components 
of precision agriculture ? And we are going to also talk about the Machine Learning for crop 
management , what are the different application of Machine Learning of crop management 
like crop yield prediction, then crop quality identification and then weed detec tion, so disease 
detection , we are going to talk about this, we are going to have a brief overview of this with 
some examples from different sources.  
Also, we are going to talk about the Machine Learning,  how Machine Learning  can be used 
in soil management . In terms of use of some sensors for rapid analysis of soil properties , also, 
we are going to talk about how image processing and data or deep learning can be used for 
predicting different types of soil properties.  
And also, we are going to talk about the  sub hyperspectral remote sensing and how Machine 
Learning  in combination of hyperspectral remote sensing can be used for different types of 
soil management practices. So, these are the major concepts which we are going to cover in our first lecture first week. So, remember that these will give you the basic overview. 
However, in subsequent weeks we are going to discuss them in details. (Refer Slide Time:  04:33)  
 
So, let us move to these are the some of the keywords which we are going to discuss, like 
Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning , regression , classification, supervised, 
unsupervised, reinforced learning , then precision agriculture , crop management , yield 
prediction, crop quality, soil management in this week one of lectures.  
(Refer Slide Time:  04:52)  
 
Now, let us start with the first important description that is Big Data . Now, what is Big Data ? 
Big Data  is a field that analyse  and systematically extract information from different sources 
and these data are too large or complex to be dealt wit h by traditional data processing application software , so we require special storages  or special application or  special software 
to handle this data . 
This data is huge data set and it requires huge amount of storage and it is not possible with 
the traditio nal methodology to handle this huge amount of data, we need some kind of help 
from the machine or help from several softwares for dealing with this kind of data. So, 
nowadays we are seeing the application of Big Data  in different sectors. For example, in 
genomics, in genetics research, we have seen the application of Big Data  for identifying or 
for explaining different gene related aspects.  
And also, in case of soil also, you can see that nowadays, Big Data  are used for creating the 
different types of manag ement decisions, especially in digital soil mapping. So, we are going 
to discuss those later in this in this course, but remember, the Big Data  is a huge and complex 
data, which cannot be dealt with traditional data processing application software.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:41)  
 
So, Big Data  has already I told you that it requires large volume, it has a large volume of data 
and which is produced by different types of digital technologies, this is important . Big Data  is 
created by different types of digital tec hnologies and it requires large storage capabilities in 
addition to editing analys ing and interpreting. So, interpretation of the Big Data , it has a 
considerable potential , why we generally nowadays more rely towards Big Data?  
So, interpretation if we inte rpret the Big Data  correctly, that has huge potential to add value 
for society, environment and decision makers and different types of Machine Learning  application or deep learning application help us to analys e these Big Data  for correct decision 
making i n different applications. 
(Refer Slide Time:  07:44)  
 
 
But, as I have told you, that nowadays this the storage of the data is an issue, because Big 
Data requires  big volume of storage space. So, of course, the digital storage application , the 
importance o f digital storage ha s becoming an important paramount issue. So, you can see 
this graph or this diagram shows a evolution of the analog and digital storage media or 
storage capacity starting from 1986 to 2007, it is a little bit old up to 2007. 
So, you can see that during 1986 most of the storage system or storage capacity was analog 
and when starting from 1993 w e have seen some emergence of digital storage and in 2000 starting from 2000 there has been a boom of use of different types of digital storage. So, 
boom of use of digital storage, and you can see that the use of analog storage continuously 
reduced after the year 2000 a nd in the year 2007.  
We can see that 94  percent the storage capacity are being utilized by digital storage, whereas, 
only few amount , only 6  percent  is being used by analog storage. So, the 2002 is considered 
as the beginning of the digital age from where we have seen a  huge amount of increase in 
digital storage device. So, in where in 1986 w e have seen only 1 percent  digital storage . 
In 1993 i t went up to 3 percent  and in 2000 it is 25 percent  and in  the year 2002 w e have 
seen 50  percent  of the data being stored in digital storage and in the year 2007 w e have seen 
94 percent  of the data was stored  in digital storage and nowadays in the year 2021 we have 
seen almost 100 percent  of the data are stored in digital storage and very few amount of data 
is stored nowadays in paper , film and audiotape,  vinyls  devices.  
So, we can see th e temporal changes of , the temporal progress of digital stor age and shifting 
from different types of analog video tapes or VHS tapes to the computer servers and then 
digital tape, DVDs, blu- rays, and hard discs and  application of them. So, nowadays, Big 
Datas are being saved in different types of servers and also i n Cloud Platform a nd also, we 
can save it in different types of hard disk.  
So, these Big Data storage as more and more application of Big Data we have seen in 
different sectors, there has been a  tremendous shift of different storage devices also,  
simultane ously we have seen . (Refer Slide Time:  11:48)  
 
So, what are the challenges of the Big Data ? We have seen the advantages of Big Data , but 
what are the challenges of the Big Data , the challenges of the Big Data , on account of their s o 
called 5-V requiremen ts. What are the 5- V requirements ? 5-V requirements is volume, we 
have already discussed it , then variety, different sources of Big Data , different digital sources, 
from where the Big Data  is generated, the velocity, veracity or accuracy and finally, value . 
So, these 5 are the major important aspects or challenges of Big Data  and the conventional 
data processing technique are incapable of meeting or  these 5 challenges of the Big Data  and 
as a result, there has been emergence of Machine Learning  application, because Machine 
Learning  is the solution for these challenges of the Big Data . (Refer Slide Time:  12:56)  
 
So, now, before we discuss in details about the Machine Learning , let us have a brief 
overview of A rtificial Intelligence also . What is artificial intelligence? What are some of the 
application of A rtificial Intelligence ? And then what are the advantages and disadvantages of 
AI we are going to discuss. 
(Refer Slide Time:  13:25 ) 
 
So, Artificial Intelligence is the theory and development of computer s ystems which are able 
to perform task normally requiring human intelligence , such as  visual perception and then 
speech recognition, decision making and transition between the languages , when you use a chatbot , that is an example of AI  system. So, here you can see some examples. For example,  
as an web search, Google is an AI system also.  
Also, some recommendation systems are examples like YouTube, Amazon, Netflix and also 
you can see that there are some human speech understanding for example, Siri and Alexa , 
you are quite familiar nowadays with these and finally, you know also if you consider the 
Tesla self-driving car, these are also an example of AI agent , which shows the AI 
applications . 
(Refer Slide Time:  14:40)   
 
Now, so, how does the AI system works? S o, AI system basically work by ingesting large 
amount of labelled  training data, analysing the data for correlations and patterns using 
Machine Learning  and using these patterns to make prediction about the future states. So, not 
only it accepts data from different sources and analyse it, it also takes decision resembling 
human intelligence that is why it is called artificial intelligence , to make predictions about the 
future states or  also take intelligent decisions.  
So, that is why it is called Artificial Intelligence and the whole thing is being modulated or 
operated by these artificial machine systems. So, that is why it is called the Artificial 
Intelligence . Now, in this way for example, when we talk about a chatbot , this way a chatbot 
that is fed examp les of text chats can learn to produce  lifelike exchanges with people , just 
like when we talk about each other .  When you feed these examples of textures in a chatbot then, it learns from there or an image 
recognition tool can learn to identify and describe objects in images by reviewing millions of 
examples.  So, when there are millions and millions of images, this  Artificial Intelligence  
system can scan them and identify the specific objects from them.   
So, that is an example of what is Artificial Intelligence or identify specialist feature which we 
want to detect. So, it is called Artificial Intelligence . 
(Refer Slide Time:  16:36)  
 
So, these terms Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  are very much related and 
generally Artificial Intelligence depends on three cognitive skills . The first cognitive skill is 
learning, the second cognitive skill is reasoning and third word is self -correction. So, that is 
why not only learning which is which is which is generally a statistical learning or Machine 
Learn ing, but also it helps in reasoning and also it, it can self -correct itself.  
So, that is why it is called Artificial Intelligence . Sometime people misunderstand that 
Machine Learning  and Artificial Intelligence are same.  No, there is a distinct difference.  
Artificial Intelligence uses some agents , whereas  Machine Learning  is more or less a 
statistical procedure.  
So, an Artificial Intelligence has a more broader term, which can help not only, which 
signifies not only the learning of from Big Data , but also it can reason and also it can self -
correct for future actions.  (Refer Slide Time:  17:45)  
 
Now, there are different types of advantages and disadvantages of Artificial Intelligence . First 
of all, it is very beneficial for detail -oriented  jobs. When you ta lk about some detail -oriented 
jobs, Artificial Intelligence is  very-very effective. And of course, when we use Artificial 
Intelligence , it reduces the time of data heavy jobs .  
We do not now have to do the data analysis using the traditional methodology of  pen and 
paper, it can be automatically done by some softwares or by agents, Artificial Intelligence 
agents.  So, that is why Artificial Intelligence can reduce the amount of stress for the data 
heavy jobs and it can handle that huge data using Machine Lear ning and also it offers 
consistent result this is another very good thing.  
The consistent result is important in several sectors, where a small amount of mistake can 
have greater implication. So, Artificial Intelligence can help in getting the consistent result. 
Finally, Artificial Intelligence power virtual agents can , are they are very much efficient and 
they are always available. So, these are the four major advantages when we talk about the 
artificial intelligence.  (Refer Slide Time:  19:18)  
 
Now, apa rt from advantages the Artificial Intelligence it has some inherent disadvantages 
also, what are these disadvantages ? First of all, it is expensive or costly a nd secondly, it 
requires deep technical knowledge to handle or to build a AI agent. So, it has , we have very , 
still now we have very limited experts to build the AI based tools.  
It is very specialized, and it required a deep technical knowledge to interpret the results or to 
analy se using artificial intelligence.  And finally, it lacked t he generalization from one test to 
another , this is another major drawback of the  artificial intelligence. So, we have covered 
what is Big Data ? What are the storage issues ? And what are the evolution of storage for last 
30 to 40 years .  
And then we have learned about what is Artificial Intelligence?  What are their applications ? 
What are their advantages and disadvantages ? And what is the relationship between Artificial 
Intelligence and Machine Learning . (Refer Slide Time:  20:35)  
 
Now, let us focus on Machine Learning now, since it is the major focus of this course . Now, 
Machine Learning  is a branch of Artificial Intelligence. R emember, I am again focusing that 
Artificial Intelligence is a broader term ; a subset of Artificial Intelligence is Machine 
Learning . Now, Mach ine Learning  is a branch of Artificial Intelligence and computer 
science, which focuses on the use of data and algorithms to imitate the way that human learn 
gradually improving its accuracy.  
Again, these Machine Learning  learns using statistical methods just like the human learns 
from the data and gradually it improves its accuracy. Remember one thing that Machine 
Learning  is also known as sometimes statistical learning, because most of the procedure 
which is employed Machine Learning  or statistical proced ure. (Refer Slide Time:  21:41)  
 
Now, who coined this term Machine Learning?  This term Machine Learning was coined in 
1959 by Arthur Samuel , an American IBM worker and pioneer in the field of computer 
gaming and Artificial Intelligence . So, he first coine d this term Machine Learning  and we 
will talk about the objectives of Machine Learning. What are the objectives of Machine 
Learning ? 
The objectives of Machine Learning  are mainly 2, first of all, to classify the data based on 
models, which have been developed and secondly, to make the prediction for future outcomes 
based on these models. So, these are the two major objectives for Machine Learning . First, 
classification of the data based on models which they have developed and prediction. So, Machine Learnin g can be broadly classified into prediction and classification. Let us see the 
difference later.  (Refer Slide Time:  22:55 ) 
 
Now, again, if we want to know the interrelationship between D eep Learning , Machine 
Learning  and Artificial Intelligence , then thi s figure gives you a better understanding. 
Machine Learning  learns and predicts based on passive observations, whereas, artificial 
intelligence implies an agent interacting with the environment to learn and take action that 
maximizes its chance of successf ully achieving its goal. So, this is the difference . 
I have already told you that Artificial Intelligence is always agent base and it interacts with 
the environment with the help of Machine Learning  to learn and take actions that maximizes 
its chance of su ccessfully achieving its goal in future , because it can self -correct itself. So, 
you can see that Machine Learning  is a subset of Artificial Intelligence and deep learning is a 
further subset of Machine Learning . (Refer Slide Time:  24:15)  
 
Now, what is d eep learning, deep learning for example, nowadays we also use a buzzword 
called  artificial neural network , convolution neural network, recurrent neural network. So, 
these are all deep learning methods. So, what is a deep learning , which is further a subset  of 
Machine Learning .  
So, it is a part of a broader family of Machine Learning  methods based on artificial neural 
network with representation learning. And this learning can be supervised, semi supervised or 
unsupervised. So, what we have learned that dee p learning is a subset of Machine Learning . 
And Machine Learning  is a subset of our Artificial Intelligence.  
(Refer Slide Time:  25:02)  
 So, if we want to contrast the traditional programming and Machine Learning  using a very 
simple difference, this gives  you the basic understanding. So, we can see here that in case of 
traditional programming and both the Machine Learning, I mean , both traditional 
programming and Machine Learning  we require computers. Now, in case of traditional 
programming, we are inputti ng the data as well as the program and the computer gives us the 
output. So, this is the traditional programming, but what about the Machine Learning ?  
In case of Machine Learning , we input data also we input output. So, apart from data or input, 
we also i ncorporate the output and it selects the most suitable program. So, this is the 
difference between a traditional programming and Machine Learning . So, in Machine 
Learning , it is not a simple programming traditional programming, where we already, we 
incorporate the data as well as a program which you want to run and it gives us the output 
based on that program. 
However, in case of Machine Learning, that Machine Learning involves inputting both data 
as well as output, the output could be either labelled  or unlabelled  and it selects the program 
for analysing  the data itself. So, this is the difference between traditional programming and 
Machine Learning . So, guys in this first lecture, we have so, far discussed some broader 
terms, we have tried to discuss brief ly what is artificial intelligence ? 
What is Machine Learning ? What is deep learning in broadly and we try to see their 
interrelationship and we have seen the difference between traditional programming and 
Machine Learning . So, let us wrap up our first lect ure here. In the next lecture will be more , 
we will  be talking about different types of Machine Learning  like supervised learning and 
also what is regression ? What is classification?  
What are the supervised learning what are unsupervised learning and so on so forth. So, I 
hope that you have learned something new in this lecture. Let us meet in our next lecture to 
discuss different types of Machine Learning  approaches in details. Thank you very much.  