Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop  Management  
Professor Somsubhra  Chakraborty 
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute  of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 15  
Principal  Component  Analysis  and Regressio n Applications  in Agriculture (Contd.)  
Welcome  friends  to this NPTEL online  certifica tion course  of Machine  Learning for Soil and 
Crop Management  and this is week  3 and we are at our lecture 15. So, this is the fifth and 
final lecture of week 3. And in this week  we are talking  about  the Princi pal Component  
Analysis  and Regression  Applications  in Agriculture .  
So, in our previous  four lectures  of this week , we have discussed , what  is principal  
component  analysis , what  are the, how principle component  analysis  can be utilized  for 
dimensionality  reduction, how to calculate the principal  components  and then what are the 
score plots , what  are the loading plots  and what  is biplot  PCA  biplot.  
We have also seen, what  is p c screeplot  and from the pc screeplot , how we can calculate the 
number  of importa nt princi ple components . And based  on the number  of princi ple 
components , how we can go with the smaller , small, short , smaller  dimension, I would say, 
for repre senting the  features  into pc base, space bas e.  
And also we have  seen the principal  comp onent  regression , how to use the, what  is the 
principal  component  regression , how we can use the pc’s for principal  component  regression , 
we have  seen. We have also seen partial  least squares  regressi on, how it differs  from  ordinary  
least square s regression  of multiple  linear  regression  and principle  component  regression , 
how we can calculate the  latent factors  or latent variables  of PLSR,  we have  also seen .  
And then we have  also seen the the application  of PLSR  for different  crop and soil properties . 
In our last lecture , we have discussed  about  the classification  and regression  tree, which  is 
one of the importan t machine- learning algorithm. We have  seen how to build a CART  
algorithm  and then  what  is the recursive parti tioning, what  is prunning we  have  seen .  
To fit the, to avoid the overfit ting, we have seen the different  types  of impurity  measures  like 
entropy then Gini Index  and how we use them  for recursive  partitioning  in CART  we have  
also discussed . And ultimately  we have seen some  examples  of crop and soil application  of 
CART .  (Refer Slide Time: 03:06)  
 
So, today in this lecture, we are going to discuss  two widely  used machine- learning  
algorithms  in soil and crop based  research  and these are Random  Forest  and Support  Vector  
Machine or  in other  words  Support  Vector  Regression .  
So, today we are going to discus s in this lecture random  forest , what is random  forest , what  
are the  features  of random  forest , how  it differs  from  decision  tree, what  are the  advantag es of 
random  forest  and also we are going to discus s, what  is support  vector  machine or support  
vector  regression . And then we are going to see some  examples  of soil and crop application  
of both these algorithms .  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:35)  
 So, some  keywords  are there like Random  Forest , then ntree, then Mtry , then SVM,  
Hyperplane  we are going  to discuss .  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 03:44 ) 
 
So, let us see what  is a Random  Forest.  Random  Forest  is basically  an ensemble learning  
method for classification  and also regression  that operates  by constructing a multitude  of 
decision  trees  at training  time, which  are later aggregated  to give one single  prediction for 
each observation in  the data set .  
So, what  happens  in this random  forest  algor ithm, we  generally  grow  multiple  trees , hundreds  
and even  thousand number  of trees, just like we have  seen the discussion  on the trees , so, 
these individual  trees  are being grown in the random  forest  algorithm . And then we either  
take the majority  of the classified  classes  from  those  individual  trees , by voting as our final 
predictio n, or in case of regression, what  we do, we take the average of the prediction from  
the individual  trees .  
So, you can see by using a multiple  weak  learners , we are getting  a strong learner . So, 
random  forest  is a very very robust  and I would say it is a very widely  used method in the 
machine- learning domain and in many  domain of science, this application  of random forest  
has been  widely  accepted .  (Refer Slide Time: 05:19)  
 
So, this random  forest , since we are also using this random  forest  algorithm  extensively in 
soil and crop studies , we are going to discuss  this in detail . So, how this, the question  comes  
to our mind , why we call it a random  forest ? Remember  that using the bootstrapping;  we are 
doing the  random  sampling  from  the training  data set.  
Suppose , we have  300 point s in the data set, so, we do the bootstra pping or bootstrap samples  
from  the 300 data set. So, it is a random  sampling  of the training  data points  for building the 
trees  and the number  of trees  which  varies  from  hundreds  to thousa nd, we define in r, by this 
parameter  called  ntree, ntree stands for the  number  of trees .  
So, for building this individual  tree, we take a bootstra p sample  from  the original  data set, 
and this bootstrap sample,  as you know  it is a random  selection  with replacement . So, this is 
one level  of randomness  in this whole  algorithm , sampling , random  sampling  of the training  
data points . Now, once  we have  sample  randomly, then in the tree, we use the random  subset  
of features , even  there are features .  
For each sample  we have suppose , for all the samples  suppose , we have  100 features  or 200 
features.  So, again  from  the feature space also, we are selecting  a random  subset  of features  
for splitting  the node . So, this is basically  denoted  by this term in r called  mtry. So, generally  
for classification  problem  it is a square  root of M and in case of, if M greater , capital  M is the 
total number  of features , it will be  square  root.  Generally , in case of square  root of M in case of classification  problem  and in case of 
regres sion problem , generally , we take M by 3 number  of features  randomly. So, you can see 
here, we are, in two stages , we are sampling  randomly. For first of all we are randomly  
sampling  from  the training  data points  for building the each of the tree and we are building  
number  of trees .  
And also we are, for building this individual  tree, we are selecting  random  subset  of features  
for the, while we are splitting  the nodes . So, what  happens?  So, basically  we forms  lots of 
decision  trees  with random  selection  of samples  and random  selection  of features . So, it 
provides  the class  of dependent  variable based  on the many  trees  and in case of regression  
trees , it is  a random  forest  regression .  
It gives  us the prediction for these individual  trees  and then we take an average  for that. So, 
you can see these trees  are random  trees , because  we are sampling  randomly bootstraps  
samples  for building a tree and then the feature which  we are using to for splitting  the nodes , 
are also random ly selected . So, that is why this tree which are being formed  are known as the 
random  trees  and when  there are multiple  number  of random  trees , hundr ed to thousand  
number  of random  trees , we call it random  forest .  
Just like in a forest  you can see multiple  hundreds  and thousands  of trees , so similarly  here in 
random  forest  algor ithm also, we are building these trees . And since  these  trees  are random  
then thereby , therefore we are considering this as a random  forest. So, this is why we call this 
algorithm  as random  forest  algorithm .  (Refer Sl ide Time: 09:09)  
 
So, a simplified  representation  of the random  forest , you can see here, suppose , this is the 
data set and from  this data set, we take the bootstrap  sample  and fit the number  of trees , here,  
you can see this is tree 1, tree 2, tree 3 and up to tree n. So, n number  of trees  we can build. 
And suppose  if it is a classification  problem , where  our target  variable is a categorical  
variable, then you can see, our final class  is suppose  A and final class  is B from  tree 2 and for 
example final  class for tree n is  class  B.  
So, after we get the prediction  of the classes  from  these individual  trees , we take a majority  
vote. And the majority  vote based  on this majority  voting, we select the final class . In case of 
regression  tree, what  we do? We take the prediction for these individual trees  and then we 
average it. So, that will be the final outcome  for an unknown sample . So, this is the 
prediction. So, this  is how  this random  forest algorithm generally  grows . (Refer  Slide  Time: 10:14)  
 
Now,  why random  forest  is widely  accepted ? Why it is more  robust  than the single  decision  
tree?  There are three  reasons . First of all most  of the tree can provide . There are two 
assum ptions,  major  assumptions;  first of all, we assume  that most  of the tree can provide  
correct prediction of  class  for mo st part of the data.  
This is the first assumption of random  forest , the second  assumptio n of random  forest  is, the 
trees  are making mistakes  at different  places . First of all again , most  of the tree can provide  
correct  prediction  of the class  for most  part of the data and the trees , if they are doing also 
mista ke, they  are doing the  mistake  at different  places .  
Since there, they are being built by taking the random  samples  and also using the random  
features , so that is why the ultimate , even  this weak learner , ultimate , when  we are getting  the 
values  from  all the indivi dual trees  then it becomes  much  more robust  and strong. So, strong 
fundamental  concept  is there , when  a large number  of relatively  uncorrelated  models  or trees 
operat es as a committee , it will outperform  any other  individual  consti tuent  models .  
So, here we can see, here, large number  of uncorrelated  models  are operating  as a comm ittee 
and then ultimately  it is outperforming all other  models  which are available . So, this is how 
the random  forest  model  is widely  accepted  is more  robust  than other models  and it has also 
very good prediction performance also.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 11:59 ) 
 
So, what  is the summary  of random  forest ? The summary  of random  forest  is, it basically  
combines  hundreds  and thousa nds of decision  trees . It trains  one on a slightly  different  set of 
observation , because we are taking the bootstrap  samples  and then splitting  nodes  in each tree 
considering a limited  number  of features  and then the final prediction of the random  forest  
are made,  when  it is a regression  problem , the final prediction for the random  forest  are made 
by averaging  the prediction  from  the each individual  tree. So, this is the summa ry of random  
forest .  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 12:34 ) 
 Now,  what  is the difference  between  a decision  tree and the random  forest ? So, decision  tree 
generally  formu lates a set of rules  to make  the predictions  using all the features . We have  
seen that in our previous  lecture. How they are setting up the rules based  on the combi nation  
of the feature and their values . Whereas  random  forest  randomly selects  observations  and 
features  to build several  decision  trees  and then  averaging the  results .  
So, of course , in case of single  decision  tree that suffers  from over fitting , however  the 
random  forest  prevents  overfit ting by selecting  random  subset  of the features  and building 
smaller  trees  using the subsets . So, this is the differe nce between  a decision tree and random  
forest  and this is why  random  fores t is more robust  than  that of a decision  tree.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 13:32 ) 
 
So, what  are the pros and cons of random  forest ? So, this random  forest  can be used for 
classif ication , both, classification  and regression  problem  and also this random  forest  can 
select  the relative  importance  of the features  or variables  or predicted  variables  in any 
classification  or regression  problem . And then the hyperparameters  are easy to understand  
and produce  the strong prediction performance.  
And it also prevents  the overfittin g, as I have  discussed  in our previous  slide . However , there  
is one drawback  in random  forest  that large number , when  you grow  the large  numbe r of 
trees , that sometimes  slows  the model . So, this is one of the drawback  of random  forest  and 
model . But, overa ll random  forest  is widely  used in as a machine- learning tool in soil and 
crop domain of  agriculture .  (Refer  Slide  Time: 14:42 ) 
 
So, let us see another  important , very important  machine- learning  algorithm  called  Support  
Vector  Machine  or SVM . So, what  is SVM?  So, SVM  is an algorithm  which  construct  a set 
of hyperplanes  in a high or indefinitely , indefinite  dimensional  place or infinite  dimensional  
place, which  can be used as a classification  or regressio n. Again  just like random  forest,  just 
like classif ication  regression  tree, we  can use this SVM  for both classif ication  and regression .  
And when  we do the regression , we specifically  call it SVR  or Support  Vector  Regressio n. 
So, what  happens  in this SVM?  So, this SVM  basicall y tries to create a hyperplane  in multi-
dimensional  data set for classification  regression . And how this hyperplanes  are being  done ? 
Hyperplanes  are being drawn  to maintain  the largest  distan ce from  the nearest  data points . So, 
largest  distance from  the nearest  data points  of any class .  
So, they are called the functional  margin . So, as again , the hyperplane  the, a good separation  
in case of hyperplane  is achieved  that has the largest  distance  to the nearest  training  data 
point of any class , I will show  you in our next slide . So, the larger the marg in, the lower  the 
generalization  error of the classifier . So, this is how, this hyperplanes  are being drawn  in case 
of support  vector  machine .  (Refer Slide Time: 16:29)  
 
So, here you can see here, two features  are here x1 and x2 and these are the different  types  of 
soil, different  for example two differen t types  of samples . So, we can build hyperplane  in 
different  fashion. We can build a hyper plane , we can build  in hyperplane  here, we can also 
build hyperplane  here .  
However,  this one is being selected  because  that this hyperplane  is creating the or showing 
the largest  distance from  this nearest  samples belong to a specific class . So, you can see here,  
we are maintaining  the maximal margin  using this red hyperplane , however  for all other  
possibilities  we are not getting  this maximal distance between  the samples  belong to two 
different  classes .  
So, the idea, the basic idea for sub SVM  is to draw  this kind of hyperplane , which  can divide  
or which  can maintain  the maximum margin  between  the samp les belongs  to different  groups . 
And these samples  which  are present  along the boundary of the margin  are known as the 
support  vector , ok. So, this  is how  the name c omes the support  vector  name origina tes.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:07)  
 
So, here you can see in this picture  this is the, this is again  the hyper plane  and this is the 
maximum margin  linear  classifier , is the linear  classifier  which  shows  the maximum margin  
and you can see these are the support  vectors . These are the support  vectors , these are the 
data points  that the margin  pushes  up against .  
So, here this is the simplest type of support  vector  machine  and we call it a Linear  SVM  or 
LSVM.  Now, the objective  of support  vector  machine is to find a hyperplane  in an n 
dimension space  that distinctly  classifie s the data points . And what  are the support  vectors ? I 
have  already  discuss ed, support  vectors  are the data points  on either  side of the hyperplane  
that are closest  to the hyperplane .  
So, you can see here, this is the hyperplane  and the either  side of the hyperplane these are the 
closest  point . So, that  is why they  are known as  the support  vector .  (Refer  Slide  Time: 19:10 ) 
 
Now,  this is another  representation  of the support  vector  regression . Now, support  vector 
regression  is a supervised learn ing algorithm  that is used to predic t the discrete values  and 
these SVR  gene rally use the same principle  as like as SVM s.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:31)  
  
Now, the basic idea behind SVR  is to find the best fit line or hyperplane  that has the 
maximum number  of points  and the larger  the margin  the lower  the general ization  error  of the 
classifier . So, this  is in nutshell  about  the Support  Vector  Regression.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:52)  
 
Now there  are certain  benefits  and disadvantag es of support  vector  regression . The benefits  
are given here in blue text and the disadva ntages  are given  here in the red text. You can see 
that the support  vector  regression  is robust  to outlier . It can help in easy implementation  of 
the, it can be easily  implemented . This support  vector regression  algorithm  can be easily 
implemented  and it generally  gives  us the higher  prediction  accuracy  also.  However , there are some  disadvantages  also. First of all it is not very much  suitabl e for a 
very large  data set and if the data is very very noisy then also it does not perform  well and 
finally  it under  performs  when  the number  of featur es are more  than the number  of training  
samples . So, we have  to take care of this consideration while  trading with the support  vector  
regression .  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 20:49 ) 
 
Now,  let us see some  example of random  forest  and support  vector  regression  based  
applic ation  for soil and crop. Here in this research , you can see made by Rawal  et al in 2019.  
They  have used the different , four differe nt models  like here you can see, it is a regression  
tree model , multiple  linear regression  model , generalized  additiv e model  and random  forest  
model  to measure the base saturation  percentage of the soil based  on the portabl e x-Ray 
fluorescence spectrometer .  
So, that shows  the application  and they used the random  forest . The random  forest  gives  the 
best prediction accuracy . So, the random  forest  shows , visually  also, it can be seen that 
random  forest  is giving the best accuracy . So, that shows  the application  of random  forest  for 
soil base saturation  percentage measurement . Base saturation  percentage generally , gives  an 
idea of  the important  nutrient  content  in the soil.  
So, just like at a (())(21:55)  capacity . So, here we can see, using the elemental  data values  
coming from  any proximal  sensor , if we can use the support  random  forest  regression , we can 
predict  the best saturation  percentage of  the soil, non- invasively using this  method.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 22:17 ) 
 
Another  application  from  Gorthi et al in 2021,  they have used image derived  indices  to 
predict  the soil organic  matter , using multiple  machine learning algorithms  in two diffe rent 
levels . And this type of construc tion is known as the Tree Based  Pipeline  Optimization  Tool  
algorithm . So, TPOT  tool, algorithm  tool.  
So, here you can see, there are two levels , in the level  0, in the level  0, there are random 
forest  then radial  basis  functio n, support  vector  regression , the Linear  SVR , then also random  
forest . And also there are two types of data, standard  scalar  and absolute  maximum scalar  and 
using the feature space, you can see here, there  are two to three different  types  of model  here 
in the level  0.   
And the level  1 they have  tried both Ridge regression  and also AdaB oost regression . And 
ultimately  they try to predict  the organic  matter . So, this shows  the application  of both 
random forest  and support  vector  regression  for image based  prediction of soil properties . We 
are going to discuss  this research  in detail s in our upcoming weeks , when  we will discuss  the 
image  base, image  processing and  subsequent  machine  learning  algorithms .  
But here, we can at least see that using  random  forest  and support  vector  regression  in 
combination with  other machine learning algorithms; we  can predict  the soil organic  matter .  (Refer  Slide  Time: 24:04 ) 
 
Another  example of the application  of suppor t vector  regression  you can see here that using  
the diffuse  reflectance  spectroscopy,  Raj et al in 2018, they have  selected  the spectral  data, 
they have  gathered  the spectral  data from  the soil and after gathering  the spectral  data, they 
have utilized  some  indicators , they  call them variable  indicators .  
So, using the variable  indicator  suite, they have selected  a number  of spectral  variables  
instead  of taking the whole  number  of spectral  wavelengt hs from  three 350 to 2500  
nanometer , they have selected  a certain  number  of variables  or wavelengths  from  the whole  
feature space and then they have  utilized  that for developing the support  vector  regression  
model  to predict  certain  soil properties .  
So, this shows  the application  of PLSR  as well as the support  vector  regression  for soil 
property measurement .  (Refer  Slide  Time: 25:15 ) 
 
Also  we can see another  RF application , random forest  application  for soil sensor  fusion. We 
are going to discuss  sensor  fusion in our coming weeks , but remember  that when  we fuse 
multiple  sensors , sometime  we get better  accuracy  or synergistic  accuracy  than using those  
sensors  individually.  
So, here you can see, using the random  forest  algori thm, Wong et al in 2015, they have  
predicted  the total Nitrogen content  by sensor  fusion techn ologies  and also they have 
produced the total Carbon prediction also and they got acceptable accuracy  with an RPD  
value , residual  predictio n variation , residual  prediction  variation  of 2.42 and here 3.39 and 
anything which  is greater  than  2 is showing the  stable  model .  
So, they have  produced  based  on these RPD  values  they have shown that using the RF and 
using the sensor  fused  data, from  multiple  sensor, it is possible  to predi ct the total Nitrogen  
and total C arbon content  in soil.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 26:37)  
 
So, this is the construction of the sensor  fusion, another  research  being done  by Cardelli et al 
in 2017, you can see here,  that here total Carbon  and total Nitrog en that were  the target  
values . So, using the PSR,  Penalized Spine  Regression  or Partially  Squares  Regression  or 
Elastic  Net Regression , they have  tried to model  this total Carbon and total Nitrogen using  
the spectral  data and  they  have  predicted  the y.  
And ultimately  the resid ual values  were further  modeled  by random  forest  using the portable 
XRF  elemental  data and the outputs  were t he YRF . So, ultimately  the final  predicted  values  is 
the combinat ion of the prediction from  both these two algorithms . So, this is how different  
types of machine learning  algorithms  are utilized  for sensor  fusion for predicting  certain  soil 
properties .  (Refer  Slide  Time: 27:42 ) 
 
Let us see some  crop examples  also here,  you can see that people  have tried or have  tried to 
use the random  forest  and support  vector  machine  regression  for predicting  the crop height  
and maturity . This table shows  the crop height  and this table  shows  the prediction accuracy  
values  while  for predict ing the crop maturity  using different  machine learning  and deep  
learning alg orithms .  
Here DL stands  for the deep  learning  method, random  foreign  support  vector  machine and 
linear regression  both these cases . So, and also based  on different  types  of multispectral data, 
they have  collect ed different  multispectral data and they have  extracted  those  bands  of 
wavel engths  and they  calculated  some  spectral  vegetation indices  and then  WLVI  stands  for a 
combination between  spectral  bands  and vegetative indexes .  
So, they have  calculated  some  spectral  bands  and vege tative  indices  and then they try to 
predict , incorporate  them  as predictor s, input  predictors  and they  try to predict the crop  height  
as well as the crop maturity , based  on different  model s and they tried there,  and they 
compared  their accuracy  prediction accuracy . So, you can see the random  forest  and support  
vector  machines  are why  so widely  used  in crop  in and soil.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 29:13 ) 
 
Another research  was there  where Ndlovu et al in 2021, they have used the UAV images  and 
after getting  the UAV images  they have , these this is the UAV,  using  multiple  integrated  with 
the imaging  platform , ok. So, there  are different  types  of camera they have  used and they 
have  taken  the image  by flying the  UAV.  
After  getting  those  images , they have  calculated  different  types  of industrie s like NDWI,  
normalized  difference  vegetation  index, then NGRDI  that is Normalized  Difference  Green  
Red Index, then NDRE , NDVI  rededge Clgreens , Clrededge  and so on so forth . So, and these 
are their  formulas .  
After calculating  those , they predicted  the maize water  indicators , there  are different  types  of 
water  indicators  like EWT  leaf FMC  then SLA  leaf, by using different  types  of algor ithms  
like PLSR  then artificial neural  network then decision  tree, random  forest  then support  vector  
regression  and then  they tried then  compared  their  model  accuracies .  
You can see from  here, the random  forest  regression  in terms  of R-square  is getting highest  
higher  prediction accuracy  in case of EWT,  whereas  in case of FMC  again random  forest  is 
giving the highes t predict ion accuracy  and in case of SLA  also we are seeing  the random  
forest  is giving the highest  accuracy . So, you can see that why random  forest  is widely  
accepted , it is  showing higher  prediction  accuracy  for multiple  soil properties .  (Refer  Slide  Time: 31:01 ) 
 
So, these are the references  which  I have used guys . It is not possible  to cover  all the machine 
learning  approaches , because there  are multitude  of machine learning approaches  for 
regression  which  are being utilized  by the soil scientist and crop scientists for predicting  soil 
and crop properties  like generalized  additive  model , like elastic  net, like partial , like 
penali zed spline  regression , there are  multiple  types  of regressions , which  are there .  
It is not possibl e, but I try to cover  all the major machin e learning algorithms  as far as the 
predictions  as far as the regre ssions  are concerned , to discuss  like PLSR,  random  forest,  
support  vector  regression , decision  trees , we have  discussed . If time permits , we will also 
discuss  the others  in our subsequent  weeks .  
So, I hope  that you have  now some  understanding of these different  machine learning  
prediction algorithms  regression approaches  and also the principal  component  analy sis and 
how people  are using this for different  soil and crop studies . So, let us wrap  up our lecture  
here and in the next week  we will start discus sing about  different  clustering  algorithm . Thank  
you very  much .  