Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop  Management  
Professor Somsubhra  Chakraborty 
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute  of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture – 17  
Application  of Classification  and Clustering  Methods  in Agriculture (Contd.) 
Welcome friends  to this 17th lecture of NPTEL online  certification  course  of Machine Learning  
for Soil and Crop Management.  We are currently  this, in week  four,  and in this week  we are 
discussing the Application of classification  and clustering  Methods  in Agriculture . In our first 
lecture of  this week,  that is lecture 16th , we have discussed  the basics  of classification .  
What is a classifier?  What  is the basic  difference  between  a classification  and clustering  
problem ? Also, we have  discussed  the linear  discriminant analysis  which  is 1 of the widely  
accepted  or utilized  linear  classification  problem.  So, today, we are going  to discuss  some  other  
linear  discriminant, linear  classification  problems.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 01:29)  
 
So, these are the major  concepts  which  we are going to cover  today. We are going to first cover  
the logistic  regression , and then we are going  to see what  logistic  function is. Then, we are going  
to see how to interpret  the coefficients  of a logistic  regression.  And then we are going to discuss  
another  very important  classification  algorithm  which  is nonlinear  classification  is kNN or K 
nearest  neighbor  classification.  So, let  us start  with  the logistic  regression .  (Refer  Slide  Time: 02:15)  
 
Of course,  some  of the important  keywords  for these, for this lecture is logistic  regression, then 
odds  ratio we are going to learn . What  is odds  ratio? We are going to, we are going to learn  what  
is kNN,  we are going to learn  some  important  classification  metrics  like recall , Kappa  coefficient  
RLC  curve, so  we are going to  discuss  all these.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 02:45)  
 
Now, what  is the logistic  regression ? So, logistic  regression  is a although it is a digression, it is 
can be used for classification  problem . And the, it is a linear  I would say meth od classification  problem. So, logistic  regression  is a process  of modeling the probability of discrete  outcome  
given an input  variables.  So, you know  in case of normal  regression  problems  our target  variable  
is a continuous  variable.   
So, Y is always  continuous. However,  when  our Y is not continuous  it is a, it is a, it is a discrete 
variable then the logistic  regression  comes  into play. So, generally  the logistic  regression  is 
useful  when  the dependent  variable or Y is dichotomous  or binary. Sometimes  we know , that the 
logistic,  when  our output  is either  yes, no, 0 or 1 then true, false this type of problem  generally  
we deal  with  logistic  regression .  
When and you can see this is a binary outcome , either  yes or no, either  true or false either  0 or 1. 
So, in this kind of condition, we generally  use the logistic  regression  model. However,  when  
there are more  than two possible  discrete outcomes,  then we go with the multinomial logistic  
regression. Generally,  we are going to in this lecture  we are going to discuss the binary logistic  
regression. So, logistic  regression  is a useful  method  for classification  problems.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 05:18)  
 
Now,  what  is the difference between  a normal  regression  and logistic  regression  is that in case of 
the normal  regressio n of a target  or Y is continuous , however  in case of logistic  regression  the 
dependent  variable the outcome  of the dependent  variable is limited , as we have  seen by 
dichotomous  or binary or sometime  multiple  are there, but they are discrete in nature . For example,  vote or no vote, morbidity  or mortality  and participation  data in a continuous  or 
distributed  normally .  
So, so, under  here you can see that in this case the data is not continuous  or distributed  normally.  
Here there are either  yes or no vote or no vote morbidity  or mortality.  So, you can see these  
binary outcomes. So, binary  logistic  regression  is a type of regression  analysis  where  the 
dependent  variable  is a dummy variable coded  0. Suppose, yes or did not vote we do we code 
them  with  the dummy variables  0.   
And also the other  1 we code  them  as 1 which  actually  another  dummy variable.  So, here let us 
consider  that there are two outcomes  what  is vote and not and do not vote. So, in case of vote we 
can assign  the dummy  variable  1 and in case of did not vote, we can assign  the dummy variables  
0. So, this  is the logistic  regression.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 07:01)  
 
Now,  in case of if we, if we define  this regression  in terms  of ordinary least squares  regression , 
then our model  will assume  this form  we know  that Y equal  to gamma  plus psi x plus e. Where 
this is the, the psi is the slope , gamma is the offset. So, however, in  case of  logistic  regression  the 
Y has only two values  0 and y1, where in case of normal  regression , linear  regression  we 
generally  assu me that Y is a continuous  variable.  And the values  of Y are independent  to each other. So, we can see here in this condition, the 
error terms  are heteroskedastic. Remember  in case of linear  regression, we assume  1 of the major  
assumption is  the error  terms are homo scholastic  or distributed  evenly.  However,  when  these are 
the cases  when  there are only binary outcome, then the  error terms  will be  heteroskedastic.   
So, because the here in this case, the error will not be normally  distributed  because Y takes  on 
only two values.  So, since  Y can take only 1 of these two values,  the error  term is not normally  
distributed. We remember  we assume  that the error  was, is normally  distributed in case of now, 
in case of  normal  linear  regression  or ordinary  least  square s regression.   
So, in this condition when  the error will not be normally  distributed  and the error terms  are 
heteroskedastic because Y have  only two values  possible  values,  then we will see the predicted  
probabilities  can be greater  than 1 or less than 0, which  is an unrealistic  situation  because we 
know  that the probability  of any occurrence of a, occurrence of any event  cannot  go beyond 1 or 
go less  than  0.  
It generally  goes, varies  between  0 to 1. So, if we are sticking  with this binary  variable, I mean  
binary outcome  I want  to do a linear  regression  or ordinary least squares  regression, based  on 
these data  test set, then  you will see  that the predicted  probabilities  can be some  time  greater  than  
1 or less than 0 which  is an unrealistic  situation.  So, to rectify  this problem, we generally  use the 
logistic  regression .  (Refer  Slide  Time: 10:17)  
 
But before  we go for the logistic  regression, let us first see what  is the logistic  function. So, here 
you can see this is a logistic  function, you can see this is a logistic  function. So, it is a sigmoid  
function you can clearly  see. And it is useful  to describe generally , generally  this sigmoid  
function is used for describing the population growth  in ecology in, when there is a rising  
quickly and, and  maxing out at the carrying  capacity  of the environment.  
So, here it is reaching  a plateau  when  it is reaching  the carrying  capacity  of the environment. So, 
it is called a sigmoid  function. Generally,  we use this logistic  function in case of ecological  
application. So, similarly  this logistic  function so, the what  is the mathematical ? So, 
mathematical  representation  of the logistic  function we can see here.  So, it is an S shaped  curve  
that can take any real valued  number  and map it into the value  between  0 to 1, but never  exactly  
at those  limits.   
So, this is how we can limit or we can confine  the probability of occurrence of any event  within  
0 to 1. And it does not allow  the probability  to go beyond 1 or less than 1 and thus rectifying  the 
problem  of discrete dichotomous  outcome  or binary outcome  of the target  variable.  So, this is the 
mathematical  form , here you can see L is the curve maximum value . Here small k is the logistic  
growth rate or steepness  of the curve . And the x, the x the x value  at the sigma  midpoint  here and 
also x is when  x is the real number. So, this  is how  you calculate the  logistic  function.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 12:22)  
 
 
So, why this called  a logistic  problem ? Logistic , in the logistic  regression  these OLS  regression  
can be reshaped  into this form, what  is this form ? This form  is the logistic  regression  form.  So, 
here you can see, we are taking the logarithm  of p by 1 minus  p which is alpha  plus beta x plus e. 
So, here we  are we  are, we are, we are producing  a logit  model  to solve  the problem  of exceeding  
the probability beyond 1 and, reducing the  probability less  than  0. 
So, we are taking this a logit model , this is called  a logic  model . So, here p what  is p? P is the 
probability that the event  Y occur.  So, p is the probability  that an event  Y will occur.  And the value , and the value  and the ratio of p by 1 minus  p is known as the odds  ratio or means  
probability. So, here this  is known as  the odds  ratio.  So, when  we are taking  the log of  these odds  
ratio p minus  1 by p it is  also known as  log odds  ratio  or in simple  form  we call it logit.  
So, this is called  a logit,  when  we are taking  the logarithm  of this ratio of probabilities.  So, we 
can re arrange,  the prop that the model  in this form  we call it a logit model . And what, why we 
do these?  Becaus e when  we do this type of representation  in terms  of logit model  that will 
restrict  the probability  within  0 to 1.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 14:48)  
 
So, graphically, you can see it here in case, suppose, there,  there are two as I have mentioned,  
here you can see there are two outcome  Y equal  to 0 and Y equal  to 1. And it is when  we plot Y 
versus  x, we can see here this is the linear  probability  model. So, this is a linear  probability  
model  and which  is exceeding the  probability below  0 and  above  1.  
And here you can see when  we are using the same in the form  of logistic  regression  model, 
where log of odds  when  you are expressing in terms  of alpha  plus beta X plus e, beta is the 
coefficient . Then you can see, we are restricting  the probability through the sigmoid  function  
within  this probability between  0 to 1. So, this is the benefit  of using these logistic  regression , as 
compared  to the linear  probability model.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 16:01)  
 
So, the logistic  distribu tion contributes, sorry  the logistic  distribution constrains  the estimated  
probabilities  to remain  between  0 and 1. So, we know  that estimated  probability from  this 
logistic  function if you simplify,  we can get p equal  to 1 by 1 plus exponential  of minus  alpha  
minus  beta x. So, from  here, we can see that if these alpha  plus beta x equal  to 0, then this 
probability generally  goes  to 0.50.  
And when  the alpha  plus beta gets really  big, the probability of, the estimated  probability  
approaches  1. And when  the alpha  plus beta gets really small,  the probabili ty or p generally  
approaches  0. So, this  is how  we can restrict  the probability  of estimated  probability between  0 to 
1.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 17:25)  
 
Now, now, some  other  features  let us discuss  some  other  features.  Now,  since we know  that log 
of based  on the logistic  regression , the sum of the log of sorry , the log of p by 1 minus  p will be 
alpha  plus beta x plus e eta or error.  So, the slope  coefficient,  so, in this form  if we consider  this 
form  and want  to describe the coefficient  in terms  of this logis tic regression, then we can say that 
the slope  coefficient  which  is beta is  interpreted  as a rate of  change in  the log odds  of x changes.   
So, here beta is representing  the rate of change  of log of words  with x as, as x is changing. But, 
this could be some what  confusing to understand. Now,  since we know  this is the simplified  form  
of this probability, we  can further simplify  it like  this.   (Refer  Slide  Time: 18:50)  
 
So, another  interpretation  of this logistic  or logit coefficient,  which  is usually more  intuitive  is 
that odds  ratio.  So, instead  of using the same representation  we can do another  way instead  of, 
instead  of expressing the logistic  regression  in the previous  form , we can just present  the odds  
ratio and take the exponential in this side. So, p by 1 minus  three will be exp1ntial of alpha  plus 
beta x.  
So, here we can say that exponential beta is the effect  of the independent  variable on the odds  
ratio.  So, this is how we can more  reasonably  express  the coefficient  of a logistic  regression. So, 
again, the exponential of beta is the effect  of the independent  variable  on the odds  ratio. So, this 
will be much  more  meaningful  than using the original  formula , while  explaining the beta 
coefficient.  So, instead  of instead  of explaining the beta coefficient  here,  we are explaining in 
terms  of exponential of  beta.   (Refer  Slide  Time: 20:24)  
 
So, we have seen both now, the logistic  linear  discriminant analysis  we have  also seen the 
logistic  regression. So, logistic  regression  is conventionally, what  is the difference  between  these  
two?  So, logistic  regression  is conventionally used for two class  and binary classification  
problem. So, that is why we generally  go with the linear  discriminant analysis.  So, though  
logistic  regression  can be extrapolated  and used in multiclass  classification  also, this is rarely  
performed .  
Generally  we stick  with the binary classification  problems. So, LDA is considered  is a better  
choice whenever  multi class , classification  is required.  And in the case of binary classification,  
we can use both of them . In case of binary classification , both a linear,  logistic  regression  and 
linear  discriminant analysis  both of them  are applied. However,  in case of multi class  
classification,  we generally  prefer  the linear  discriminant  analysis  over the logistic  regression.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 21:44)  
 
Now,  let us discuss , we have  discussed  some  parametric classification  algorithm  called  linear  
classification  algorithm.  Now,  let us see some  nonparametric classification  algorithm.  So, the 
nonparamet ric classification  algorithm  here, the kNN classification  or K nearest  neighbor  
classification  which  classify  based  on the similarity  measure.  So, it classify  based  on the 
similarity  measure and  classify  by majority  of the votes  for its  neighbor  classes . 
And assign  the most  common class  among these  K nearest  neighbors. So, but, first of all it 
identify  suppose, we are assigning any value of K, so, it first identify.  Suppose  K is 3 so, first it 
will identify  the nearest  three classes  for any unknown sample  and then it will assign  the label  of 
the class  based  on the maximum voting.  So, this is how, this kNN classification  generally  works , 
by measuring  the distance  between  the data set.   
So, the major  question in case of kNN is suppose  there is a suppose, there  is a new sample  and 
we want  to assign  it based  on the distance of this sample  to one of these two classes . And it will 
identify  the nearest  class  and then based  on that distance it will classify  the sample , unknown 
sample  to one of these classes.  So, let  us move  ahead  and see the kNN  classification .  (Refer  Slide  Time: 24:05)  
 
So, here kNN classification  the step by steps are given. Suppose  there are multiple,  there are two 
classes,  red and blue, and they are mixed  together. So, we want  to assign  a new sample  which  is 
denoted by this green  dot to one of these two classes.  So, how we can do that using kNN  
classification?  So, there  are several  steps , first of all, we need  to load the training  as well as the 
test data.   
So, suppose  this green  data is the test data and all other  samples  are the training  data set. So, we 
need to first choose  the value  of K, that is nearest  data points  K can be any integer,  3, 4 any 
integer  you can select.  In the next step you can calculate the distance between  this test data,  
between  this test data and each  row of the training  data.   
So, you can calculate  the distance  between  this training  between , this test data and between  this 
test data and the linear  distance I am sorry,  the distance between  the test data and each row of the 
training  data with the help of the method. So, there are several  methods  for calculating  the 
distance, Euclidean  distance  are there,  Manhattans  or hamming  distance  are there. However,  in 
most  of the cases,  we generally  use the Euclidean  distance.   
Now,  based on the distance values,  we then arrange  or sort them  these, adding them  into 
ascending  order . And then it will choose  the top K rows  and from  the, from  the, from  the sorted  
array.  So, if they are it is, it is when  the K value  is 3, it will select  the top three rows  and then it will see what  is the maximum outcome  out of these  three  rows  or maximum class  levels  
predicted  class  levels.   
So, if we see that the three rows , out of the three  rows  two of them  are showing the yes and one 
of them  are showing no or in other  words, if two of them  are showing the red class  and only one 
of them  are assigned  to blue class,  then these  unknown or validation  samples  will be assigned  to 
this kNN,  to this red group.  
So, this is how, so, again, let me let me summarize  this, first we load the training  data,  then we 
calculate  the distance  between  the test data with these,  between  these  each row of the training  
data.  And then we ascend  them,  we sort them  in the ascending  order,  and then we select  the top 
three or top four based on the K values  and then we assign  the value  or assign  the class  level  
based  on the majority  class  for those  three  or four observations. So, this is how the K nearest  
neighbor  algorithm  basically  works.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 27:44 ) 
 
So, what  are the advan tages  of K nearest  neighbor  algorithm?  So, it is a very simple  algori thm to 
understand and interpret.  It is very useful  for nonlinear  data,  because  there is no assumpti on 
about  data in this algorithm. It is a versatile  algorithm  as we can see, as we can use it for 
class ification  as well  as regression.  It has relatively  high accuracy,  but, there  are much better  supervised  learning models  than kNN.  
And since the kNN algorithm  requires  no training, before  making prediction, new data can be 
added  seamlessly,  which will not impact  the accuracy  of the algorithm.  So, these are some  
advantages  of the algorithm.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 28:27)  
 
However,  there are some  disadvantages  of kNN also. First of all, it is computationally  a bit 
expensive  algorithm  because it stores all the training  data. And here the accuracy  depends  on the 
quality  of the data.  And high memory  storage  is required  as compared  to other supervised  
learning  algorithm.  Then prediction  is slow  in case of big, big values  of N, and also it is a very 
sensitive to the scale of the big number  of data and when  it is very sensitive  to the scale of the 
data as  well  as the, as well  as well  as irrelevant  features.   (Refer  Slide  Time: 29:15)  
 
So, these are the some  of the important  advantages  and disadvantages  of, for K nearest  neighbor  
classification.  Now,  the classification  problem  we can define  in terms  of different  performance  
metrics  or confusion matrix,  we have  already  discussed  what  is the confusion matrix , and what  
are the two positive  true negative  false positive  and false negative.  We already  know  from  our 
previous  discussion of confusion matrix,  we generally  use for identifying  or calculating  the 
accuracy  different  performance metrics  for classification.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 29:53)  
 So, as  it is a simple  example here is  given. Suppose, we  are classifying  some  disease and suppose  
these is true negative,  where  actually  there  are no disease  and we are predicted  the disease  there  
is no disease.  So, it is a true negative  when  there is actually  no disease,  but we predicted  yes 
there are disease.  So, it is a false positive  and here you can see this is a false  negative,  because 
there is  actually  disease but  we are predicted  no.  
And here when  the actual  disease is there,  and we have  also predicted  disease.  So, here you can 
see, this is called  the true positive. So, true positive , true negative , false positive , false negative  
four types  of outcome  we can generate from  any confusion matrix.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 30:48 ) 
 
And using those  values  we can calculate some  important  performance  metrics  like overall  
accuracy , recall, precision, FPR. FPR stands  for the false  positive  rate. So, accuracy  stands  for 
this metric  simply  measures  how often  the classifier  makes  a correct  prediction. And recall  is 
basically  the sensitiv ity or true positive  rate, this matrix  denotes  the classifiers  ability  to predict  a 
correct  class , so formula  is given here.   
Precision , it is a measure of classifier’s  certainty  of correctly  predicting  a given class.  False 
positive  rate or FPR is the metric representation;  it is a representation  of the number  of incorrect  
positive  predictors  out of the total true  negatives.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 31:39)  
 
Also,  there are true negative  rate, f1 score,  Matthews’s  correlation  coefficient , Cohen’s  Kappa, 
there are different  types  of performance metrics . And we will discuss  it, in our next class  these 
things  in details,  but here I want  to just focus  on this Cohen's  Kappa , because it is widely  used. 
This metric  compares  and observed accuracy with the expected  accuracy. Expected  accuracy  
means  accuracy  by random  chance.   
We are also going to  discuss  this in details  in our, in our upcoming lectures  and also  when  we are 
going to discuss  the digital soil mapping. So, these  are all indicative  of the performance of the 
classification  algorithm.   (Refer  Slide  Time: 32:28)  
 
So, there is another  importa nt performance metrics  called  ROC curve.  And this is generally  
commonly used to graph  or summarize  the performance  of a classifier  over all the possible  
threshold. And it is generated  by plotting  the true positive  rate against  the false positive  rate. We 
have  already  discussed  these are important  metrics , as you vary the threshold for assigning the 
observation to  a given class.   
So, ROC curve  you also can see in some  of the literat ure, where  they have used the ROC curve  
for as an as in performance metrics  of any classification  algorithm.  So, in our upcoming lectures,  
we are going to, we  are going to  discuss  this performance metrics  in details . (Refer  Slide  Time: 33:12)  
 
Just I want  to, wrap  up this lecture by showing some  soil and plant  application  of K nearest , K 
nearest  neighbors  method. So, you can see here,  here in this example,  soil samples  were  
classified  into one of the four hydrologic  groups. So, here you can see four hydrologic  model  
says HSG A, HSG B, HSG C, HSG D, based  on this K neares t neighbor  and all. So, they have  
used the support  vector  machine classification , decision  tree based  classification .  
We already  know  decision  tree and support  vector  machine classific ation.  And here you can see 
the K nearest  neighbor hood classification  they have  used using the K value  of 4. So, different  
performance may increases  are given like recall  position FPR, TNR , F1 score  MCC  Kappa  and 
from  there they have calculated  which  class ification  algorithm  performed  better . So, this is the 
application  of KNN in  soil.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 34:14)  
 
And also here, application  of KNN  in plant  where  images  of guava  was used for, for classifying  
the samples  classifying. So, basically  the image  features  of differe nt guava  diseases  were used 
and, to classify  them  using different  types  of classification  algorithm  like K nearest  neighbor  and 
then support  vector  machine, then boosted tree, back  tree, complex  tree. So, people, scientists  are 
using dif ferent  types.  
So, they have  used, first instance they have  used the RGB  histogram, which  is a specific color  
model . In the second  table  is showing the HSB  histogram . In the third  is to, in the third  table  it is 
showing LBP features.  So, these features  they have  used from  the images . And from  collecting  
from  different  diseases  and then they have tried to predict  the target  variable.  So, these are some  
examples  of KNN application  implant.   (Refer  Slide  Time: 35:35)  
 
So, guys, I hope  that you have  learned  something new while  we discuss  the logistic  regression  
and also K nearest  neighbor  classification . These logistic , while  logistic  regression  is a linear  
classification  method. However,  this kNN method is a nonparametric  method. So, these are the 
references  which  I used, you can, you can this you can, you can go back  to these references  and 
you can  have more  information  regarding these technologies.  
Thank you and, we will, we will go from  here in our next class,  and we will also discuss  in 
details  about  different  performance  metrics  in our next lectures.  So, stay tuned and let us join in 
our next  lecture to  discuss  other  classification  and clustering  algorithms.  Thank you.   