Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop  Management  
Professor Somsubhra  Chakraborty 
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute  of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 12  
Principal  Component  Analysis  and Regression  Applications  in Agriculture (Contd.)  
Welcome  friends  to this lecture 12 of NPTEL Online  Certification  Course  of Machine  Learning 
for S oil and crop Management . We are in  week  3 and this  is the second  lecture of  week  3. And in  
this week  we are continuing principal  component  analysis  and regres sion applications  in 
agriculture . In our  first lecture  of week  3, we have  already  discussed  what  is principal  component  
analysis .  
Just to summarize , principal  component  analysis  is a dimensionality  reduction approach , 
sometime  it can be both supervised and unsupervised. In case of classification  regression  
problem , it is supervised;  sometimes  it is unsupervised, when  you want  to see the clustering  
among the samples . And principal  component  analysis  as I told you it is a dimensionality  
reduction technique , where  the correlated  variables …  
It generally  applies  for high dimensional  data, where multiple  features  are correlated  to each 
other , or in other  words  when  there is a multicollinearity  available. So, when  there is a 
multicollinearity , that also can invol ve that also can induce  over fitting . So, to remove  this 
problem , we generally  go with  the, we generally  go with  the principal  component  analysis .  
Principal  component  analysis  deals  with the calculation  of principal  components , which  are the 
linear  combination  of the original  variables  in the feature space. And we linearly  combine  them  
together  in a single  principal  component  and this principal  components  are ordered  and named  
based  on their relative  predictive  power . So, principal  component  1 always  show  higher  
predictive  power  followed by principal  component  2 and  so on so  forth . 
So, with if there is a n number  of features  in a data set, we can actually  calculate n number  of 
principal  components . And then we can selectively  remove  some  principal  component s, which  
are not showing very good explaining power  for the data set, in that way we can reduce  the 
dimension without  neglecting  the importance  of relatively  weak  predictor  because while  
calculating  the principal  components , we capture  their  importance  also.  We capture the importance  is the linear  combination;  we capture the information  coming from  
both the important  features  and also some  unimportant  features  also. So, it does not matter  if we 
selectively  remove  some  of the principal  components , we can still capture their contribution of 
the, we can still capture the  contribution of  the unimportant  variables . 
So, how to calculate the principal  components ? What are the eigen  values  and eigen  vectors ? We 
have  discussed  based  on the matrix  algebra,  although there is no scope of mathematically  
explaining all these terms  at this point  of time because our major  focus  is to show  the application  
of this technique  for soil  and crop  problems .  
So, today in this lecture, we will start from  here and I will discuss  how to select  the important  
principal  components  for subsequent  analysis . What are the considerations ? And then we will 
discuss  what  is principal  component  regression ? And we will see some  examples  of application  
of principal  component  analysis  and then princi pal component  regression . We will also see some  
example of  principal  component  biplot . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  4:43)   
 
So, these are the  concepts , which  we are going to  cover  in this lecture. W e are going to  talk about  
the screeplot , we are going to talk about  the application  of PCA . Then we are going to talk about  
the application  of principal  component  regression , or PCR.  We are also going to talk about  the applications  of PCR.  And then partial least squares  regression , if time permits , but that will we 
are going to  mainly  discuss up to  applications  of PCR.   
And briefly  we will be discussing what  is partial  least square  segregation . However , partial  least 
squares  regression  will be  discuss  in details  in our upcoming lectures . 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 5:27)   
 
Now,  these are the important  keywords  for this lecture . We are going to discuss  screeplot , we are 
going to discuss  PCR.  We are going to discuss  what  is loading plot? We are going to discuss  
what  is score plot ? And also we are going to  discuss the  biplot. (Refer  Slide  Time:  5:46)   
 
Now,  when  we do the principal  component , suppose  there are n number  of variables  and we are 
doing the principal  component  analysis  and calculating  the n number  of principal  components . 
The most  important  question comes  to our mind is ok, now what ; how many  principal  
components  we should keep  for subsequent  analysis ?  
How many  of them  are really  important ? So, for n number  of principal  components , correlation  
matrix  is of course n into n and this will give us n number  of eigen  vectors . And n number  of 
eigen  vectors  means , will be  having n number  of principal  components . 
So, how does this dimensional  reduction come from ? I told you briefly  in our previous  lecture, 
that we can selectively  remove  some  of the unimportant  principal  component . But how we know  
that which  principal  component  is unimportant ? To identify  the unimportant  and important  
principal  component , we generally  use screeplot. (Refer  Slide  Time:  6:56)   
 
So, here you can see this is one of the way, this is the example of screeplot . But before  
discussing the screeplot  let us see the approach , the approach is calculate how to how to develop  
the screeplot ? So, first of all we calculate the proportion of the variance explained  for each 
principal  components  and then  we pick  a thresh old and  add features  until  you hit  that threshold. 
So, generally  for example this example you can see this is a called  a screeplot and here we have  
used the spectral  data to calculate  the principal  components . And we have  calculate  10 principal  
component , principal  component  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And simultaneously we have  
calculate their percent  variation , percent  variance , or proportion of variance  they can explain  in 
the data set .  
So, we have  seen of course as the name suggests , principal  component  1 will show  the highest  
variance followed by principal  component  2, principal  component  3, principal  component  4, 
principal  component  5, and up to principal  component  10 but how to select , how many  of them  
are important ? Now,  it generally  varies  from  one application  to another  application . 
Suppose  you have  that this principal  component  1 is showing  almost  60 percent  of the variance. 
And this principal  component  2 is showing 15 percent  of variance , principal  component  3 is 
showing 10 percent  of the variance. So, cumulatively  60 plus 15 plus 10, that means  we are 
getting  85 percent  variability , just  from  this first 3 principal  components .  So, if we fix a threshold  of including the principal  components  up to 85 percent , then only we 
select  these three principal  components  for subsequent  analysis . And we remove  all the seven  
remaining  principal  component  analysis  principal  components . In other  words  you can also see 
here the  number  4 principal  component  showing almost 5 percent .  
So, if we add it up it will give us 90 percent  variability . So, you can see instead  of using all 10 
principal  components , if we use only first 4, then only we can capture  90 percent  of the principal  
90 percent  of the variance in the data set. So, 90 percent  of the variance in the data set, we can 
we can capture by only these 4 principal  components . 
So, it depends  on our threshold, we set up a threshold and then we add the feature, or add the 
principal  until we get to that point  of 90 percent  principal  component . We can see here that up to 
4, we are getting  this 90 percent  and then we will stop. So, this is called  scree plot. Sometime  the 
screen  plot you will also  see are shown based  on the  eigen  values  also. 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 10:35 )  
 
So, another  approach  for calculating  here you can see here another  example  is given we they 
have  calculated  the eigen  values  and they have ordered  the eigen  values  of course , it is another  
application . And here you can see for principal  component  1, they have calculated  the eigen  
values  and they have  plot the eigen  values . And at the simultaneously  you have  they have  plot 
the cumulative  variability  shown by these principal  components . So, if we fix any threshold, suppose  we are fixing any threshold here, in terms  of cumulative  
variability . Then we can see up to 5 principal  component , they are showing the 80 percent  
variability  in the data set. So, we will keep  5 principal  components  and will remove  the rest of 
the principal  components . Other way people  also use the principal  components  with the eigen  
values greater  than  1.  
So, the eigen  values , which  are greater  than 1, sometime  also researcher  used to keep  only those  
principal  components  because that shows  the more  important  features  in the principal  component  
space. So, these are known as the screeplot  and these are the ways  through which  we can keep  
the principal  component . In other  words  sometime  also people  use the elbowing, or elbow  in this 
cumulative  variability .  
Suppose  the cumulative  variability  in the principal  component  goes like this and suppose  and 
then it reaches  a plateau , then people  always  go with the principal  components  up to this point  
also. It is called  the elbow  point . So, they can select  the principal  components  up to the elbow  
point . So, there are different  ways  through which  you can calculate, or you can select  the 
principal  components  for subsequent  analysis . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:36)   
 
So, this is an example of principal  component  analysis  screeplot , you can see here if we see that 
first two principal  components . So, first two principal  components  collectively  explain  almost 80 percent  of the variation . So, in the subsequent  PCA  analysis , we can we should we should focus  
only based  on the first 2 , or first 3, if we combine  first 3 we are getting around 85 percent  
variation . 
 So, if we combine  if we if we plot our data into this principal  component  space,  we can use up 
to first 3 principal  components . So, this is a one example of soil petroleum  contamination . Now,  
I am showing some  soil application  and crop application . This data was gathered  from  the 
principal  component  analysis  of a from  the spectral  data, which  we have  gathered  using a spectro  
radiometer .  
The spectro  radiometer  and its principal  and how it collects  the data we will get we will discuss  
in our, in coming  weeks . But at this point  of time remember  that, there are thousands  of spectral  
features  starting  from  350 to 2500 nanometer  wavelength , at each 10 nanometer  interval  350 
nanometer , 360 nanometer , 370 nanometer , up to  2500 nanometer . 
So, using these spectral  featur es, we have  calculated  this principal  components  10 principal  
components  and from  this 10 principal  components , we have  seen that up to 3 principal  
components  our data up to 3 principal  components  we can explain  up to 85 percent  of the data 
variability .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:35)   
 And then you can you can use this, this score plot and you can see here these are the PCA  score 
plot. In the PCA  score  plot, these you  can clearly  see these solid  points  are contaminated  samples  
and these hollow  points  are non-contaminated  samples . So, using this is PC 1 versus  PC 2 plot, 
this is PC 2 versus  PC 3 plot, and this is also PC 1 versus  PC 3 plot. So, also this is PC 1 versus  
PC 3 plot . 
So, you can see that using this type of principal  component , we can capture, or we can cluster  
different  samples . So, here you can see we can clearly  classify  the samples , or cluster  the 
samples , which  are contaminated  and which  are non-contaminated . So, this is the application  of 
principal  components .  
And for this for seeing  this we do not have  to we do not have  to plot up to principal  component  
10, principal  component  1 and 2 will be sufficient  and then principal  component  2 versus  
principal  component  3 are also showing the clustering  features  as you can see here, the cluster  
the they  are clustering  the data based  on the  similarity  in their  spectral  feature.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:03)   
 
You can see here another  example for soil petroleum  contamination , published in 2014. And you 
can see here also the data set another  data set is , they are showing the clustering  among the data 
collected  from  different , collected  from  different  locations . So, here you can see one cluster , here 
you can see one cluster , of course  there  are some  mix mixing  between  the cluster  samples . But you can clearly  see some  cluster  here. So, this is how you can identify  the clustering  among the 
data set  using the  principal  component  1.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:53)   
 
A one another  example  we have used for identifying the compost  enzyme activity , using the 
spectral  method. So, this we have  we have  calculated , we have  we have taken  the spectra of 
different  types  of compost , five to six different  types  of compost . And then we have plotted  their 
principal  components . 
So, here you can see for different  types  of spectral  preproc essing . These are different  types  of 
spectral  preprocessing ; you can see here normal , very standard  normal  variate, Norris Gap 
Derivative , Gap Segment  Derivative , Sevisky Golay, normalization  by range, multiplicative  
scatter  correction . And then  log 1 by r eflectance.  
So, we can we will discuss this spectral  processing in our in our upcoming  weeks , but remember  
that once  we do this kind of spectral  processing and then we do the principal  component  
analysis , we can get this type of clustering . So, you can see clearly  identify , the clusters  of 
sample  based  on the similarity  of their spectral  features . At this similarity  of the spectral  features  
also identity  also indicate  the similarity  among their  property.  
So, that means  these  compost  samples , these compost  samples  are different  than this compost  
cluster , this is also different  than this compost  cluster , this is also different  than this compost  cluster , this is also different  than this compost  cluster . And they might  be varying  from  each 
other  based  on certain  properties . 
So, PCA  gives  us a qualitative  identification  of separation , or possible  clustering  among the data 
set. So, this  is one example of  based  on the  compost  enzymatic activity . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  18:49)   
 
Another  example you can see here, this is the PC application  in tundra  soil. So, we have  
collected  soil from  5 different  sites and based  on the principal  component , we have first 
produced this screeplot . And this screeplo t from  this screeplot  you can see by combining this PC 
1, PC  2, cumulatively  showing around 72 percent  variability .  
And this is the principal  component  1 versus  principal  component  2 score plot, which  showing 
the differences  and clustering  among different  samples  coming from  different  slides , different  
sites. So, here this PC 1 versus PC 2 plot, qualitatively  separate samples  from  5 different  
sampling  sites  in northern A laska.  
And these are actually  calculated  based  on the elemental  results  collected  using the portable  X-
ray fluorescent  spectrometer , we are going to  also discuss  that in our coming lectures . (Refer  Slide  Time:  19:53)   
 
We have seen that principal  component  analysis  can be useful  for separating  soils coming from  
two different  types  of lakes . And showing variance  in the salinity , you can see here this principal  
comp onent  1 versus  principal  component  2. So, we can see some  clustering  pattern  and also that 
shows  the sample  heterogeneity  among the two different  types  of areas , or sampling  site, and 
also shows  the similarity  among those  samples  coming  from  the same site. So, you can see here, 
this is how  we apply the  principal  component  analysis . 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 20:39 )  
  
Now,  the next question  comes  what  is principal  component  biplot? So, principal  component  
score plot you have  already  seen this is called  the princi pal component  score plot, where we 
calculate the principal  component  score floor  individual  data point  and plot them  into principal  
component  space. Now,  what  is a loading  plot? Loading plot shows  how strongly each 
characteristics  influence a principal  com ponent .  
So, suppose  this is a principal  component  1, that is denoted by PC dimension 1, and this is PC 2. 
And you can see these are the features , or the variables . Now,  when  two variables  are vectors  are 
close forming  a small angle, then the two variables  they represent  are positively  correlated . So, 
here you  can see this  is a vector  called  discuss  and here short  part, long jump, they  are very  much  
close and  forming  a small  angle  so they  are these 3 are positively  correlated . 
So, if they meet  each other  at 90 degree they are not likely  to be correlated  because  we have  
already  seen that when  there is a orthogonal  to each other  there is no correlation . So, one 
example could  be this javelin  and high jump  they are almost 90 degree they are making a 90 
degree angle so they  are not correlated  to each  other . 
However , when  they diverge  and form  a large  angle  which  is close to 180 they are negatively  
correlated . So, here you can see this long jump  and 100 meter , 100 meter  run they are almost 180 
degree far apart  and they are negatively  correlated . So, from  the loading plot we can see the 
relative  influence  or relative closeness  among different  features  based  on their  angle . (Refer  Slide  Time: 22:59 )  
 
So, what  is a biplot ? This term comes  very frequently  PCA  biplot  is, so we know  that a PCA  plot 
generally  shows  the cluster  of sample  based  on their  simplicity  and we know  that the loading plot  
shows  how strongly each characteristic will influence  a principal  component . Now, the 
combination of principal  component  score plot and loading plot is known as principal  computed  
biplot . 
So, here you can see this is an example of principal  component  biplot , it is principal  component  
1 and this is principal  component  2 and these  blue dots are the principal  component  scores  of 
sever al compost  samples  and here you can see the elements  which  are reported  by the PXRF  or 
portable  XRF  we have  produced there and these vectors , the vectors  of those  elements  which  or 
features  which  you have used for calculating  this principal  components . 
So, here you can see these  are the loading so we can see iron, vanadium , titanium, zirconium , 
manganese, chromium  they are highly correlated  to each other . Whereas , manganese and 
potassium  are non-correlated  or chlorine  is non-correlated  to each other  and we also can see that 
zinc and strontium  are inversely  related . So, we also can see what  are the features  which  are 
important  for these samples  from  this PCA  biplot .  
So, in the PCA  biplot  not only we can see the cluster , we can see the variables  which  are 
important  for those  samples  and also we can identify the correlation  among the samples  so from  here we can see that for calculating  the principal  components  this copper  for this samples , 
copper , zinc and  lead  are important  features . 
Whereas , for these samples , for these samples  strontium , calcium , sulphur , chloride  and 
potassium  are important  features . So, this is how we get the idea of the distribution  of the 
samples  as well  as their, as well  as their  loading from  the PCA  biplot . 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 25:27 )  
 
So, here one example of principal  component  analysis  in crop. Here you can see that this PCA  
graphics  scatter  plot of osmolytes  and physiological  parameters  and antioxidant  enzyme and 
agronomic  trait clustered  according  to the similarity , so clustered  according to their similarity  
and dissimilarity  at anthesis  and grain  filling  stage. So, there are two stage , anthesis  stage and 
grain  filling  stage and  they cluster  together  of wheat  genotypes . 
So, from  this, so the vectors  derived  from  the biplot  origin represent  positive  and negative  
association  among the traits . So, you can see these are different  types  of traits  based  on which  we 
have  clustered , they have clustered  these, they have  defined  these two clusters , so the vectors  
derived  from  the biplot  origin  represents  a positive  and negative association  just I have  discussed  
in our previous  slide .  
We can also see which  are the features , which  are positively  correlated  and which  are negatively  
correlated . So, we can see the TSS generally  is the total soluble  sugar, TSP is the total soluble  protein, then GS is the stomatal conductance , Tr is the transpiration  rate, MD is the membrane  
damage, PN is the photosynthetic  rays, SOD  is the superoxide  dismutase  enzyme, CAT  is a 
catalyst  enzyme, POD is a peroxidized enzy me, FL is the flag leaf area, SL is the spike  length  
and TGW  is a thousand grain  weight .  
So, these are the feature based  on which  we have  clustered  the sample  into two category , one is 
the, we have clustered  the wheat  genotypes  into grain  filling  stage as well as the anthesis  stage.  
So, this is how, this is the very good application  of PCA  in crop. So, now you have understand  
why we use the PCA . 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 27:28 )  
 
Now, next comes  the principal  component  regression . Principal  component  regression  is a 
technique  for analyzing  the multiple  regression  data that suffers  from  multicollinearity  when  
multicollinearity  occurs  least square  estimations  are unbiased but their variants  are large so they 
may not be, may be far away  from  the true value. So, this principal  component  regression  
generally  it is very  simple . 
So, first we do the principal  component  analysis  on to the independent  variable matrix , matrix  of 
the independent  variables  and then the regression , in the second  step we do the regression  where 
PCs are independent  variables . So, instead  of incorporating the original  variables  as an independent  variable we first calculate the principal  components  and select  the important  
principal  components  and incorporate  them  in the model  as independent  data  set. 
So, one typically  uses only a subset  of all the pieces  for regression  making PCR a kind of 
regularized  procedure and also a type of shrinking estimator . So, this is how the principal  
component  regression  is done . 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 28:42 )  
 
The PCR approach  involves  constructing the first M principal  components  and then using this 
component  as the predictor  in the ordinary  least square  regression . So, principal  component  is 
similar  to ordinary least square  regression , only the exception  is here the independent  variables  
are the principal  components . So, the key idea that often  a small number  of PCs suffice  to 
explain  most  of the variability  in the data as  well  as the relationship  among  the response . 
So, we assume  that the direction  in which  this X1, X2, up to Xp show  the most  variation  are the 
direction  that are associated  with the Y or dependent  variable. So, when  performing  the PCR 
predictors  should be  standardized  prior to  generating the  principal  components . (Refer  Slide  Time: 29:33 )  
 
So, it is one example of principal  component  regression  analysis  for measuring  for compost  
salinity  and pH prediction . So, I have already  showed  you this biplot  in one of my previous  slide  
you can see here, here this is principal  component  1 and principal  component  2, we can see the 
importance  of the features  and this is the scores , these are the  scores . 
So, after selecting  the important  principal  components  we have  predicted  the compost  electrical  
conductivity or salinity  and compost  pH and we can see that and this is the measured  pH versus  
predicted  pH, measured  pH versus  predicted  pH and both these cases  we can see in case of 
electrical  conductivity we are getting  very high R square  values  or coefficient  of determination , 
in case of  measurement  of pH also we are getting moderate prediction accuracy . 
So, that  shows  one application  of principal  component  regression . Here, remember  the regression  
is done  where measured  electrical  conductivity of the compost  samples  are target  whereas  the 
predicted  values  are calculated  based on the principal  components  which  are calculated  from  the 
input  variables . And similar  in the measure pH relationship versus  predicted  pH relationship  
also.  
So, the pH are predicted  when  ECs are predicted  based  on the principal  component  analysis  and 
then we are showing this prediction plot. So, guys  I hope  that you have  now a very good idea about  the principal  component  analysis , their application  and biplot , their application  and also 
the principal  component  regression  and their  application  in soil and crop  sectors .   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 31:36 )  
 
Now let us, these  are the  references  and let us wrap  up our  lecture  here  and in our next  lecture  we 
will start from  the partial  least squares  regression , remember  partial  least squares  regression  is an 
anothe r modification  of principal  component  regression  and the calculation  of the factors  we call 
them  latent  factors  or PLSR  latent  factors  are somewhat  different  than calculating  the principal  
components . 
So, partial  least squares  regression  is more  robust  algorithm  than principal  component  regression  
and partial least squares  regression  is widely  used as a machine  learning tool for soil and crop 
application . So, we are going to learn  about  partial  least squares  regression  in our next lectures . 
And also, we are going to learn  other  type of regression , multivariate  regressions  also and their 
application  in crop  and soil. So, thank you, let  us meet  in our next  lecture.   