Machine Learning For Soil and Crop Management  
Professor Somubhra Chakraborty 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture – 16  
Application of Classification and Clustering Methods in Agriculture  
Welcome friends to this NPTE L online certification course of M achine Learning for S oil and 
Crop Management. And today, we are going to start lecture 16. And we are in the week 4 and 
this will be the first lecture of week  4, and in this lecture we are going to focus mainly on,  in this 
week, we are going to focus mainly on A pplication of C lassification and D ifferent Clustering 
Methods for A griculture.  
Now, in the previous three weeks, we have discussed the basics of machine learning. Also, we 
have discussed the basic s of multivariate data analysis and also we have in the previous week we 
have discussed the different multivariate regression problems like partial least squares 
regression , also we have discussed principal component analysis, then principal component 
regression partial least squares regression, random forest regres sion, s upport vector regression.  
So, we have discussed some of the most widely used regression methods. Today, we are going to 
start the discussion on different classi fication and clustering meth ods. You know  the basic 
difference between the regression and classification when our target or the dependent variable is a continuous numeric variable , then we call it a then it is a regression problem and when our 
target is categorical variable, then we call it a classification problem. 
Classification problem, we are g oing to start today basically, with the basic classification 
algorithms, and then, we are going to discuss some of the most wide ly used classification 
methods. (Refer Slide Time: 02:37)  
 
So, let us start in this lecture, we are going to mainly discuss this following concept, we are 
going to first discuss what is classification and then we are also going to discuss one of the major 
linear classification algorithm that is linear discriminant analysis or LDA. And then we are going 
to discuss how to calculate the LDA and what are the advantages and disadvantages of LD A we 
are also going to discuss.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:10)  
 So, these are the keywords which we are going to discuss classification also classifier, then 
clustering then supervised and LDA these are some of the keywords for this lecture number 16.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:27)  
 
So, what is classification you already know the base that when our target variable is a categorical variable, then we call it is a classification problem. So, in other words, classification denotes the 
systematic grouping of units based on their common characteristics or features. So, if there are multiple samples and we want to group the samples in a different cl asses based on some common 
characteristics or features, then we call this problem as a classification problem.  
Now, the major goal or problem in a classification, Statistical Classification is to identify which of the set of the categories or sub populations and observation belongs to. So, basically we have to assign any sample or observation into one of the sub population in the feature space. So, for 
example, a perfect example of a classification problem we generally encounter each and every 
day is separating the ma ils automatic separation of the ma ils in spam or non- spam folder . 
So generally those emails which are generally spam, our mailbox automatically identify them 
based on certain features or characteristics, maybe the presence of certain words and t hen they 
are grouped into a specific folder that is a spam folder. So, they are automatically filtered out. 
So, this is a classification problem here our target or  the dependent variable is of,  are generally 
binary because we are getting either spam or non- spam email.  So, us ing the algorithm, the  mailbox is discriminating all the emails into two sub population that 
is either spam or no spam. So, these grouping into spam or non- spam email is based on certain 
explanatory features or variable . In generally classification problem w e call them features , they 
are similar to variables. And remember, here our target variable is always categorical variable.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:22)  
 
Now, what type of features can be there? There are different types of features eith er these 
independent or independent variables or features in any classification problem could be 
categorical that means we can have multiple classes like A , B, C, D and so on or we have some 
ordinal  values like large medium short. W e can also have some int eger variables, for example, 
number of people in a group it is an integer variable  we cannot have fraction values here . 
And also some real values, for example, human height is a real value because it can take any 
value. So, these different types of feature s or variables are there in the feature space and our 
target is categorical variable, then we go for the classification problem. Now, there are different 
types of classification algorithm and the mathematical function we generally use for classifying 
the sample into different groups or sub population is known as classifier.  
So, the mathematical fu nction is known as classifier. N ow, remember that what is the distinction 
between classification and clustering? We frequently see these two terms use we can see f requent 
use of these terms in any statistical methodologies that is one is classification another  is clustering, what is the difference, what is the fundamental difference in case of classification, it 
is a kind of a supervised method and whereas, in case of clustering, it is generally unsupervised 
method. Now, in case of clustering, we do not have  any group or class information. 
And in case of a classification problem, we ha ve their groups defined or there are target groups. 
So, this  is the basic difference between  classification and clustering.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:55)  
 
So, now, we know the difference between classification and clustering and their connection to the supervised and unsupervised method. In this week, we are going to discuss different 
class ification methods. And the first type of classification methods we are going to discuss is the 
linear classification methods. Now , linear classification methods we call a problem as early as a 
linear clas sification when the features or  variables are used t o classify the targets based on linear 
function and those features are known as linear latent variables.  
So, the two most important linear classification methods are linear discriminant analysis and 
logistic regression. So, in this lecture we are going to elaborate or we are going to explain the 
linear discriminant analysis and in the next lecture we are going to discuss the logistic regression.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:08)  
 
So, linear discriminant analysis is used to solve that dimension reduction again just like principal 
component analysis in case of LDA . So, we try to reduce the multi- dimensional  data into some 
small number of dimensions. So, generally these LD A are linear discriminant analysis is used for 
pattern classification and machine learning appli cations . Generally they are used this is used for 
feature extraction also.  
So, we use this linear discriminant analysis for extracting some important features by combining 
all the  features in the feature space.  So, the idea behind linear discriminant anal yses is to linearly 
transform and linearly transform the features and maximize the separation between the multiple classes. Again please pay attention we are linearly transforming the features in the feature space 
to ensure there is maximum separation betw een the different classes or sub populations.  
So, generally these LDA are linear discriminant analysis is used for supervised classification 
problems and generally it is also used to model different  sense  in the groups for example,  
separating two or more classes.  So, here is a movie I found a very good picture  photo of linear 
discriminant analysis you can see how a line on a new axis we can assume this the new axis or 
direction or axis is separating the samples into two classes based on some common featur es. So, 
this is an example of linear discriminant analysis.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:35)  
 
So, in case of linear discriminant analysis, our idea is to reduce the dimension or  for example, let 
us conside r there is a d  dimension data space . And we  want to proj ect, reproject this  d 
dimensional data set into k  dimensio n where k  is less than D . So, of course, in this case you can 
identify you can see that we are reducing the feature space or we are we are reducing the 
dimension when there are a huge number of vari ables of course, there are huge number when 
there are in variable there are in dimensions.  
So, when we are reducing the dimension is the di mensionality reduction problem. So, similarly, 
in case of LDA we are doing the same kind of thing as we have seen in case of PCA, if you 
recall . Now, the original linear discriminant analysis was proposed by R  A Fis cher in 1936 and it 
was original ly a two class technique. Later so  the another name of LDA is Fis cher discriminant 
analysis also . Now, the multi- class  versio n was lat er generalized by  C. R Rao  and also known as 
the multiple discriminant analysis.  However, both of them are generally termed as discriminant analysis or linear discriminant 
analysis.  Now, what are the general approach for the linear execution of t he linear discriminant 
analysis first of all we calculate from the feature space we calculate the eigen vectors and we 
collect them in the scatter ma trix and then we generate the k dimensional data from the d 
dimensional data space I will show you how we c an do that step by step. (Refer Slide Time: 14:39)  
 
Now, what are the basic assumption in case of linear discriminant analysis there are major two 
assumption first of all the variable and features are normally distributed. So, it is a parametric 
approach . Remember, it is a parametric approach because it assumes that variables and features 
are normally distributed a nd each feature has same variance. So, here the variance feature 
variance is constant. So, these are the two major assumptions  in case of linear discriminant 
analysis.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:16)  
  
So, let us see one good example. So, it is assumed that there are two feature in a feature space x1 
and x2. So, we can see two sets of data points belong to two different classes that we want to 
classi fy and here we can see that the samples the different classes are designated by different 
colors . Here there are two colors, one is blue and other is red. So, essentially we want to 
discriminate the samples in to two sub population or class.  
So, when the da ta points  are plotted in the in this a 2D  plane, so, we cannot see a two in a 
straight line that can separate the two classes of the data points completely. Why I  am saying so? 
Because, if we want to reduce this two dimensional data into one dimensional da ta suppose so, 
what we will  do, we will  draw the lines from these individual samples back into the x1 axis , x1 
axis. 
And so, here you can see the points are projected or reprojected over this  x1 axis, and however, 
we can see that there are something overlapping because here you can see the rate sample comes 
in between these blue dots. So, there are some overlapping, if we go for the simple reproduction 
of the samples into one of this dimension. Now, what is the solution?  (Refer Slide Time:  17:08)  
 
So, the  solution is we calculate a new axis and which can maintain the maximum distance 
between these subpopulations. So, here in this linear discriminant analysis, it uses both axes. So, 
here the axes are x 1 and x 2. So, here we are using two axes x1 and x2 to create a new axes. So, 
this is the new axis, which we are seeing here and projects the data onto these new axes in a way 
to maximize the separation of the two categories and hence reducing the  2D graph into 1D graph.  
So, here we can see it is  1D graph, and you can  see here, but, so, this is a 1D  graph. So, we are re 
projecting the samples into these new axes. So, here we can see clear separation between the b lue 
class and the red class. S o, this is an example of linear discriminant this as you can see, will this 
is how we calculate this is the basically the principle of linear discriminant analysis, we are 
projecting the data into a new dimension, so that we can maintain the maximum sepa ration 
between the two classes.  
So, the two criteria are used for LDA to c reate these new axes first of all, maximize the distance 
between the means of the two classes and minimize the variation within each clas s. So, these two 
are the major criteria we need to fu lfill while we compute this, the single dimension to  reprojects, 
the simple  one dim ension to reproject the samples . So, this is a linear discrimina nt analysis. (Refer Slide Time: 19:13)  
 
So, this new axes remember, based on these two criteria maximizes the distance between the two 
class between the means of these two class and minimizes the variation within each class. Again, 
here, when you draw these new axes, it minimizes the distance between the means of th e two 
classes and maximize the distance between the means of the two classes and minimizes t he 
variation within each class. And in other words, it increases the separation between the data 
points of the two classes. S o, this is how this LDA basically works.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:00)  
 So, how to calculate the LD A? So, there are some general five steps and in the next slide we are 
going to see details. So, generally first we compute the D dimensional mean vectors then we 
calculate the scatter matrix. In the third step we compute the Eigen vectors and corresponding 
eigen  values of the scatter matrix recall  PCA we already know what is Eige n vectors and Eigen 
values. Now, we have to solve the Eigen values and choose the choose those with the larg est 
Eigen values to form a d into k dimensional matrix. 
So, basically from the two dimensional data set we have to calculate the se vectors and then we 
have to calculate the scatter matrix once we calculate the scatter matrix we have to calculate the 
eigen  values and eigen  vectors then we have to solve the e igen values from large to small and 
then we want to transform the samples on  the new subs -pace. So, this is  how we do the LDA 
calculation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:13)  
 
So, in more details, we have to classify if we have to classify the x number of samples x items at 
hand to one of the J groups let us consider there are  J classes or  groups based on the 
measurements on p predictors . So, suppose, we want to classify the item suppose, this is an 
unknown item x, and there are p predictors or features in this feature space and we want to 
classify these x into one  of these J groups, where this j  varies from 1 to J capital J.  So, our rule for LDA is to assign these x to a group j that has the closest mean. So, what distance 
measure we generally use for this ? Generally use this Mahalanobis distance measured which 
considered the spreading of t he data. So, the  distance measure from 1 to  2 J groups we need to 
compute these distances distance measure and then we assign these new variable or new sample 
x to the group for which this distance d subscript j is minimum . 
And how to calculate these d subscript j for a new value new sample then we have to calculate 
by this formula x minus x j  bar transpose into S inverse Spl  inverse i nto X minus X bar j where 
these Spl  stands for the covariance matrix  what is covariance we have already discussed or 
equival ently we can assign x to this group for whic h the following term is maximum. So, the 
following term is maximum when we calculate these.  
So, we calculate this value by using this formula and we assign the new sample into that group for which this value is m aximum. So, this is how we calculate the linear discriminant analysis.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:51)  
 
So, what are the advantages of linear discriminant analysis? Well, the major advantage of using the linear discriminant analysis is it uses information from both the features to create a new axes 
which in turn minimizes the variance and maximizes the class dis tance between the two 
variables . So, this is the ma jor advantage.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:21)  
 
However, there are certain disadvantages also. First of al l the LDA fails when the mean of the 
distributions are shared. So, in that condition when the mean of distributions is  shared LDA 
cannot find a new axis that can make both the classes separable and in that case, we cannot rely 
on the linear discriminant an alysis then we have to rely on the nonlinear  discriminant analysis.  
And one of the major problem for linear discriminant analysis is , it is a parametric so here t he 
assumption of normal distribution of the features are followed.  
So, we have to verify whether our features or variables are normally distributed or not. And we 
have to do the if they are not normally distr ibuted, we have to do the required transformations  
Box and Cox transformations we have seen, we have discussed the what  Box and Cox  
transforma tion previously. S o, that type of transformation we have to do.  (Refer Slide Time: 25:33)  
 
So, how to prepare your data for linear  discriminant analysis in case of classification problem,  
these LDA supports both binary and multi- class  classification when  we are assuming that the 
input variables are features  are following the normal distribution, if the data or featur es are not 
normally distributed  then as I have mentioned we need to consider l og and root transformation 
for and also B ox and Cox transformat ions.  
We also need to remove the out laye rs from the data if we want to go for the linear discriminant 
analysis because this can skew the basic statistics used to separate the classes in LDA such that 
mean and standard deviation. And when there is a same v ariance,  same v ariance is important 
assumption. So, LD A assume  that each input variable has the same variance. So, you need to 
standardize your data with a mean of  0 and standard deviation of  1. 
So, that is why we have learned how to standardize scaling and centering , centering scaling of 
the data we have already discussed. So, we have to do the normality check, we have to do the 
standardization of the data, we have to  remove the out  layer. And so, these are the some of the 
important data I would say manipulation you need to do if we decide to go for the linear 
discriminant analysis.  (Refer Slide Time: 27:31)  
 
So, guys, these are the references for this lecture. And I hope that now, the linear discriminant 
analysis is clear to all of you. We have discussed  the basics, of course, we can dig into the more 
detailed mathematical expressions. But we do  not have the scope for discussing all those in 
details, but I hope that I am able to convey the major message from or the major message as far 
as the princ iple of  LDA is concerned. I hope  this is useful for you.  
And we will  see later some application of LDA in our upcoming lectures. So, thank you guys. 
Let us meet in our next lecture.  