Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop  Management  
Professor Somsubhra  Chakraborty 
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute  of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 14  
Principal  Component  Analysis  and Regressio n Applications  in Agriculture (Contd.)  
Welcome  friends  to this NPTEL online  certification  course  of Machine  Learning for Soil and 
Crop  Management . And in this week , we are discussing Principal  Component  Analysis  and 
Regression  Applications  in Agriculture. Today, we are going to discuss  our lecture  number  
14. And  this is the fourth  lecture of  week  3.  
In our previous  three  lectures,  we have already  discussed  some  of the important  aspects  of 
Principal  Component  Analysis , what  is principal  component  analysis,  how we can utilize  
principal  component  analysis  for dimensionality  reduction. W e have also seen , how  to use the 
principal  component  analysis  for clustering, what  are the PLS PCA  score  plot, what  is 
loading plot  and what  is the PCA  by plot .  
And then we have seen, what  is the Principal  Component  Regression , which  is an application  
of PCA  for predicting certain  predictors. So, and how to select  the important  principal  
component  based  on the Eigen  values  in the screeplot  and also based  on the cumulative  
percentage, the cumulative  percentage variat ion explaining power  of the principal  
components.  
In our last lecture,  we have  also discussed  one of the major  important  machine learning  
regression  algorithm  that is partial least  squares  regression  for predicting several  soil and 
crop properties. We have seen the major  features  of Partial  Least  Squares  Regression and 
how we can use the Partial Least  Squares  Regression , what  are the important  consideration of 
partial  least squares  regression , how it differs  from  principal  component  regression, how we 
can calculate the  Latin  factors  of partial least s quares  regression .  
And we have also seen the mathematical  representation  and matrix  based  representation  or 
partial  least squares  regression. So, remember  the principal  component  regression  or partial 
least squares  regression  which  we have discussed so far, both of them  are the parametric 
regression  and today we are going to start another  method, which  is a nonlinear  
nonparametric  method of  regression .  We are going  to discuss  today the classification  and regression  tree. So, this is a very 
important  aspect  of machine  learning  application  for soil  and crop.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 03:05 ) 
 
So, these are the major  concepts  which  we are going to discuss  today, we are going to first 
discuss , what  is classification  and regression  tree and then we are going to also discuss , how 
this classification  regression tree at generated  by, how the software  generates  this 
classification  regression  tree by recursive partitioning .  
We are also going to see, what  is prunning for reduci ng the overfitting . We are also going to 
see, what  are the different  impurity  measures  and finally,  we are going to see some  
advantages  and disadvantages  of classification  regression  tree. And we also we are going to 
discuss  the some  applications  of classi fication  regression  tree algorithm.   (Refer  Slide  Time: 03:58 ) 
 
Now,  these  are the keywords  which  we are going  to discuss  today in this lecture,  the CART , 
also recursive partitioning , then entropy, Gini Index and Pruning. So, let us start with the 
classi fication  and regression  tree.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 04:17)  
 
So, the classification  regression  trees , which  we can use the short  from  that is CART.  It is an 
important  machine- learning  algorithm  for classifying  or predicting an outcome.  When  our 
target  variab le is a categorical  variable,  then this tree is known as the classification  tree. And 
when  our target  is a numerical  variable,  then we call it or continuous  variable,  then we call it 
a regression  tree.   The approaches  are same , however, the final output  calculation  is somewhat  different,  we are 
going to also discuss  that. So, here the goal of classification  and regression  trees  is to classify  
or predict  an outcome  based  on the set of predictors. In case of regression  tree, we use to 
predict  outcome, whereas , in case of classification  tree, we use to classify  that target.  So, 
what  are the  outputs  from  this regression  tree or  CART  algorithm ?  
The output  of this algorithm  are a set of rules  which  we can use to predict  or define  any 
particular  output. For exampl e, here you can see, it is a classification  tree, for the sake of 
simplicity  I am just explaining this and we are using different  element  like Zinc, Potassium  
Zircon, Lead, copper, then Potassium , Manganese, to segregate soil samples  coming from  
three diff erent  land  use PET, land  use class.   
So, these three  different  land use class  are, A stands  for agriculture  and C stands  for 
converted  land and F stands  for forest  area.  So, you can see that using some  set of rules  at 
different  points, we are getting some  splits  and using getting  and these splits  are continuing  
until these final  endpoints  are the  squares , where no further splitting  is possible.  
So, this is called  the classification  tree. Similarly,  there will be a regression  tree, where the 
final output  is some  continuous  numerical  variable.  Now,  we will see the principle  of this 
classification  regression  tree,  in our coming slides . 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 07:17)  
 
But let us discuss them , what  is our goal for example . You can see, our goal is to classify  a 
record as whether  the sample  belongs  to Class  A or will not belong to class  A. So, here if we see, this is the first important  feature which  is basically  segregating  the samples.  So, we can 
see if the Zinc content  is greater  than point , if the Zinc content  is greater  than equal  to 91 
ppm, and if the Zirconium  content  of the soil is less than 328 ppm,  then we can get the 
majority  of the class  as the agricultural  samples.   
So, you can see these rule goes this way.  So, you can see using the IF and AND algorithm  
rules, we can we can define  any specific class.  Similarly,  for all other  terminal nodes , these 
are called  the terminal node s or leaps , where these  are not further split,  we cannot  split this 
farther.  So, these  are known as the terminal  nodes. So, you can define these terminal nodes  
using a  set of rules , okay.  So, this  is the classification  regression  tree in  a nutshell.   
So, this classification  regression  tree is also known as the CART  decision  tree or sometimes  
only just tree. So, you can see the rules  are represented  by tree diagram . Similarly,  here you 
can see, if the Zinc content  is less than 91, less than equal  to 91 and the Zirconium  content  is 
greater  than that 328 and if the Potassium  content  is greater  than 35196  ppm, then we will 
get, most  of the soil samples  will belong to  these converted  land  use region.  
So, this is how we can define any output  based  on the set of the rules  and you can see, these 
splitting  are going on, at different  levels , based  on certain  criteria’s  which  we are going to 
discuss . Sometime  they are no splitting  and some  time, we can see, there are continuous  
splitting  going on until we reach  this final terminal nodes . So, what  are the consideration for 
getting  this type  of splitting , we are going to  discuss  in our next  slides.  
(Refer Slide  Time: 10:14)  
 So, if we see another  very good example of CART  using the famous  Iris dataset,  which  gives  
the measurement  in centimeter  of the variable sepal  length and width  of the petal  length and, 
petal  length and width  respectively  for 50 flowers , each from  three  different  varieties.  What  
are these three  different  varieties ? These three different  varieties  of Setosa, then Versicolor  
and Virgini ca.  
And once  we use this classification  tree, since  these are the categorical  variables,  so, we are 
using the classification  tree. So, you can see at the first split the petal  length, based  on the 
petal  length, which  is less than 2.545 centimeter,  you will see that all 50 samples  will be 
classified  as the setosa  samples.  So, this is the first splitting  criteria , petal  length combination 
of the feature  as well as the value.   
So, the here the feature is petal  length and the value  is 2.45. So, this combination of feature  
and its value  will segregate these will, will cluster  the Setosa, Setosa grouped into one cluster  
and here you can see, in the second  splitting , based  on the petal  width , which  is less than we 
do petal  width  of 1.75, we  are getting  two more  classes.   
So, when  the petal  width  is less than 1.75, we are getting  most  of the samples  classified  as 
versi color  and when  the petal  width  is greater  than 1.75, we are getting  most  of the samples  
classified  as Virginica.  So, this is how we are getting, this is called  the recursive  partitioning,  
continuous  partitioning , recurring  partitioning , until we reach  a point  where no further  
splitting  is possible.  
There are a set of rules  where we should stop this type of partitioning  and we are going to 
discuss  in our coming slides.   (Refer  Slide  Time: 12:23)  
 
So, tree partitioning,  the tree partitioning  is a phenomenon where  the feature space  is getting  
partitioned  into a set of rectangles  and fit a sample model  in each of the leaf or terminal node.  
So, let us see, let us consider  that there is a feature space and here we have  y we have x and 
we have  number  of samples, two different  types  of samples , one  is hollow , another  is solid .  
And in the first iteration , what  this classification  CART  algorithm  basically  tries? It tries to 
find out the combination  of the variables  and their values . Suppose , there is a value  of S. So, 
this combination of x variable  and S value  can separate out this, this whole  rectangle, into 
two dotted rectangles  or two terminal nodes , okay.   
Then, remember  these terminal  nodes  are selected  based  on the homogeneity among each 
termin al nodes  and among  each classes.  It is not necessarily  that in these data terminal node  
there will be equal  distribution  of the samples . No, it is not necessary.  So, in the second split, 
you can see, based  on another  y and another  value of y, we can see another  split. So, in this 
next iteration,  you can  see there may  be another  split here.   
So, this type of splitting  will continuously go on and ultimately  you can see here 1, 2, 3, 4 
ultimately  rectangles  are there, based  on the  recursive splitting.  So, there will  be four terminal  
nodes  and the splitting  in each point  is going on, based  on certain  criteria  which  we are going  
to discuss  by measuring  some  purity measures  or in other  words  by measuring  some  impurity  
measures,  which  we are going to  discuss.   Now,  so, these are the  three partition  in the feature  space is  set of rectangles  and if it is simple  
model  in each of the each leaf, so, in case of a regression, there  is a constant  and in case of a 
classification  the final output  is the classification.  So, a tree will generally , tree growth is 
generally  content , if there are generally  two steps  is being done , one is growing by binary  
splitting  of the each  region  repeatedly .  
You can see that when  the CART  algorithm  that data is getting  binary splitted , okay. One is 
highe r of that splitting  value ; another  is lower  than the splitting  value . And pruning is the 
weakest  link, pruning which  is collapsing of the internal  node. We are going to discuss  what  
is pruning in  our upcoming slides.   
So, a key advantage of classification  regression  tree or CART , it is interpretability  and the 
feature space partitioning  is fully  described  by a single  tree in a graphical  representation , 
okay. So, in our software,  we can use the rpart  library, to generate this CART  algorithm . And 
another  majo r competitor  of CART  is C5 algorithm , which  we are going  to discuss  in our 
DSM , Digital Soil  Mapping module.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 16:16)  
 
So, what  are the major  elements  in case of a CART?  There are three major  elements  in the 
class . First of all rules  for splitting  data at a node  based  on the values  of one variable , and 
secondl y stopping rules  for deciding when  a branch is terminal and can be split no more . 
Three major  consideration and the final consideration is a prediction for the target  variable 
each of the terminal node.  So, you can see here, first, we are talking  about  rules  for splitting  the data at a node  based  on 
the value  of one variable  we have already  seen,  then we can see, how to stop this type of 
recursive partitioning  when  a branch  is termin al and can be split no more , we are going to 
also discuss  that. And finally, the prediction of the target  variable in each of the terminal 
node, when  no further  splitting  is possible  in the terminal node  then we predict  the target  
variable in  each  of the terminal  node  or leaf.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 17:25 ) 
 
Now,  here we can see here,  this is the example of recursive partitioning  in case of this Iris 
dataset.  We know  we can see that the CART  algorithm  is repeatedly  splitti ng the records  into 
two parts,  so as to achieve maximum homogeneity within  the new parts . I have already  told 
you, while  I was showing you the, I was showing  you the rectangle, here you can see, this is 
the another  rectangle,  so, here two  features  are there,  petal  width  and petal  length, okay.  
So, these are two features  in earlier , there are two features  x and y or x 1 and x 2, you can 
think of anything, either  x 1 or x 2 or X and Y maybe  two features.  So, here also you can see, 
petal  width  and petal  length are two features.  So, here based  on at the first split,  we are here,  
the petal  length is  the first and petal  length of  2.45.  
So, if you see the petal  length of 2.45, it is distributing  the samples  into two major  categories  
here.  So, this is the Setosa class  and other  two classes  are in the other  part that is when  the 
petal  length is greater  than 2.45. And in the second  split again  you can see just like I have  
showed you, based  on the petal  width  of 1.75, we are again  classifying  the samples  into two 
data nodes  or two terminal nodes.  So, ultimately  we are getting  here 1, 2, 3 terminal node , 1, 2, 3 terminal nodes . And this 
separation  is going  on or binary splitting  is going on, based  on the maximum homogeneity,  
you can see here in each of these terminal n odes, one class  is maximally  homogeneous . Here, 
in this, if we consider  this the first terminal node , here the  setosa is  more  homogeneous .  
In the second terminal node, this versicol or is more  homogeneous  and the third  node  or third  
terminal node, the virginica  is more  homogeneous. So based  on these relative  homogeneity, 
these the  samples  are divided into  several  classes  or recursively.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 20:00)  
 
So, how these trees  are being built actually.  So, as I have told you, I have showed you. So, 
first you have to pick one variable that is x i and then pick a value  of the variable say a si that 
divides  the training  data into two, remember  as I have  mentioned it that data or the terminal  
node s for these binary  splitting  should not  be necessarily  equal , in equal  portion.  
So, it may not be necessarily  equal  splitting.  So, basically  in each of these split, it basically  
measured , how pure or homogeneous  each of these resulting  portions  are? We can see in case 
of Iris dataset,  how homogeneous  the, how the splitting  was going on, based  on the relative  
homogeneity of three  different  types  of samples.  So, what  is pure? Pure means,  containing 
the records  of mostly  one class .  
Now, here algorith m tries different  values  of x i and s I, to maximize  the purity on the initial  
state.  So, whatever  featu res are there,  this CART  algorithm  will try to consider  all the 
features  and they are combination with their values,  so, that they can identify  the best variable  or feature and their value combination to get, to give us the maximum purity in the 
initial sp lit and  so on so  forth.  
So, after you get the maximum purity split,  repeat  the process  for a second  split and so on. 
And this is how  you do the  recursive partitioning  in a CART  algorithm.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 21:41)  
 
So, how  to compute  the purity?  It is based  on certain  metrics; the  first important  metrics  is the 
Entropy. What is Entropy?  Entropy is used to measure the impurity  of randomness  of a data 
set. Just like in case of  entropy in  thermodynamics, the  entropy is  the degree  of randomness.  
So, similar ly, in CART  algorithm,  it is used to measure the impurity  or randomness  of the 
dataset.  So, let us consider  that if we imagine  choosing a yellow  ball from  a box of just 
yellow  ball, say there  are 100 yellow  balls  and we want  to select  the some  yellow  balls  from  
those  all the 100 yellow  balls  then these boxes  say to have  zero entropy, which  implies  zero 
impurity  or total purity, because all the balls  are yellow  balls .  
But, if we replace 50 balls,  yellow  balls  with 50 blue balls  and then we want  to see the 
probability  of selecting  yellow  ball then of course,  the entropy will go down. Because, then 
that way there is no total there is no zero entropy, there are randomness, when  you are 
introducing some  other  types  of balls.   
So, this is called  the entropy and entropy we measure by using this formula,  this is the 
formula  of entropy, which  is denoted by A which  is minus  summation  of k equal  to 1 to m which  is pk log 2 base pk. So, p is here is the proportion of the cases  out of m, in rectangle A 
that belongs  to class k and entropy changes  between  0, which  is most  pure which  we have  
already  seen , and  log 2 base m , which  is showing the equal  representation  of the classes.   
So, this is how we calculate, this is an important  impurity  metrics . Another  important  metrics  
for CART  algorithm  is Gini Index.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 23:55)  
 
So, what  is Gini Index?  It is calculated  by subtracting the sum of squared  probabilities  of 
each class  from  1. So, it favors  the larger  partitioning and easy to implement, whereas,  
information  gain favors  smaller  partition  with distinct  values.  So, this is the formula  of this 
CART , Gini impurity  or Gini index.  
So, it is this is the formula  where  p is the proportion of the cases  in rectangle A that belongs  
to class  k, where  these this Gini index will be 0 when  all class  belong to the same class  and 
maximum values  it will assume  when  all classes  are equally  represented  in case of binary  
case it will be 0.50. So, this is how we calculate these entropy and Gini index in during these  
recursive partitioning of  CART .  (Refer  Slide  Time: 24:53)  
 
 
And how these impurity  impacts  is recursive  partitioning ? This is another  question. So, We 
know  we can identify  the, obtain the overall  impurity  measure, which  is the weighted  average  
of the individual  rectan gles and then at each successive  stage,  we can compare the impurity  
measures  across  all possible  split in all the features  and then we select  the split that reduces  
the impurity  most  and then  select  the split points  become nodes  of the tree.  
So, the splitting  points  are becoming the nodes , we call them  nodes. So, first of all in the first 
step, we in each split, we obtain the overall  impurity  of the measures  which  is a weighted  
average, then at each successive  stage,  we compare  the impurity  measures  across  all possible  
split, in all the features  with their variable, with their values  and select  the split that reduces  
the impurity  most  and then  select  that splitting  point  will become the  node  of the tree.   So, if we go back, these are the nodes  of the tree. So, this is one node  this is another  node, so 
where  the tree divides  or branches  are coming out that is called  the nodes  of the trees , okay.  
Where  to split?  So, this this is the mathematical  representation,  which  showing, reducing  the 
impurity  in each of the classes  by will increase the purity in each of the, each stages  of 
splitting.  So, this is a mathematical  representation . We have to find the variable j and the 
splitting  point  at value  s to minimize  this total mathematical  expression, okay.  
(Refer  Slide Time: 26:40)  
 
So, how impurity  impacts  recursive partitioning, we know  that. We were we recursively  
partition  or repeat  the splitting  process  on each of the two resulted  region till some , we know, 
we will go on partitioning these,  this data set, and then ultimately  we will stop at a point  
where some  stopping criteria  are met.   
So, in our software,  we generally  use the following options  called  rpart . Control , you know,  
this is an argument  which  we use in our to assign  some  stopping  criteria.  So, minimum split 
is the minimum  size for a node  to split and then minimum bucket  is the minimum size for a 
terminal node  which is leaf size and maximum depth is maximum  depth of any node  on the 
final tree with  the node , root  node  set counted as  0.  
So, if we can fix the maximum depth, the tree will go up to that depth and then it will stop.  
Minimum buckets , suppose, we assign  the minimu m size of a terminal node  or leaf size then 
also the CART  will stop once  that number  of terminal nodes  m min reached . So, as m min  
reached. And finally,  minimum split is also the minimum size for not to split. We can assign  
the minimum number  of samples,  which  will be  required  for further splitting.   So, if we can specify  these  criteria,  you know, the CART  will not go indefinitely  and it will 
stop at a particular  point  based  on these  features.  So, why we need  these kind of features , 
because we are using these we can prevent  overfitting, because,  if we do not give this topping  
criteria , CART  can perfectl y create a rule for each of the sampl es, which  are present  in the 
dataset  and in that way,  it will train  so, it will be  trained  on the  noises  of the data.   
So, it becomes  over fitted.  So, that so, to prevent  that overfitting , we go with this type of 
stopping criteria .  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 29:06)  
 
Other stopping criteria  as I have already  mentioned, maximum tree depth, then when  the only 
one case is left in the node , also all other  cases  are duplicates  of each other  and finally,  the 
node  is pure. So, all target  values , when  they agree, then this is the another  stopping criteria.  
So, these are the stopping criteria,  which  we can apply in the CART  to stop the recursive  
partitioning  at some  stage.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 29:37 ) 
 
Now,  what  is pruning suppose, we have allowed  the tree to grow  into his full extent.  And 
when  we see a tree is grown  to a full extent , there  is always  chance of getting  overfitting . So, 
to reduce the chance of overfitting, we can simplify  the tree by pruning the peripheral  
branches  to avoid the  overfitting .  
So, we can reduce the number  of peripheral  branches  just we have seen in case of gardening, 
when  a tree grows  indefinitely , we cut their terminal by peripheral  branches  to reduce  the 
overfitting. So, similarly,  here also we can do the overall  you know  pruning to simplify  that 
to reduce or  to avoid the  overfitting .  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 30:23)  
 What  are the advantages  and disadvantages?  First of all, it is very easy to explain  using these  
if and then rule, to people  even  easier  to explain  than the linear  models. Some  believe that 
decision  tree mirror the human  decision -making. It likes  the human, how humans  are making  
the decision , making some  rules  and step by step .  
And then trees  can be displayed graphically and are easily  interpreted  by a non-expert , 
especially , if they are small and then it can easily  handle  quantitative  predictors  without  the 
need  of creating  any dummy  variables  and can naturally  handle  the missing  values  in the 
predictors  entries  generally  do not  have  same level  of predictive  accuracy.   
But, this is the only demerit of trees;  the trees  do not have  the same level  of predictive  
accuracy  as some  of the other  some  of the other  regression  classification  approaches. So, 
these are some  of the advantages  and disadvantages  of the tree.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 31:23)  
 
Let us see some  example  of classification  regression  tree application  in soil. We have  already  
discussed , how we have  classified  around 500 number  of samples,  you know  one of our 
projects  using this classification  tree algorithm to. So, these are the splitting nodes , these are 
the nodes  of the tree and these are the terminal nodes  and you can see in the terminal nodes , 
how the samples  coming from  three different  classes  are distributed.  
So, while  we know  based  on certain  stopping criteria,  the fact that no further  splitting  was 
possible, and ultimately,  we are able to define the soils coming from  different  land use by using a set of rules  and then set of rules  you know, are really  helpful  for identifying the 
samples  coming from  different  land  use patterns.   
So, if we can set we can if we can set up certain  rules  if we can define  certain  rules  to divide  
the soil samples  into different  land use Styles,  in future  we can also bring some  unknown 
samples  and using the set of rules  you can getting  their elemental  values and using that setup  
rules,  we can also classify  them  into one of these three categories.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 32:38)  
 
Another  way, crop applicat ion I would like to show  you here, when  the maize crop, we have  
applied  this classification  and regression  tree and we have  applied  different  types  of 
variables , not only the socio  economic  variables,  we have also used some  management  
variables,  agronomic  variables  and soil variables  to classify  the crop  yield  into.  
So, this is an example of, this is the perfect example of the decision  tree where you can see 
the terminal nodes, our target  is already  given, y values  are given , a number  of samples  are 
given, an each node  you can see the splitting  based  on certain  features  and their value. For 
example,  in this node , you can see splitting  node ; you can see seed rate is one of the major  
features.   
So, first seed rate was a major  feature  with a value  of 27.78 and then when  it is less than 
27.78, we are getting  to further split. And in the second  level , we can see here based  on the 
principal  component  1 of soil spectral  data,  we will divide  them  into again  two terminal  
nodes. So, similarly,  these  are the final terminology. So, this type of algorithm  helps  us to identify , what  are the features  and what  are their values,  which  are very much  important  to 
define  or to predict  the ultimate  the crop  yield.  
So, these type of applications  have  been  done, you know, lots of application  you can see in 
the literature,  where people  are using a scientist  and using this CART  algorith m for 
predicting the crop yield  predicting the soil properties  then we call it a decision  tree. You will 
see they  are using the  decision tree model. So, these  type  of applications  are there.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 34:34)  
 
So, these are the references  which  I have used in this lecture.  So, thank  you. I hope  that you 
have  gathered  some  knowledge  about  CART  and how it operates  what  are the basic features  
of CART  and we have  seen one or two examples  of CART  application  on soil and crop based  
studies. So, let us stop here and in our next lecture we will discuss  some  more important  
machine learning algorithms  for soil  and crop  application . Thank you.   