Machine Learning for  Soil and  Crop Management  
Professor. Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 26  
Use of ML for Portable Proximal Soil and Crop Sensors  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:22)  
 
Welcome friends  to this week 6 of lectures for this NPTEL online certification course of 
Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management . And this will be the first lecture of week 
6, lecture number 26. And in this lecture, we are going to cover some impor tant aspects. In 
this week, we are going to cover some of the important portable proximal sensors and how 
we have used them along with the machine learning approaches for different types of soil 
survey and soil property prediction as well as crop character ization.  
So, in our previous couple of weeks, we have discussed the basics of machine learning and 
deep learning and the basics of multivariate data analytics we have seen , different aspects of 
sub classification as well as regression. And in our previous week, we have discussed about the diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, the details as well as how spectrally you can 
characterize soil as well as rock . So, today, we are going to start discussing about the other 
portable proximal sensors. (Refer Slide Time: 02:00)  
 
So, these are the concepts which we are going to cover. First of all, I  will give you a very 
brief overview of historical and modern soil survey and why we now need the application of 
advanced sensors. And then, we are going to talk about the proximal cell sensors or proximal 
sensors and their classification. Then, we will start with the P ortable X RF for Portable x-ray 
fluorescence spectrometer . And then, we are going to see some S oil PXRF  Applications. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:51)  
 
These are the som e of the keywords which we are going to discuss today. One is Proximal  
sensors then SS NM or Site-Specific Nutrient Management then PXRF , primary x-ray and 
Fluorescence . (Refer Slide Time: 03:08)  
 
So, you know that for soil science, the historical survey of soil started long back by US 
Department of Agriculture. And they relied on, initially they relied on reconnaissance soil 
survey. And since the earliest days of soil survey, geology has strongly influenced the 
discipline . And at the time, the soils were mapped based on geologic  formation , landforms 
and lithologic. As you can see, this is a picture of reconnaissance soil survey in Texas in 
1922. So, the history of soil survey started with the reconnaissance soil survey, where 
geology played a major role for mapping of soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:11)  
 
Now, Curtis Marbut  the scientist, he first gave this normal soil concept which identified two 
major types of soil , one is Pedocals  and another is  Pedalfers.  So, Pedocals are  the types of soil which contain lar ge amounts of calcium carbonate and mainly found in the western 
United States.  
And in case of Pedalfers,  it contains a large amount of iron and aluminium and mainly found 
in the Eastern US. And also, as the name suggests c als, which contains ca that means  it 
contains calcium carbonate whereas in case of Pedalfers , which is alfe that means aluminium  
and iron dominance is there.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:14)  
 
Now, in 1950, during 1950s to 60s soil science has saw rapid advances in soil chemistry, soil 
physics, soil biology and soil mineralogy, etc etera,  the disciplines . Which drove a shift from 
qualitative to quantitative soil science. So, earlier scientists mainly resort to qualitative soil 
survey, but with the advent of these some  disciplines of soil science, like soil chemistry, soil 
physics, soil biology, soil mineralogy, it drove a shift from qualitative to quantitative soil survey.  
People were more interested in quantitative description of soil properties. By the 1960s Guy  
Smith was commissioned to develop a new system of soil classification based on quantifiable data and discrete classes. So, that marks a paradigm shift as far as the soil survey and soil 
characterization are concerned.  (Refer Slide Time: 06:24)  
 
So, from 1990s to present time, the Global Positioning System receivers were used to notate 
exact location of descriptions, field notes , etcetera. And proximal and remotely sensed data 
represent a collection of tools capable of providing large amount of data at minimal cost and reduced labor requir ements.  
There are several types of sensors people are using nowadays, like infrared satellite imagery 
they are using, visible near infrared diffuse reflectance spectroscopy or DRS, we have 
discussed the details in our previous week, that ground penetrating radar , electromagnetic 
induction, field portable x-ray fluorescence spectrometry, then  in situ soil sensors that is 
connected to data loggers and then these data loggers can measure water and gas movement to the soil of real tine in relation to climate ob servations.  
So, there are different types of sensors are being used to generate the quantity information 
instead of qualitative information that gives this  soil survey a huge leap and also more chance 
for exploiting or the machine learning and deep learnin g-based  algorithms for soil 
characterization and answering some of the unanswered question in the soil science domain and crop size domain.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:11)  
 
Now, if we take a look at this barren  surface where grow the crops are very much scarce. So, 
what is the limiting productivity in this soil? The first question comes to our mind what is the 
limiting productivity of this soil, is this due to pH , is this due to salinity , is this due to soil 
textual variation , is this due to unfavourable  protec tion capacity , is this due to low organic 
matter , is this due to pollution, we never know.  
So, the only way of accessing or answering this question is to take the soil samples bring 
them into the , take some soil samples bring them into the lab analyze them and after the 
analysis which is time consuming, we can tell , okay this is the major limiting factor . But 
think about some alternative where we are using some sensors which we can directly use in 
the field to answer these queries.  
This will give us more in formation for answering this question which is the most important 
limiting factor of this  soil. So, here you can see this PXRF  sensor is placed in the soil and 
using this PXRF  extracted data along with some machine learning and statistical application, 
it is now possible to identify what is the major cause of this situation in the soil.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:17)  
 
So, another  perspective of using this sensor is  to boost the agricultural productivity. You 
know that fertilizers we generally use in the field for boosting the agricultural productivity 
and most of the farmers they generally  think since they do  not have the access to the 
traditional soil testing services, they really think that if little is good, that lot will be better for increasing the agricul tural productivity because to increase the you know, it because of 
productivity fertilizer is one of the major inputs.  
However, due to these indiscriminate . So, as a result of that, they generally apply these 
fertilizer s in a blanket fashion. And due to th is blanket application of these fertilizers , there 
are three major problems one is they are losing the inputs, and due to the application of these 
chemical fertilizers, there is loss of natural soil fertility and the also creates human health 
hazards becau se these are synthetic chemicals.  
And this nitrogenous  fertilizer application, these nitrates can go to the groundwater and then 
contaminate the groundwater which can cause human health hazard. So, to stop this fertilizer application, without soil testing,  it is important that we should take the help of some of the 
smart sensors which are available off the shelf and we can use them for rapid measurement of soil properties use them as auxiliary tools along with the standard soil testing services.  
So, we need  to use this type of sensors to assess the soil health along with AI ML tools are 
artificial intelligence machine learning tools . And the three major objectives are for onsite  
rapid testing, and then to maintain the cost effectiveness of the total analysis.  And thirdly, is 
to minimally  processed the soil . And finally, the use of these proximal sensors and cheap soil sensors or cost effective soil 
sensors are first to increase the utility use efficiency because we are not now , we are giving 
the fertilizer bas ed on the need of the crop we are not applying the fertilizer in a blanket 
fashion then we are improving the crop productivity and finally and most importantly, we are 
improving we are increasing the profit of the farmers because unless we can increase the  
profit of the farmers, they will not be attracted to these type of advanced sensors. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:28)  
 
Now, if we consider the conceptual framework of the site -specific  nutrient management, 
which is a very important word nowadays in the agricult ural domain, because site specific 
nutrient management will help you to reduce the fertilizer consumption and to increase the 
fertility. So, you can see that how this smart soil sensing framework  can help in site specific 
nutrient management.  
So, for this smart soil sensing framework, the ultimate end product  is the yield  map, which 
we can create using different sensors, we have already discussed about the diffuse reflectance 
spectroscopy and apart from that portable X RF is there and then on the go soil sensor is there, 
the mobile soil testing lab then optical sensors and smartphone images, we could use all of them to develop these yield  map and ultimately these yield  map will be considered as an 
input for variable rate application. 
Now, this variable rate a pplication will also  take the help of this decision -making system. So, 
this decision -making system is directly linked with this yield  map and also these decision -
making system takes the help of remote sensing and also crop canopy sensor -based  
measurement , UAV based measurement and also smartphone images.  So, in combination with the yield map and also remote sensing imagery, crop canopy sensor 
measurement , UAV imagery and smartphone images, we can make a decision -making system 
and based on this decision -maki ng system , it is now possible to develop to, it is now possible 
to use this variable rate applicator for site specific nutrient management. So, you can see that 
how these different components are linked together and how these are interrelated.  
And in each of these application for example, optical sensor -based  soil property mapping, 
then smartphone images, then portable XRF, then DRS , and then remote sensing, crop 
canopy sensor -based  modeling , UAV,  smartphone images, you can see all of them take s the 
help of  artificial intelligence and machine learning applications. We are going to discuss it 
this week , in the coming weeks. So, this gives you a conceptual framework of the site -
specific nutrient management . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:24)  
 
And let us see what is th e definition of proximal soil sensors. So, according to Viscarra 
Rossel et al  in 2011 he define these proximal soil sensors as these are the sensors , these are 
the ground- based  sensors used in agriculture to gather information about different soil 
properti es by obtaining signals with direct contact with soil samples or from a distance within 
2 meter. So, these sensors, we generally keep them in contact with the soil or within a 
distance within 2 meter. So, that is why they are called proximal soil sensors. (Refer Slide Time: 17:09)  
 
Now, if we see the classification of the proximal soil sensors based on their mode of 
operation, we can classify them into 5 categories. First one is the one which is the first 
category basis reflected radiation. For example, i n this category, diffuse reflectance 
spectroscopy, then Nix  Pro sensor , then camera images, smartphone images, digital images, 
they will come . 
Secondly, so, they are helpful for measurement of soil organic matter, total organic carbon, 
total nitrogen , soil , colour, texture and moisture because they showed the colour  variation that 
they are colour  sensitive , proximal soil sensors. Then,  the second category measures 
incoming radiation from the soil in this category PX RF, gamma spectrometry and laser 
induced breakdown spectroscopy will be there and they can measure in soil element,  soil 
texture , pH, salinity, volumetric moisture . 
In the third category, these sensors measure backscattered electromagnetic waves or temporal 
propagation of electromagnetic waves. Th e examples of these sensors are EM  or 
electromagnetic induction , then ground penetrating radar , then time domain reflectometry or 
TDR and frequency domain reflectometry these sensors can measure volumetric moisture content, salinity, soil texture and struc ture. 
The fourth category measured the horizontal or vertical soil strength example penetrometer  
they can measure soil strength and bulk density. And the fifth category measures electro 
chemical properties examples are ion selective electrodes and ion sensitive field effect 
transistor  (())(19:01). So, they are helpful for measurement of pH,  salinity and ion activities.  So, we can see that there are different categories of proximal soil sensors and based on their 
mode of operation and they are categorized a nd they can address or they can measure a set of 
soil properties , they cannot predict or characterize all the soil properties but a set of soil 
properties.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:38)  
 
So, let us move ahead and see , we can start with the portable XRF, PXRF , sometimes we call 
it PXRF , sometimes people call it small pXR F, sometime we call it HH -XRF or handheld 
XRF. So, you can see these terms very frequently. Remember that these terms are 
synonymous, so, PXRF,  small p XRF and HH-XRF these are same term. S o, we will be using 
these PX RF in this course. 
So, the PXRF stands for the portable x -ray fluorescence spectrometry , the technique is known 
as portable x- ray fluorescence spectrometry and the instrument is known as portable x- ray 
fluorescence spectrometer . This i s a portable x- ray fluorescence spectrometer , you can see 
here it is a handgun type of instrument and this instrument is field  portable, this does not 
require any consumable, it can measure the soil properties without any chemical treatment, it 
is non- destructive  that means it does not destroy the soil samples during its analysis. 
And it helps for multi elemental analysis and provides the simultaneous analysis of 20 to 30 elements starting from M agnesium to Uranium. So, this  is very lightweight, earlier ver sions 
were around 1.5 kg. Now, the latest versions are lighter than that, almost 1 kilo of weight at 
this is very fill portable rugged, and they can be taken into the field for measurement of soil 
properties.  So, this instrument you can devise, you could go, you can take it to the , in the field or you can 
use the with the lab also and you can touch the nose of this instrument to the bare soil surface 
and then you can press the trigger and within 60 to 90 seconds, it will give you the reading of 
the total elemental content , within 60 to 90 seconds and it will give you the total elemental 
content from Magnesia to Uranium . 
So, using these elemental contents scientists have proved the utility of this instrument for 
measurement of soil pH, electrical conductivity , catenation capacity, all the macro and 
micronutrients , gypsum , percent -based  saturation, heavy metals, pollution, permafrost  pH, 
land use land cover classification , parent  material , profile horizonation, geochemistry, 
compost EC and C EC, then  water heavy  metals , and leaf elements.  
So, you can see this instrument has been used extensively it both soil and crop as well as in  
the water for measurement of multiple properties. So, this is the internal construction of this 
instrument, we are going to talk about  this principle more  in our coming slides, but this 
instrument has changed the concept of soil testing drastically in the last 10 years . And in 
Western countries now, it has been utilized as one of the major , one of the approved methods  
of soil testing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:06)  
 
So, if we see the working principle of this instrument, this instrument basically works , the 
working principle of PXRF is same as x -ray fluorescence. Now, basically what happens in 
this instrument there is a primary x- ray beam. So , this primary x- radiation is produced in a 
vacuum tight tube containing a cathode , here is the cathode which is the source of electrons with a high accelerating voltage supplied by a generator that works in a range of 20 to 60 kilo 
volt. 
And an anode whic h is the metal target , this is an anode which is a metal target. So, when the 
electrons which are produced by this cathode collide with this anode, then this is a metal 
target or anode , these x-rays will be produced which is known as the primary x- rays. So, the 
metal of the anode is usually , so this anode  is metal.  
So, this metal  of these anode is selected among the elements with high melting point and 
atomic number able to produce high intensity primary x- ray radiation such as , so generally 
the metals we are used are R h, Mo, W, C r and other. So, generally they are used for this 
anode. And this is the kinetic  energy with which the anode is heat is converted into heat the 
past water circuit was used to avoid the melting of the anode and overheating of the ent ire 
system while newer system  are air cooled system. So, this is how this primary x -ray beam  is 
generated.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:59)  
 
So, in the next step  this primary x- ray beam generally goes through a filter also known as this 
window and this primary x- ray beam interacts with the electrons which are there in the lower 
orbitals of the atoms and then ejecting them and these atoms get energized and then they eject from these lower orbitals creating an electron hole . And the next step, the electrons from th e 
higher orbital cascade down to fill up these voids. 
And when they try to cascade down to these to fill up these voids , they will release the 
secondary x-rays and then they are known as the fluorescence and in the terms of photons, and they will be detect ed by the detector. So, the wavelengths comprising the secondary 
fluorescence x-ray radiation and are identified and measured by these detectors, which are 
either gas field scintillation counters or solid state . 
Nowadays, most of the detectors are solid st ate which converts this individual photon energy  
into pulses of electrical energy. Now, since each chemical element has characteristic x- ray 
spectral line and their intensity is related to the amount of the element, it is therefore, possible 
to ascribe x- ray spectra to their own elements and access that abundance in the sample. So, 
this is how the x- ray fluorescence technology works and the same technology works in the 
portable x- ray also.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:43)  
 
Now, depending on that transition, depending on the transition of these of these electrons from the higher arbiters to lower orbitals, we can see different types of naming of this 
emission. For example, when the electrons move from this L orbital to K orbital, then we turn 
with K alpha emission when the transition occurs from M orbital to K  orbital then it is known 
as the K  beta emission. And so, it depends on from where this transition is occurring. 
Ultimately, we are naming them as alpha emission or beta emission.  (Refer Slide Time: 27:35)  
 
Now, if we see the evolution of PXRF,  it has been used since 1980s. But at the time the 
instrument was heavy, heavy and with the passing of time with the advancement of 
technologies, these technologies have been evolved drastically and with the advent of the 
solid -state detectors, we have seen a drastic change in the technology , a drastic change is the 
PXRF  technology which helped the scientists for better characterization. 
And so, there are different types of companies , several companies who are producing t his 
instrument nowadays, and they are available in the market. And so ultimately,  we have seen 
there has been a drastic change in this technology, earlier instruments were heavy and latest instruments are lightweight, and they are more rugged and they are proof to the drop test . The 
new versions of Olympus instruments for example, they are proof to the drop tests. So, if you drop them in the field that will not create any problem for this type of sensors. So, you can 
see that there has been tremendous improvement in this type of sensors. (Refer Slide Time: 29:30)  
 
And this instrument can be used both in situ as well as ex situ and as you can see scientists 
are using them in the field directly touching the instrument in the soil profile to define the soil 
profile . Also, they have been used in the lab. Of course, when you use them in the lab, you 
can control the variability in the soil. However, for soil application also there are some prescribed steps which you can follow for reducing the heterogeneity in the measurement.  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:17)  
 
So, the limit of detection, if you can see this is the limit of detection of earlier version of Vanta PXRF Analyzer s produced by Olympus and you can see that most of the heavy 
elements are having the LOD of less t han 5 PPM and only aluminium  and Si as they have the 
LOD of less than 400 PPM . And some of the elements like phosphorus , sulphur  and chlorine they have the limit of 
detection of less than 50 PPM . So, now adays  the instruments with lower limit of detection a re 
now available, which can give you the more accurate results and they can quantify the minute 
amount of these presence of these elements in the soil surface.  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:14)  
 
So, there are different reference methods for portable XRF  soil appl ication. One is given by 
the US EPA as you can see the first one which is called the method 6200. The second one is 
given by USDA, United States Department of Agriculture NRCS . And the third one is 
produced by myself and P rofessor David Weindorf  of Texas T ech University , now he  is at 
the Central Michigan University.  
So, we have produced this portable x -ray fluorescence spectrometry analysis of soil as a 
method of soil analysis published by Soil Science Society of America. So, these three are 
largely known s tandard difference methods for PX RF soil applications. (Refer Slide Time: 3 2:11) 
 
So, these are the references  which I have used. So, guys, in a nutshell, we have seen that why 
we need these advanced sensors  nowadays  because these advanced sensors are helpful for 
both soil survey as well as to reduce the application of chemical fertilizer in the field and to 
maintain the environmental sustainability and to increase the profitability of the farmers , to 
increase the productivity of the field.  
And there are this smart solid sensing framework  using different types of sensors optical 
sensors, PXRF sensors, spectral sensors can help in developing the yield  map which can be 
used as an input for site specific nutrient management . Of course, along with several othe r 
sensors like satellite imagery, then crop canopy sensors, and all these operations  are 
interrelated and takes the help all these operations , take the help of the machine learning and 
deep learning application to accomplish their objectives. 
And we have s een the broad classification of the proximal sensors based on their  mode of 
operation. And we have also seen, we have also started discussing the portable XR F we have 
seen the basic working principle, and what are the benefits of this instrument and in the next 
class , in the next session, we  will be starting discussing how this application of PX RF started 
in the domain of soil and how evolution of different statistical methods happened while using 
this PXRF  for soil and crop characterization. 
So, I hope tha t you have learned something new. And let us up some of these discussions  you 
will find in my other NPTEL course, soil science and technology where I briefly touched 
these PXRF . But here we will be discussing their application in details along with the 
mathematical explanations . And we will be , in the next lecture, we  will be discussing how we have started with the basic 
statistical tools and then we move towards machine learning tools for exploring the soil 
properties using the portable XRF based elemental  data from soil. So, guys, thank you. Let us 
meet in our next lecture to start from here and I  will show you more application of PX RF for 
soil and crop characterization along with the different machine learning applications. Thank 
you. 