Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty 
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 23  
Diffuse Reflectance Spectroscopy : Basics and Applications for Crop and Soil (Contd .) 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:25)  
 
Welcome friends to this 3rd  lecture of week 5  of NPTEL online certification course on 
Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management. And in this week, we are discussing about 
Diffuse Reflectance Spectroscopy and Basics and Ap plication for Crop and Soil. This is 
lecture number 23, our 3rd lecture of this week 5.  
And in our previous two lectures, we have discussed some of the important concepts , we 
have discussed the multispectral remote sensing , hyperspectral remote sensing, what are the 
differences , what is soil spectroscopy and what is the difference between mid -infrared 
spectroscopy as well as near visible to near infrared spectroscopy, why mid infrared 
spectroscopy contains more information than visible near infrared spectroscopy we have 
discussed. 
So, and also we have discussed different types of specifications of the visible near infrared 
spectroscopy. We have seen what is sampling interval , what is spectral resolution we have 
discussed. And also, we have seen the working p rinciple of different types of detectors like 
VNIR detector , which is 512 silicon photodiode array, and indium , gallium arsenide detector, 
which is used for is SWIR1  and SWIR2 region we have seen . So, today we are going to start from there and we are going to discuss some of the other 
important specs like FO V, what is field of view and then we are also going to start a very 
important aspect that is spectral prepossessing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:19)  
 
So, these are the topics which we are going to cover in today's lecture one is the FO V or field 
of view and then we are going to discuss the spectral prepossessing. S ome of the important 
spectral prepossessing like spectral trimming , Savit zky-Golay filter , standard normal variate , 
detrending we are going to discuss. So, most of the discussion in today's lecture in this lecture 
will be focused on the spectral prepossessing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:49)  
 So, these are the keywords for today's lecture for this lecture, FO V, spectral trimming , 
moving window average and then Savit zky-Golay filter , SNV which we are going to discuss. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:03)  
 
So, in the previous lecture, we have stopped here that is discussing about the pre and  post 
dispersive spectrometer. So, what is the difference between this pre  and post dispersive 
spectrometer ? There are two types of spectrometers one is pre -dispersive another is post -
dispersive. Now, in case a pre -dispersive spectrometer, the ambient light that means stray 
light signal can represent a large fraction of the total lig ht signal measured by the detector.  
So, as a result of that, it can be a major source of error. So, that creates a problem in case of 
user pre -dispersive spectrometer . And other one spectrometer is there that is called post -
dispersive spectrometer. So, her e the ambient  straylight scattered from the sample is also 
collected, but with the post -dispersive instrument only ambient stray light of the same 
wavelength as then being measured by the detector is added to the signal.  
So, this stray light signal represe nts a much smaller fraction of the total light signal measured 
by the detector resulting in instrument baseline stability. So, that is why the pre -dispersive 
spectrometer is not preferred over the post -dispersive spectrometer . Post-dispersive 
spectrometer is rather preferable than the pre -dispersive  spectrometer . (Refer Slide Time: 04:28)  
 
Another important concept is a field of view that means using different types of foreoptics  
like we have different types of lens , we have different types of probe . How much area we can 
cover ? What is the field of view ? So, this selection of this field of view generally varies based 
on our objective. So, and the selection of the field of view should be done very carefully 
because they are some pros and cons of both small and large field of view.  
So, generally in case of the spectroradiometers which are commercially available, they are 
having very small size foreoptics , we are going to discuss like contact probe , this contact 
probes are very small size. So, you can position  this contact probe of this foreoptics  at a 
greater distance from the surface under observation, we  will see some photographs.  
So, but at the same time, you should remember that, in case of large FOV when we are 
talking about large  FOV,  that larger FO V gen erally show few measurement for larger special 
coverage. So, when you have to have a large special coverage, we generally go with the large 
field of view, but when there is a small FOV  that helps in removing the self -shadowing 
effect.  
So, this is the diffe rence between small FOV  and larger FOV , but in case of large FOV  you 
can have a special coverage. So, you can have, you can do a very few number of 
measurements to cover a large area. So, this is how you can calculate the effective diameter 
of, the diamete r of the field of view or Y, you can see here the formula is given. So, a 
diameter field of view which is denoted by Y  is given. So, in case of near field which is less than 1 nanometer,  1 meter and there is a far field which 
is greater than 1 meter distan ce. So, in case of nearfield the formula is D plus 2 X Tan A by 2  
where D is the effective diameter of the foreoptics  lens. So, this is the effective diameter of 
the foreoptics  lens, this is the foreoptics  and this is the effective diameter of the foreopti cs 
lens. X is the distance of the viewed surface, s o that is called as X.  
And A is basically the foreoptics  angular field of view, so it is the angular field of view. So, 
this is how you calculate the diameter of field of view , use for the near field condi tion. But in 
case of far  field condition when it is greater than 1 meter, then you utilize this formula that is 
2 X Tan A by 2. So, 2 X, so this is the formula for both the near field FOV  and the far  field 
FOV  calculations. So, this is how  you calculate th e field of view. So, the large  FOV is useful 
for special information , small FOV  helps in no self -shadowing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:53)  
 
So, you can see here that as we move from different types of FOV , this is the 1 degree, then 5 
degree,  then 3 degree, 5 degree and as we go to the 25 degree of course, the diameter is 
increasing. So, higher field of view is showing the , higher field of view is covering the larger 
area than that of the smaller field of view . And also, for this tilted orientation, how to 
calculate the FOV is also the formula is given here. So, you can utilize this formula to 
calculate the diameter of field of view or the area of the field of view you can calculate.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:52)  
 
Now, of course, this as I have told you, that this  spectroradiometer  can be utilized both in 
field and lab and as you can see, you can take a field measurement by putting these foreoptics  
at a certain distance from the surface, you can see these are very small. So, it is having a 
small FOV  and the larger FOVs  are also there, but at the same time you can see whenever we 
are doing this optical measurement, there are a wide spectrum and panels are always there for 
referencing your spectroradiometer.  
And also, this is the fields this is a laboratory setup, which you can use for making the 
laboratory measurement. This is the fore -optic,  it is connected to the spectroradiometer  and 
this is the wide spec (())(09:49) panel. Y ou can take the scan of the any surface just keeping 
the sample below in any powder form . (Refer Slide Time: 10:00)  
 
Now, there are different types of foreoptics , these are generally I have given here some 
example of the foreoptics , which are  there with the field spectrometers, you can see here the 
contact probe, which is used for directly touching the powder surface and then collecting the 
spectral response.  And this is a high bright contact probe, which is useful, which is also 
similar to this contact probe, but it has a high intensity light source . 
And these are called the Hi -Brite Muglight. So, whenever we go for the field scanning, lab 
scanning, we can keep the sample just over these M uglight and we can scan it from below. 
So, generally the idea is we take it especially optically transparent petri dish . And this 
optically transparent petri dish we keep this sample in it and we place over this M uglight and 
it scan from below.  
So, this is another arrangement for doing the laboratory measurement . This is for plant probe 
and also heat the plants leaves are heat sensitive. So, special care has been taken by 
producing these plant probe which are for the heat sensitive surface and this is useful for scanning the plant bodies or plant leaves.  
Now, also this called a leaf clip which is useful for scanning the leaf and also this called a pistol grips . This pistol grips are useful for using the foreoptics  directly in the field. These are 
very handy and you can use very easily to use the foreoptics  directly in the field specifically 
in the in case of field measurement.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:00)  
 
So, we have discussed the some of the important specifications of the diffuse reflectance 
spectroscopy. Now, we are going to start the discussion about the spectral prepossessing. 
Now, generally you can see here that we can see, we can plot the spectra using diff erent types 
of unit of measurement . Most generally , we use the it this  wavelength in terms of micrometer 
and nanometer . The reflectance values, the reflectance values are plotted here in terms of 
micro , in terms of wavelength in micrometer.  
And also, we can represent or we can plot the same reflectance values in terms of wave 
number which is centimeter  inverse. So, this is the formula of calculating the wave number 
from any given wavelength in nanometer. So, once we have a nanometer  or micrometer , we 
can co nvert it to the wave number and we can plot . So, it is basically simple conversion the 
unit of measurement for this reflectance spectra.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:19)  
 
Now, the question comes why we go for the spectral prepossessing, because as you know that  
while we capture the spectra specifically in the field or sometime in the lab, there are some 
errors in the recorded spectral data because it is spectral instruments, optical instruments are 
highly sensitive to the surrounding variation. So, when there is  a variation in the surrounding 
specifically  light condition, temperature condition that creates some variation in the 
spectrum.  
So, scanning soil with non- uniform also, scanning the soil which is highly heterogeneous 
with non- uniform particle size. So, the reflectance spectrum is often accompanied by 
scattering noise. So, because as you know that soil contains sand, silt and clay which are 
having different size. So, when we take the scan will see the scattering effect . The noise 
scattering noise in the spe ctrum because of variation of the size of the particles.  
So, generally you remember that in case of spectr o transfer modelling or spectral transfer 
modeling, the first step is the spectral prepossessing. If you want to look qualitatively 
discriminate the s pectral also, you need to go for some kind of spectral prepossessing. So, 
spectral  prepossessing is generally considered as the first step in spectral data analysis.  
At the same time, it should be mentioned that there is no single best method and the best optimum method is to be selected by trial- and-error method, so the best spectral 
prepossessing method depends on the sensitivity of the following analysis to random 
variation in soil spectra. So, if the following method generally the quantitative method or  the 
generally we call it a chemometric  algorithm, they can identify the random variation in the 
spectra, then we can identify this is  the best prepossessing method. So, the best prepossessing method should be selected by in a trial -and-error basis and the re is 
no uniform or optimal  or globally optimal I would say spectral prepossessing method. There 
are various types of spectral prepossessing methods and depending on the data set, we have 
seen that for individual data set , specific a type of spectral prepossessing  works better . 
In some database, we have seen that first derivative of reflectance spectra works better , 
sometime we have seen only the smoothing of the spectra will work better , sometime we 
have seen standard normal variate works better , sometime we have seen multiplicative scatter 
correction works better. So, the suitability of a specific spectral  prepossessing varies from 
one data set to another data set. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:27)  
 
So, you can see here one example of spectral prepossessing is given here, this is reflectance 
to absorbance. So, we have the reflectance data we can convert it to the absorbance data also. 
So, this is one type of spectral processing and we have seen that instead of reflecting 
sometime the use of absorbance data also ca n produce higher , comparatively higher 
prediction accuracy in the subsequent calibration model. So, this is one of the important 
spectral conversion I would say. (Refer Slide Time: 17:07)  
 
Now, another important spectral processing is called the spectral  trimming. So, here you can 
see this is a raw -spectra and you can see here there are certain regions in generally , generally 
the certain regions in case of VisNIR  spectrum appears at around 350 to 499 nanometer  and 
from 2541 to 2500 nanometer . So, here you have very low SNR , signal to noise ratio. So, this 
signal to noise ratio does not , this low SNR region does not contain any useful information 
for the soil because they are present in the border lines. 
So, we remove these low SNR regions to capture or to detain only this 500 to 2450 
nanometer  range which is having relatively high SNR then the stream region. So, this is one 
of the recent , one of the popular methods of spectral prepossessing. You trim the spectra and 
you keep the spectra from 500 to 2450 nan ometer  which and then you remove the two sides 
of the spectra which is having. And basically , when there is a low SNR that means, it is 
corrupted by noise. So, we remove these two regions from these two extreme sites to keep 
only the 500 to 2450 nanometer  range.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:52)  
 
So, another spectral prepossessing  method is known as the moving window average method. 
So, in moving into average operation each wavelength value is taken as the average of the 
neighbouring wavelength. So, the original spectra are smooth, which reduces the information 
content but also the noise that it contains too. 
So, basically the idea is when you do the moving average window , sorry moving window 
averaging, then you reduce the noise  but at the same time, you  are losin g some information 
also. So, the user has to specify the size of the window and over how many wavelengths 
values are average. So, basically it is an averaging and in moving basically each wavelength 
value is taken as the average of the neighbouring wavelength.  
So, as it moves it takes the average and type then in kind of smooth the spectrum . Smoothing 
the spectrum is it is reducing the noise . And although it is reducing the noise, but at the same 
time it is using some of the important information also. So, we should be carefully or 
objectively select the applicability of this moving window averaging but this is a useful 
method. (Refer Slide Time: 20:16)  
 
Now, let us see one of the most important spectral pre -processing method, which is called 
Savitzky -Gola y filtering method. So, you can see this Savitzky -Golay  Filter fits a local 
polynomial regression of order k on a series of spectral values to determine the smooth value 
for each wavelength for a given filter length. And this filter length is also known as  the 
window size and this method of filtering, spectral filtering is given by proposed by Savitzky  
and Golay  in the year  1964. 
So, let us see one graphic or one  example here from this plot. So, here you can see this is the 
raw spectra and then this is the Savitzky -Golay , Savitzky -Golay  filtered spectr a (())(21:11)  
smooth spectra, and this dashed line represents the another Savitzky -Golay  spectra, but the 
difference between these two Savitzky -Golay  filters spectra is given in the parenthesis which 
basically shows the window size , so here the window size is  5 here, window size is 17. 
And a lso, the polynomial order is both the cases is 1. So, and also here the derivative order at 
0, so there is no derivative, it is only the smoothing. So, you can see here based on the 
window size also how the smoothing will change the shape of the spectral curve. So, in case 
of when we are taking the higher window size , window size it is making the , it is losing huge 
amount of information and making almost these variations spect ral, variations are almost not 
there.  
But when we are taking the relatively less filter length with which is only 5, then the window 
size 5 then we can see it is retaining the spectral variations. So, depending on your 
application you have to select which one you will select and you have to objectively select the best one out of the several options of window size . (Refer Slide Time: 22:42)  
 
Now, as I have told you that variation of the soil particle size can help,  it can produce light 
scattering and it dep ends on the wavelength and also path length and also sensitivity of the 
detector. So, these deviations are difficult to quantify using during the soil scanning. So, a 
pre-processing step is used to correct for deviation, but due to the light scattering. So, this 
light scattering effect needs to be corrected. So, there are several methods like standard normal variate, multiplicative scatter correction, these are important spectral pre -processing 
generally scientists are following for removing these light sca ttering effects.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:34)  
 
So, let us start with the standard normal variate . This standard normal variate was first 
proposed by Barnes et al.  in the year 1989. And it basically helps in the correcting for single light scattering. So, als o this is known as the z -transformation or z-transformation or a 
centring or scaling. So, here you can see that these are the raw spectra and these are the SNV 
corrected spectra.  
So, these are grass hays  and original spectrum the grass hays  and this is an absorbance 
spectra actually log 1 by R is an absorbance spectra and this is the standard normal variate 
spectra of these grass hays . So, generally this SN V works for individual spectrum or row size 
and it normalizes the spectrum by using this formula . 
This Xi is  the individual spectrum , the spectral values and then you subtract the mean and 
divide  it with the unit variance. So, mean is 0, variance unit variants. So, you get the 
normalize each spectrum and then you get this type of shape. So, when you normal ize the 
spectrum you can remove the light scattering effect . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:06)  
 
Another one spectral processing pre -processing is multiplicative scatter correction . So, this  
multiplicative scatter correction is used to compensate for multiplicativ e deviation dependent 
from the wavelength or deviations which are dependent on the wavelength. So, the correction 
aligns each spectrum to a reference spectrum. So, that the baseline and the amplification 
effects are at the same level in every spectrum.  (Refer Slide Time: 25:38)  
 
So, what is the way of doing this multiplicative scatter correction because this reference 
spectrum is unknown. So, the mean spectrum of a given spectral library denoted, so, 
generally we consider a mean spectrum which is denoted by this xref . So, these xref  
represents the mean scattering and offset and then each spectrum Xi  then fitted to the 
reference spectrum using the least square method. 
We know the least square method that is Xi  i plus bi xref plus eta , where these a is offse t, bi 
is the slope and then e is the residual. Now , once we calculate these then we calculate the 
MSC  by using this formula where ai  and bi . So, ai is offset  bi is the slope. So, using this is the 
formula for multiplicative scatter correction. So, particle  size and path length effect  should 
vary randomly from sample to sample and therefore, the average should reasonably reduce 
the effects.  
So, this is the fundamental assumption behind this  multiplicative scatter correction. So, in 
case of multiplicative sca tter correction, we have seen the basic assumption is the particle 
size and path length effects should vary randomly from sample to sample and as a result the 
average should reasonably re duce this effect. So, based on this assumption, this multiplicative 
scatter correction is generally done. And these two multiplicative scatter correction and SNV 
are helpful for removing the light scattering effect from the spectrum.  (Refer Slide Time: 27:20)  
 
Now, here you can see some example of these , this is an exampl e of raw absorbance spectra 
and this is the SN V spectra of these data and also these the MSC  spectra of this data. So, you 
can see the difference from these raw spectra and then MSC  and S NV and this MSC  spectra. 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:43)  
 
Another method w hich we generally use is called the detrending method. So, it is a practical 
alternative to SNV and MSC . And also, generally what we do in case of d etrending?  So, we 
remove the mean value or a linear trend from the spectra. So, that is why it is called 
detrending. A nd it can be used in combination with S NV and MSC also. 
So, generally you will see that some of the , in some literature they have used SNV DT that 
means standard normal variate followed by detrending. So, sometimes these two spectral pre -processin g are combined together for the ultimate , for the whole spectral pre- processing of 
the data. So, you can see how these raw data and this det rend data looks like . And this is a 
linear trend the dashed line is showing the linear trend. So, this detrending is  another 
important spectral pre -processing which is often used in combination of SNV and MSC. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:57)  
 
So, here you can see another spectral pre -processing that is called the continuum removal. So, 
this convex hull or continuum removal is one type of baseline method that works by fitting a 
convex hull to each spectrum and computing the deviation from the hull. So, here you can see 
these raw reflectance data from the soil. So, if we fix a convex hull and then computing the 
deviation from t he hull, then we can get this type of spectral data.  
So, this is called the continuum remove spectrum. So, why we go for the continuum remove 
spectra ? Because this continuum removal accentuates the absorption bands in the spectrum 
while minimizing the brig htness differences. So, this is how the continuum removal is also 
considered as one of the important spectral pre -processing and has been used in different 
application. (Refer Slide Time: 30:03)  
 
So, guys, let us wrap up our lecture here . The derivative spectral pre-processing we will be 
discussing in our next lecture. So, I hope that you have already got some useful information 
for spectral pre -processing , you have seen what is field of view, what is a large field of view, 
what is small field of view, ho w to calculate the field of view and also you have seen what 
are the important spectral pre- processing we have started with reflectance to absorbance 
conversion, then spectral trimming , then we have seen continuum removal , then SNV, then 
detrending, t hen w e have seen multiplicative scatter correction.  
So, I hope that you have gathered some useful information and we  will start from here , we 
will discuss the derivative spectral pre- processing in our next lecture, which is one of the 
most important spectral pr e-processing methods. So, we  will discuss the derivative spectral 
pre-processing , what are the advantages of derivative spectral pre- processing in our next 
lecture. And we  will also see some examples of the soil spectroscopic application for soil 
specific or soil sand studies. (Refer Slide Time: 31:31)  
 
So, some of the  -- These are the references which I have used ; Barnes , which we have given,  
Barnes  et al. who have given the standard normal variate and de -trending. And also, the 
Reyna et al, you can see that some examples are given . And again Wadoux et al.  you should 
follow this book. 
I would highly recommend you should follow this  book where you can have some R  
packages and the already these datasets are there which you can plot and you can have more 
confidence of dealing with the spectral pre -processing and you can see what things are 
changing, what aspects are changing when you transfer one soil spectra with a specific type 
of spectral pre- processing . 
And you will see by yourself and you will gain enough confidence by doing this spectral pre -
processing. And if you want to know more about the spectral pre -processing and how to do, 
you should follow this book. So, it is highly recommended that you should consider this book 
for gaining more information rega rding the different types of spectral pre -processing.  
So, thank you guys and let us meet in our next lecture where we will see the derivative spectroscopy. And also, we  will be discussing about some of the important application, soil 
application of diffuse  reflectance spectroscopy. Thank you very much.  