Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management  
Professor. Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 2 9 
Use of ML for Portable Proximal Soil and Crop Sensors (Contd.)  
(Refer Slide Time : 00:21)  
 
Welcome friends to this fourth lecture of week 6 of these NPTEL  online certification course 
on Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management . And in this week, we are talking about 
use of machine learning for portable soil and crop sensors. And in our first three lectures, we 
have discussed about the proximal soil sensors. And then we have discussed about site 
specific nutrient management smart soil sensing network.  
And then we have talked about the portable XRF. We have seen the evolution of por table 
XRF from using the simple statistical m odel to machine learning model , their application in 
different aspects of soil, different physical chemical properties of the soil and how they are 
very expert or very much helpful for predicting different types  of soil parameters we have 
seen.  
So, we  will continue from there, we have started discussing about model fusion between the 
diffuse reflectance spectroscopy and PX RF. And today, we  will go from there. And we  will 
discuss some applications of model fusion. (Refer Slide Time: 01:51)  
 
So, if you see the concepts, which are going to cover in this lecture are merely sensor fusion, 
then I  will be showing you some application of PXRF  for plant elemental content 
measurement. And then we  will be starting discuss ing about the Nix  colour  sensor . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:13)  
 
And some of the keywords which we are going to discuss are Nix,  organic carbon, colour  
space model, RGB and Munsell  soil colour . (Refer Slide Time: 02:24)  
 
So, if you see the portable XRF  and diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, we have already seen 
that these two methods are useful individually for predicting different soil properties. We 
have seen the application of DRS in our previous week. And in this week, we are talking 
about PXRF  application  for different soil properties. Although these two sensors are accurate, 
and they show huge potential for predicting multitude of soil properties.  
We have seen that when we combine the data set from these two sources together, they gives 
some synergistic re sult. What is the synergistic result? As you can see in the topic of the slide 
that gives 2 plus 2 equal to 5 that means, when we combine the data set from these two 
sensors together, we get better prediction accuracy than using the individual sensor in 
isolation. Because we have found there is some kind of complementarity between these two 
types of dataset.  
Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy or in other words, the spectral method is sensitive to 
wearing colour  properties or chromophores. For example, soil texture, then soil organic 
carbon, they impart differences in soil colour . So, this diffuse reflectance spectroscopy is 
sensitive to this colour  change. However, the heavy metals do not have any spectral , direct 
spectral signature in the diffuse reflectance s pectra, although they can be coexist,  they can 
coexist with organic matter and this co -variation is helpful for their identification or 
prediction using diffuse reflectance spectroscopy.  
On the other hand, portable XRF  is not very suitable for predicting organic matter, but it can 
predict different metals and elements. So, when we combine the spectral data as well as PXRF  data together, then we can see some kind of complementarity between these two types of data set. And as a result, they will give higher pr ediction accuracy then using individual 
sensors  alone.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:03)  
 
So, that notion of these synergistic effect by fusing the portable XRF  as well as DRS together 
helps to generate the first patent in this aspect. Myself and Professor David W eindorf , we 
jointly applied for a US patent which shows the novelty of using PXRF  and DRS  data for 
better soil prediction . And so, we got this patent, then the name of this patent is portable 
apparatus for soil chemical characterization.  
(Refer Slide Time : 05:49)  
 
Now, remember, there are different ways throu gh which we can fuse the dataset. One of the 
simple methods  of using the data set is simple concatenation . That means, we gave the elemental data and we get the elemental data from P XRF , and we get the  spectral data from 
DRS  and we just simply merge them together in a single spreadsheet and then use them as 
predictors in the prediction model. 
So, this is the simplest way of merging these two datasets. So, one of the first application we 
tried this senso r fusion approach is to predict the soil salinity. So, we collected several 
hundreds of soil samples from Western Texas of US and from some saline  lake. And these 
saline  samples as you can see, the salt crust are clearly visible on the soil , in the soil and these 
salt affected soils were first sampled and then scanned via PXRF  as well as the diffuse 
reflectance spectroscopy.  
Apart from combining these PXRF and DRS, we have also combined the L andsat bands, 
which is a satellite band, satellite sensor. So, Lan dsat satellite sensor bands are also used with 
portable experiment DRS  data and all these three in combination produce higher prediction 
accuracy together for predicting the soil salinity . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:45)  
 
So, you can see these are the two locat ion. We have collected the samples and using the 
support vector regression while combining all these data sets, we have got very good r square  
values with a value of 0.95. So, our model was highly accurate to predict the log transform 
electrical conductivi ty values as a measure of soil salinity.  
And using the principal component analysis, we were able to segregate the samples coming 
from two different locations, because of their which may be due to the elemental variation 
between the two types of soil and w e have validated the results using scanning electron microscopy as well as using the same EDS technology. And also, so we have proved the 
usefulness of the PX RF and diffuse reflectance spectroscopy method for prediction of soil 
salinity.  
(Refer Slide Time:  09:03)  
 
So, if you can see that results, where we are using the PXRF  alone, we are getting an r  square 
validation , r square value of point r square , validation  r square values of 0.71. And when we 
are using the diffuse reflectance spectroscopy alone,  we are getting 0.90 when also when we 
are combining the PX RF plus DRS although we are getting the similar 0.90 r square , but if 
you compare the RPD values , RPD stands for residual  prediction deviation, which is 
basically the standard deviation minus RMSE of t he model. 
So, if you see specifically,  we calculate this for validation samples . So, the validation 
standard deviation by the RMSE we get the RPD value. So, according to Chang et al  if we get  
the RPD values of less than 1.4 that shows poor  model performanc e, if the RPD values lies 
between 1.4 to 2 that shows fair model performance and if it is more than 2 that shows good 
and reliable model performance.  
You can see that when we are combining the PX RF and DRS data, we are getting 3.17 which 
is highest among a ll these three models. The model which I showed you the SVR model, 
which is showing the  r square  values of 0.95 that is basically when we are combining PXRF 
DRS  and also the remote sensing data and this is basically a combination of PXRF  and DRS 
data. So, you can see that when we are combining the PXRF  and DRS data, we are getting 
high RPD values, which shows the importance of the model fusion or sensor fusion. (Refer Slide Time: 11:04)  
 
So, also in subsequent research , we try to model the total carbon and total nitrogen, these two 
are important soil parameters by combined diffuse reflectance spectroscopy and PXRF  
model. So, these two properties were modelled  using 675 soil samples collected from Texas, 
Nebraska, California, of United States. And we have se en that the combined PXRF and DRS 
model where status were better, then using these PXRF and DRS individually or in isolation.  
So, that shows the again the importance of PXRF as well as DRS combination through sensor 
fusion. And it was also published in a very good journal called Geoderma. You can see here 
the total carbon was , and both total carbon and total nitrogen were predicted using the 
combined DRS and PX RF using two models. One is random forest and other is penalized 
spline regression.  
We will discus s this penalized spline regression in our upcoming lectures, which is a spline -
based  regression we  will discuss this, but remember that in this research, we have found that 
when we combine the PXRF  and DRS  data together, we can get better results than using the 
individual sensor alone. So, that shows the importance of sensor fusion or multi sensor fusion for producing the bet ter soil prediction. (Refer Slide Time: 12:56)  
 
Now, another  research we executed in 2017 and it was also published in G eoderma. Her e also 
we try to predict the total carbon and total nitrogen using combine diffuse reflectance 
spectroscopy and PXRF . And we have found that when we combine these diffuse reflectance 
spectroscopy and PXRF  together, we got better model accuracy then predict ing the total 
carbon and total nitrogen using individual sensors . We compared their RPIQ , RPD , RMSE , 
which are performance matrix and we have seen that combined model produce always better results than using the sensors in isolation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:54)  
 
So, you not only we have produced we have showed the importance of combined model but also at the same time, we produce the prediction map through kringing. So, these are the four  different maps you can see , total carbon, total nitrogen , then clay an d loss on ignition , organic 
carbon. So, these maps were used, these maps were produced by combining these PXRF  and 
plus DRS model , fused model and interpreted through Kriging interpolation. 
So, if you can see that, the variation of nitrogen in this zone, s o that shows that high content 
of nitrogen was  found in this patch and we have seen that this is due to the presence of a pile 
of manure , so that shows that this combination of PXRF and  DRS realistically identified 
these higher nutrient concentration in the proper space. So, that shows that not only this 
synthesized or fused model can produce better prediction accuracy, but at the same time it 
can produce better mapping of soil properties . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:31)  
 
Subsequently in another research, we tri ed to model the total carbon and total nitrogen. A nd 
here, instead of simple concatenating the data simple and merging the data, we have used 
another strategy for model fusion. As you can see here, here first we started with the total 
carbon and total nitr ogen these were our response values or target values. So, in first instance 
our input was spectral data coming from DRS and using the spectral data we fit the model 
using penalized regression, partial least squares  regression and elastic net regression.  
So, we tried and  compared three different models and then we predicted the total carbon and 
total nitrogen . Obviously, for any model there will be some residuals. So, the subsequently 
the residuals from all these three models were predicted or modelled  using the PX RF data. 
So, simultaneously we are getting the predicted results from both these PSR or PLS  or ENET  
model using the spectral data . And also, simultaneously we are getting the prediction from this random forest model using 
the PX RF data.  If we add th en the final predicted values will be basically a combination of 
this component and  this component. So, this is another way of fusing model and this new 
novel strategy was also used for predicting the total carbon and total nitrogen by Cardelli et al 
in 2017. And we have proved that using this strategy also, we can see that we can produce 
better model accuracy that using these individual sensors  alone . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:40)  
 
So, there are several other attributes also, which can be predicted using this  sensor fusion 
approach. These are total nitrous and total carbon, I have already showed you then loss on 
ignition, soil organic matter , clay contents , sand content all of these attributes have showed 
good results and supported the use of sensor fusion for  their better prediction accuracy.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:10)  
 
Another application we have tried is to predict the petroleum hydrocarbon. So, you can see 
that these petroleum pump jacks or the petroleum extraction process sometime contaminate 
the surrounding fields. So, this is a picture taken in a cotton field of Texas and we can see 
that this crude oil  which are being extracted from the soil sometimes get spilled away and 
contaminate the surrounding land. 
So, this petroleum contaminated soils should be predicted using some sense , using some 
advanced sensing methods. So, we tried to use this combined sensor method also to predict 
these petroleum hydrocarbon contamination. So, in this case, our response was longer than 
we converted this total petroleum hydr ocarbon and we model it using the spectral data. So, 
you can see here we tried to model this logarithmic log converted the total petroleum hydrocarbon using the spectral data using penalized spline regression model. 
And then, the residuals were further pre dicted using either random forest or linear regression 
model using PX RF data. So, we got Y PSR or we got Y  RF or Y linear model regression, 
which had the predicted values and then the final predicted values is basically the 
combination of these two terms . We have seen that  when we combine these two dataset, we 
combine these two data set by using these model fusion technology, then we can get higher 
prediction accuracy.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:15)  
 
As you can see from these results , when we are combining thes e penalized spline regression 
and random forest not only, we are getting the highest r square , but also,  we are getting the 
highest RPD values among all the models, where we have tried these , either we have tried 
these individual DRS or other models , like PLS, PSR or linear regression  combination. So, 
we have found that not only the sensor fusion is important, but also combination of model is 
also very important for producing the better results . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:02)  
 
We have also seen that it is possi ble to segregate the soil samples or crude oil contaminated 
samples. So, here you can see that these green points are showing heavy crude oil 
contaminated sample , these red points are showing these control samples which are non-contaminated  and these blue circles are showing the crude oils contaminated samples , it is 
possible to segregate the samples based on their contamination level. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:40)  
 
So, so far guys we have talked about the combined sensor platform . And also, we have talked 
about the model fusion. So, we move from there and also try to use the portable XRF  for 
plant elemental characterization, you know that plant has different parts and different parts 
can accumulate different elements. So, the elemental content in the plant is also very 
important and generally we measured them in the lab after total digestion process which 
involves caustic chemicals like acids and also digestion process which is very hazardous 
which is very much exothermic . 
So, to replace or to supplement those hazardous time consuming and corrosive  chemical 
intensive elemental concentration measurement in plant bodies, we also use the portable XRF  
for predicting the elemental content, we have used different plant parts . And we have seen 
that PXRF is very much he lpful for predicting accurate elemental content. So, we got very 
high correlation between the PX RF elemental content as well as the total elemental content 
which we get from the traditional methods. 
So, that shows that this PXRF cannot be only used for soi l, but also it can be used for other 
matrices like plant matrices. So, but at the same time, it is also advisable that since the 
commercially available PXRF are only having a limited number of internal calibrations  
focusing on geochemistry soil, it is important to expand this library for other matrices also like plant because it depends on metrics density. So, since the plant metrics density is different than soil metric density, we need to develop 
individual and separate prediction model for plant material s and plant elements also and we 
should incorporate that calibration within our next generation of PXR F. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:09)  
 
And other sensor fusion technology we have tried that is called model averaging. And in this 
model averaging you can see we  try to  use different models . For example, her e you can see 
that a whole dataset is segregated into calibration set and validation set and using the 
calibration set. Suppose, we fitted this lasso regression, we will be discussing this lasso 
regression in our upcoming lectures.  
Remember that this DR S spectra was used to predict the pH , EC and organic carbon of the 
soil using the lasso regression. The Nix  which we are going to discuss , Nix is the colour  
sensor. So, Nix indices  colour  indices  are also being us ed for predicting these same 
parameters using random forest model and PXRF  elements were also used for predicting the 
pH, EC and mostly using random forest model. So, for all these three models, we can get the 
predicted values for this calibration set.  
So, predictor 1, predictor 2 and predictor 3 or predictor set 1, predictor set 2 and predictor set 
3. So, all these were combined to use the final model through ridge  regression , we are also 
going to discuss this ridge  regression  in our upcoming lectures. So, these predicted 
calibration samples are our predicted values of the calibration samples were used as predictor 
sets for and then they were subsequently combined to produce the final prediction model 
through ridge  regression . And that model was validated using the validation set. So, this is 
called model averaging.  This model averaging has been used in other literature in other applications also, some soil 
scientists have used different versions of model averaging like Granger and Ramanathan 
model averagin g method they have tried for combination of P XRF  as well as DRS  data.  So, 
there are different approaches for combinat ion of data set, remember, it depends upon your 
particular application, sometimes you will see that simple concatenating or simp le merging of 
these two dataset is better and sometimes you have to use these either model averaging or these model fusion strategies for getting the better results.  
And there is no universal best  model, you have to develop this model and you have to try 
different com binations that you have to you have to try different types of model to see which 
one works better with your data set. And then you have to select that for subsequent analysis.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:28)  
 
We have also seen that PXRF  can be also , as I have  told you that PXRF  can be used for 
elemental content analysis in the vegetation, we have extensively used these for heavy metal 
content identification, heavy metal identification in tea leaves, and based on this elemental 
content of these tea leaves , we try to classify these tea leaves using different types of 
classification schemes.  (Refer Slide Time: 27:55)  
 
So, another  sensor we have used is Nix  Pro Colour  Sensor or Nix Colour  Sensor , which is an 
inexpensive colour  sensor.  Remember this is a very recently used colour  sensor for soil and 
soil colour  is defined by using the Munsell  soil colour  chart, which is qualitative definition. 
So, these Nix  probe gives you the quantitative results in terms of different types of colour  
models like RGB , CMYK, CLAB,  LCH and so on. 
So, it is a , Nix Pro is an inexpensive colour  sensor, it  is relatively cheap, add it is 
rechargeable, and portable. It has its own LED light source . It can connect to the smartphone 
and operated through smartphone via Bluetooth and smartphone Android app and iOS app 
and then it is very small and also very lightweight also, only 43 grams. 
So, this sensor has been used for last 4 to 5 years in different domains of soil and we are 
going to discuss that, but remember that this is now , this sensor has  become an important 
topic of discussion among the soil scientist. Nowadays, for better prediction of several soil 
properties. We are going to discuss the application of Nix  Pro Colour  Sensor or Nix Colour  
Sensor in our upcoming slides. (Refer Slide Time:  29:42)  
 
So, guys, let us finish this wrap up this lecture here. These are the references for this lecture. 
And in our next lecture we are going to talk more about the Nix Colour  Sensor and their 
application . And we will be seeing  how Nix can be also comb ined with other sensor to 
produce better results and how the other sensors, crop sensors can be used along with 
machine learning tools for predicting different types of crop  properties. So, let us wrap up 
this lecture here. Thank you and let us meet in our  last lecture of week 6.  