Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management  
Professor. Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 2 8 
Use of ML for Portable Proximal Soil and Crop Sensors (Contd.)  
(Refer Slide Time : 00:21)  
 
Welcome friends to this third lecture of week 6 of this NPTEL online certification course of 
Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management . And in this week, we are talking about the 
application of machine learning for portable proximal soil and crop sensors. In our first two 
lectures, we have discussed about the framework of smart soil sensing and how it is related 
with site specific nutrient management.  
And also, we have seen the broad classification and examples of proximal soil sensors and 
the properties they can measure. We have also seen the principle of portable XRF,  working 
principle a portable XRF.  And in the previous lecture specifically we focused on evolution of 
PXRF  for characterizing different soil properties and how it was used. And also, how it 
moved from the application of simple statistical linear regression relationship to the machine 
learning based application for characterizing different soil properties . 
We have seen its application for soil pH, EC, C EC, compost pH, compost C EC measurement, 
and also, we have seen their application for measurement of heavy metals in the industrial 
sites. So, today, we  will start from there, and then we  will see some other applications. And 
then, we  will also discuss the sensor fusion aspect, wher e we can combine multiple sensors  to 
augment or to get the synergistic prediction of soil properties.  (Refer Slide Time: 02:37)  
 
So, these are the major two topics for today's lecture  or this lecture number 28. First of all, we 
are going to discuss the PX RF for soil characterization, and then we  will see the PX RF plus 
DRS model fusion. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:55)  
 
Now, these are the some of the keywords which we are going to discuss today in this lecture, 
DRS, PXRF , Texture , texture by texture, we mean soil  texture, and also model fusion, and 
also clustering. (Refer Slide Time: 03:11)  
 
So, another important application for PXR F is soil texture . And soil texture  it is a very 
important parameter which controls different soil physical -chemical properties. So,  in this 
study in 2020, the Brazilian scientist have proved that PXRF  elemental content can be also 
used for measurement of textual parameters like sand, silt and clay using different models, 
machine learning models. 
So, they have used the textural PXRF  elemental content for predicting the sand, silt and clay . 
As you can see here in this plot, this is clay content by GLM or generalized linear modeling, 
then generalized linear model here this is a support vector machine model and this represent 
random forest  model. Similarly, this is the GLM model for silt content , this is the SVM 
model for silt content and this is the random forest model for the silt content. 
Similarly, this is the GLM model for sand content , this is support vector machine for sand 
content  and this is the random forest model for sand content. In all the cases you can see the 
model are, they have modelled  both the superficial horizons, as well as the sub superficial 
horizons. 
And you have seen that more or less this type PXRF  can be utilized f or prediction, rapid 
prediction of soil texture, instead of relying on time consuming particle size analysis, we can 
use the PXRF  elemental content as a proxy for measurement of clay, silt and sand, because 
the presence of sand , silt and clay is generally they indicate the presence of certain elements . 
And the coexistence of these elements with sand, silt and clay particles shows their 
applicability for predicting the soil particle size analysis. So, this is one important application . (Refer Slide Time: 06:12)  
 
Similarly, Zhu et al  in 2011 also proved the utility of PX RF for rapid measurement of soil 
texture. So, here you can see that these are sand, silt and clay content, these three plots 
represent sand, silt and clay content for one location and this is for another location. And they 
have utilized the stepwise linear regression model for producing this equation  and you can 
see for sand content they have got 0.85 to 0.89 R square , for silt content 0.68 to 0.87 and for 
clay content they got very high that i s 0.97 to 0.87 R squared values , so that this is the first 
application of PXRF  for prediction of soil texture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:31)  
 
And another very recent application which was published last year in precision agriculture journal and there we have proved that px serif can be utilized for prediction of certain soil available nutrients . Here, you can see the exchangeable calcium and also available potassium 
and available phosphorus were predicted using different types of models like linear 
regression, then power regression. 
So, this is linear regression, then second degree polynomial regression, then power regression 
model, then stepwise multiple linear regression model. So, these models were tried in for 
three different parameters and it was seen that  for calcium we are getting very high R square 
values and highest R square  you can get for LR and second -degree polynomial . 
Whereas, in case of phosphorus also, we  are getting high R square values using the PR  
regression . So, that shows that utilizing the PXRF  elemental content, it is possible to predict 
the nutrient content available nutrient content not only you can predict the nutrient content, but also you can produce the special variability map of nutrient.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:15)  
 
So, similarly, th ey have done the special variability map of the calcium , exchangeable 
calcium and available phosphorus using these four different models . As you can see here, 
linear regression model in the first panel followed by the second- degree  polynomial 
regression, t hen power regression and in the last there will be stepwise multiple linear 
regression.  
Here also, we can see that Lin's concordance coefficient between prediction maps , map built 
by four different algorithms from PX RF data obtained from the Brazilian soil. And we can 
see how these values are coming related with each other. So, that shows an important application because whatever we do using P XRF  from the soil science point of view, its 
utility can be well justified, if we can show its application for nutrient measurement.  
So, if we can use this instrument as an alternative to the traditional weight chemistry -based  
measurement of available nutrient, that will certainly make a paradigm shift and that will 
change and that will change the dependency of the farm ing community towards the 
traditional soil testing processes.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:49)  
 
PXRF has also been used for heavy metal contamination in polluted areas. So, in this 
research, in 2017, we have utilized this P XRF instrument as you can see in this picture to on 
site scan the soil samples in an industrial area , abandoned industrial area of eastern Europ e in 
Romania.  
And after collecting the scan results, we did the principal component analysis and using the 
principal component analysis, we try to expl ore the relationship between the day , between the 
elements heavy metals to cluster them, and also to identify their source . We are also 
calculated several pollution index . And for example,  index of geo- accumulation as you can 
see in this map . 
So, these index of geo -accumulation were created for Vanadium, Chromium, Copper, Lead, 
Arsenic and Zinc . And we can classify the samples based on their index of geo-accumulation 
and after classifying we have identified the reason behind this classification categories . So, 
we seen that the presence of the sampling points nearby the industrial sites, the major reason 
behind their classification as highly contaminated sites.  So, not only that, but also,  we use the Indicative Kriging approach for producing the special 
variability map of different heavy metals like here you can see Chromium , then Copper , then 
Zinc, then Arsenic and Lead . So, these special variability maps are also been created for 
identification of the pollution hotspots.  
So, also the PCA score , from the PC A score plot, we try to identify the outlets and we try to 
locate those outlets and we have seen that those outlets are very close to the smelter dispersal 
stack. So, that represents that this is , that shows that the nearby presence of this sampling size 
to the original contamination source is responsible for their abnormally high concentration. 
So, that shows the utility of these PXRF  for heavy metal contamination mapping. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:57)  
 
And first Indian application was seen in the year 2019 whe re we have used around 500 soil 
samples collected from the northern part of eastern India, I  mean in the state of West Bengal . 
The northern part is hilly region dominated by forests , so we collected 500 soil samples from 
three different land use type. So, these land use where forest land use , also agriculture and 
converted . Converted means, these lands where actually forest l and 20 years back, but then 
they slowly started converting into agricultural fields. 
So, we collected around 500 samples from all thes e three land use types . And then we use the 
different classification methods using the random forest, their linear support vector machine, 
nonlinear support vector machine and classification and regression tree. And we compared 
their misclassification rate . You can see the misclassification rate of the random forest and 
also the nonlinear SVM are very close.  And that shows the misclassification rate is quite 
small, that shows in other words, the higher classification accuracy.  So, that means that PXRF  can be used in future for assigning the proper class of land use  to 
any unknown samples coming from those three land use types. So, not only we have 
compared their misclassification rate, but also the random forest relative importance of PXRF  
variables were id entified, whereas Zinc and Manganese were the two most influential 
parameters . 
Not only that, we also utilize this classification regression tree to form the rules to segregate 
the classes based on the PX RF elements. So, this is the classification and regr ession tree. 
These forms the rules of segregating the samples or assigning the samples into one of these terminal nodes.
 I would request you to please go through this literature  and see this 
application. So, to get more comprehensive information about this  type of classification. And 
this was the first Indian application of PXRF  in soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:12)  
 
Also, PXRF  elemental content was used to differentiate the rural and urban lakes in the 
United States. So, the lakes  or playas they call it, the y have different elemental content  and 
their variation in the rural areas as well as urban areas due to variation in their land use. And 
as a result of that, we are interested to see whether PXRF  could be able to separate the urban 
samples from the rural s amples or not. So, principal component analysis was executed.  
And then classification was done using the principal component 1 and principal component 2.  
Principal component 1 and 2 cumulatively produce around 80 percent  of the variability more 
than 80 percent of the variability. And we have seen that classification using the principal 
component based on the principal component  score where more or less uniformly or 
efficiently separated the samples coming from the rural play as as well as the urban lakes.  This is the confusion matrix showing the random forest -based  classification of the play as or 
lakes  of a county in Texas and these cells  these. S o, here is the rural versus rural there are 90 
plus correctly classified samples, then urban versus urban, they ar e 96, there are some hybrid 
playas also, which 15 correctly classified.  
So, they are a total 219 samples and from there we can see that majority of the , that is 91 .78 
percent  of the samples were correctly classified. So, that also shows that PX RF is able t o 
segregate the sample based on their geochemistry. So, that also made an important paradigm 
shift in the soil characterization , specially when we consider the geochemical parameters . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:42)  
 
 
Another very important application for PX RF was  to segregate the carbonate stage 
development. Now, there are different carbonate stage development like here you can see 1  to 6 there are paedogenic  carbonate development stages for both fine and coarse fragment 
metrics. So, there are 6 different sta ges. So, here you can see stage 1 and stage 5.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:13)  
 
So, the question was, is there any correlation between the development stage and the calcium 
carbonate content ? And if so, can PXRF be useful in helping to determine the development  
stage. So, 75 samples were collected across four states like Texas, New Mexico, Colorado 
and Kansas and which represented all six development stages and sample scanned as intact 
aggregates and ground powders.  
So, we first ground the , we first scan the soi l samples as intact aggregates as well as we 
subsequently ground the soil samples into powders and sieve  them with 2 millimetre  sieve  
and then we can we again scan them using PXRF.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:11)  
 
So, average development stage are determined i ndependently by a panel of 5 experienced 
radiologist , they also did, but we have seen that panelist only unanimously agreed to only 22  
percent  of the samples , evaluated ex -situ. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:20)  
 
So, that means that in the most of the cases there  is a disagreement between the Phonologists 
while describing these 6 development stages of calcium carbonate. So, we thought that let us 
use the portable XRF  for identifying these development stages of the carbonate or 
developments stages of the secondary carbonate. So, there are 6 development secondary 
stages of the carbonate and you can see here we have utilized mathematical formulas to identify or to establish certain rules for identification of the 6 secondary carbonate level 
stage, development stage fi rst, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth. 
So, the rules were developed based on our judgment from one of our figures, which is created 
because Calcium Intact and  Calcium Ground were highly correlated. And some stages where 
we have seen that these Calciu m Intact soil a nd Calcium in ground soil were highly 
correlated, and some stages were above the diagonal  line. 
So, we utilized for this rule formation, you can see one thing guys, for rule formation, we 
have utilized this Calcium Intact and Calcium Ground only and then we formed these rules . 
So, based on the calcium content only using these rules, we can separate these stages. So, that 
shows another good application of PXRF  for identification of the development stage . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:03)  
 
And this is  the scatter plot used for establishing the rules for explaining different secondary 
carbonates development stages  based on Calcium Carbonate, Calcium Intact minus Calcium 
Carbonate Calcium Groun d in the x- axis and Calcium Intact plus Calcium G round in the  y-
axis. And you can see that utilizing these two ax es, you can separate out or you can produce 
the boundary for the samples belongs to each of these 6 stages.  (Refer Slide Time: 23:37)  
 
And based on this, we have utilized a support vector machine confus ion matrix and we have 
seen the support , based on the support vector machine calculation, we can see the most of the 
stages were correctly classified using the PX RF based elements. So, here you can see these 
are the measured  stages and predicted  stages and  this diagonal line is showing the correctly 
classified sample.  So, you can see these correctly classified samples ultimately shows that the 
PXRF is very much helpful for quantitatively identifying these stages .  
And these SV M classification plot we have a lready seen it previously in one of our lecture. 
So, this support vector machine classification plot used was used for classifying the different 
secondary carbonate development states. So, you can see here which are colour  coded 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5, 6; 6 stages 6 colour  and then they are colour  coded to explain the stages based on the 
Calcium Intact and Calcium Ground. Calcium Intact sample as well as Calcium in ground 
sample . (Refer Slide Time: 25:03)  
 
 
One of my PhD student has recently utilize this PXRF  also in India for landfill soil 
characterization. So, we collected around 335 samples from a landfill soil adjacent  
agricultural fields and we characterized the soil samples using PXRF  and we focused on 7  
heavy metals like Chromium, Manganese, Copper , Zinc, Arsenic, Lead and Mercury . So, 
these 7 heavy metals were considered and we have compared their abundance with the local 
background value as well as the threshold levels, geochemical threshold levels. 
Now, this  is the landfill site and these are the agricultural , surrounding agricultural fields 
from which we have collected the samples . And the major goal , the major reason for 
undertaking this research was to establish whether PXRF  can be used to predict the pollution hotspots in the surrounding agricultural z ones,  so that we can judiciously plan our agricultural 
practice or we can avoid those pollution hotspots for subsequent growing of the crops.  
So, you can see this is the soil type and these are composed of several debris , mainly they are 
composted products . So, after collecting the soil samples, we scan ned them and then using 
the scan results, we utilize several clustering  patterns, we have explored several clustering 
patterns. So, here you can see, we did the k medoids  clustering and based on the solute wi dth, 
in the solute plot, we have identified two clusters.  
So, here it is cluster 1 and this is cluster 2. So, actually this was the area. So, this area was, 
this is the upper patch of the area, this is the lower patch of the area, and we have identified 
two clusters based on k medoids  clustering . And identifying we have located that the samples 
from this cluster one belongs to this upper region and sample for cluster two belongs to this 
lower region.  
And the reason behind this clustering is the relative closeness of this lower patch to the main 
active dump site. So, of course, the concentration was relatively higher , concentration of 
heavy metals were relatively higher in the lower patch than that of upper patch.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:01)  
 
So, we have also utilized  these the heatmap , these heat maps to identify the correlation 
between the different heavy metals and their relative clustering, which will be utilized, which can be very much informative for identifying their source . We call it b i-clustering heat maps. 
So, using this bi -clustering heatmaps, we are able to cluster certain elements, and then which 
were actually helpful for identifying their source . (Refer Slide Time: 28:43)  
 
Not only we have cluster, but we have also utilizing these PXRF  elemental content, we 
produce the indicator kriging maps, where before all these seven elements where we can see 
the probability of exceeding its respective threshold values 0 to 25 percent  probability, 25 to 
50 percent  probability. And in this way, we have identifie d this 75 to 100  percent  probability, 
which were actually the lower p atch as I have already told you. 
So, that shows that our PX RF method was actually able to identify this pollution hotspot 
zones mainly in the lower patch  for these heavy metals , so that w e can using this indicator 
kriging. So, in this way it will be helpful for future planning of agricultural practices in this 
zone.  
So, we should avoid growing the leafy vegetables in these zones, which are known as hyper accumulator of the heavy metals fr om the soil. So, this is how  PXRF is helping the farmers to 
make, a  policymaker  to make the informed decision quickly and rapidly without wasting their 
time for traditional soil analysis.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:16)  
 
And also, a couple of years back we hav e seen that these PXR F and DRS when we combine 
their data together, they produce the synergistic results. So, the se synergistic results is we call 
it sensor fusion or model fusion. And we got the 2 plus 2 equal to 5 synergistic effect because 
there are som e kind of complementarity we have found in this two data set from PX RF and 
also DRS . And the application was useful for prediction of soil organic matter , clay content 
and sand  content.  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:01)  
 
And the fusion of this PXRF  and DRS was pe rformed in different fashion. And we have 
secured a United State  patent for these using the sensor fusion technology. We  will talk about 
this sensor fusion more in our next lecture, and we  will describe this thing in details. So, guys, I hope that you have  gained some good information in this lecture. There are certain 
other aspects of this sensor fusion which we are going to talk about in our next lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:43)  
 
And these are some of the references which I have used. And so, in a nuts hell, we have seen 
how PXRF  is useful for prediction of several soil properties and how the evolution of the 
PXRF that have happened from the simple statistical methods to complex statistical methods 
and how the expansion of PXRF  application happened i n different domains of the soil, 
starting from the routine soil parameters to land classification to pollution identification . 
And also, we have seen the synthesis of the PXRF data with the DRS  data and how they 
produce better results than using the individual  sensor alone. We  will start from here we  will 
talk more about the sensor fusion. And then,  I will show you another important portable 
proximal sensor called Ni x sensor, which is  also making a paradigm shift in the proximal soil 
analysis.  
And I  will also s how you how we are using different machine learning approaches using the 
Nix sensor based results for better prediction of different soil properties rapidly and cost 
effectively. So, thank you guys. Let us meet in our next class. And we  will start from her e. 
We will talk more about this sensor fusion, and I  will show you some application and then we  
will go to other sensors like Ni x and so on so forth. Thank you and let us meet in our next 
lecture.  