Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management  
Professor. Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 2 7 
Use of ML for Portable Proximal Soil and Crop Sensors (Contd.)  
 
Welcome friends to this second lecture of week 6  of this NPTEL online certification course 
of Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management . And in this week, we are talking about 
the use of machine learning for portable proximal soil and crop sensors.  
 
So, in our first lecture of this week, we have discussed what is the requirement of different 
types of advanced sensors from the point of view of soil survey, as well as for site specific 
nutrient management and what is the interrelationship between the smart soil sensing and 
site-specific nutrient management we have also discussed . 
 
And then I showed you the classification of proximal  sensors , specifically proximal  soil 
sensors. And we started discussing about portable XRF.  Remember portable XRF  is an x-ray 
fluorescence -based sensor and this field  filled portable and it requires minimum cal  
consumables and they are non- destructive . 
 That means, they are not consuming the soil samples while analysing  and they can measure 
25 to 30 elements starting from Magnesium to Uranium w ithin only 60 to 90 seconds. So, we 
discussed about the working principle of XR F. And also, we have seen the how PXRF 
elemental,  PXRF base elemental contents of soil can be utilized for exploring different soil 
properties.  
 So, today we are going to discus s about the evolution of statistical approaches for PX RF and 
also side by side we  will be seeing some PXRF  application  for soil and crop. Particularly in 
this lecture we  will be focusing on soil . And in upcoming lectures, we  will also see the PXRF  
applicat ion for crop also. And the major emphasis in this lecture will be given to describe how the application of RXRF  utilized simple form of statistical analysis to advance machine 
learning based analysis for exploring different soil properties.  
 
So, these are the some of the important keywords for this lecture . We will be talking about 
PXRF, compost  salinity , then soil horizons, soil salinity and also soil heavy metal 
contamination.  So, 10 to 12 years back when the initial application of PX RF started in soil f or exploring 
different types of soil elements , then we did an experiment  in Southern United States and we 
used the portable exertive instrument to gather the information of elemental content in the 
peri urban  areas that means, surrounding some industrial s ites. So, soil samples were 
collected as you can see these soil samples were collected around t wo places industrial places 
of the city of Baton Rouge, Louisiana USA.  
 
And these samples were analyzed using the standard laboratory measurement. They are 
diges ted and measured through inductively coupled plasma and atomic emission 
spectrophotometer. And then, we measured these heavy metals, arsenic, chromium, 
manganese, lead, zinc, iron, copper, cobalt and barium. Side by side w e took the reading 
PXRF and then w e try to correlate both the results.    
 
And we have seen that for most of the elements, there is a good correlation between the 
PXRF elements as well as the standard elemental analysis result. So, that shows the 
applicability of PX RF for exploring the soil  elements. Not only that using geo statistics, we 
have mapped the enrichment factors or in other words, we mapped the enrichment of a heavy 
metal in that soil using geo statistical approaches or pre interpolation.  
 
So, that shows that not only this type of  equipment is helpful for measurement of elements in 
the soil, but also for the environmental contamination point of view, they can be helpful for 
mapping the soil , special distribution of soil heavy metals. So, this was one of the first 
application of PXR F.  
And then the PX RF was applied for measurement or prediction of soil properties through 
modeling through regression modeling. So, here we have used the simple linear regression 
and then multiple linear regression. Now, you know that PXRF cannot measure sodium and 
that is why chlorine which can be measured by PXRF  was used as a proxy for predicting the 
electrical conductivity of the soil.  
 
So, here, you can see, this is the log of e lectrical conductivity values a nd this is the predicted 
electrical conduct ivity values using the chlorine, using the C l measured by PXRF. And the 
calibration R square in this case was 0.83 and validation R squared was 0.77 a nd that is using 
the simple linear regression. Simultaneously, we did also the multiple linear regression and 
where we combined the chlorine, sulphur , potassium, calcium, apart from that, we have also 
included some of the easily accessible or easily measurable soil properties like sand , clay and 
LOI.  
 
So, these three sand,  clay and LOI were incorporated as aux iliary soil predictors for 
prediction of soil electrical conductivity . And using the multiple linear regression, the 
calibration R squared, we got 0.90. And validation was 0.70. So that shows the importance of 
PXRF or how PXRF  can be useful for measurement  of soil salinity . 
 
Soil salinity is an important indicator of soil fertility, not only that, using the standardized 
coefficient, we were able to identify which element were more influential for prediction of 
soil salinity and we have found apart from loss  on ignition organic matter and sand, the 
calcium content and potassium content are also very much important when we consider this multiple linear regression.  
 
So, this was the application and also that shows the presence of chloride and potassium ions 
and calcium ion in the soil, calcium salts in the soil, which may be the reason for soil salinity. 
So, that shows the applicability of PXRF  for me predicting soil salinity.  
 Subsequently, the PXRF  was used to predict the soil pH . Soil pH, you know it is very 
important soil property. And several hundreds of soil samples were collected from multiple 
states of US  and we utilized the PXRF elemental content to predict the pH with an R square 
value 0.77.  
 
Similarly, PXRF was used to predict the catenation capacity , the catenation capacity is a very 
important indicator of soil fertility. So, catenation capacity has also been utilized as an 
important property which can be predicted by PXRF . So, using the PXRF  elemental content, 
we can predict the catenation capacity o f the soil with good accuracy.  
 
Then another problem we face during a pH measurement is destructive . That means, you 
have to sample the soil , you have to take the sample and then you have to process the sample 
before you can make a saturate paste or you ca n do a 1 is to 2 soil water or 1 is to 2.5 soil 
water suspension or if you want to extract saturation extract . These are time consuming, but 
what happens when the soil is frozen and this type of condition is mainly seen in Tundra 
Region and we re the soil is sometimes shows the presence of ice flakes.  
 
So, in that case it is very difficult to take those soil samples and dissolve in the water . Also, 
sometime it is difficult to do any measurement in monoliths in preserved monoliths. So, in 
this type of conditi on to resolve the issue of measurement of soil pH, we extended our 
application of PXRF  for measurement of soil pH. So, we collected several soil samples from 
Alaska which are permafrost soil . 
 And these permafrost soils pH were measured via elemental contents measured using PXRF . 
So, here you can see these plot shows the measure pH versus predicted pH in Alaska . In 
Alaska soil sample using PXRF  reported elemental content. So, this shows the relationship 
between the predicted pH and the measured pH  by a port able XRF with a field Geochem 
Mode. So, there are two modes we have used one is Geochem M ode, another is Soil Mode , 
and we scan the soil both in the field as well as in the lab.  So, this shows the results for regression results for field Geochem Mode and this is the 
laboratory Geochem Mode. And this is the , third one here you can see the field soil mode and 
the fourth one is the laboratory soil mode. And in all these conditions you can see more or 
less, of course, the laboratory applications are more preci se. However, in case of field 
applications also we are getting decent R squared values. So, that shows the applicability of PXRF for measurement of frozen soil or permafrost  soil pH . 
 
Not only we predicted the pH of this permafrost  soil, but also using pri ncipal component 
analysis, we are able to segregate the soil samples coming from different sites. So, here you 
can see the scree plot of the first principal , 11 principal components of , and then we can see 
the PC 1 versus PC 2 plot to qualitatively separate samples from five different sampling sites 
using in the laboratory Geochem Mode . 
 
So, based on and we can see that these clustering of the samples were due to some of their 
similarity in the parent material as well as dominant vegetation and also managemen t 
strategies which  impacted the elemental content of those sites. So, the elemental content 
variation due to the variation of parent material as well also geology and also different 
variation of the soil properties can be easily identified using the PXRF . 
 
Similarly, here shows the scree plot showing the first principal , 9 principal component and 
this is in the laboratory soil mode. And similarly, here also we are able to cluster the soil 
sample based on their relative similarity in geology, as well as othe r soil properties, which 
left an imprint on t he elemental content on these sites.  
 
Then, we apply this PXRF  for base saturation percentage prediction, base saturation 
percentage is another indicator of soil fertility . And in this research in 2018 Rawal et al  in our 
group, we have also proved that we can use the elemental content from PXRF  for predicting 
the base saturation percentage. And we have compared different types of model , one is G AM 
model or generalized additive models, and then multiple linear regression models, regression 
tree model and random forest model.  
And you can see here these are the plots of four different models and we have seen that using 
the random forest and also. In case of BSP, we have made, actually we model two properties 
one is BSP , base saturation percentage and another is C EC or catenation c apacity . And if you 
take a look at these validation R square RMS in RPD values, you can see that in case of BSP 
this regression tree perform better . 
 
Whereas, in case of C EC, the best perfor ming model was the GAM model or generalized 
additive  model. Now, we have also seen the variable importance of these potassium 
magnesium and calcium both for random forest as well as the regression tree approach. So, 
here we have already discussed these mul tiple linear regression model and also the regression 
tree model and random forests model . 
 
However, generalized additive model is another very flexible model, which is an adaptation 
of the linear regression model. So, which allows to model the nonlinear data while 
maintaining the explaining power. Generally, if you want to model it very nonlinear data 
using a linear model, it fails miserably. So, that problem is being addressed by these GAM 
model or generalized additive model which can learn nonlinear feat ure. 
 
So, here you can see this is the representation, linear regression or ordinary least squares 
regression representation where these beta 0, b1 and b10, these betas are the slope. Whereas, 
in case of these generalized additive model, these beta 0, beta 1 and beta n are replaced by 
this s0, s1, sn, which we call the smooth function which are nothing but splines. So, this  by 
applying this smoothing function, we relax the restriction that the relationship must be simple 
weighted sum and instead we assume t hat the outcome can be modelled  by a sum of arbitrary 
function of each feature.  
 
So, if we mathematically represent the smoothing function, it will look like this here the k 
represents the weights and function per variable in the equation. So, that makes m ore flexible, 
this model more flexible and much less linear than our linear ordinary least squares regression. So, this is a very important regression, this generalized additive model and it has 
been used in several data mining applications for learning the nonlinear features in the data 
set. 
 
Now, another application from the pedological point of view is of P XRF  is most of the time  
the times the horizon boundaries in the soil profile are identified visually and they are 
described visually and qualitatively. But to reduce the dependency on qualitative description 
of the horizon boundaries, we have tested the PX RF elemental contents and their variation for 
replacing this qualitative nature of horizon delineation to with the quantitative framework.  
 
So, what happens here you can see there are different soil profile and these soil profiles  are 
differentiated into different horizons like AP horizon AP 2, BT2, BT1 and BT 3 these are 
different soil profile they are described in different horizons and these differenti ating 
horizons are given by the experience pedological . And these dashed lines are showing the 
transition between the horizons. 
 
So, we have calculated the elemental content variation in these transition zones, and this was 
denoted as DE, this was collecte d using the formula where these formula for calculating the 
formula, we have used the principal component analysis . And using the significant principal 
component, we have calculated that formula. In other words, we have calculated the 
difference in the val ues of one horizon from its overlying horizon.  
 
And we have plotted that and we have seen that these D E index which is calculated by PXRF  
elemental content aligns very good with the qualitative description of the horizons. So, that 
shows that PXRF  now can be used in the field for better horizon identification, it is even 
performing better than using the clay  difference and other soil property difference also.  
 
So, that shows that the applicability of PXRF  in the domain of pedagogy, which is  -- And 
also this  is gaining more and more importance nowadays for soil property delineation. So, this was one , this type of application made some paradigm change in the field of soil 
pedagogy.  
 
And then, we have also used this portable XRF  for measurement of compost salinity. Now, 
you know compost is an important additive for maintaining the soil fertility. And in this 
research, we measured the compost salinity  using the principal component regression. Here 
you can see first graph is showing the principal component  scree p lot. And from there we 
have selected the principal components and then we predicted here, we can see here we have 
selected two principal components for making a biplot.  
 
And you can see here that first two principal components cumulatively show shows around 
50 percent  of the total variation. So, also using the principal component regression, which we 
have already discussed in our previous lectures. So, using principal component regression, we 
got an R square value  of 0.80. 
 
And also, you can see that, these  are the standardized coefficients . From the standardized 
coefficients we can see that zinc, potassium and then chlorine and these are the major factors 
or major contributors for prediction of soil salinity by PXRF  instrument. So, that shows the 
applicatio n of PXRF  for compost salinity . 
 
And then we have also used this instrument for predicting the compost C EC, compost C EC is 
an indicator of the fertility of the compost and using the PXRF elemental content, it is now 
possible to predict the compost C EC. Here, we have used the random forest regression  and 
this shows the relative importance , random forests relative importance, where we also seen 
the presence of zinc, copper, titanium and rubidium are the most infringing parameters as far 
as the prediction of C EC is  concern ed. 
 
And also, we have produced the biplot of C EC using the principal component analysis, these 
are the scores and we have seen the explored the relationship between the elements as well as 
the sample C EC values.   
Also, the PXRF was extensivel y used for prediction of soil parent material. So, soil parent 
material is an important indicator of soil weathering pattern . And if you understand, if you 
know the parent material of the soil you can predict different soil properties you can assume 
different soil properties.  
 
So, this research was done , was executed in Brazil in 2019, where PX RF elemental content 
were used for predicting the soil parent material and three types of regression machine 
learning approaches where use d, random forests support ve ctor machine and artificial neural 
network. And we have calculated the Kappa coefficient, we have already discussed the 
Kappa coefficient in our previous lectures . And also, user’s accuracy  and producer ’s 
accuracy . 
 
Now, what is user ’s accuracy  and produce r’s accuracy?  The next slide will clarify these 
things. So, user ’s accuracy  you can see here suppose, there are four different classes, water . 
forest , urban, there are three different classes water , forest and urban. So, here we can see that 
the these are the reference data and these are the classified data. We can see the correctly 
classified water sample is 21 , for forest it is  31, and for ur ban it is total 22.  
 
So, producer ’s accuracy  in case of water is basically correctly classified reference site by t he 
total number of reference sites. So, here the correctly classified reference site is 21 , reference 
samples and the total number of reference samples is 33 . So, 21 by 33, so this is the 
producer’s  accuracy . Similarly, which is 64  percent . Similarly, for forest it will be 31 by 39, 
so 80 percent . So, this is  call producer’s accuracy . 
 Now, what is user’s  accuracy ? So, user’s  accuracy , you know here will be for water, it will be 
21 correctly classified sites by the total number of classified sites 27 . Similarly, forest  it will 
be 31 by 37, so 78 percent  and 84 percent , in case of urban it will be 22 by 31. So, this is the 
difference between producer’s accuracy and user’s  accuracy . So, we have seen that using the PXRF elemental content and machine learning ap proaches it is possible to predict the 
different parent materials.  
 
And you can see here this graph shows the prediction accuracy and prediction accuracy in 
terms of Kappa coefficient and overall accuracy for prediction maps of soil parent material 
through elemental content in A, B a nd C horizons in Brazil. So, they have calculated , they 
have considered three horizons A , B and C horizon. So, this is for A  horizon, this is for B 
horizon, this for C horizon. 
 So, for all three horizons we have seen that the o verall accuracy is quite high. So, that shows 
that PXRF  can be utilized for prediction of soil parent material . These graphs shows the 
artificial neural network , support vector machine and random forest -based  comparison of , 
classification comparison of Fer rous, Geothitic and Hematitic  parent material . 
 And here they have compared the producer’s accuracy and user’s  accuracy . So, this is for 
neural network, this is for  support vector machine and this is for random forests . They have 
calculated and compared th e producer’s accuracy and user’s  accuracy for all these three 
classes and for using these three machine learning approaches and deep learning approaches.  
 
So, not only the PXRF  based elemental contents were used for classifying the parent material, 
but als o they have used, using this scheme they have also mapped the soil parent material , as 
you can see here , artificial neural network for A  horizon, this is also A NN based B  horizon, 
this is A NN based C horizon. Similarly, this is support vector machine based A horizon, B 
horizon and C horizon parent material distribution, then it is random forest based A  horizon,  
B horizon, C horizon distribution maps. 
 So, guys, now, I hope that you are now under , you have gained enough knowledge that how 
the evolution of P XRF happened from very elemental statistical analysis like simple linear 
regression and multiple linear regression and how we went to the app higher machine learning approaches like advanced machine learning approaches like random forest, artificial 
neural network and support vector machine.  
 
So, we will let us wrap our lecture here. And we will start from here and we will also see in 
our next lecture, what are the other application of PXRF , and then we  will also see the sensor 
fusion between P RXF and other portable proximity sensors. 
 So, we will discuss some other aspects, but these are the references for this lecture. And 
thank you. Let us meet in our next lecture to continue from here. And then we  will be 
discussing the other application of PXRF  for soil and crop. Thank you.  
 
 