Machine Learning for So il and Crop Management  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 25  
Diffuse Reflectance Spectroscopy: Basics and Applications for Crop and Soil (Contd.)  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:18)  
 
Welcome fr iends to this twenty fifth lecture of NP TEL online certification course of M achine 
Learning for S oil and Crop Management. And we are at w eek 5 and this is the fifth lecture of 
week 5. And in this week, we are talking about the D iffuse Reflectance Spectroscopy:  Basics 
and Application for C rop and S oil. And in our previous 4 lectures, we have seen the basics of 
diffuse reflectance spectroscopy specifically, the visible to near infrared diffuse reflectance 
spectroscop y, and then we have seen the basics of some the working principle of 
spectroradiometer , some specificatio n of the spectroradiometer.  
Then w e have also seen the spectral resolution , sampling interval, spectral pre- processing 
methods and we have also seen t he important spectral features , some of the important 
literature s in the domain of DRS application for soil. So, guys, today, we will start from 
there, and then we will be discussing some more application on soil and also we will be discussing some applica tion on crops.  (Refer Slide Time:  1:40)  
 
 
So, these are the 2  concepts which we are going to cover VisNIR DRS soil application and 
VisNIR DRS crop application in this lecture and these are some of the keywords which we 
are going to discuss today. And t hen soil arsenic pool , then orthogonal signal correction or 
OSC, then external parameter orthogonalization or EPO, RSI , NDSI are 2 index which are 
used for predicting some of the crop paramete rs via the spectral modeling we wi ll be also 
seeing.  (Refer Sl ide Time:  2:25)  
 
So, let us see some example of let us first see some example of DRS based, sorry VisNIR 
DRS  soil application. So, in our previous lecture, we have seen some of  the literature where 
DRS was used for predicting several soil fertility and al so soil physiochemical properties. 
DRS has also been used for predicting the soil heavy metals , metalloids as well as other 
contaminants. So, let us see some example.  
So, this is one example where DRS was utilized for soil arsenic prediction. So, this study 
actually was conducted in a landfill nearby Kolkata city called Dh apa. And several hundreds , 
couple of hundreds of soil samples were collected from these sites and after collecting the samples, we have scan them using the diffuse reflectance spectroradi ometer. So, once we 
have collected the soil samples, we scan them using the VisNIR spectroradiometer. And then 
we estimated the total soil arsenic using the standard method which we have used as a 
response soil arsen ic values and just like the spectral tra nsfer model, we have used the 
VisNIR DRS there is reflectance spectra as the predictor.  
But before using in the model, we have done first derivative reflectance spectra, then second  
derivative reflectance spectra, then orthogonal signal correction these 3 are the spectral pre-
processing and after the spectral preprocessing, we have used the elastic net model , Random 
Forests model and penalize spline regression model. And then, we have evaluated the model 
based on the validation set and we have selected the  best performing model and then we have 
used the model predicted arsenic values.  And finally, after we predicted the arsenic values using the best  prediction model, we have 
interpolat ed those values using ordinary kriging and indicator kriging, which are geo 
statistical approaches. S o, these geo statistical approaches are useful to predict the parameter 
in some in those locations where from un- sampled location. So, these interpolation s were 
done by ordinary k riging and indicator kriging.  
(Refer Slide Time : 5:26)  
 
So, we have seen this is the distribution of the major arsenic concentration and when we have 
used the elastic net model, we have seen we are getting the best prediction accuracy with an 
R squared values of 0.97 and RPD values of 6.32 which is ve ry high. So, using the elastic net 
model, we have predicted the arsenic with high accuracy. So, that shows that these arsenic can be predicted by in the soil using diffuse reflectance spectra.  (Refer Slide Time:  6:06)  
 
So, these are the original reflect ance spectra of the soil for those samples and these is the 
elastic net coefficients and these red dots are showing the significant wavelengths which have 
been selected by the elastic net model. Now, using this elastic net regression model, when we 
predict ed the arsenic, we have also interpolated those values using the indicator kriging as 
well as the ordinary kriging. So, these are the measured and predicted arsenic concentration using ordinary kriging and these are the measured and predicted arsenic soil arsenic content 
using the indicator kriging.  
Indicator kriging generally gives you maps the spectral variability based on the probability of 
any value which is exceeding a threshold value. So, in our case, we have kept the threshold 
values at 5 ppm or 5 milligram per kg and we have tried to identify the areas which are 
having 0 to 25 percent  probability , 25 to 50 percent probability, 50 to 75 percent probability 
and 75 to 100 percent  probability and these greens areas are water bodies. So, you can see in 
both the cases in case of the measured values as well as the predicted values we have seen, we have identified the similar hotspots.  
So, these regions are the pollution hotspots. So, the identification of this pollution hotspot by 
this kriging interpolatio n can help you to identify the areas where you should give special 
care and so, similarly, in case of indicator k riging also, these 2 areas have been come these 2 
area came under this 75 to 100 percent  probability showing the potential hotspot zone.  
So, that implies that our DRS method was able to identify the DRS  method was able to 
identify or predict the  soil arsenic content not only they have they were able to predict the soil arsenic content contamination, but also they were able to produce the almost accurate 
special  variability map or using the geo statistical interpolation like ordinary kriging and 
indicator kriging.  
(Refer Slide Time:  9:13)  
 
Another  in the subsequent study, we have tried to predict the soil arsenic pool. Now, that 
analysis of soil  solid arsenic phase has commonly used different types of sequential 
extraction which are time consuming which are invasive or destructive and also very much 
costly. So, in the soil , arsenic remains in different pools. So, for example one of t he form is 
called we call them M g pool, which is basically the in organically bound arsenic. And then 
there is a pure PO4  pool or phosphate pool  which is strongly absorbed arsenic .  
And then there is HCl pool which is co- arsenic which is co -precipitated with the carbonates, 
manganese oxide and very amorphous iron oxy hydroxides and OX is the arsenic co-
precipitated with the amorphous iron oxy hydroxides and organic is arsenic associated with 
the organic method and sulfides. So, you can see in the soil , arsenic can be ass ociated with 
different phase and for proper  identification of this phase or  proper prediction of this phase is 
very much important if we want to map that dynamics of soil arsenic.  
So, can we map it using diffuse reflectance spectroscopy that was the hypot hesis this was the 
research question. So, our hypothesis was yes, we can do using the diffuse reflectance 
spectroscopy and appropriate spectral pre -processing. So, generally these individual target 
phase are extracted generally in conventionally they are extracted by using different types of 
extracted and it is a very cumbersome process. So, can we use VisNIR DRS as an alternative to prey dig these individual pools of arsenic in the soil along with the total arsenic? So, that 
was our objective or that was  our research question.  
(Refer Slide Time:  11:30)   
 
So, what we did? W e after we measured these individual phase individual target phase, then 
we have used the arsenic soil spectra to predict using different model different PSR  model. 
So, you can see here the re are at 3  different spectral pre -processing we have used , first 
derivative, second derivative and orthogonal  signal correction and this is AST  means to tal 
arsenic, then organic pool, M g pool, PO4  pool , HCL pool and OX, OX pool.  
This shows the calibra tion R square,  calibration RMSE and validation and you can see 
comparing all of these that in case of first  derivative , second derivative total arsenic was 
predicted very high, organic also very good, M g pool was not that highly predicted. I n case of 
PO4 pool it was satisfactorily predicted , in case of HCl  pool it was moderately predicted. So, 
you can see the prediction accuracy changes from one  pool to another pool, but most of the 
pools are satisfactory predicted except for a one or two.  
So, that shows t hat a combination of PLSR  and a proper spectral processing can identify 
these individual phases of arsenic in the soil, which may help in future identification of the 
soil arsenic dynamics. So, that was also published in another journal called the Geoderma.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:15 ) 
 
So, VisNIR DRS for these are the prediction plots you can see our scalar values for total 
arsenic 0.88, 0.92, 0.58, 0.70, 0.83, 0.54. So, these are the prediction plots for different 
arsenic pools in the soil using diffuse r eflectance spectroscopy.  
(Refer Slide Time:  13:39)  
 
Now, considering the complexity of these pools, these values are still very much encouraging 
because, you remember that this soil a rsenic and this complex and their phases are at so much 
heterogeneous a nd it is very much if we can get a moderate prediction also for some of them, 
that would also help us that is also greatly helped us for identifying their dynamics in the soil.  These are the spectral the coefficients , PLSR  coefficients and these PLSR  coefficients have 
identified these red dots, which are the significant PLSR  coefficients which may use very 
useful in future research  if they want to pinpoint , if they want to selectively use these 
wavelengths for a subsequent machine learning application.  
(Refer Slide Time:  14:43)  
 
I have already shown you this application of DRS  for p etroleum contaminated soil so I a m 
not going to discuss it again. But just briefly you can see that this  petroleum contaminated 
soil using the diffuse reflectance spectroscopy and also you can see the what  we have used 
original reflectance first derivative and second derivative in different condition like  field 
moist intact, air dried intact and air dried ground. So, we have got in terms of validation at 
(()) (15:19 ), we have go t satisfactory R squared values for field m oist intact when you 
considered the validation R squared and also the potential RPDs  were also encouraging.  
So, the RPD values were 1.64, 1.70. So, if w e can focus , if you can see that first derivative of 
the ref lectance spectra using the field moist intact gave the best reading when we consider the 
validation R squared among all the models and also the RMSE values and also the RPD. So, 
using these we can consider that DRS  is a useful method for identifying the pe troleum 
contamination in soil.  (Refer Slide Time:  16:04)  
 
Another very important application for soil is , you know that  soil contain moisture and 
moisture absorb this infrared radiation. So, one of the major obstacle for in situ application 
for diffuse d reflectance spectroscopic based soil property model ling is the presence of 
moisture. So, to remove the impact of moisture, scientists have proposed a methodology that 
is called EPO or external parameter orthogonalization. It was first proposed by Roger et  al in 
2003.  
And this EPO algorithm is based on the proposition that field moist spectral matrix  if we 
consider this an X  can be expressed as an amalgamation or mixture of an useful section 
which is denoted by XP that describe a target soil properties suppose it is clay and extraneous 
section using the influence of moisture which is XQ and also spectral noise. So, you can see 
that the  field moist spectral matrix  can be decomposed into these 3 components.  
This is spectral noise and this is the external sec tion including the influence of moisture XQ  
and this is the XP which is target soil properties up in our case it was clay . So, the useful part 
this is only the  useful part can be computed by the difference matrix, what is the difference 
matrix D, which is the difference between the spectra of the soil with moisture and spectra of 
the dry soil. So, if we have taken the spectra from moist soil and the same soil which is dried, 
then we can differentiate the spectra that will give you the difference matrix D.  
Note that the Q can be calculated from the singular value decomposition which is known as 
SVD of D and subsequently can be used for deriving the projection matr ix P from this 
equation, where I  denotes the identity m atrix. So, specifically this S VD helps in  removing the space of the moisture ultimately generating an orthogonal space that remains unaffected by 
the moisture effect. So, in other way, in other words, basically this  EPO tries to orthogonally 
project the useful spectral section from that of the mo isture from that section which is 
influenced by moisture or that is XQ.  
So, when then the 2 variables are orthogonal projected from each other, then they do not have 
any interaction among this. So, in this way by orthogonal ly projecting the spectral space  
using this mathematical procedure of EPO, we can remove the impact of moisture . Notably, 
the number of EPO components can be derived from the SVD of D , alternatively , Q can be 
calculated by the principal component analysis of D transpose D, this is D transpose D. So, it 
should be read as D transpose D.  
So, if you do the principal component analysis you can also calculate the Q  from this 
principal component analysis. So, the idea is EPO is useful to orthogonally project the useful 
part from the non -useful part that is moisture  and in that way we can remove the impact of 
moisture f or in situ  prediction of soil properties without the influence of moisture .  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:07)  
 
So, we have used this technology for several scientists have used this technology and we have 
also used this technology. And we have seen that our result  shows that using EPO method, it 
was possible to reduce the error introduced by the weight or in situ measurement. So, if we can utilize this EPO, we can reduce the error which w e can get when we scan the sample in 
situ of course, because in situ samples are having moist moisture and this  moisture can produce some errors. And that error can be reduced if we go with this external parameter 
orthogonalization.  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:52) 
 
Scientists have also used a penetrometer mounted VisNIR probe for collecting the VisNIR 
spectra you can see here Jason  Ackerson et al in 2017 they have used thiss  penetrometer 
mounted VisNIR probe this is the original picture and the exterior, this i s an exterior picture 
and you can see this is an interior picture. So, this here is a lamp, here is a mirror and 
ultimately this is a fiber optic cable. So, as this penetrometer goes inside the soil, the fiber 
optic cable is getting the soil scan, s o, for from in  situ soil scan.  
So, for each sampling location visitor spectra were collected in situ using the penetrometer 
mounted probe and from air dried and ground soil course. So, and then followed by an EPO 
was applied to in situ VisNIR spectra to remove t he effects of the soil moisture and intactness 
of the spectra. And after application of the EPO , PLSR  model calibrated using a spectral 
library containing only spectra from these air dried and ground soil were used to predict the clay content from in situ spectra.  
Ultimately, they have seen that prior to application of EPO , PLS  was unable to accurately 
predict clay content from the in  situ spectra. Howe ver, after application of the EPO, PLS  
performance or in  situ spectra was quite good wit h an average RMSE  and R square across all 
sampling areas 88 grams per kg and then 0.0, asked values of  0.76. So, it shows that 
application of EPO in this VisNIR penetrometer mounted VisNIR probe also gave very good R square and remove the inherent error which you can get f rom scanning the soil sample in 
situ, moist samples in situ.  
(Refer Slide Time:  22:56)  
 
So, let us see some examples for crop you can see here the use of DRS and chemometrics for 
water deficit in  rice this research was done in a Das et al  in (2018)  was p ublished by Das et al 
in 2018. So, what they have done, so, they did a field experiment where we the 16 genotypes 
and 3 replicates and then they have made the spectral measurement using FieldSpec portable 
spectrophotometer. And simultaneously they have mea sured the sucrose reducing sugar and 
total sugar and then they have identified the suitable bands , indices and spectral models.  
They have proposed to novel indices, RSI which is the ratio of spectral index and normalized 
different spectral indices , NDSI  and then they have used different models like  artificial neural 
network, MARS, MLR , PLSR, RF and S VR and then they develop the prediction model and 
then evaluated the prediction model and then they have used the spectral phenotyping for 
water deficit stress .  
So, ultimately, the best performing multivariate models for sucrose reducing sugars and total sugars were found to be MARS , multivariate adaptive regression spline, then artificial neural 
network and also MARS  and also they produced the RPD values of 2.0, 2.44 and 1.9. So 
these RPD values are satisfactory. So, this shows the application of DRS and chemometrics 
can be useful for identification of the water deficit in ric e.  
So, they have developed these novel spectral indices in near infrared range , one is RSI, which 
is ratio  spectral index and normalized difference  spectral indices , NDSI , which is sensitive to sucrose, reducing sugars and total sugar content also identified which were subsequently 
calibrated and validated.  
(Refer Slide Time:  25:08)  
 
So, another application so, these are the spectral signatures you can see variation in spectral 
signatures in the rice leave at different waters deficit stress you can see these green one is 
controlled and the vegetative stress is this one and this is a flowe ring stress. So, you can see 
clearly see the difference in spectral patterns, when you go from the control to vegetative 
stress to flowering stress and they have predicted the sucrose and also different other 
parameters also using different models DRS. So , that shows that use of DRS and 
chemometrics can be useful for water deficit identification in rice.  
(Refer Slide Time:  26:02)  
 They have also recently shown that use of DRS and chemometrics can be useful for salinity  
stress of rice also. So, this VisNIR  DRS was used for leaf nutrient estimation in rice  under 
salinity stress  and novel spectral indices in VisNIR range were developed and validated and 
PLSR  and PCA based machine learning models were evaluated and PLSR  based models 
provided the superior performances for predicting the salinity stress in rice. So, that shows 
that different types of abiotic stress can be identified when we combine this  DRS with the 
chemometric algorithms.  
(Refer Slide Time:  26:46)  
 
A recent research published by Brackx et a l., they have shown that DRS in crop, diffuse 
reflectance spectroscopy can be utilized in crop for air quality monitoring. So, in urban areas, 
there i s air quality is one of the major issues. So, to assess the potential of hyperspectral, this 
research were trying to assess the potential of hyperspectral tea leaf reflectance for 
monitoring the traffic related air pollution.  
So, they have c ollected 29 C arpinus betulus sapling, they were exposed to the environment 
with either high or low traffic intensity and th e local air quality was estimated by leaf 
saturation isothermal remanent magnetism and lift chlorophyll content , index specific leaf 
area which is denoted by SLA a nd water content were determined. And to gain insight in the 
link between the leaf reflectanc e and air quality , the correlation between this SIRM and 
several spectral features was determined . 
And spectral reflectance for wavelength bands in the red and S WIR around the red edge were 
correlated with the SI RM with a Pearson correlation which you can see very high Pearson correlation coefficient 0.85 negative Pearson correlation coefficient negative correlation was 
there, but with the R squared value 0.72.  
So, this is that shows that if we can use the diffuse reflectance  spectroscopic based for 
captur ing the reflectance from the leaf to identify the air quality . There is a, this is very novel 
application of DRS in crop.  
(Refer Slide Time:  28:44)  
 
One of our research in back in 2017, w e have seen that if we can use the diffused  reflectance 
spectroscop y for algae different parameters for predicting the different parameters in the 
algae also. S o, for rapid assessment of algal biomass and pigment content also we have used 
diffuse d reflectance spectroscopy and PLSR  model has produced very good results when we 
try to predict the chlorophyll A, chlorophyll B and then total carotenoids prediction for 2  
different algae and we have got very good R  squared. So, that shows the high, wide range of 
application of DRS  both in soil and crop.  (Refer Slide Time:  29:30)  
 
So, guys, these are the references, I hope that you have gathered some good knowledge, but 
of course, it is not possible to cover all these application, but I hope that I was able to 
pinpoint some important advances at important advancement in the fiel d of DRS application 
for soil and crop. Of course, this will give you the impetus to go ahead and read more papers there are thousands  and thousands  of papers in the field of diffuse reflectance spectroscopy 
application in soil and crop.  
So please go ahead and read more and more papers to gain more and more knowledge. And 
these things will be much clearer to you once you go ahead and read those papers. So, some 
of these references  which I have utilized in this lecture are given here. But, of course, you ar e 
requested to go ahead and read some of the papers. And if you find a ny difficulties, let me 
know, I wi ll be more than happy to answer your queries.  (Refer Slide Time:  30:32)  
 
So, thank you guys. This makes the end of this week 5, and in the next week, we wi ll start 
with a new topic. Thank you.  