Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop  Management  
Professor Somsubhra  Chakraborty 
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute  of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 33  
ML and DL for Soil and Crop  Image  Processing  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 00:29)  
 
Welcome friends  to this NPETL Online  Certification  Course  of Machine Learning for Soil 
and Crop  Management , and we are currently  in Week  7, and in this week , we are talking  
about  machine learning and deep  learning  model  for soil and crop image  processing. And 
today, we  are going to  discuss  the lecture number  33 or  third  lecture of  this week.   
So, in the previous  two lectures,  we have  already  discussed  about  the different  machine  
learning  algorithms . Like we have talked  about  two regularization  algorithms , actually  three  
regularization  algorithm , one is ridge  regression, then we have discussed  Lasso  regression  
and also, we have discussed  elastic  net regression.   
So, we have seen what  are their importance , and also we have discussed  how they can 
compensate the overfit ting problem  which  we generally  encounter  in case of linear  model  or 
also they  can, how  they  can address  this multicollinearity  problem  in case of  this linear  model  
we have  discussed . Also, side by side we have  discussed  what  are the different  strategies  for 
calibration  and validation . Random  holdout  K-fold cross  validation  as well as leave- one cross  
validation , leave- one-out cross  validation  we have  discussed.  
So, today we are going to start in details  about  artificial neural  network. In the previous  
lecture I have told you what  is artificial neural  network , and what  is the basic  functionalities  
of artificial neural  network, and why what  is the what  is the history of artificial neural  network and then we have  discussed  about  the best why it is called  neura l network, what  is 
based  on its similarity  with the biological  neuron system  and nervous  system,  we can we 
define  this as an artificial  neural  network.  
So, today also we have seen what  are the basic construction of this artificial neural  network  
that mean s, how a node  is constructed . A node  is constructed  using different  inputs  and these 
inputs  are having different  weights  and they are these the multiplication  of these  inputs  along 
with their weights  are calculated  and then they, then if they are higher  than a threshold value,  
then they will active there will be an activation  function which  will be activated  and an 
activation  function will activate  and that will pass the signal  from  one node  to another  node . 
Here node  means  the whole  neuron.  
So, the signal  or the information  will be transformed  from  these inputs  to outputs  within  a 
single  node  and these outputs  of a single  node  will be taken  as an input  with the next node  or 
neuron, and that is why, the information  will pass from  one node  to another  node  or 
subsequent  nodes. So, this is why it is called  artificial neural  network. And today, we are 
going to discuss  in details  about  the artificial  neural  network  their features  and basic  
mathematical  representation . 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 04: 09) 
  
 
These will be the two concepts  we actually  are going to cover  today. And then secondly, we 
are going to cover  the convolutional  neural  network which  is a modification  of the 
convolution of the artificial  neural  network. So, these artificial neural  networks , and then 
multilayer  perceptron  or MLP  then activation  function, then convolutional  neural  network  
and then  convolution these  are the  important  keywords  for this  lecture.   
So, if we start by recalling  the basic concept  of artificial neural  networks,  remember,  these  
artificial neural  networks  is basically  composed of an input  layer  it will be basically  
composed of an input  layer  and then there will be hidden layer  and finally,  there will be an 
output  layer.  So, the information  will pass from  this input  layer  to the hidden  layer  to the 
output  layer  and these  information  sorry, inputs  are connected  to the subsequent  layer  by 
giving some  of the weights . And so, these artificial neural  network  or ANN basically  
composed of  a node , which  is also known as  the artificial neuron.  You can see this forms  an artificial  neuron,  which  transform , which  transmits  the signal  from  
the or inputs  from  its input  points  to the output  point. And you remember  in our previous  
lecture,  I have  showed you the biological  neural  network system  biolog ical neuron. In the 
biological  neuron there are dendrites,  which  are the receptor  of signals  and then they pass 
these signals  through the cell body to the axon to the axon end where they will be transmitted  
to the next neuron through the synaptic  to the synapses,  where the dendrites  of the next node  
or neuron will again  will receive this  information  from  the tail of  this axon.  
So, this is how this information  passes.  So, similarly,  here in artificial  neural  network  also it 
consists  of input  layers  one or more hidden layers  and an output  layer.  So, in reality  you will 
see they are having one or more  output  layer,  so, each node  or artificial  neuron connects  to 
another  and has an associate weight  and threshold, we  have  also seen .  
Now, if the output  of any individual  node  is above  the specified  threshold value,  then node  is 
activated  by this activation  function and this sending data to the next layer  of the network , 
otherwise,  if that value  will is less than the threshold predefined  threshold, then there will be 
no data will which  will pass to the next layer  of the network.  So, this is how, this is why, this 
is how  this information  passes  from  one layer  to another  layer  in artificial neural  network.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 07:37)  
  
Now,  let us move  ahead  and see some practical  example.  So, the most  widely  used the 
practical  application  of this artificial neural  network is the Google  search  engine . We all use 
this thing and  this is based  on the  artificial neural  network concept.  
Now,  if we see the basic structure  of an of a node, then you will see that there  are several  
inputs . We have already  discussed  this in our previous  lecture, so we have  x1, x2 up to xn, 
and these inputs  are having different  weights  based  on their importance. So, those  inputs  
which  are more  important, will be having more  weightage  than those  inputs  which  are less 
important .  
And ultimately,  there will be a transfer  function which  will sum up the  multiplication  of these 
inputs  with their weight , and ultimately  these summation  if it, if this net input  which  is 
denoted by these net j is higher  than a predefined  threshold value then these activation  
function will be active  these activation  function will be activated  and then the based  on this 
activation  function, the  final  output  will be  passed  to the next  node.  
Now,  remember,  there  is no verbatim  signal  passing . Of course,  the if this next  input  is higher  
than a specified  threshold, then  this activation  function will be  on and obviously based  on this 
activation  function an output  will be  transmitte d. So, the  output  may  not be same  with  this net 
inputs , so output  is different.  So, this  is how  these artificial neural  networks  works.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 09:37)  
 
Now,  if we see that some  of the features  of this artificial neural  network  I have  mentione d it 
that not all inputs  are equal . Of course,  some  inputs  are having more  and more  impact , so 
those, so that is why their weights  are also different.  So, remember  that the signal  is not 
passed  down to the next neuron verbatim,  because that depends  on this activation  function. 
And if this activation  function is on based  on this activation  function,  the output  will be 
determined  otherwise  the information  will not  pass.   
So, the output  is a function of the input  that is affected  by the weights  and the transfer  
function. So, here these  the final output  which  is denoted by O, will be based  on these  inputs  
and their weights  as well as these activation  function or transfer  function they will calculate 
based  on that  these final  output  will be  calculated . (Refer  Slide Time: 10:49)  
 
Now,  so, what  are the roles  or features  of an artificial neural  network, why do we prefer  
artificial neural  network ? Now, the best feature  of artificial  neural  network  or in other  words, 
why we prefer  artificial  neural  network  in solving a complex  problem  is because it can 
compute  any computable  function by the appropriate  selection  of the network topology and 
weighted  values . And these weights  are based  on their experience and also these experience  
is nothing but  trial and  error.  
This is a very important  term trial and error. It tries evaluate and adjust  their weight. So, 
based  on these process , based  on these repetitive  process  it learns  from  the data. And from  
this just like our brain . We go to a new place we explore  the new,  new things  and these are 
being stored  in our brain . And then we give it, we know  based  on those  information which  
are stored  in our brain  we take a decision. And if you see that decision  is not working, then 
we adjust  our, we rethink and adjust  our decision , so that that decision  can be helpful  for 
achieving  an objective.  
So, similarly,  just resembling  our brain , just mimicking  our brain, these  artificial neural  
networks  also goes for trial and error to adjust  their weight . Because adjusting this weight  
will only you know  can change  this net input  and this net input  will have  a drastic  effect  of 
whether  they  will activate that  activation  function or not.  
So, if  we give  these weights  based  on our experience then  it will be  a true learning  experience  
and it will be through trial and error.  So, these,  this is the best feature of artificial  neural  
network because  it can adjust  these weights  based  on trial and error , so it can learn  from  the 
experience.   So, what  are the three  features  of this trial and error ? First, it will give the trial that means  it 
will come to the output  function of the given unit input . Second, it will evaluate these output  
with the original  value.  So, the actual  output  and the predicted  output  will be compared . And 
if you see there is mismatch  then these artificial  neural  network will adjust  their weight  so 
that the outputs  can be as close to  the actual  output.  
So, this is the trial and error, and this is a very important  feature of artificial  neural  network  
and that is why artificial  neural  netwo rk can compute  or can learn  from  any complex  
relationship , because it can  adjust  by trial and  error  and it can  learn  from  this experience.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 14:03)  
 
So, let us see the mathematically.  So, the mathematically  the simplest design  of this node  will 
be this one, and we call it a perceptron. So, this is the first and simplest of all the node , which  
we can in the neural  network. So, here you can obviously see there are x1 and then there are 
three inputs. Let us consider  these as x2 and then let us consider  this x3 and this will be 
computed and  finally,  activation  function based  on will be  getting  the output.  
So, we can see that individual  nodes  can be considered  as its own linear  regression  model.  
So, if we considered  these individual  node, so, the final output . So, we can consider, we can 
express  this node  as this summation  of weights . Suppose, there are w1, w2 and w3. So, x1 
multiplied  by w1, x2, w2, x3. w3 and then we add some  bias or threshold. So, the threshold is 
defined  by the threshold can be automatically  given  or it can be well defined. So, remember  
that here we are giving here w1, w2, w3, so more  importance  of an input  they will imply  
more  weight.  So, suppose  our activation  function says which  is denoted by these  fx, if it is 1, then it will be 
of no. If according  to our activation  function the condition is if this term that is wy, xi plus 
threshold will be greater  than 0, then the activation  function will give the output  of 
1otherwise,  if it is less than  0, then  the activation  function will produce  the output  of 0.  
So, you can see here based  on these weights, this final term will be calculated  and then we 
will be getting  these, based  on these condition this activation  function will be activated  and 
then they will produce  the final output. So, if that output  exceeds  that given threshold, as we 
have  seen in this case,  so, this threshold then it activates  the node  and passing the data to the 
next layer  in the network , and these results  in the output  of one node  become the input  of the 
next node  which  I have already  told you.  
Now,  this process  of passing  data from  one layer  to the next layer  defines  these  neural  
network as a feed forward  network. So, you can see the information  is going from  the inputs  
to the activation  function and then it will go to the output , so it is a feed forward  network. So, 
you can obviously understand by adjusting these weights  or adjusting these  threshold we can 
change  the outcome.  
So, when  we change the weights, when  we change this threshold, we can produce  different  
types  of outcomes . So, that is why, during the trial and error process  it changes . It changes  
weights  and so, producing different  types  of outcomes.  So, neural  network could make  
increasingly  complex  decision , because  of these features  a neural  netwo rk can produce  
increasingly  complex  decision  depending on the  output  of previous  decision  on layer.   
So, you can see these layers  are interconnected  these nodes  are interconnected . Since these  
nodes  are interconnected  and the output  of one node  is dependent  not only the  inputs  but their  
weights  and also the bias and subsequently the activation  function. So, you can see that how 
influencing this could be for learning  from  a complex  data set. So, from  a complex  data set, if 
we want  to learn  by trial and error,  we have to have this kind of complex  setup, so that we 
can learn  from  the experience by trial and error.   
So, neural  network  that is why could make increasingly complex  decision  depending on the 
output  of the previous  decision  layers . So, this is an exam ple of the simplest  model  that is 
called  perceptron.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 19:07)  
 
Now,  let us see mathematically  remember  that, although we are getting  these neural  networks  
which  we are having the, it is a linear  function we can see, and we are getting  binary  output  
like 0,1 or something like that. But in actual  neural  network  they follow  these sigmoid  
neurons, which  are distinguished by having x values  between  0 and 1.  
So, these x values  between  0, 1, 1, so that is why. So, you can take any values  between  0, 1, 
1, so fraction  values  of 0 and 1 so the neural  network they can behave like the decision  trees.  
Remember  the decision  tree I have already  discussed ? So, in the decision  tree what  happens  
based  on these decision rules,  there will be hierarchically  segregation  of the data.  So, 
similarly  in the neural  network also  just like decision  trees,  the x values.   
So, since they are being distributed  in the next layer  based  on these  rules,  hierarchically,  so, 
the values  between  0 to 1 can diminishes  the impact  of the variable  change.  So, and 
ultimately  output  from  a single  node  and ultimately  the output  of the artificial neural  network.  
So, that is why artificial neural  network is very helpful  for predicting any complex  
relationship  from  the data.   
So, what  is the goal of an artificial neural  network ? The goal of an artificial neural  network  
will be always  to adjust  the weights  and bias to reduce  the cost function. So, in this case,  the 
cost function is the mean  square  error.  So, you can see when  you plot the value of the weight  
and loss of information  or so, you can see at a point . So, point  of convergence, where  the cost 
function is  at its minimum.   So, here the MSE  will be at minimum mean  square  error will be at minimum,  so, this will be 
the optimum  value  of the weight. So, this value  of the weight  is considered  based  on the point  
where these error term is or the cost function is minimum.  So, this is how these  error  term is 
being this  is how  these values  the weights  are being calculated.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 21:52)  
 
Now,  most  deep  neural  networks  are feedforward  meaning  they flow in one direction  only. 
So, that means  from  input  to output . However,  there are some  backpropagation network also 
which  moves  from  the opposite , which  moves  in the opposite  direction , that means,  from  
output  to input .  
So, basically  these backpropagation network, they calculate the attribute  the error associated  
with each neuron and subsequently adjust  and feed the parameter  of the model. So, this is a backpropagation network. You will see these terms  vary frequently when  you go for these  
artificial neural  network -based  application.  
So, what  are the advantages  and disadvantages  of artificial neural  network ? Now, there  are 
several  advantages . First  of all, it can  adapt  to unknown situation . 
It is very powerful . It can model  complex  functions , and it is easy to use, it can learn  by 
examples,  and it is very  little  user  domain- specific  expertise  is needed.  So, anybody can  try to 
feed their data by using the ANN model, but there is a disadvanta ge also that means,  there 
will be a large complexity  of the network structure.  So, sometimes  the interpretation  may not 
be very  straightforward.   
So, these are some  of the advantages  and disadvantages . But irrespective of these advantages  
and disadvantages , I would  say, that these artificial neural  network is one of the most  widely  
used deep  learning method  in current , in modern  artificial intelligence  and machine learning  
domain.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 23:49)  
 
So, we have seen the single  layer  perceptron  but of course,  in real life situation,  there will be 
a number  of perceptrons , which  are also connected  between  each other. So, of course  they are 
called  the multilayer ed perceptron.  So, of course,  here you will see that these input  layer  is 
connected  to the next layer , and this next layer  are subsequently connected  to the numerous  
multiple  hidden layers  and these f inally,  there will be  an output  layer.   So, this is called  the multilayer  perceptron. Earlier , we have  seen a single  layer  where  the 
inputs  are comi ng and output  is generated.  So, this is called  the simple  perceptron. However,  
here you are  seeing  the multilayer  perceptron.  
So, although, these multilayer  perceptron  actually  comprised  of sigmoid  neurons, not 
perceptrons  as most  real world  problems  are nonlinear . So, these multilayer  perceptrons  are 
actually  comprised  of these sigmoid  neurons  non-perceptrons , because the sigmoid  neurons  
are nonlinear  and remember  that most  of the features  in the real world  situation  are having the  
nonlinear  relationship . And that is why these  multilayer  perceptron  are basically  composed of 
the sigmoid  neurons.  
Now,  what  are the application  of these multilayer  perceptron?  The multilayer  perceptron are 
being used for computer  vision, natural  language  processing and so on, they are a different  
types  of application  and nowadays  these artificial neural  network has a wide  application  in 
different  domains  of agriculture  and including soil and crop,  which  we are going to discuss  in 
our coming lectures.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 25:54)  
  
So, what  is convolutional  neural  network?  So, convolutional  neural  network or CNN  is an 
advanced  method, which  specifically  deals  with the images  speech  and audio signal  inputs.  
So, when  there  is a the image  is a special  file, that means,  it has some  width it has some  
length. So, when  we have  at this image  is divided into millions  and millions  of picture  
elements  or pixels . We know  this time pixel  very much . Multi, megapixel  and all these things  
we know.  
So, an image  is divided into millions  and millio ns of pixels. And to get the information  from  
these millions  and millions  of pixels, we generally  use the convolutional  neural  network. So, 
it basically  consists  of three  layers , one is called  the convolutional  layer,  another  is called  the 
pooling layer.  And the  third  one is called  up fully  connected  or a fully  connected  layer.   
So, basically  this construction of these convolutional  neural  network basically  we input . 
Suppose  we input  the image  and there will be convolutions . Convolutions  we will discuss . It 
is basically  the selection  of the feature  based  on some  filters , and we are going to discuss  this 
in our upcoming lecture.   
So, after this convolution, we will get the feature maps , which  are derived  from  these  images.  
And subsequently, we will go from  the subsampling and feature maps.  Ultimately,  we will be 
getting  the fully  connected  layers  and then will be based  on this final output  will be based  on 
these fully  connected  layers.   
So, what  are the filters?  What  are the pooling layer? What  are the fully  connected  layers ? We 
will be discussed  in our next lecture.  So, let us just go ahead  and I would just like to give you this reference,  which  we are going to use. So, let us wrap  up our lecture here and we will start 
from  where we  stop in  our next  lecture.   
So, remember  guys, whatever  I have covered  is a basic overview, but there are plenty of 
literature  available for these deep  learning models.  Specifically,  if you are interested  to go 
and explore  these artificial neural  network  or the application  of artific ial neural  network  in 
different  domains . Please go and search  some  of the available literature.  There are plenty of 
available literature,  so that you can have a more  in depth understanding of artificial  neural  
network.  
So, we have  a basic  overview.  We have seen the basic overview  of convolutional  neural  
network, but in the next lecture,  we will see details  of their working and then I will, we will 
be discussing what  are the benefits  of using the convolutional  neural  network. Thank you 
guys. Let  us meet  in our next lecture.  