Machine Learning for Soil a nd Crop Management  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 37  
UAV and  ML Applications in Agriculture (Contd.)  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:22 ) 
 
Welcome , friends , to this  second lecture of w eek 8 of this NPTEL  online  certification course 
of Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management . And in this week we are talking about  
UAV and ML applications in agriculture . So, in our first  lecture of this week , we have 
discussed and how these machine learning and deep learning models can be used to predict or 
to classify soil or  plant features . 
We have discussed in details about the Convolutional Neural Network method, and they had 
three different structures . And based on those structures , how much accuracy the researchers 
have got  for classifying different weeds in the crop field, we have also discussed , showing 
some good application of machine learning and deep learning for crop image based process . 
The reason w e have discussed  this is because the same process are being used by the  UAVs 
for making decision using the images . So, in the later part of this week we  will be seeing 
similar type of applications . So, things will be not , things will be more clear to us  because we 
have already learned  the basic work flow of this , how this image processing is combined with  
the Convolutional Neural Network.  (Refer Slide Time: 0 2:03) 
 
Now, in this lecture , we are going to focus on this  4 major aspects . We are going to talk a bout 
the UAVs or Unmanned Aerial Vehicles , and then we are talking about some of the  UAV 
parts , then we are going to discuss about the use of UAV for agricultural  operations , and 
finally , we are going to list some of the agricultural benefits of using thes e drones or  UAVs . 
Now, these drones are basically synonymously used for  UAVs in this whole  week . So, 
whenever  I am using either  UAV or drone , they are basically same.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:40 ) 
 These are some of the keywords which we are going to discuss . We are going to discuss this  
UAV, then Payload , what is , and then S praying, Crop health, Multispectral sensors . So, these 
type of  things we are going to discuss in this week. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:55 ) 
 
So, the first question comes to our mind, what is an  UAV?  Now UAV is the short form of 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, and of course , that is also known as a drone , which is basically an 
aircraft without any human pilot , crew or passengers on board. So, there is another term 
called UAS  or Unmanned Aircraft System . So, this UAS  is basically a combination of  UAV 
plus ground based controller and a system of communications . 
So, UAV is a component of U nmanned Aircraft  System , and UAVs are very , very important 
nowadays  for different applications . And simultaneously, in agriculture also . Although, I am 
going to discuss some of these applications in other field but we are going to focus  mostly on 
the agriculture . (Refer Slide Time: 04: 00) 
 
So, as you can see, the applications of the  UAVs is majorly , we can see in case of defense 
operations , then taking the aerial photography,  then product deliveries , then agriculture , 
policing and surveillance , and finally infrastructure inspection . So, also there are different 
types of variable application where drones are being used nowa days, but we are going to 
focus more on this agricultural aspect of  using this drone or  UAV.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:40 ) 
 
Now, so, what are we go for the  UAV or drones in agriculture ? Because drone can help the 
farmers by precision agriculture. Now, convent ional agriculture where farmers grow the 
crops and then they apply the  different types of inputs for growing the crops like fertilizers , like pesticides , they are not very much efficient enough. So, their efficiency is diminished by  
manual processes . 
And so, to augment  their efficiency of agricultural operations it is very , very important that  
farmers should  resort to these different precision agricultural practices . And drone is another 
very important concept or  component of this precision agriculture . So, how? Because it can 
reduce the human error also it can increase the efficiency . So, here, please read it as increase 
the efficiency in  traditional farming  methods . 
So, it can reduce the human error . So, whatever human error is there , it can be reduced . And 
it can increase the efficiency in traditional farming methods , because it generally execute that 
by gathering data to regulate this crop health, then crop  treatment irrigation , crop damage 
assessment and soil analysis . We are going to discuss them in det ails. 
So, in agriculture , you will see that most of these drone based applications are  focusing on 
this crop health identification, then crop treatment , and then producing the irrigation or 
spraying, and then crop damage assessment , and finally, the soil a nalysis . So, it is also very 
much essential , because drone survey  can ensure minimum cost and time , but at the same 
time it can boost the crop yield . 
So, when you go for survey with a drone , that can ensure minimum cost , because you  can 
cover a huge amount  of land within a short period of time . And when you when you finish an 
operation within a short period of time , it can ensure the minimal cost and time , but at the 
same time due to the judicious application , due to the  application based on empirical 
obser vation, it is always  a fact that it can increase or boost the crop yield . 
So, nowadays there is a term called  digital sky platform. So, this digital sky platform  
becomes a buzz word where it consists of these drones , AIML  based algorithms and also the 
remo te sensing . So, in this week , later in this week , we are going to see some drone based 
remote sensing followed by some AIML  tools to  address these, one of these issues , like crop 
health,  crop treatment , irrigation , crop damage assessment , and soil analysis . 
So, so  far, most of the agricultural operation using drones or  UAVs are focusing on these type 
of aspects using these remote  sensing based images as well as different types of  AIML  
applications . Some drones are using the multispectral sensors , some drone s uses the  hyperspectral sensors , and most of the common drones are using this  RGB camera for getting 
the high resolution color photographs . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:55 ) 
 
Now, what are the major components of the drone ? So, in a broad sense , a drone can be  
composed of three major part . One is the aerial platform, second is the ground control system , 
and the third one is the communication system . So, the aerial platform basically composed of 
airframe , the navigation system and the power system , and the payload. So, these are very, 
very important terminologies , the airframe, the navigation system , the power system and the 
payload.  
And the  ground control station, or GCS  allows the human control from a remote  
emplacement . And finally , the communication system . So, these three are the major three 
component , in a broad sense , of a drone . (Refer Slide Time: 09:40 ) 
 
So, if we see, what is a payload ? Payload  is the weight of the drone, the  weight a  drone or 
unmanned aerial  vehicle  can carry . So, it is usually counted outside the weight of the drone  
itself , and it can include anything additional to the drone , such as extra cameras , sensors or 
packages for delivery . 
In agricultural drones , which are specifically  focused on agricultural operation, most of the 
times these  payload are synonymously used for  these image sensors , like RGB image , 
thermal image , multispectral image , hyperspectral images , image sensors , so, apart from 
other sensors also.  
So, in case of agricultural operation , the payload is  majorly  encompassing these image 
sensors because these images will be subsequently used for different types of soil and crop 
applications . (Refer Slide Time: 10:42 ) 
 
So, what are the different parts of a  drone ? As you can see,  here this is an example of a 
agricultural drone Ph antom 4 RTK, which is being used for field mapping. And these drones 
have different types of parts  like navigation system , it has global positioning system , or GPS,  
it has different multiple sensors , they have  cameras , programmable cameras , as well as tool  
for autonomous drones are also there.  
So, this is a DJI,  this Phantom 4 RTK  is made by the company DJI, which has  also other 
types of drones for different , different application . They have also sprayer  drones also for 
agricultural spraying purpose . (Refe r Slide Time: 11:25 ) 
 
So, if we see, the different types of sensors  which are there in a drone specifically for 
agricultural purpose , you can see that it can consist of  this RGB camera, and also they have  
these multispectral camera , and also they have the rmal camera, and they have also LIDAR  
camera also . So, different types of sensors are there , and these multi , as you can see these 
multispectral sensors , and also this RGB camera is attached to this  drone , and also you can 
see there is a DLS  sensor which is a short form , DLS  is a strong short form of  downwelling 
light sensor . 
So, this downwelling light sensor is used for  different  optical  based characterization . So, this 
DLS  sensor is b eing used along with this multi spectral camera, and RGB camera, in this 
drone which is  being used for  taking the images of the  of the field . So, these are different 
types of sensors and image sensors  are being used . (Refer Slide Time: 12:51 ) 
 
There are two broadly there are two  types of drones one is called the fixed wing dr ones 
another one is the rotary drone . So, fixed wing drones are having the fixed wings  and their 
advantage is they can cover a large area of the field within a very short period of time 
because of their fixed wing operations . Another type of drone is calle d the  rotary drone , and it 
is the mostly , the majority of the agricultural drones are rotary drones . 
So, this rotary  wing drones are having multiple rotors . As you can see here, they are having 
this multiple rotors , 1, 2, 3, 4 here. So, they are having mul tiple rotors with rotating blades . 
So, drones with 4 rotors are known as quadcopters , and when they are having 6 rotor they call 
as the hex copters . So, these quadcopters and  hexcopters are made,  are mostly prevalent or 
mostly dominated in the  agricultural drone enterprise . 
So, this rotary wing drones allow for  vertical takeoff . So, they can take off vertically , and 
they can hover  at a particular place, and they can be also useful for  closer crop inspection.  
They are easier to control manually than fixed wing drones , and generally , these rotary  
wing ed drones are less expensive than the fixed swing drones . 
So, there are new types of drones and they are  called hybrid drones . So, the hybrid drones,  
you can see , these both rotary  drones and rotary features and fi xed wing features are there . 
So, those are known as the hybrid drones. But in general , most of these drones are basically 
either fixed wing or rotary wing drones . (Refer Slide Time: 14:38 ) 
 
So, what are the steps of data collection by a drone for agricul ture. So, the first step is of 
course you have to analyze the area on which you want to execute this drone operation. So, 
you have to identify first the area of operation, or the  of the field , in case of agricultural 
operation you have to identify the fiel d. And then you have to establish a  boundary where 
you want to operate these drones . And then you have to analyze the area of this , within this 
boundary.  
Once you analyze this area, you have to upload the GPS  points into the drone ’s navigation 
system . And, so, these are the first step , that is  analyzing the area. In the second step, you 
have to use the autonomous drones which you can use the , you can enter the  flight patterns 
into their system, and they will fly to cover this established boundary or this  area, which you 
have already  analyzed , and you have already uploaded the GPS  coordinates of that area into 
the drone ’s navigation system . (Refer Slide Time: 15:53 ) 
 
Now, once you upload the data , it can capture via, this  uploading the data , it can be execu ted, 
either via  capturing the data via different sensors , and then subsequently, those images will be 
processed by softwares for analysis and interpretation. Finally , there will be different types of  
outputs , like formatting for easy understanding of the f armers . These outputs can be  prepared 
in different formats . 
Either, you can produce the 3- D mappings or photogrammetry or you can also output the 
vegetation index based mapping. There are different  types of vegetation index like 
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index and Normalized Difference Red Edge, or NDRE.  
So, this NDVI  can be calculated  by using this formula , that is , NIR minus Red by NIR  plus 
Red. 
So, the NIR and this R ed stands for the  reflectance of the near Infrared  and the R ed spectral 
bands . So, using this  near infrared reflectance from this near infrared and R ed spectral bands,  
you can predict the crop health status , because  this NDVI  generally is most effective  for 
portraying the variation of the chlorophyll content , and canopy density during t he early to 
mid growth stages of  the crop . 
So, this NDVI  is widely used by these drones for producing different types of  maps for 
identifying the crop health status . And another one is known as NDRE.  So, NDRE  is 
basically Normalized Difference Red Edge. So, this NDRE  formula stands for NIR  minus Red Edge  by NIR plus Red Edge. So, Red Edge is a band which situated,  which  is generally 
situated between R ed band as well as the NIR band. 
Because, when for healthy crop, the reflectance  values generally increase d rastically from 
Red to NIR,  and this NIR,  and this R ed edge  band which is  situated just in between of these 
Red and NIR  can show a drastic increase of the reflectance. So, these in Red Edge band is 
also used for identification of the crop health status . So, we are going to discuss this NIR  and 
this NDRE and NDVI  based maps in our upcoming lectures . 
But at this point of time , you should understand these are the different  types of vegetation 
index which shows the crop health status . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:13 ) 
 
Now, what are the importance, what are the other application of NIR  drone ? So, for 
agriculture as you can see here we can use this drone for irrigation monitoring using either 
hyperspectral or multispectral or thermal sensor data, we can identify the areas that are too 
dry or needed improvement by the farmers , and using this drone survey, it is possible to 
improve the water use  efficiency , and you can already , using this drone you can identify or 
recognize  the leaks  or pooling of in irrigation . 
And also you can calculate this  vegetation index to identify the healthy crops . Vegetation 
index like NDVI, NDRE,  just like  I have discussed in our previous slide . (Refer Slide Time:  20:03 ) 
 
Also these drone can be used for crop health monitoring, because using this drone survey you 
can identify the patches  which are showing the bacterial or fungal attack of the crops , you can 
also get the variable reflection of the green light and NIRS,  and then you can, and also using 
that multispectral images , can track the crop  health by using the reflection of the green and 
NIRS.  
You can  monitor any problem of the crop if you either , if you expecting there is some 
problem , you can monitor that problem very quickly and then you can save the crop. So, that 
is another advantage of  using this drone  for crop health monitoring. And finally, if there is a 
crop failure , you can take the image as a document for claiming the  insurance . So, these are 
some of the application for crop health monitoring using drones . (Refer Slide Time: 21:08 ) 
 
Of course , you can use , another application is crop damage assessment . So, as you can see,  
this image , in this image , the drone camera is capturing the reflectance from this different 
zones of this field, and by analyzing the reflectance values , it is now possible to identify the 
crop damage. So, as you can see here, it can detect the  weeds by either multispectral or  RGB 
sensors . It can identify the pests and infections , and farmers can quantify the exact amounts 
of chemical needed based  on this type of  maps . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:54 ) 
 
Another application for this drone is  soil analysis , field soil analysis . So, you can get a huge 
amount of land soil information regarding the land soil conditions using the drone survey . Generally , multispectral sensors  can gather the data which is useful for planting patterns  
throughout the soil  analysis and  then irrigation and nitrogen level management and then you 
can also use the photogrammetry and 3D  mapping for the farmers to analyze their soil 
condition thoroughly. So, field soil analysis is another  important application for  drone . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:46 ) 
 
Planting is another very important application. So, nowadays , there are different type , 
multiple drone  startups in I ndia. They are investing in developing the agricultural drones 
which  are focusing on agri, specific agriculture operations like  spraying and the crop health 
monitoring. So, these drone startups in India have invented drone planting system that allows 
drone  to shoot  pods , their seeds and th ese impor tant nutrients into  the soil , which can reduce 
the cost by almost 85 percent , but also increases consistency  and efficiency . 
So, it is quite obvious that in near future , with the advancement  of these technologies , it will 
be possible to automate these agri cultural practices , conventional agricultural practices using 
drone . (Refer Slide Time: 23:43 ) 
 
Drone, another  widespread application of this drone for spraying the pesticides . So, this 
spraying the pesticides can reduce the human exposure or human conta ct for , with these 
harmful chemicals . And they can cover a large area relatively quickly and they can uniformly 
spray the liquid by flying the  drone over the crop . So, this agricultural drone , spraying drone 
has become a very important  component of the agr icultural drone market . 
And not only the spraying, but also using the drone , you can monitor the movement of the 
cattle , you can use the thermal sensor technology to find the lost  animals and detect an injury 
or sickness . So, there are different types of s ensors you can use to identify the lost animals 
and they can , their injury or sickness can be  also identified using these drone base d sensors.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:50 ) 
 
So, here, you can see the spraying drone  are in operation and they can spray the droplets 
uniformly throughout the field within a very short period of time by flying in close contact to  
this crop. And in this operation, it is quite important that while doing the spraying , the human 
contact to these harmful chemicals are being reduced . So, that is a  both way benefit , not only  
uniform and cost effective and rapid spraying, but also from the health as a point of view also 
this type of spraying drones are  making a paradigm shift in I ndian agriculture . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:41 ) 
 
So, what are t he benefits of drone use in agriculture , if we can list out some of  the points . So, 
first of all it can ensure the enhanced production by comprehensive irrigation planning and  monitoring of crop health and soil health. Sorry, guys , so, please consider i t as soil health . 
And then, effective and adaptive techniques based on weather  conditions and allocate 
resource with out wastage . 
The third one is  greater safety for the farmers because when you are using the spraying drone 
for spraying the pesticides , in challenging terrains , infected areas , taller crops and power line s 
are there in some of the fields . So, they are  the human contact is being reduced by using the 
spraying drone and that produce d the greater safety for the farmers . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:38 ) 
 
And also it ensures the quick operation, that means quick and mindful decisions can be taken 
without second guessing , and various sensors of the drone generally enable capturing and 
analyzing their data from the entire field . Less wastage of resources , of co urse, these 
agricultural drones enables optimum uses of all the resources such as fertilizer waste of  
water , seeds and pesticides . 
And you can get that  quick operation, by quick operation I mean that it can enhance the speed 
of operation 10 times more than  the conventional operation. And simultaneously, it produces 
99 percent accuracy rate.  So, this drone survey helps farmers calculate the precise land size 
segment the various  crops and indulge  in soil mapping. (Refer Slide Time: 27:28 ) 
 
Also from the poi nt of view of insurance also this is very important , because farmers can 
easily capture the image of the damaged crop . If there is a failure by using the drone in a 
relatively easily , and they can claim  the insurance benefits by producing those pictures . So, 
and also these drones captured images of the agricultural fields can be an evidence for the  
insurance companies also . 
So, the agricultural insurance sectors can use agricultural drones for efficient and trustworthy 
data. So, they capture the photos of c rop damages that have  occurred for the right estimation 
of monetary payback to the farmers . So, you can see that there are different types of 
application and different types of benefits of  applying the drones in agriculture sector . 
Recently , couple of year s ago , there was a  locust swarm . So, locust , they are the insects 
which can feed on the crops . And when they, the swarm of locusts can invade the crop field,  
they damage the crop field entirely. So, to control the locust , different states of India has 
produced several , they have developed certain methodologies to control them using the 
organophosphorous chemicals . To spray these  organophosphorous chemicals also they use 
these agricultural drones , spraying drones. So, that shows that  the multi- directional  uses of  
agricultural drones for the overall benefit of agricultural enterprise . (Refer Slide Time: 29:27 ) 
 
So, these are the references , guys . I hope that you have learnt something new . This is an 
overview class of  UAVs . And in the  next lecture onwards , we will be discussing more and 
more application of how these images are generally  taken , and what are the steps of further 
image processing and then combine  it with the machine learning and deep learning 
algorithms to get the desired outputs from those image s. 
So, thank you. Let us meet in our next lecture to discuss more about  UAV based agricultural 
operation in combination with machine learning and deep learning algorithms . Thank you, 
guys . 
 