Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 47  
Digital Soil Mapping – General Overview (Contd.)  
Welcome friends to this second l ecture of week 10 lecture number 47. And in this week we 
are talking about digital soil mapping overview . And in this first lecture of this week, we 
have already discussed the basic overview of digital soil mapping, what is digital soil 
mapping, why it is different than non -traditional soil mapping, what is the motivation of 
digital soil mapping what are the uses of digital soil mapping, how these digital solving workflow operates .  
And then we have seen the Jenny's model of soil formation and SCORPAN plus e  model 
given by McBratney et all  in 2003. What are the differences , why we call it digital soil 
mapping and so  on. So, in this week we will be will be continuing that and then we will be 
also discussing the geographic information system and why it is important in digital soil 
mapping we are going to also learn .  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:17)
 
 
So, these are the concepts which we are going to discuss, we are going to discuss the 
covariates in digital soil mapping then  digital elevation model then geographic information 
system then GCS or geographic coordinate system  then UTM or Universal Transverse 
Mercator and then datum. So, all these concepts which are we are  going to cover in this 
lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 1:40)  
 
These are some of the keywords which we are going to discuss like GIS raster  vector UTM 
DEM.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:49)   
 
So, let us start with the covariates in DSM. Now, guys  we have seen according to both the 
Jenny's model as well as the SCORPAN plays plus e  model the soil formation depends on 
apart from soil properties, it depends on different types of other auxiliary soil properties, 
auxiliary properties like climate organism parent material relief.  
So, why the why are they important because it has been found that soil formation sometimes 
depe nds on these factors and there is a direct correlation between these factors and the soil properties. So, that is why by incorporating these auxiliary variables in the soil inference 
model of DSM it is possible to produce higher resolution soil maps.  
So, that is why these properties have been included in the digital soil mapping concept. Now, 
what are the most common soil climate variables which we generally incorporate in the DSM 
you can see here minimum and maximum temperature cumulated mean temperature mean 
temperature precipitation potential evapotranspiration, climatic water balance global radiation 
snow depth all these are incorporated in the as covariates in the digital soil mapping.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:13)   
 
And if we talk about the remote sensing remote sensing has got an immense importance in 
digital soil mapping. Here we have seen that remote sensing images have highly correlated 
with the iron oxide content of the soil, then soil organic matter content salt content, parent 
material differences soil moisture content, then pH calcium carbonate mineral nitrogen, total 
carbon total and available phosphorus clay, silt and sand contents all these can be inferred 
from the remote sensing images.  
So, remote sensing images have utilized or imagined indic es image derived indices have been 
well utilized in different DSM application as auxiliary variables.  (Refer Slide Time: 4:10)  
 
So, let us talk about D EM which is anot her important covariant. So, DEM stands for the full 
name is digital elevation model, it is basically a 3d representation of the bare  earth or bare 
ground topographic surface of the Earth excluding the trees, buildings and any other surface 
objects.  
So, if we remove all the surface objects and will take the picture of the bare ground and t he 
differences at the surface, then it will be a 3d representation and that is called Digital 
Elevation Model. Now, there are different types of digital elevation model from a variety of 
sources variety of resolution. More high resolution means higher larg e is the file size.  
So, depending on your computer resources you can select what resolution DS  DEM you are 
going to use. So, D EM is a very important auxiliary variable or covariate in the DSM 
domain. Now, for example  these USGS United State geological ser vice, D EMs  used to be 
derived primarily from topographic maps.  
And those are being systematically replaced with D EMs  derived from high resolution, 
LiDAR and IFSAR  data. N ow, this is an example of this DEM map produced by NASA.  (Refer Slide Time: 5:33)   
 
And as I have told you that these D EMs are basically generated by Li DAR. Now the question 
comes w hat is a Li DAR? So, Li DAR is a short form  of light detection and ranging. S o, it is 
basically used to measure the exact distance of an object on the Earth's surface. So, it 
basically uses a pulse laser to calculate an object variable distance from the Earth's surface as 
you can see, in this picture, it can be either airborne or it can be fixed in some moving vehicle 
or tripod.  
So, using these they basically use a pulsed laser to measure the unevenness or the distance 
objects variable distance from the Ear th's surface. So, using these Li DAR data, it is now 
possible to develop the DMR digital elevation model. So, these light pulses put together with the informat ion collected by the airborne system generates is accurate 3d information about 
the earth surface and the target object as you can see, these a D EM of the forest.  
So, using this type of Li DAR based technologies nowadays, the traditional topographic map 
base DEMs  are replaced. So, these are more accurate.  (Refer Slide Time: 7:01)   
 
Now, why DEM is very much important . Now, we have seen that there are multiple terrain 
parameters and this terrain p arameters we can extract from DE M using different types of 
software and these extraction is known as terrain parameterization. And using these terrain 
parameterization and via dedicated software, these extracted terrains  are highly correlated 
with the soil properties .  
For example, a depth of for example, altitude  channel, altitude of channel  which is an 
important ter rain parameter extracted from DEM . So, this scan helps you to understand the 
movement of water, when there is rainfall and how these water will drain and where these water and from this movement of wat er you can gather information about the formed soil.  
So, these extracted terrains  parameters can be used to improve the mapping and modeling of 
the soil, vegetation land use and geomorphic and geological features and similar. So, when 
we combine these ter rains  parameters in a digital soil  infer spatial inference model that helps 
us to get better accuracy of the predicted maps.  (Refer Slide Time: 8:30)   
 
So, these are some of the covariance terrain  parameters which are gathered from DEM  file 
using softwa re like absolute evaluation rating elevation slope aspect curvature, specific 
catchment area length of the slope,  distance from the waterway s, height above the closest 
waterway,  potential drainage density, genetic land form shapes , wetness index , or CTI , then 
stream power index, then drainage proximity index, accumulated flow index, sediment 
transport capacity index, incoming solar radiation, solar radiation hours , relative wind 
exposition.  
So, all these different terrain  parameters are important for predi cting the soil properties along 
with other parameters . And basically incorpora ting these parameter extracted terrain 
parameters in any spatial inference model can improve the spatial prediction of soil 
properties. So, this is how these common terrain param eters are extracted and used in in 
digital soil mapping .  (Refer Slide Time: 9:40)   
 
Now, we have discussed about the digital soil mapping . Let us discuss a very important 
concept that is called geographic information system. Now for creating the map in digital soil 
mapping it is required extensive use of geographic information system as the name suggests, 
this is a basically requires  the geographic application and since we are dealing with the 
locational data in case of digital soil mapping of course, that will have these geographic information system has a tremendous impact on this product production of the maps.  
So, different scientists have defined these digi tal these GIS in different ways. T hese are some 
of the these ar e some of the definition of GIS . But to in a short form  it is basically a 
technology where we can utilize AI software to make some query from a map and of course, 
we can relate both the locational context as well as the attribute in terms of a digitized map.  
So, this is called geographic information system, geographic information system can be can 
be visualized as a super imposition of multiple layers. So, each of these layer may indicate any important features and then when they superimposed over each other, they will pr oduce 
the real world situation.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:21)   
 
So, GIS Of course, in a short form is a technological field that incorporate the geographical 
features with tabular data in order to map analyze assess real world pro blems. So, as the name 
suggests  these geogr aphy is deals with the spatial data and it attributes data can be generally 
defined as additional information about each of these spatial features. For example, if you 
want to develop the political map of the world, you are getting these each of this count ry can 
be described by a polygon.  
So, each of these polygon will not only have these their identifier  but also we can incorporate 
we can include some other values also like the population, the number of cities and all these 
important information we can ta g these polygons with in this table. So, you can see this is 
called the attribute table.  
So, not only we are se eing the map the digitized map. T hese maps are also having some 
attributes. So, using some software we can extract these information and interpr et based on 
our requirement. So, this is called the geographic information system.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:49 )  
 
Now, what are the uses of geographic information system, GIS can be used for computer 
cartography, it can be can use spatial and statistical methods to analyze the attribute and 
geographic information, agricultural planning suppose you want to develop a soil web spatial variability map of soil properties using remote sensing data you require GIS.  
Because without GIS you cannot map and interpola te and also the agricultural planning. So, 
city planning if you required  GIS transportation map, you required  GIS, then environmental 
management, endemic epidemic mapping, then military use , and then government planning 
and many more. So, there are endless  application of GIS . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:36 )
  
 And then so basically, if we summarize, we can see that GIS helps in creating editing and 
making queries and analyzing and displaying map information on the computer. So, that is 
why GIS is nowadays  has bec ome an integral part  of our society and in every discipline, we 
use the GIS to interpret the data and give them some locational context.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:07 )  
 
So, what are the two different types of data GIS have two different types of data one is called 
raster  data and other is called vector data. Raster  data basically cells or grid of cells I will 
show you and vector data are of three types one is point lines and polygons. Now, any feature 
on the earth  surface can be described in terms of points polygons and lines.  
So, for example, here in this map you can see these are  suppose these are some of the wells 
and these lines so  these points are indicating the well. So, these lines are indicating the river 
and these polygon is indicating the lake. So, these vector data can be used to define these type 
of features in the map, whereas raster  data is more or less continuous using cells or grid of 
cells.  
For example, an image can be also considered as a is a collection of pixels we know that. So, 
this is a  raster  file which is continuous and each of these pixel remember this is grid shaped 
or square shaped. So, this is an example of raster . So, any continuous feature of the art 
surface can be represented in a raster  file for example, digital elevation model which we have 
already discussed can it is it is a raster  file which has locational context in terms of latitude 
longitude and also they have the elevation.  So, using these continuous elevation data you can produce the raster  of digital elevation 
model. S o, this is the two types of data we generally use in case of GIS.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:53 )  
 
Now, you can see some a pictorial description of these raster  and vector data, you can see 
some point features and same point features you can represent in term s of raster  data. So, 
raster  data you see, they are divided into grids, equally sized cells. So, you can produce you 
can you can identify the se grids.  
You can identify these point features in the grids in these features line features can be used by 
the ra ster line features and then polygon features can be used by the raster  polygon features or 
zones of these cells. So, using these you can you can see that all the properties all the features 
can be described in terms of both vectors and raster.   
For example, here it shows the vector to raster  and raster  to vector conversion you can see 
this is the vector data, we can convert it to the raster  data and then again we can convert it to 
the vector data. So, this is how the one data type can be converted into othe r data type and 
then we can re convert it back.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:59 )  
 
So, vector data a vector  data remember a vector  data generally stored on a computer as a 
shapefile the extension is dot shp or a layer file that is dot lyr with its corresponding data to 
the database stored in a separate file that is dbf file. So, dbf file is known as is the short form 
of database file.  
So, not only the geographical features are stored, but also their attributes from the attribute 
table are also stored in the dbf file. So, when opening a layer of shapefile in GIS software that 
automatically locates and opens the corresponding database file and links the feature and their attributes.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:42 )
  
 So, you can see this is how these GIS basically wor ks in different layers. Suppose this is the 
first layer which shows the customers and this is the second layer which shows that street this 
is the third layer which shows the parcel in the fourth layer shows the elevation fifth layer 
shows the land use and when we superimpose all the so among these also these customers 
and then streets and parcels these are the vector data whereas these elevation land use these 
are raster  layers.  
So, when we superimpose all these together we will get these real world scenario that is the 
final output or display from a GIS platform. So, this is how GIS basically works, we can peel 
out all these layers one by one from these GIS and we can make some query to get the 
important information interpretation from this type of repres entation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:39 )  
 
So, what we should use a raster  data vector data of course it uses it depends on a specific 
application. First you ask the question whether you are interested in pixel based or 
coordinates based representation . Now, raster  data works better with pixel whereas vector 
data consists of coordinates.  
The second important consideration is mapping scale vector data can have wide very 
flexibility in scale, but raster  data does not have wide flexibility and restriction for fi le size. 
So, raster  file size can result in larger they are larger in size than vector data set with the same 
phenomenon and area. So, that is these are some of the consideration you should issue you 
should take into account for digital for using this rast er data and vector data .  (Refer Slide Time: 19:34 )  
 
Now, another important concept is geographic coordinate system. Now you all know about 
the latitude and longitude why we require it. So, geographic coordinate system is a system 
that uses the three di mensional spherical surface to determine location on the earth . Any 
location on the earth  can be referenced by poi nts with latitude and longitude  that geographic 
coordinate system is appropriate for all Global dataset and applications such as  satellite 
imagery repositories.  
For example, here in this location you can see these location is represented by coordinates, 
longitude of 80 degrees. So, this is the pri me meridian so  this is the longitude  of 80 degree 
east and latitude 55 degree not. So, this is this  information this location can be can be 
identified by giving this this particular latitude and longitude.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:34 )  
 
Now, the next question comes to our mind a coordinate system what is required. S o, a 
coordinate system can be defined either as a sphere or a spheroid approximation of the earth 
shape. N ow, because the earth  is not perfectly round, it is spheroid in nature it is ellipsoid 
nature. So, it is ferrite can be held can help to maintain the accuracy for a map depending on the lo cation on the earth. So, it is spheroid  is an ellipsoid.  
So, you can see this is spheroid which is basically an ellipsoid that is based on an ellipse and 
where is the sphere is based on a circle. So, in this speed in this spheroid you can see there is major axes and this is the minor axis. And this is known as the semi major axis this is known 
as the semi minor axis.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:24 )
  
 So, next important concept is datum . So, a datum is a set of values that defines the position of 
the spheroid r elative to the center of the earth . So, basically it is basically it is a reference 
system for this these different types of coordinate reference system, we need a kind of 
reference. So, these data gives us the reference.  
So, it is a set of values that de fines the position of the spheroid relative to the center of earth . 
So, that data provides a frame of reference for measuring location and defines the origin and 
orientation of the latitude and longitude line, some datums are global and intended to provide  
good average accuracy around the world, a local datum aligns with the spheroid closely fit and the earth's surface particular area.  
So, here you can see  suppose, this is the earth's surface this broad this thick black line and 
here there are two datums o ne is the earth center datum , which is the continuous line, which 
is WGS 84 also known as world Geodetic Survey 1984. And this dotted line is another datum 
that is NAD 27 t hat is not the north American datum 27 so this is a local datum .  
So, you can see that this in NAD 27 in this case approximately aligns better to these we know earth  surface better than these of these WGS 84. But depending on the data sources 
depending on your application, these datums the us e of datum get changed. So, datum  is 
basically a reference system for your geographic coordinate system. So, which approximates 
the spheroidical  nature of the earth . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:18 )
  
 
Now, the next is Universal Transverse Mercator UTM . UTM is basically a plane coordinate 
grid system which na med for the map proj ection on which it is based so transverse Mercator.  So, what happens in this UTM zone is the two dimensional representation, we divide the 
whole art surface into 60 zones, each zone is then the number them 1 to 60 zone 1 to zone 60 
beginning at this 180 degree longest with an increasing to the east.  
So, each zone  is 6 around 6 degrees. So, these military uses their own implementation of the 
UTM system called the military grid reference system. So, these UTM is also extensively 
used in geographic in GIS and digital soil mapping.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:10 )  
 
So, guys, I hope that you have gathered some important insights from this lecture we have 
now understand we have now  understand what is a DEM? How to extract , what are the 
important terrain parameters which you can extract  and use s an auxiliary variables in the 
digital soil maps also we have seen what is GIS? What are the uses of GIS, what are the 
different types of data types in GIS .  
And then how GIS can help in AI for the presentati on of any geological features, making 
some queries and then also we have seen some geographic coordinate system datum and 
Universal Transverse Mercator. So, guys, I hope that you have gathered some good 
knowledge who Remember all these will be required for  understanding the digital soil 
mapping concept or digital soil mapping applications.   
So, in the next lecture we are going to discuss the geo statistics and then we are going to see 
some application focusing on agricultural soil and crop management. So, thank you let us 
meet in our next lecture.  
 