Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop  Management   
Professor Somsubhra  Chakraborty 
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department   
Indian Institute  of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 49  
Digital  Soil Mapping  – General  Overview  (Contd.) 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:23)   
 
Welcome friends  to this 4th lecture of week  10 of NPTEL Online  Certification  Course  of 
Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop Management . And in this week  we are talking  about  
basic overview  of digital  soil mapping. In our first couple  of lectures , we have  discussed  the 
basics  of digital soil mapping, digital soil mapping workflow  principle , how to take 
management  decisions , using DSM .  
And also we have seen different  auxiliary  variables , SCORPAN plus e model . And also we 
have  seen what  is GIS, what  are these  applications , what  are the different  types  of data in 
case of GIS, and also we have  seen what  are the different  types  of geography coordinate  
system , universal  transverse  marketer  and also datum  we have  seen .  
And in our last lecture, we have  discussed  about  Geostatistics , which  is very important  for 
digital soil mapping, its applications , its concept  of Geostatistics , models  of Geostatistics , 
universal  model  of variation . We have  also discussed  the inverse  distance interpolation , 
Kriging interpolation  as well as we have  discussed  the Variogram  and different  parameters  of 
the Variogram . 
So, today in this lecture number  49, we are going  to discuss  and I am going to show  you how 
we can use a software  called  R for different , different  DSM  approaches , but before  that this lecture will be  a overview  lecture for R . I am going to  show  you how  to download R  and I am 
going to show  you some  of the basic  functions  for the beginners  in R, which  you can 
perform . And I will also distribute  this codes  in our class  platform , so please feel free to ask 
me any questions  in the forum  if you have . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  2:39)   
 
So, let us start. These are the concepts , which  we are going to cover  in this lecture. First of all 
the basic overview  of R and then we are going to see how to install R. And then we are going 
to see what  is Rstudio. And then we are going to see some  basic operations  in R. This lecture 
will be  basically  focusing on these concepts . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:06)   
 And these are some  of the keywords , which  we are going to discuss , R, then R studio and 
then CRAN,  then  packages  and what  are the libraries , we are going to  discuss  in this lecture. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:24)   
 
Now,  the first question comes  to our mind  what  is R? Well R is a widely  popular  and most  
common programming  language , it is one of the most  widely  accepted  widely  popular  and 
one of the most  common programming language . And this helps  this language  this 
programming language  helps  in statistical computing, data mining  and graphics . The biggest  
advantage  of using R is it is open source , this R software  was created  by statistician  Ross 
Ihaka and  Robert  Gentlemen , these two  statisticians  have  developed  this language  R. 
And it is supported by the R core team  and the foundation for statistical computing. So, R 
generally  you can see this is the symbol  of R and this is the console  or the major  console , 
where  you can type all the commands  in R, I will show  you what  is console . And then I will 
show  you how  to use this console  also. (Refer  Slide  Time:  4:42)   
 
So, what is R? R basically  is an implementation  of the S language . So, S was created  
originally  in 1976, it is a statistical programming language  developed  by John Chambers  
from  Bell Labs. So, the R project  started  in 1991 and R first appeared  in 1996 as an open 
source  software. So, you can download R freely  from  this website  I will show  you and users  
can another  important  advantage  of using R is users  can create packages  in R, focusing  on 
specific applications . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  5:31)   
  
Now,  when  you download  R you will see that I mean  if you go to this website  also you see 
CRAN  or CRAN  what  is CRAN?  CRAN  is basically  a short  form  of comprehensive  R 
archive network . And it basically  stores  R’s all the executable files, source  code , documents , 
as well  as the packages  contributed by users .  
So, for doing any specific operation in R you need  to download certain  packages . So, these  
packages  are developed  by users  and you have to for example  if you want  to, if you want  to 
execute the  partial  squares  regression  you have to  download or  install this  PLS  package in  R.  
So, there are numerous  packages  in R focusing on specific operations , so originally  CRAN  
had 3 mirrors  and 12 contributed packages , but right  now CRAN  has 101 mirrors  and 18,728 
contributed packages , mirrors are the source  sites from  where you can download the 
executable file of R. So, there are different  mirrors  available, CRAN  mirrors  are available for 
different  countries  all over the world  and I will show  you how to download this from  any a 
CRAN  mirror.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  7:15)   
 
So, this is called  the R console , so the console  window  when  you open  R, you will see a 
window  this is called  the console  window  and in so it is a place  where  R is waiting  for you to 
tell it what  to do and where  it will show  the results  of a command . So, you can type 
commands  directly  into the console , but they will be forgotten  when  you can close  the 
session .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  7:54)   
  
 
  
 
So, let  me show  you how  to download R  first, guys , so now  I will show  you how  to download  
and install R. So, you go to Google  and type R software  and it will open this, it will show  this 
the R project  for statistical computing, you click  on it and it will redirect  you to download R. 
So, if  you click  on it this  link of download R , it will redirect  you to  CRAN  mirrors .  
So, this CRAN  mirrors  are as I have told you this is a comprehensive  R archive  network, it is 
available at these following URL’s.  So, every  country I mean  most  of the countries  of the 
world  they have their own URL’s,  unfortunately  India n link was not opening for last couple  
of days, so probably they have  removed  it, but hopefully it will be again  revived  in couple  of 
days.  
So, you can download this from  any CRAN  mirror, for example we can go to this Iowa  State 
Universit y and then we can click  on this CRAN  mirror link and it will redirect  you to this page , which  will show  you that you can download it for either  Linux based  on your operating 
system , you can download it from  the Linux you can download it for a mac operating system  
or you can  download it for windows . 
So, here I will show  you based  on windows , so I will just if you, I will show  you how to 
download it from  there. So, click  on it and it will redirect  you to this page  where you will see 
that this install R for the first time, so those  who are installing  it for the first time you can 
click  on it install R  for the first time so it will again  redirect  you into this page which  is called  
I mean  you can see here a link called  download R 4.1.2 for the windows , which  is having 86 
megabytes  and 32 or  64 bit. 
So, if you click  on it, the file will start downloading it will take some  time depending on your 
speed , so I have already  installed  it, so I am not going to download it, but once  you download  
this EXE  file you can just follow  the normal  process  of installing  it and from  there  you will 
be able to install R. So, I am going to cancel  it since I have already  installed  it, it is very 
simple  guys , you just need to install it just like any other  software . So, this is how you 
download R . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:59)   
 
Now,  if you go back  to this R console , so this R console  is the original  R graphical  user 
interface. So, here you basically  type the functions  you give the commands  in R and it will 
you can directly  give the comments  in R and it will be generating  the results  here. So, this is 
called  R console . However , this is not so much  user friendly , so to make  the R more  user 
friendly  people  are people  use different  types  of integrated  development  environment .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  11:46)   
 
So, one of these IDE for R is R studio. So, there are other  IDE’s  also but this is most  popular  
that is R studio which  is available in either  R studio desktop, which  is a regular  desktop  
application  or R studio server  which  allows  the R studio access  using a remote  server . Again 
just like R, it is free however  there are some  premium versions  which  are available  with 
which  has some  amount  of cost, but generally  it is free the R studio desktop, it can run on 
windows , mac and  the Linux. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:37)   
  
 
So, if you download, I will show  you how to download this. So, if you download it you will 
get four different  windows , one is code  editor  window  or console  window , this is a code  
editor  window, second will be a console  window , third  will be workspace and history  
window  and fourth  will be  plots  and files  window .  
So, in the code  editor , we generally  write  the codes , the codes  will appear  in the console , the 
results  will appear  in the console . In the workspace , you will see the files which  you are, you 
are creating  and in the plots  and files window  you will be generating  the plots  you can, you 
can export  this plots  into different  formats  like JPG,  then  PDF  and so on.  
So, this code  editor , the window  will allow  you to create and open  a file containing this R 
script , the R script  is where  you can keep  the record  of your work  and R script  can be created  
as follows , so you can click  on this file tab it will open a new and then you go to R script . And this R console  will help you for typing the commands , so you can directly  type the 
command  here in the R console  or you just play you just run the commands  from  the code  
editor  window  also. 
So, this is the workspace  tab, so this workspace  tab shows  the list of R objects  you created  
during your R session and finally  this is the history tab which  shows  the history of all the 
previous  commands . So, here I am sorry , there will be history tabs here,  so the history you 
can see all the history and  these the  plots  and files  window . 
So, this  plots  tab you can  see history of  the plots  we have  created  from  this tab you can  export  
the plot to a PDF or an image  files and there will be a file tabs also, so from  there also you 
can see the files in your working directory . And there will be packages  tab also, which  show 
external  R packages  available on your system , so you can download the package on 
download and  install the  package in  R using this  command , using this , using  this package tab . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:06)   
  
 
  
So, let me show  you how to download and use this R studio. So, again  just like R you just go 
to Google  and type R studio, like right  now I am typing R studio, so if you click  on it you 
will see that R studio, so there are different  versions  of R studio, of course  as I have told you 
go to download, you see that R studio desktop it is free, but there  are some  R studio desktop  
pro or studio server  also this free anal  studio workbench.  
So, these are some  commercial  licenses , but you do not need  that at this point  of time, you 
just download it from  here and remember  one thing that before  you download the R studio 
desktop you need  to download and install R, this is mandatory. So, once  you install R, then 
you download R studio  for windows , you just click  on it and it will start downloading so it is 
around 169 Mb. So, it will take some  time just like R this installation  is also very simple , so 
you can  download it and  you can  install it just  like R, okay guys .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  16:30)   
 
 
  
So, now we have  downloaded and install R studio, now when  you open the R studio, these  
are some  of the codes  which  I have already  prepared  for you, but you can write  your own 
script  by click  on this file and then you can click  on this new file and you can create  your 
own script  also.  
So, you can type it here also, but I am going to show  you some  of the already  made scripts . 
So, we do not waste  time, so let us just remove  that, so this is the R studio and as you as we 
have  discussed  this is the editor  window  and this is the console  window , this is the R 
environment  tab and this is the files  and plots  window . 
So, in this editor  window , will we can type the codes  and it will appear  here in the console  
and then we can see, we will see some  of the files which  are we are going to create, these  are 
some  of the files which  I have  already  created  for my own work  and for my other  classes , so 
other  courses  and in the plot window  we will be seeing  different  types  of plots , which  we can 
create by using R . 
So, in R remember  that some  important  aspects  is you have to, if you want  to annotate  some  
lines  you have  to start it with this hash sign, so anything which  starts  with hash basically  
gives  some  annotation. So, suppose  you want  to use a command  and you want  to remember  
for what  you have  used that command  you can give some  explanat ion starting  by this hash, 
starting  by this  hash .  
So, here I am going to show  you some  basic operation , but before  that let me tell you one 
important  thing also, here you can see the package tab, so in this when  you click  on this 
package tab  you can see t here a list of  packages  which  are available, so  you can get a package  from  here I am just caret  package for example or suppose  a aqp package  for example, and 
then you can hit install and this package will be installed  or you can directly  type a package  
called pls package and in this pls package you can and then you can type install and it will be 
installing  this whole  pls package.  
So, you can see that it is showing install packages  pls, so it will take some  time and when  the 
package will be installed , then this package pls is successfully  unpacked and MD5 sums  
checked , so that means  this pls package has been  installed . So, this by this way you can you 
can download any package and install any package which  is not originally  contained  in R, so 
you have  to basically  go and you have  to select  that particular  package  and then you have  to 
hit this install button.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:51)   
 
  
 
 Now,  let me show  you some  of the important  operations , very basic operations , we are going  
to start from  the, for the beginners . So, let us do some  simple  sum so I have annotated  it with 
this hash and we can do some  1 plus 1 and then we can we can directly  click  on this run 
button or  by taking this  cursor  here.  
So remember  that when  you want  to run something you can either directly  copy it or you can 
take this cursor  just here you can either  hit run or you can just click  control  enter  together , 
they will have  the same outcome . So, run or control  and enter  you can control  plus enter  
together  will give  you the  same output .  
So, here you can see here we are putting 1 plus 1, so directly  we can get the results  in the 
console , so that is 2 and this first parenthesis  I mean  in the third  bracket  we are getting  the 
line, so sometime  you will see the output  will come in multiple  lines, so these starting  
parenthesis  will show  which  line this we are seeing  currently .  
So, here  let us assume  that we are creating  a variable  x with  1 plus  1 and this 1 plus  1 you can 
see we are instructing  R that you should understand that x is basically  1 plus 1, so we are 
running it and let us see what  it if you click  on it, if you just type x and click  run, so you will 
see that  the output  will be  given also  here.  
So, another  important  thing  I forgot  to mention  that whenever  you install any package you 
have  to upload  that package by using  a command  called  library , I will show  you. So, we have 
just for an example at this point  of time, since we have  already  installed  this R package called  
pls, let us just use this library  pls also. So, I am typing this  library  pls, so actually  (())(22:20) . 
So, now we have  seen that how x can we can create a variable and assign  some  values , so 
now let us see how we can use this R as a calculator . So, you can see that 1 plus 2 by 2 minus  
1, so if we type it so and run it you will see that the values  will come  and then infinite  
numerical  values , so when  x equal  to 1 by 0, of course  and you want  to know  what  is the 
value  of x it will show  the Inf, Inf stands  for infinity .  
Similarly , y equal  to 1 by 0 and then y equal  to and y we want  to see that is infinity  and x and 
y both are infinity , so of course  when  you subtract  them  together  will not will get a this NaN,  
which  stands  for not a number . So, suppose  you want  to remove any object  which  you have 
already  created  so this object  which  you have already  created  x equal  to 1 plus  1.  
So you want  to remove  this object  from  your workspace , so you see here whenever  we 
created  these two objects  x and y, which  is infinity , infinity , so we want  to remove  this x which  is infinity . So, we are going so these two have  been  already  populated in this global  
environment  tab. So, we want  to remove  these x now, so that has been  removed  now if we 
type just x, so  you will see that  error object  x is not found. 
So, we can see we can remove  any object  from our workspace , so that we can we can see the 
desired  results . New  line separator  if you want  to separate any lines , so we can use for 
example here exponential  of 1 and exponential  of 0, if you want  to separate the output  you 
can see here the separating  the output  and then you can see the constants , different  types  of 
constants .  
So, here this is pi and you can see the value  of 3.14 and if you want  to know  any help if you 
want  to have any help  of understanding pi , so you have  to use this help  function an d just  click  
on it and  then  it will open these built  in constant . So, pi  all the sign these are built  in constants  
and functions , so if you just click  help and it will open a sheet  where you will have  all the 
information’s , which  are required  for understanding that  particular  function. 
So, similarly  if you want  to have  sin 2 multiply  pi, so you will see that the values  will be 
generated  and if you want  to know  what  is the sin, so of course  all trigonometric  functions  
will appear  and their arguments  will also be generated , remember  you can, you can recall  a 
previous  command  in R graphical  user interface by hitting  the up arrow  on your keyboard, so 
if you can  just go to this console  and hit the up arrow  you will see the  previous  command  will 
be generated , all the previous  command  will be  generated . 
So, suppose  you want  to assign  the same  value  to several  symbolic  variables  you can use this 
x and  y and z equal  to 1 and you can  then  list them , those  variables , so here  you can  see in the 
global  environment  x, y and z are being  created . Now,  remember  one very important  thing 
that R is very much  case sensitive , so if you using R you must  be very, very careful  about  the 
case R  will not  understand, if  you change  your  case. 
So, here you can see x is lower  case, so 1 plus 1 and if you want  to know , if you want  to if 
you want  to get the output  of capital  X, then it will create problems . So, capital  X have been  
already  created  before in one of my, one of my previous  application . So, let me remove  this 
capital  F. 
Now,  let us see this small x equal  to 1 plus 1, we know  it and let us now see capital  X and 
you will see there  is an error will appear  in red text, so object  x is not found. So, if this object  x was not created  previously and only you have  created  an object  small x, if you type it you 
will get  this type  of output  that this is not. So, R  will not  understand if  you change  your  case.  
So, if a command  is not completed  in one line, then typical  R prompt  is so you can just go to 
the next line and R will basically  assign  will just automatically  give this plus sign. So, here 
we are selecting  the whole  line and then running it and then will get the value  of x here 
directly , so 2. 
So, there are different  types  of data numerical  data of course  you can see here 10.2 it is a 
numeri cal data,  then  if you want  to have  the character  data of  course  remember  that it must  be 
in the code. So, John Doe is a name and so you have  to un you have  to instruct  R that John 
Doe is a character  and so to instructor  you have  to put them  within  this in a in code  and you 
can click  on it and  then  you can  see that  the same thing will be  reproduced.  
So, logical  data generally  gives  the output  in true false and not applicable . So, if 4 is less than 
2, if we want  to if we want  to make  a query  of course the output  will be false  and if we have  
if you want  to give and we create an object  b with that and we want  to see the object  output  
then also you will see the  false.  
Complex numbers  a complex  number  we are suppose  here one complex  number  we are 
creating  by the name of C num1 and 10 plus 0 plus 3i and if we click  on it will say and then 
let us see it is a we are running it, so this is a complex  number  and we can use the mode  or 
class  function also  to see the type  of data.  
So, suppose  we have  created  a object  called name John Doe, so you want  to see the class  of 
that name, so we can see here it is a character  and then if you want  to see the class  of b of 
course  it is a logical , it is a logical  and class  of x it is a numeric  and or mode  of x also it will 
be numeric , so and then  class  of this C num 1, which  is a complex  number , so you can  see it is 
a complex  number . So, all  these type  of different  types  of output  you can  get from  R. 
So, let us wrap  up our discussion here, in our next lecture,  we will be starting  from  here and I 
will show  you how to use the data frame  using R, how to handle  the different  vectors  in R 
and what  are the preparatory  stages  of of R for how to how to prepare the data before  going 
for the  standard DSM  application .  
Remember  one thing guys  that, once  you download any package you have  to upload, you 
have  to you have  to, you have  to use the library  command, I will show  you in our in our next 
lecture. So, once  you install any package  you have to call that library , before  you want  to perform  that particular  operation  without  calling  the library  it is not possible  to execute that 
particular  operation  in R.  
So, guys  let us wrap  up our lecture here and I hope  that you have  gathered  some  useful  
knowledge  and thank you for your attention  and let us meet  in our next lecture to discuss  
more  about  R, I will show  you how to use R for DSM  in upcoming  lectures  in more  details . 
Thank you.  