Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management  
Professor Somsubra Chakraborty 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department   
Indian Institute  of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 04  
General Overview of ML and DL Applications in Agriculture (Continued)  
Welcome fri ends to this fourt h lecture of week one of this NP TEL online certification course 
of machine learning for soil and crop management. And in this week, we are having a general 
overview of machine learning and deep learning applications in agriculture. In our  past three 
lectures, we have discussed broadly some important concepts, we started with the machine learning and what is big data and then what are the different types of challenges we have in 
the big data storage.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:01)  
 
Also, we ha ve seen the application, the basic overview of machine learning and then artificial 
intelligence and deep learning and their interrelationship, what is the difference between a 
basic computer program and machine learning program we have seen, we have also seen the supervised learning as well as unsupervised learning, then semi -supervised learning and 
reinforcement learning, we have seen some good examples of reinforcement learning and 
also we have started discussing about the deep learning.  
So, today we ar e going to start from there, we have already covered this thing. So, let us go to 
the deep learning, and we will go from there wh ere we left in our last lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:52)  
 
  
So, we have also discussed the basic structure of machine le arning, why it require some pre -
processing stage why it require  some features selection or extraction step and what is the 
feedback loop, this type of discussion we have made in our last lecture. So, we have started 
with a deep learning. Remember, this dee p learning is a subfield of machine learning as I 
have already told you and in thi s machine learning architecture  the deep learning generally do 
not consider this feature engineering step.  
And it  presents a fully trainable system. And it starts from a raw  input and ends with the 
desired output. So, just an example of deep learning, as I ha ve told you, that convolutional 
neural network , this is an example of deep learning, it is a very common deep learning 
method. And suppose, there are some  images and from  these images, it learn the feature 
levels in scenes and then utilize this in the subsequent model development .  
We will discuss their architecture and their application in our subsequent lectures, but at  this 
point, just remember that  they basically learn  the feature levels in the scenes and then they 
utilize these for subsequent prediction or classification problems.  (Refer Slide Time: 03:34)  
 
Now, let us see why we are talking about machine learning applications in agriculture. So, if 
we see some of t he contemporary challenges of modern agriculture , these are some of the 
contemporary challenges of modern agriculture . First of all increasing food demand, so 
increasing food demand is a very important challenge of modern agriculture and  at the same 
time there is global population explosion.  
So, to meet the increasing food demand, which is proportionate to the global population 
increase rate, we need to increase the productivity of the crop and to improve the crop 
productivity, st ill maintaining the profit  of the farmers, we require  to add up some modern 
tools in agriculture otherwise, using the traditional methods it is getting difficult each and every day.  
Simultaneously, there are some other challenges also like climate changes, climate changes has created some obstacles in performing some of the previous steps tra dditional pract ices 
which you are used to adapt for example, burning of the stubble, this is a very important issue nowadays, specifically in Indian subcontinent, where farmers are burning thei r rice stubble 
after after harvesting their crop , wheat stubble after harvesting their crop and that creates a 
huge environmental impact.  
So, this climate change effects are also very important which instructs the agriculture to add 
up new modern technologies. Also, natural resource depletion is another important thing as the time progresses natural resources  are continuously depleting and as a result, there are 
exertions  of the water resources.  
So, we need to use some judicious management practices and t hese judicious management 
practices can only be done when you use some decision support system and these decision  
support systems are generally used in the modern agricultural practices. Alteration of the 
dietary choices another important issue .  
Due to gl obalization, the human dietary choices are getting also changes and that i s why 
modern agriculture should cope up with these changes in their dietary choices using some 
advanced tools. And also finally, there are some safety and health concerns . Earlier th ere 
were  least health concerns , but nowadays, due to the safety and health concerns, the applicate 
the modern agriculture is is a is undergoing some drastic changes.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:52)  
 
  
So, what are the consequences of these challenges ? The challenges results in huge pres sure in 
the agricultural sector,  and also as a result of this pressure in the agricultural sector, there is a 
need for optimization of the agricultural practices without putting extra environmental 
burden, we cannot , we have to reduce these challenges .  
But at the same time without putting any extra burden in the environment , because the 
environment is already stays by default anthropogenic activities and to reduce the 
environmental impact while maintaining or improving the crop productivity and profitability 
of the farmers is always a very -very challenging task.  
So, that is why the concept of precision agriculture came. So precision agriculture is the 
management practice or it is a concept or philosophy that identifies , that add resses these 
challenges to improve the agricultural practices without putting any extra environmental burden. S o, what is the definition of the precision agriculture ?  
The International Society of P recision Agriculture defines that precision agriculture is  a 
management strategy that gathers processes and analyzes temporal spatial  and individual data 
and combine it with other information to support management decisions, according to estimated variability for improved resource use efficiency, productivity, quality, profitability 
and sustainability of agricultural production.  
So, very important definition, and it covers a wide variety of sectors and aspects. First of all, 
it says about it analyzes temporal data, so not only the spatial  data;  it also encompasses the 
temporal data, spatial  and individual data from different sensors and combine it with other information of support management decision. So, there are other infor mation also not only 
the sensor  information or sensor generated values, but also some aux iliary information 
suppose we want to develop a soil map or using digital soil mapping.  
So, in case of digital soil mapping, we are not only using the legacy soil data, but also we are 
incorporating some correlated or auxiliary data from different sources  like rainfall data, 
climatic data, also the topographic data. So these are the other sources, which we are incorporating and ultimately we are producing a high resolution sitemap through DSM 
practices or DSM methodology.  
So it ultimately helps us for tak ing the management decision according to the estimated 
variability for impro ved resource use efficiency.  Our objective would be to improve our 
resource use efficiency;  we want to minimize the wastage of resources, at the same time we 
want to increase the p roductivity. So, when we improve the resource use efficiency and 
minimize the wastage that will increase our profitability and also the quality of the products 
and finally, sustainability of the agriculture production.  So, you can see that in this definit ion, it covers all the major objectives of precision 
agriculture and machine learning helps in achieving these objectives in the precision 
agriculture using artificial intelligence. So, machine learning is a small subset of precision 
agriculture, which is it uses to achieve these different types of goals.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:03)  
 So, this gives a very  broad structural overview of precision agriculture, you can see precision 
agriculture has their irrigation system, also it gathers the data from its weather station, it 
gathers data from soil moisture sensors  station , also evapotranspiration sensors on drone, it 
uses the data and then process the data through a decision support system and ultimately, it 
sends the data into a smartphone and farmers can get the results of the required inputs in their 
hand in the form of irrigation a nd also some time nutrients .  
So, this is the precision agriculture , once you have proper  information of the spatial 
variability and temporal variability of the soil properties or properties, you can manage your 
resources in a better way and that is the ultimate goal of precision agriculture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:14)  
 
Now, if you see the cycle of precision agriculture, the cycle of precision agriculture has 
different components a s we have, I have I mentioned in the slide you can see here, GIS and 
crop yield maps are there. And then fertilizer , irrigation , pesticide recommendations are their 
algorithms for biotic and abiotic stress and abioti c stress detection  are there,  variable 
technology or VRT is there,  vegetation is another important part.  
So, all these are important components of precision agriculture, and the objectives the major objectives of precision agriculture is to increase the production of the crop and then reduce 
the labour time and finally, effective management of the fertilizer and irrigation. So, these 
three are very important objectives of precision agriculture.  And as you can see, that this fertilizer recommendation, identification of the biotic and 
abiotic str ess, VRT, GIS and cropping maps all these are having the application of machine 
learning and deep learning approaches.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:35)  
 
So what are the benefits of agricultural modernization?  If you see the benefits of the 
agricultural moderniz ation, as I have pointed out that there are three major benefits , one is 
environmental sustainability, so that we do not degrade the environment or we cannot put 
extra burden on the environment.  
And then at the same time, we do the maximum productivity and to maximize the 
productivity and sustainability, because until the farmers are getting the profit from 
agriculture modernization, it will  be difficult for them to add up these new new technologies 
in their field, because the agriculture sector is run thr ough profit making.  
So if there is no profit, then there will be problem of a doption of new technologies. So 
sustainability, maximum pr oductivity and safe environment  these are the three benefits of 
agricultural modernization.  (Refer Slide Time: 14:37)  
 
 
Now, what are the four p yield ars of smart farming? If we see the smart farming there are four 
major p yield ars. One is optimum natural resource management, and secondly is the 
conservation of the ecosystem ; thirdly, adequate service development and four thly, use of 
modern technologies.  
So optimum natural  resource management means when w e are optimally using the natural 
resource , we are not over exploiting the natural resource , when we are irrigating, if we are 
irrigating based on the sensor records, sensor records and also some model output.  
So, in that case we are doing the irrigation management and that is optimum natural resource 
management , we are reducing the wastage of the irrigation water , then we are conserving the ecosystem , then we are doing t he adequate service deployment and finally, we are using 
modern technologies for achieving these goals.  
So, these are the four p yield ars of smart farming and if we consider the information and 
communication technology or ICT, which is a very common word n owadays, they are 
especially in the agriculture sector;  this ICT application  in agriculture has diff erent 
components.  For example, farm management information s ystem is an important component , then 
humidity and soil sensors are very important component and then accelerometers, then 
wireless sensor networks . then cameras for taking the images, then drones also for taking the 
images, the low cost satellites, online services and automated guided vehicles all these are part of the information and communication technology.  
Nowadays, automated guided vehicles have been used with machine vision for performing 
different types of field operation like weeding, like harvesting also, online services are there 
to provide the required  information to the farmers doorstep, also there are some local service 
satellites, drones are being utilized for spraying and other operations and also to take the 
images for better image processing and management decisions .  
Cameras are being used for for taking the images and developing t he image based algorithms, 
wireless sensor networks are being used for IoT or internet of things. So you can see that a 
multitude of elements are there in the ICT especially when we talk about agriculture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:37 ) 
 So, if we move ahead we will see that what are the major sectors under agriculture where 
machine learning has got their application?  First of all the crop management , so machine 
learning has a huge application in the crop management and this category involves studies 
concernin g with the yield  prediction,  then disease detection, then we detection, crop 
recognition and crop quality.  
So, you can see that all these four to five categories are important and show s the application 
of the machine learning in the crop management sector . And then the second is the water 
management, water management this category is associated with the optimal use of natural 
resources or water resources.  
Then soil management this category is related to soil protection and soil management aspects. And finally in the livestock management and this category involves the management 
pertaining to the animal welfare and livestock production. Now a mong all these all these four 
in this course, we are going to focus on crop management and soil management.  
So, we a re going to focus the application on crop management specifically focusing on yield  
prediction, disease detection, we ed detection, crop recognition and crop quality and in case of 
soil management, we are going to discuss the application of machine learning for soil 
property prediction and rapid clustering of soil features for better management decisions. So 
we are going to discuss all these .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:50)  
 
  
So there has been a review. There is a review done by Benos et al  in 2021 to see the 
emergence of machine learning application in agricultural sector and they have found that , 
they have  around 300 to 400 research papers, they have consulted and they have seen, this is 
the geographical distribution of the contribution of each country to the  research field focusing 
on machine learning in agriculture.  
And you can see here the maximum contribution of machine learning in agriculture is coming 
from China and also from United States. India is also contributing, India and Australia is also 
contributing a considerable number of studies in the field in the domain of machine learning 
application in agriculture. And secondly, we can see here machine learning models giving the 
best output .  
If you see that artificial neural network is giving which is a deep learning method is giving 
best results in most of the crop related or agricultural sector related machine learning 
application papers followed by Ensemble Learning, Support Vector Machine, D ecision Trees 
then R egression and then Instant based model then Dimensionality reduction, Bayesian 
model  and clustering.  
So, we can see and also the in which which area they are doing also are given here like you 
can see here these green indicates the yield  prediction and then this  blue indicates that disease  
detection and then this is w eed detection, then crop recognition, and then crop quality. 
Finally, this is the water management and yellow is the soil management, then animal welfare 
and finally, livestock production.  So, you can see in most of the cases artifi cial neural network, which is an important and 
widely used deep learning method is giving the best result .  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:18)  
 
If you see the 10 most investigated crops using machine learning models will see that mai ze 
has been extensively studied by application of machine learning, you can see here yield  
prediction, then disease detection and crop recognition and small amount of crop quality 
studies have been done and also followed by wheat, rice, soy bean, tomato, grape, canola or 
rapeseed cotton , potatoes and barley.  
So, maximum machine learning application related papers pertaining to the maize. So, the part of the reason is these maize is universally cultivated in all the countries specifically in 
the United States, in Europe and also in India  and also in China, where we use this machine 
learning application for better crop management and decision support system.  
Also, if we see the most useful features, which the users use from different types of machine 
learning application. So, in case of y ield production, w e can see the remote sensing is th e 
most important feature for yield  prediction in the machine learning model followed by 
weather  and then soil parameters , in situ measurements, topographic variables, and also 
irrigation and fertilization .  
So, these are the some of the important most useful features, while we use machine learning 
for yield prediction. When you go for the disease detection, RGB images, which you take 
using the RGB cameras are very much useful, followed by spectral measurem ents and others, when you go further weed  detection in situ RGB images followed by UAV RGB images , in 
situ multispectral images , UAV multispectral images, then unmanned ground vehicles, 
satellite sp ectral data and others are very  very important.  
When you talk about crop recognition the satellites are very important ; the in situ  manual 
measurem ents are also very important , then laboratory measurements, RGB images, 
hyperspectral images,  these are important consideration, these are important features for crop  
recognition using machine learning.  
When you talk about the crop quality RGB images, X ray images and then quality parameters 
and then spectral data from the spect ro radiometer and satellites data are very very important . 
When you talk about the soil management, the soil properties , weather data, remote sensing 
data, topography data, proximal sensing data, soil moisture content data, the crop properties , 
these are all important features.  
And in case of water management we can see whether influences most in case of water 
management followed by remote sensing then soil water content then stem  water potential 
and then in situ measurements soil data and others .  
In case of livestock measurement, motion capture sensors are the most important sources for 
and followed by up to acoustic data, physical and growth characteristics weather data, these 
are the most useful features or  variable which gives the desired outputs or in other  way we 
can say that these are the most important features or variables which are necessary for developing a calibration model for trading model for yield prediction, disease detection , weed  
detection, crop recognition, crop quality identification, soil management, water management and livestock management.  (Refer Slide Time: 26:30)  
 
 
So, if we focus on the crop management, you can see that it involves versatile aspects that 
originate  from the combination of farming techniques in the direction of managing the 
biological, chemical and physical crop environment with the aim of reaching both 
quantitative and qualitative goals.  
So, if we see using advanced advanced approaches to manage crops, what are the sectors , as I 
have already told you yield prediction is an important sector followed by disease detection, 
weed  detection, crop recogniti on and crop quality detection;  all these are very  very important  
approaches to manage the crops using machine learning.  So, first we will see that yield prediction. Yield prediction is one of the most challenging 
topic in agriculture , because an accurate model ; we need an accurate model t o help the farm 
owners to take, inform management decisions on what crop to grow towards matching the 
crop to the existing market ’s demand.  
But this is a very very difficult task, because crop growth is a phenomenon  which  depends on 
several interconnected factors and it is not a simple model can do that. S o, that is why we can 
say that it is a very important challenging topic in agriculture. So, it is  basically determined 
because, why it is challenging, again it is determined by several factors , such as environment 
management practices, crop genotype and phenotype characteristics and their interactions .  
And it requires , and to predict the crop it requires  a comprehensive data and also powerful 
machine learning models. So, unless you have a comprehensive data set and also very 
powerful machine learning models, you cannot do the yield  prediction.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:40)  
 
Now, some examples  let us see some very good examples. So, here in this study Gong e t al, 
which was published in sensors in the year 2021, you can see that they have used a novel 
neural network based methodology, novel deep neural network based methodology. They 
have proposed to predict the future crop will based on the historical yield and gre enhouse 
environmental parameter.   
What are those environmental parameters ? You can see here, the carbon dioxide 
concentration is an important greenhouse environmental parameter then tempera ture, humidity, radiation etc. these are important  parameters. You can see here they are doing the 
data nor malization.  
And once they a re doing the data normalization, they are incorporating the data in the LST M 
which is the long short term memory and RNN , recurrent neural network and the n they are 
concatenating the LS TM outputs and fin ally they are incorporating in t he TCM part and then 
finally they are getting the predicted .  
So they a re fully connected layer part and finally, they are getting the predicted yield. So, if 
we see these research, there are the proposed method is based on the hierarchical integration . 
As you can see, these are hierarchical integration starting from the no rmalization part, then 
this LSTM which is long short term memory and then RNN which is the recurrent neural 
network and temporal convolutional network neural network .  
You can see here TCN part and which  are the other state of art, DNN  architecture for 
temporal sequence processing. So, ultimately, we are getting the , we are predicting the yield .  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:45)  
  
 
So, four major parts one is  normalization part and other is recurrent neural network part, 
which we can see here, then temporal convolutional network part and finally, the fully 
conne cted layer part we can see here.  Ultimately, when all these four parts are connected 
together, they are giving the predicted yield.  
And you can see for three different data set s these are the accumulated tomato fruit yield  with 
the passing of the days, so temporal changes in the  fruit yield for three different dataset. Also 
we can see that ground truth tomato fruit yield values and predicted ones for testing the 
datasets we can see here directly.  
So, days of year 2018 for three different datasets you can see that how the predicted values 
are matching with the actual values using the machine learning models. So this shows some of the good applications for machine learning in agriculture for yield prediction. Let us wrap 
up our lecture here, and in the next lecture we will start from here and we will see some more 
applications of machine learning algorithm s for crop and soil management. Thank you.   