Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 48  
Digital Soil Mapping – General Overview (Contd.)  
Welcome friends to this 3rd  lecture of week 10 of NPTEL online certification course of 
Machine Learning for S oil and C rop Management. In this week, we are talking about general 
overview of digital soil mapping. In our first two lectures, we have discussed the basic 
concept of digital soi l mapping, why it is important , what are its uses, and also we have seen 
the different types of applications .  
And also different models for soil formation starting with the Jenny’s  model of soil 
formation . We have also discussed the SCORPAN plus e model given by McBratney et  all in 
2003, which provides the fundamental backbone of digital soil mapping and why it is called 
digital soil mapping we have also discussed ; different types of digital sources of data and 
how we can handle those data we have discusse d.  
We have seen different covariance data DEM  and different types of terrain parameters , 
climatic variables , which you can use for producing the digital soil map which we have also 
discussed . We have discussed the workflow in DSM , we have also discussed t he principle of 
DSM and also we have discussed how we can take management and policy decision using 
digital soil mapping.  
Apart from that we have also discussed the basics of GIS . Why GIS is important nowadays 
and also  what are the different types of data structure in GIS , we have seen . We have also 
discuss the different types of coordinate reference systems starting with geographic coordinate system , also we have discussed UTM or Universal Transverse Mercator . And we 
have also discussed what is datum .  
So, today in this lecture, we are going to discuss a very important topic which is extensively 
used in digital soil mapping or rather I would say that digital soil mapping is based on this 
particular discipline , sub- discipline of statistics , this is called g eo statistics.  (Refer Slide Time: 2:52)   
 
So, in this lecture we are going to have the overview of this concepts, we are going to have 
basic overview of geo statistics . Of course, the time is limited s o I will try to cover the basic 
aspects of geo stati stics. In this lecture, we will be learning about Kriging interpolation, then 
inverse distance interpolation and also we are going to talk about the Variogram and why it is 
important.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:19)   
 
These are the keywords of this lecture, geo  statistics, spatial dependence, V ariogram , Kriging 
and IDI.  (Refer Slide Time: 3:27)   
 
So, let us define what is geo statistics. So, it is a class of statistics that deals with analytical 
production of high resolution maps by using different field obse rvations, auxiliary 
information and a computer program that computes values at location of interest or a study area.  
So, whenever our resources are limited, and there is not possible to collect enough number of 
samples from the whole study area or the loc ation of interest, then we take the help of geo 
statistics who are doing different types of interpolation, what is interpolation is prediction and map of properties of in the context of geo statistics, the definition of interpolation is 
prediction of prope rties soil properties at locations where there was no preliminary sample.  
So, in other words  interpolation helps in predicting the properties at unsample location as you 
can see here, these are two interpolated maps of soil arsenic concentration, which we have 
created in one of our previous research and published in the Journal of G eo derma. Here w e 
can see the distribution, spatial distribution of the soil properties of course, these were made 
by taking only hundreds of samples.  
So, using those samples w e have, we have produced this map. So, that shows that shows the 
actual application of geo statistics to predict the property at unsample  locations also.  (Refer Slide Time: 5:30)   
 
So, what are the major purposes of geo statistics ? There are a couple fi rst of all, it gives you 
the practical mean to describe the spatial patterns and interpolate values for location where 
samples were not taken of course, this is a major rational  behind this interpolation spatial 
interpolation, apart from that, it gives you at the same time, it gives you a measurement of 
uncertainity.  
Now, generally, before the advent of geo statistics in the soil science domain, we have seen 
that the experts are developing their maps by their observation and by the knowledge of 
correlation  with other auxiliary properties. So, these are called the maps made by mental 
models. However, these models were not able to generate a measure of uncertainty.  
So, you do not have any idea about  how accurate your mapping is so, but geo statistic gives 
you not only the map using the predicted values  but side by side, it gives you the map of 
uncertainty it is also so, that you can have enough confidence while interpreting the map 
using geo statistics.  
Now, also we have seen that  when  there are several auxi liary variables which you are using 
for producing the geo statistical interpolation that helps you for getting better accurate map of 
the primary variable of interest because of their correlation with the primary variable of 
interest. So, we have already s een what are those covariates we general ly use in geo statistics 
in DSM.   
We have seen the climatic variables, we have seen the terrain variables, we have seen the 
remote sensing variables, all these are used as auxiliary variables in the geo statistical interpolation to get more we generally use them to get higher prediction accuracy and 
subsequent better mapping of the primary a property of interest.  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:50)   
 
So, what are the uses? Of course the geo statistical application first was in itiated in mining 
industries, then environmental science for pollutant level pollutant level and hotspot 
identification . And it began and lately in last couple of decades, people have started using this 
for agricultural operation.  
For example, in the spat ial variability of the soil properties and fertility parameters, if you are 
interested to see what is the spatial variability of fertility parameters in your in your field 
agricultural field, then you have to take the help of geo statistics . And also if yo u want to 
make a correlation with the spatial variability of soil fertility properties with your crop yield, 
then also and also you want to make some fertilizer recommendation based on those mapping 
you have to take the help of geo statistics .  
Of course, apart from that public health and metrological applications like prediction of 
temperature, rainfall, all these are dependent on some geo statistical approaches. So, you can 
see that agricultural  indicates one of the major area of application of geo statis tics. Now a 
days you the advent of different types of machine learning different types of machine 
learning approaches, these geo  statistical approach or geo statistical interpolations are getting 
improved each and every day .  
And new methods are coming and with the help of these hyperspectral resolution 
hyperspectral remote sensing high resolution data, we are getting higher resolution of soil properties map . So, using in combination with different types  of machine learning algorithms. 
So, these are some of  the applications of geo statistics .  
(Refer Slide Time: 9:46)   
 
And but before we discuss the basics of geo statistics. L et us understand what is spatial 
autocorrelation or spatial dependence is a very important term and this is the backbone or I 
would s ay, this is the major motivation behind geo statistics ar eas application. W hy we could 
do geo statistics, this is because of spatial interpolation sorry spatial autocorrelation or spatial 
dependence.  
Now, this spatial autocorrelation or spatial dependence  is a term that is used to describe the 
presence of systematic spatial variation in a variable and positive spatial autocorrelation 
which is most often encountered in practical situation is the tendency for areas or sides that 
are close together to have si milar values if you can see these maps, one thing is for sure, you 
can understand that the locations which are close by are showing similar properties or similar 
levels of properties.  
And those areas which are far apart are having some differences and also there is an  some 
abrupt changes of such properties. So, you can see that  this is called spa tial autocorrelation 
that means  the observations at a particular distance ar e not independent to each other  they are 
closely related to each other . And this is cal led spatial dependence or spatial autocorrelation .  
In real life situation also in the agricultural field, you will see that the soil properties which 
are which are measured from the nearby samples, they match with each other. However, when you take a soil  sample far apart from the primary location of soil sample, you will see 
that these two samples may differ in their properties.  
So, one thing is clear that the data is some correlation of the soil properties based on the 
spatial distance between the sampl e point . So, this is called spatial dependence or spatial 
autocorrelation. Now, geo statistics exploits these phenomena to map the variability spatial 
variability of the soil properties. So, all these maps are being developed by keeping in mind 
that phenom enon of spatial dependence using some defined models which we are going to 
discuss .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:24 )  
 
Now, let us see what are the aspects of spatial variability if we can see here in this is the 
spatial variability map of soil property you can see there seems to have a spatial pattern of 
how the value changes, values that are close together are more similar just like I have showed 
you in my previous slide. And locally the values can differ without a ny systematic rule or 
randomly s o, we can see all these things.  
So, the variation or spatial variation of soil properties can be explained in terms of universal 
model of variation. Now, what is universal model of variation universal model of variation is 
says that the property at a given point will be combination of deterministic component which 
is denoted by these Z star  and then especially correlated random component which is eta dash 
and then eta double d ash is basically the pure noise or this is basically the measurement error.  
So, Z is for the p robabilistic model that means, there is a range of equal probable realization 
of the same model. So, we can see that the universal model of variation says that a property of the given place is basically a combination of the output from a deterministic mode l and a 
stochastic model and beyond noise.  
Now, from the point of view of geo statistics and point of view of a mapper we are more 
focused towards mapping this deterministic component and specially correlated stochastic 
component . Because pure noise which  could be due to measurement error, this is not our 
primary focus area because this may might be the beyond the control of the mapper.  
But at the same time  so, the major variation comes from this deterministic component as well 
as the spatially correlated  random component. Now, in theory map of an environmental 
variable can be decomposed into two grids  one is deterministic and other is error surface but 
practically it is very difficult to decompose into those two  grids .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:41 )  
 
Now, l et us discuss what is deterministic model and how it differs from a stochastic model. 
Now, in the deterministic model the output of the model is fully determined by the parameter 
values and the initial condition. So, it is more or less fixed however, stochastic model is 
more , more random. So, stochastic models  poses some inherent randomness  the same set of 
parameter values and initial conditions will lead to an ensemble of different outputs. So, this 
is the major difference between deterministic model as we ll as the stochastic model.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:21 )  
 
Now, let us see what is support size, support size basically shows the discretization level of a 
geographical surface and it is a concept of scale it based on the concept of scale. B ecause you 
are developing what you are downloading the data at different scales you can download a 
raster file in 90 meter by 90 resolution and two meter resolution and you can download 
another raster file of covariates with 30 meters by 30 meter resolution.  
So, this 30 meter by 30 meter resolution or 90 meter by 90 meter resolution is known as the 
support size. So, support size varies from one layer to another layer. And it is very important that to improve the prediction accuracy, you need to homoge nize all the support  size by using 
several methods, most of the cases the samples wh ich you take from the soil are point sample.  
So, that does not matches with the support size of any other covariate which is having higher 
support size suppose 90 meter by 90 meter. So, in that case, we have to deal with different 
types of we need to do some modification for example  either we can upscale the auxiliary 
map to match the high resolution data this could be very attractive, but it is costly in 
processing storage.  
So, you can upsca le the auxiliary map which is originally 90 meters and by 90 meter 
resolution to say suppose 5 meter by 5  meter resolution to match with the soil sampling point. 
But this would hugely enhance the cost of processing as well as the storage size or the other 
way of dealing with is average or make some composite sample within each block of land 
and so, that can give better feed.  But at the same time validation using point data may not give the significant variation in the 
results. So, this is why we generally suggest that you should homogenize the data for 
matching the support size which will help you to increase the predictive power otherwise, if 
there are different support sizes that will decrease the predictive power.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:40 )  
 
Now, if you see the spatial prediction model, this is a process of estimating the values of 
quantity of quantitative values of course, at unvisited side within the area covered by existing 
observations. So, these are  our area of interest which is displayed to in two dimensional place 
x and y bounded by. So, here these z  s1 s2 and all these observations the solid dot black dots 
are showing the original sampling points and suppose you want to predict the value at an 
uncertain  location.  
So, here you have to take the he lp of spatial interpolation. So, this is the scheme of in the 
horizontal space and this is the values of some target variable in a one dimensional base 
space. So, the and this the whole area of interest is noted by this capital A. So, we use 
different type s of spatial prediction to predict that property of at sample is  zero point. So, 
what are those what are those methods?  (Refer Slide Time: 18:49 )  
 
So, these methods can be called generally as a spatial prediction models. So, there are two 
types of spat ial prediction model one is called mechanical or empirical model and second one 
is called statistical or probability based model. Now, some examples of mechanical or 
empirical models are Thiessen polygons, inverse distance interpolation, regression 
coordinates splines.   
However, in case of probabilistic model like Kriging, which is the most widely used method 
and also which is also very synonymous with the geo statistics. And also you can do some 
environmental correlation which is will be regression based B ayesian base models and mixed 
models like regression Kriging.  
So, we are going to learn this regression tuning in our upcoming lectures but at the same at 
this time, let us focus mostly on these two one is inverse distance interpolation and Kriging.  (Refer Slide Time: 19:54 )  
 
So, what is the difference fundamental difference between these mechanical model and 
statistics model in case of mechanical models, they are arbitrary or they are our empirical 
model parameters we use and no estimate of the model error is available, and usually no strict 
assumption about the variability of a feature exist.  
So, this is called the  mechanical or empirical model So, arbitrary empirical model parameters 
are used, when we will discuss how to create these, these models w e will we will just we I 
will show you, but here just mentioned just understand that the spatial dependence cannot be 
measured objectively in this kind of mechanical or empirical model we are just assuming 
some arbitrary values .  
And then it is a kind of a  trial and error method to see which one is giving you the best 
interpolation. However, in case of statistical or probabilistic model, the model parameters are 
commonly estimated in an objective way following the probability theory and the predictors 
are accompanied with the estimate of the prediction error. So, input data set usually needs to 
satisfy but there is of course  a drawback because in case of  statistical probability models  
these input data set usually need to satisfy strict statistical assumption s.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:22 )  
 
So, let us  first discuss one example each  we will start with the inverse distance interpolation. 
Now, in case of  inverse distance interpolation a value of the target variable at some new 
location suppose there is s0 can be derived using a weighted average with the sample with the 
already sampled points.  
So, here we can see that this is the predicted values that s0 . And this is how we are going to 
calculate the value at this point by multiplying this weight of the neighbors  and also with the 
values of the neighbors. So, here  these lambda i shows the weight of the neighbor i and the 
sum of the weights needs to be equal to 1 to ensure an unbiased interpolation.  
So, this is the for general form of IDI  and t he matrix form you c an see here this is the matrix 
from s o, the simplest approach so, this is lambda transpose of lambda 0 multiplied by Z . So, 
the simplest approach for determining the weights is to use the inverse distance from all the 
points to the new point.  
So, basicall y, it also in case of inverse distance interpolation, we give more weightage to the 
points  which are close by and less weightage to the points which are far apart from t he 
location of interest. So, here, this for executing the inverse distance interpolation, the idea is 
you give more weight, you assign some arbitrary values to give more weight to the nearby 
points and less weight to the far to the distance points.  
So, this is this lambda how we calculate this lambda. So, this lambda is calculated by using 
this formula 1 by d beta  s0 is 1 and then summation of i equal to 0 to 1 by d beta  and then s0 s1 and where b eta equal to greater than 1. So, here this distance s0  is i is basically is the 
distance from the new  point to a known sample points .  
So, basicall y we calculate the distance from the new  point to a known sample points  and beta 
is the coefficient that is used to adjust the weights. So, beta is arbitrarily given. So, this way, 
So, the points which are close to an output pixel will obtain large weights  and those points 
which are farther from the output pixel will opt in small weights just like I told you.  
So, the higher the values of the beta you can see the higher the values of the beta, the less 
importance will be put to on distance points, and the r emaining problem is how to estimate 
this beta objectively So, that it can reflect the inherent properties of the data set.  
So, you can see here in this calculation, these weight is being calculated by using this 
formula, here d s0  1 is or si  is the distan ce from that unsample location to a nearby sample 
location or any sample location and this beta is the weight . So, higher the value of the beta by 
this formula we can see that lower will be its weight. So, lower importance will be given to 
the distance poi nts and higher importance will be given to the points which are close enough.  
So, these beta values are greater than 1 we can try with different beta values and see which 
one is gives us the  which reflects accurately the inherent properties of the data. S o, you can 
see here the beta values we are assigning is not collect is not calculated in an objective way. 
So, this is the problem with inverse distance interpolation .  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:39 )  
 
Now, the Kriging is an  advancement from this inverse dista nce interpolation in case of 
Kriging for we synonymously as I have told you that we generally use this screening synonymously with geo statistical interpolation it was originated in in 1950s as a means of 
improving or reserve estimation in the mining indus tries.  
So, a standard version of the Kriging is known as the ordinary Kriging the expression is this of course, you can see that, the value at any given location is basically composed of two 
components, one is constant stationary mean or constant stationa ry function or global mean 
and this is the spatially correlated stochastic part of variation.  
So, global mean plus stochastic variation combined together to give the property at any given 
location. So, the formula of Kriging shows that it is same just like we have seen the in case of 
IDI also. So, it is a weight of any given points weight of an unsample location from a sampl e 
location and that their value.  
But only the difference is here, these weight or the importance is objectively calculate d by 
using a  model called Vario gram. So, this lambda 0 here shows the vector of Kriging weights 
and Z is the vector of an observation at primary locations. And in a way Kriging can be also 
seen as a sophistication of the inverse distance interpolation.  (Refer Slide T ime: 27:27 )
  
 
So, what is the Variogram ? Variogram is the model based on which these Kriging assign 
these weights or calculate these weights,  how much weight is to use to give to any location 
which from the any location which is either close or distance f rom the unsampled location. 
So, this is what is being objectively calculated by variogram because in case of IDI the major 
problem was to determine how much importance should be given to each neighbor .  And it was arbitrarily decided by giving some values of beta howe ver, in case of Vario gram, 
the differences between the neighboring values are taken care of and at the same time, 
objectively we assign the importance using the Variogram. So, we generally calculate so, 
here you can see that he had the distance  between the pairs of the points are given .  
And in the y axis, we are putting the semi variance, what is semi variance semi variance is 
basically half one half of the square difference of the two of the properties between two 
sampling points. So, semi var iance is basically measures of the spatial dependence between 
the observation at a function of the distance between them.  
So, you can see with the change of the distance between the point pairs, we can see the semi 
variance are also increasing and it is s ay add after say after so, after a particular location it 
will reach a plateau. So, this is showing the spatial autocorrelation so, with increase with the 
distance up to a certain distance, these semi variance is related to the distance.  
So, this is basic ally the graphical representation of spatial dependence or spatial 
autocorrelation after a certain distance there will be no further correlation it will reach a plateau and then there will be more or less constant. So, the semi variance is a measure of the  
spatial dependence between two observation as a function of the distance between them and 
the semi Variogram sometime we call it Variogram also.  
So, semi Variogram is a graph which shows how semi variance changes as the distance 
between the observation c hanges. So, from this graph, we can see that how these semi 
variance will change with the distance between the observation pairs. Here the observation 
pairs means the pair considering unsampled location as well as the sample location.   (Refer Slide Time: 30:04 ) 
 
So, in the Variogram there are different types of parameters, you should understand that here 
we are putting the distance and here we are putting the semi variance. Now, you can see here 
the difference between the sill and the nugget represents th e amount of observed variation. 
So, here you can see at distance 0 there is some variability, which we cannot explain in terms  
of distance between the points.  
This may be due to sampling error this may be due to measurement error and this is known as 
the nugget , n u g g e t,  nugget component. So, nugget is the variability which shows the, 
mainly due to the measurement errors and the maximum variability is known as sill. And the 
point a t which the semi Vario gram reaches a plateau is the distance and this di stance is 
known as a range parameter.  
So, you can see the difference between the sill  and the nugget represents the amount of 
observed variation that can be explained by distance between the observation. So, of course 
the sill versus minus nugget, if we s ubtract nugget from the sill t his is the actual variation 
which we can observe which can be explained by the distance between the observation. So, these distance between sill  minus nugget is known as partial sill.  
So, there is much special dependence. So, if course, an ideal situation would consist of a 
small nugget and large scale large scale. So, of course, we want that this partial seal should be 
maximized because and we should always try to reduce the size of the nugget so, that we can 
get maximum spatial dependence.  So, that means, there is much spatial dependence and a lot could be inferred about an 
unobserved location based on its distance from an observed site. So, this is what is ideal 
situation, but in some cases, you will see that the measurement error is too much that the 
most of this variation is accounted by this nugget.  
So, that is in that condition, we will call it is a pure nugget effect. So, if nugget is showing the you know explaining the maximum of the scale or nugget is occupied a maxi mum of the sale 
then we call it is a pure nugget effect. So, the range is the point at which the semi variance stop increasing the range is represented by the distance at which two observations are 
unrelated that is independent you can see after this range , there is no relation between the 
distance and the semi variance.  
So, here these points will be unrelated to each other after these range distance. So, often a mode l is fit to the empirical Vario gram. So, basically we fit this model with some empirical 
Variogram to aid in interpretation and in order to make use of the special dependency in other 
statistical techniques.  
(Refer Slide Time: 33:30 )
 
 
So, this is the Vario gram guys and we use the Variogram to model in the geo statist ics. So, 
the experimental  Vario gram . So, experimental Vario gram is calculated by averaging one half 
of the distance squared of the Z  values over all the pairs of observation with the specified 
separation this direction.  
So, the distance if we just calculate the average of one half of the difference squared of the Z 
values  that is property values of all pairs of observation, then we will get this semi Vario gram . So, we are putting the separation distance that means, the distance between the 
points in the y axis we are putting the semi variance.  
So, semi variance means it is one half of the it is the average of one half of the difference 
squared of the Z  values. So, we will get this type of ups and downs this is the experimental 
Vario gram and then we try to fit these experimental V ariogram using a model Vario gram and 
this model could be of different types either exponential model or it could be different types 
of spherical model. T here are different types of model.  
(Refer Slide Time: 34:40 ) 
 
 
So, guys, I hope that you have got som e good knowledge about geo statistics of course, this is 
an overview, I would always strongly recommend you to go through some good literature for, geo statistics. Because geo statistics itself it is a discipline and it requires  itself is a course. 
So, it is not possible to cover all these aspects in details within the short period of time.  
But I would always recommend you to go through some of the literature to understand these 
geo statistical parameters and geo statistical modeling in a detailed manner a nd but I hope 
that whatever we need to understand for our for understanding the basic of DSM we have 
already covered .  
And let us wrap up our lecture here, these are some of the references you can follow. Let us 
wrap up our lecture here and we will meet in  our next lecture to discuss how to deal with a 
new software called R software and I will show you how to download and what is our and 
why it is extensively used in digital soil mapping, we are going to discuss thank you guys . 