Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty   
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture 44  
Hyperspectral Remote Sensing and  ML Applications in Agriculture (Contd.)  
(Refe r Slide Time:  0:22)  
 
Welcome to this fourth lecture of week 9 of NP TEL Online Certification Course of Machine 
Learning for Soil and Crop M anagement. And in this week, we are discussing about 
Hyperspectral Remote Sensing and M achine Learning for agricultur e and their applications. 
In our first 3 lectures, we have discuss the differences between hyperspectral remote sensing 
and multispectral remote sensing , characteristics of hyperspectral r emote sensing we have 
discussed.  
We have also discussed the different types of hyperspectral sensors which are which are 
developed and utilized by NASA , different types of spaceborne hyperspectral sensors as well 
as satellite hyperspectral sensors we have discussed and also we have discussed the 
hyperspectral sensors deve loped by Indian Space Research Organization.  
And also we have seen different types of data handling methods, how to download the data , 
from where to download the  data and what are the softwares  needed for handling the 
hyperspectral data we have discussed . And also we have discussed different types of scanner 
configuration, pushroom configuration and then whisk broom configuration we have 
discussed.  So, in this lecture, we are going to discuss the hyperspectral remote sensing application 
focusing on crop c haracterization and crop nitrogen estimation specifically cotton estimation 
and we are going to discuss one case study which was published in a reputed journal.  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:23)  
 
So, in this lecture, we are going to discuss these hyperspectral r emote sensing crop 
application a case study . Also we are going to discuss what is red edge  absorption and why it 
is important and also we are going to see different types of vegetation indices which were 
calculated in this case study.  
(Refer Slide Time:  2:46)  
 So, these are the keywords which we are going to discuss, we are going to discuss 
hyperspectral , random forest then cotton, vegetation indices , Sentinel 2. These are some of 
the keywords for this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time:  3:04)  
 
So, this is the case study or the other published paper in remote sensing journal . You can see 
it is a machine lea rning optimized Hyperspectral Remote Sensing R etrieve Cotton Nitrogen 
Status. So, in this research, the researcher tried to estimate the cotton nitrogen statu s and also 
the map cotter nitrogen status using hyperspectral remote sensing data in combination with different machine learning approaches.  
So, this is an open source journal. So, you can search it in the internet and you can get it free and I would request you to go through it in details to have more comprehensive information, 
comprehensive knowledge about the steps which they have followed. So, in this lecture, we 
are going to briefly discuss the important points or the takeaway points from this study.  (Refer Slide Time:  4:15)  
 
So, first question comes what was the motivation of the study? Now, you all know that 
remote and rapid identification of nitrogen level in plants can help in boosting the  higher 
yield in the potential z ones and also it can redu ce the unnecessary applic ation of nitrogenous 
fertilizer. N itrogenous fertilizers are being applied in huge amount of huge quantity by the 
farmers to boost the growth of the crop.  
But if we can identify the areas, which require higher nitrogen content, which require higher 
nitrogen inputs, which can reduce the nitrogen application by adjusting our nitrogen doses for 
the whole area and by giving less amount of nitrogen for thos e patches which we do not need  
high amount of nitrogen application for which we do not need any high amount of nitrogen application.  
So, what happens when we go for these judicious plant requirement based nitrogen as 
application that helps in reducing the environmental impact while increasing the profit because you are now cutting dow n your nitrogen inputs and cost and simultaneously is the 
cost involved and also simultaneously that nitrate is a potential environmental pollutant .  
And when you apply judicious amount of nitrogenous fertilizer that can reduce the 
environmental impact bec ause otherwise that will these nitrate will go away through runoff 
and that will go to the different types of water bodies and it will mix with the groundwater 
creating environmental hazards.  So, we have seen that with the rise in computer codes and proce sses speed and also different 
types of advanced machine learning algorithm there has been a tremendous increase in this 
hyperspectral remote sensing based crop characterization and specifically agricultural 
operations since 2010.  
(Refer Slide Time:  6:37)  
 
So, in this study, they had three major objective . First of all, they try to explore different 
supervised and unsupervised learning methods to identify the hyperspectral regions 
responsive to variable of interest, what is it is crop nitrogen content. So, they try to use some 
supervised and unsupervised learning methods to identify these hyperspectral regions, which are very much responsive to the plant nitrogen content.  
And secondly, they try to leverage these highlighted spectral regions in novel configuration 
of hyperspectral bands and test their ability to predict the nitrogen concentration. So, using these selected bands , so first of all, they tried different types of supervised and unsupervised 
method to identify the important bands from the hyperspe ctral data, which are responsive to 
nitrogen concentration of the cotton.  
And secondly, they have used those bands to calculate a novel configuration of a novel or I 
would say it is a vegetation index. And then they try to predict use the nitrogen content  of the 
crop using those vegetation using those vegetation indices. And t hirdly, they tried to compare 
a UAV- based hypersp ectral data against a satellite -based multispectral instrument for 
detecting cotton nitrogen concentration. So, these three were the m ajor objectives for their 
study, and they have used both hyperspectral as well as multispectral data.  (Refer Slide Time:  8:25)  
 
Now, this was the study site, it is the Northwest this study site is situated in the northwest of 
New South Wales, and it is b asically Australian C otton Research Institute  at Nairobi. And 
they basically  sample the leaves of the cotton periodically and after taking the samples, they 
analyze the leaf nitrogen content by standard laboratory analysis and LECO  gas analyzer.  
(Refer Sl ide Time:  8:59)  
 
Now, once they did that, at the same time, they are also captured the hyper spectral data using 
these DJI matrices M 600 drone and using these drone they have taken the hyperspectral 
images and for taking the hyperspectral images they have used these Cubert Butterfly LS S199 imaging sensor and this imaging sensor has a wavelength range of 475 to 925 nanometer with a 2 megapixel sensor resolution using a  silicon CMOS detector and they, this 
sensor had the spectral resolution of 5 to 10 nanome ter and after they took the images .  
Those images w ere stitched together and also orthomosaic ked, what is orthomosaic ing, we 
have already discussed . Now after Orthomosaici ng they have I , they have taken the 
hyperspectral data into fashion. I n one way they have taken the sample t hey take it they have 
extracted the pixel spectrum for 30 pixel from which they have taken randomly planned 
sample.  
So, initially they have they took 30 samples from 30 spots and from the hyperspectral 
imagery they have taken , they have extracted the spectral information from those 30 
individual pixels. So, this is one way. I n another approach what they ha ve done, they have 
also taken areal average reflectance vector of for a  20 centimeter aerial average reflectance 
vectors. So, they have taken an average reflectance also for 20 centimeter aerial coverage.  
So, they have compared both these average spectrum as  well as they have covered also the 
individual pixel based extracted spectrum.  
(Refer Slide Time:  11:06)  
 
So, once they have extracted the spectrum, they did the first derivative calculation . Now, we 
have already discussed different types of first , different types of spectral preprocessing in our 
week 5. Now, remember that this first derivative were calculated using this first o rder 
differential equation.  So, here dR by d lambda, R  stands for the reflectance and so, basically using this formula 
they have taken they have  calculated the first derivative of the reflectance spectra. So, R is 
here the reflectance and lambda is the wavelength, which is ordered from j equal to 1 to n and 
d lambda is a bandwidth between the wavelengths.  
Now, in this case the bandwidth was 5 nanometer . Now, the first derivative a fter taking the 
first derivative of the reflectance spectrum, the spectra was further smoothed with a filter 
using a second order polynomial and a 5 band fitting window . We have already discussed 
these sectors smoothing before .  
(Refer Slide Time:  12:11)  
 
So, they have used both the nominal spectrum that is the original spectrum at the same time 
they have used both the, also they have also used this derivative spectrum. So, they have 
compared the performance for both the nominal or original  spectra as well as the deviating 
spectrum. So, nominal and derivative reflectance values we re investigated using density 
based hierarchical clustering.  
And at the same time, we are going to discuss these hierarchical clustering, but at the same 
time, they also did random forest regression to identify the most important band for discriminating the nitrogen content. And, the density based hierarchical clustering which I 
have told you also they have done the density based spatial clustering application with noise. 
So, the full name is DBSCAN, s o, density based spatial clustering application with noise.  So, this method they have tried after decomposing the average reflectance into 4 principal 
components using PCA principal component analysis and plotting them using the  2 that 
explained the most variance. So, what happens using the original reflectan ce they have done 
the principal component analysis and after they did the principal component analysis, they 
selected the first 2 principal components and using this has 2  principal components they plot 
they plotted the scatterplot or using the first 2 pri ncipal components that will the score plot .  
And based on the score plot, they try to identify the important spectral regions and that noise 
in the spectral region. T he important spectral region is the spectral region which is more 
correlated to the nitrog en content or so, and also they have tried to identify the noise in the 
spectrum. So, these are the different types of machine learning classification on the hyperspectral detective they have used.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 14:08)  
 
So, what does this DBSCAN doe s, so, it basically group the samples of unlabeled data into 
clusters of high density. So, we have several samples. So, if we can cluster this data through 
PCA, then these DBSCAN basically try to identify the region of high density that means, 
those with t he many neighbors and also some noise those samples with fewer neighbors. So, 
from there they try to identify, this region is important and this is that noise.  
So, this and also from your previous knowledge that hierarchical clustering is it is a clusteri ng 
method, and in this research, they use the hierarchical clustering using an agglomerative 
complete linkage approach. We start s with all samples in individual clusters and then groups 
based on the minimizin g and Euclidean distance metric.  (Refer Slide T ime:  15:08)  
 
We have already discussed this, if you can recall from our previous lectures, the clustering 
methods, these hierarchical clustering method use a set of nested clusters organized as a 
hierarchical tree. And there are 2  types , one is agglomerat ive and other  is divisive. So, you 
can see this in hierarchical , a hierarchical is of course, a bottom up approach. T he, from the 
bottom it goes to the  upward direction by calculating the Euclidean distance.  
So, this is the hierarchical clustering with ag glomerative approach or in other words, we also 
call it agglomerative hierarchical clustering. So, in this method also, they have tried to use 
these agglomerative hierarchical clustering to cluster the data , to cluster the spectrum or the 
wavelengths to be  precise to cluster the wavelengths which are close together and then they 
try to correlate them with the nitrogen content.  (Refer Slide Time:  16:19)  
 
Now, in case of random forests, they have tried maximum three depth levels using a random  
30 percent  data set per split. And the most important bands identified in the unsupervised and 
supervised learning were then ite ratively  combined and assessed against the nitrogen samples 
using ordinary least squares  with leave one  out cross validation as with the hyperspectral 
dataset. S o, using a sum product and different ratio configuration, there were  3000 possible 
combination of 10 band.  
So, once I selected the 10 important bands, using these different types of methods, there are 
different 3000 different types of  combination for different types of vegetation indices, they 
have developed , however, 300 were dropped to avoid repeating the same band in the 
numerator and only those vegetation indices were kept with R  square value of greater than 
0.40.  
So, this is the methodology they have used, we have already discussed all these important 
concepts before, we have discussed principal component analysis. So, the principal 
component analysis, we have discussed the hierarchical clustering also. So, the hierarchical cluste ring, you also we have also discussed the random forests. So, the Random Forests too.  
So, all these which are required to understand the results of the study, we have already discussed . Now, we are focusing on the results only.  (Refer Slide Time:  17:57)  
 
So, these are the vegetation indices, which they have calculated . So, NDVI, NDRE , we have 
already discussed these things previously, and also some VOG1, CC1 and all these different 
types of vegetation indices they have calculated and their respective eq uations. So, here you 
can see one term that is called REmin, another term is called REmax. So, here you can see 
REmin, REmax  and also REmid .  
So, the mean derivative curve between these 650 and 800 nanometer was assessed for troughs and to find the left and right side of the feature and for the peaks to find a midpoint between 
the peaks. So, while we are talking about these REmax, REmin, REmid , we are trying to 
identify the leftmost and the rightmost trough like features in the 650 to 800 nanometers zone and in case of REmid  we are trying to see th e midpoint between the peaks.  
I am going to show you how they have calculated this and why they have calculated this we 
have also we are also going to discuss .  (Refer Slide Time:  19:18)  
 
Simultaneously apart fr om this hyperspectral data , they have also collected the Sentinel 2  
data. Now, the Sentinel 2 is a multispectral sensor and the Sentinel surface reflectance was 
downloaded through Google Earth Engine and the Sentinel bands were combined to form the 
same vegetation indices as the hyperspectral reflectance and tested against the nitrogen 
concentration. So, they have compared both the hyperspectral vegetation indices and also the 
multispectral vegetatio n indices to correlate with the  nitrogen content of the cotton crop.  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:03)  
 
So, they have used different types of statistical indicators . These are common that is R square 
value RMSE and lin’s  concordance correlation coefficient. So, these R square  value they have calculated RMS E value is calculated , lin’s concordance correlation coefficient was 
calculated using this formula. So, both the hyperspectral and the Sentinel data were assessed 
in predicting the leaf nitrogen content using the ordinary least squares with the leave one out 
cross vali dation and these were the statistical indicators.  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:33)  
 
 
Now, if you  see the results , in the results  it is quite clear that the left plot is showing the 
hyperspectral reflectance of each geo reference sample points . I told you that there are 30 
pixels from where they have extracted the spectral information. So, these are those 30s spectrum for extracted from 30 pixels. And here in the second case, they have  also took the 
average of pixel within 20 centimeter , I told you from the aeri al 20 centimeters.  So, they have compared both and you can clearly see that in the first case there is too much 
noise in this zone. So, to remove the noise or to remove the noise and not to consider these 
noise in the model they have they did all the subs equent analysis using the ave rage pixel 
within 20 centimeter  spectral , average spectrum which were which are collected or the 
spectrum which were collected from the average of pixel within 20 centimeter.  
So, this is how this is showing the change in refle ctance or I would say this basically shows 
that how the approach of spectrum in extraction from the hyperspectral data can have an 
important impact on that result. So, here they have taken these average of pixels within 20 
centimeter for subsequent analysi s.  
Now, before we discuss the next step, it is also important to discuss one important concept 
that is called red edge. Now, red edge  is a region so, this is you can see this is a plant 
reflectance or plant part  or leaf reflectance. Now, here you can see that water band and red 
edge band this portion is known as the Red Edge band and these  are the water absorption 
bands.  
So, that red age is a region in the  red and NIR  region, so here this is th e red region and this is 
the NIR  region and in the transition between red t o NIR you will see these red edge  band is 
there. So it is basically these red edge band just generally we can see in the transition zone 
between the red and NI . So, this red edge is a region and in the red- NIR transition zone of  
vegetation ref lectance spectrum and marks the boundary between absorption by chlorophyll 
in the red visible region and scattering due to l eaf internal structure in the NIR  region.  
So, two types of events occur . In the red region generally there is an absorption by the 
chlorophyll and in the NI R region there is reflection by the scattering, but in the NI R region 
there is a scattering due to leave internal structure. So, you can see there is a clear changes in the reflectance pattern in this transition zone.  So, generally  these red is utiliz ed in different 
crops studies, w hy?  
Because the rate portion is one of the areas where chlorophyll strongly absorbs light and NIR  
is where the leaf cell structure produces a strong reflection. So, the variation in both the chlorophyll content and the leaf structure are often reflected in the red age band. So, here in 
these red edge band , if you consider this red edge band , it gives a clear indication of the 
variation of the chlorophyll content at the same time, the leaf structure also.  So, accordingly s everal studies have suggested that these band is able to provide additional 
information in order to identify the plant types, nutrition and health status and characterized 
plant cover and the abundance among other features. So, to identif y the healthy plants , to 
identify the nutrition status, it is important to focus on these red edge  absorption features. So, 
why we are telling these red edge  absorption features ?  
(Refer Slide Time:  25:07)  
 
You will see that in this study also they have utilized the red edge,  they have extracted these 
red edge  they have isolated these red edge  portion and you can see this is due to the original 
reflectance or mean spectral reflectance and this is the derivative spectrum . And you can 
clearly see that the impact of differing nitrogen level can be observed in both mean 
reflectance and also in the mean derivative in the red edge region .  
Of course, you can see that when the nitrogen condenser there are two, we have grouped that 
they have grouped the samples i nto 13 samples with less than 3 percent  nitrogen and 17 
samples with greater than 3 percent  nitrogen. So, you can clearly see that, these the 
reflectance pattern or mean spectral reflectance for these two groups are showing the 
difference in these zone clear ly showing the difference in this zone  in both the original 
reflectance as well as in the NIR  region. So, that shows that why these red edge  is considered 
as an important indicator of plant nutrition content.  (Refer Slide Time:  26:30)  
 
Now, I told you a bout these REmin, REmid  and REmax . So, the first derivative curve  around 
these red edge was utilized to identify these REmin, REmid  and REmax  bands used in the 
calculation of the derivative vegetation indices. So, here you can see REmin, s o, this is one 
trough and this is another trough, s o, REmin, t his is REmax  and t hese are the two peaks. So, 
mid, REmid was calculated at around 722.5 nanometer. So, they use these values to calculate 
the vegetation indices based on the derivative spectrum.  
(Refer Slide Ti me: 27:16)  
  
So, if you see the results of nitrogen content estimation using different types of vegetation 
indices, you can clearly see that using different types of vegetation indices we are we got they 
have got satisfactory more or less satisfactory pr ediction performance. Of course, you can see 
these RID Amid which  give the highest R squared of 0.81 followed by these VOG1 0 .80.  
Then DIDAmid , so, different types of vegetation indices, they have tried to predict the 
nitrogen content extracted from the hyperspectral data and then followed by different types of processing. And once they use this, they have seen that these vegetation indices can be used 
satisfactorily to predict the nitrogen content of the cotton crop.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 28:19)  
 So, they have also used the principal component analysis I told you, so, you can see here this 
principal component 1 and principal component 2. So, to explore the ability of the machine 
learning to classify the reflectance bands into clusters based on their relation ship with 
nitrogen concentration, this density based clustering was used followed by after PCA.  
Now, you can see this first principal component and the second principal component cumulatively explained 99 percent  of the total variance. And you can se e her e two strong 
clusters, here the two strong clusters  that were identified these D BSCAN algorithm, one is 
this 475 to 750 nanometer c lustered, an other one is 740 to 920 meter region and 720,  in 
between th e 720 to 735 nanometer and 920 nano meter bands were  found to be noise in the 
clustering which are in between.  
So, you can see here based on their  closeness, we can see that, their relationship, we can 
establish their relationship with nitrogen concentration based on this type of clustering, 
density based clustering, which we do generally by using the principal component analysis.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 29:44)  
  
Also, hierarchical clustering, you can see this is a hierarchical clustering Dendrogram  and we 
can see that hierarchical clustering shows the same spli t with bands less than, 740 nanometer , 
you can see here 740 nanometer, here one group and one clus ter those fo r who greater than 
740 nanometer. So, these cluster is based on the bands which 700 greater than 740 
nanometer , these cluster is based on the bands with the greater than 700 less than 740 
nanometer .  
Further the region between 705 and 735, s o, here these zone 705 to 735 nanometer is 
separated into two into in  one subgroups labeled as RE . So, this is RE. So, you can see here 
these zone  is separated i n its own group that is called that is denoted by RE  and the grouping 
on the right side of the NIR main clu ster which is denoted by these Mix  is composed of the 
742 to  755 nanometer and also 915 to 925 nanometer.  
So, we can clearly see the clustering of t he wavelength based on certain characteristics and 
we can correlate it with the nitrogen content of the plant.  (Refer Slide Time:  31:17)  
 
  
Now, so, guys , this is the reference which I am which I have used and I hope that you have 
gathered good knowle dge. T he discussion is not over yet, we are going to stop here and in the 
next  lecture, we are going to start from here and we are going to see the results from random 
forest regression and how they were useful for identifying or to for predicting the nitr ogen 
content of the cotton crop.  
So, guys, I think that we have gathered some important insights from this lecture, we now 
know in application in crop where we can extract the hyperspectral data from the avera ge of 
the pixels and how to extract the inform ation from those spectral data by using different types 
of supervised and unsupervised clustering methods.  
So, we are going to discuss more on this in our comings  in our coming lecture . And please 
stay tuned. And we wi ll finish the discussion. An d also in this coming lecture, l ast lecture of 
this week, we are going to discuss and some other application of hyperspectral remote 
sensi ng for soil  
And side by side, I wi ll show you some other novel application of hyperspectral imaging for 
both crop as well as i n soil. So, thank you for joining. And let us meet in our last lecture of 
week 9 to continue with this and to explore other ideas of hyperspectral remote sensing 
application in agricultural domain. Thank you guys. 
 