Machine Learning for Soil and Crop Management  
Professor Somsubhra Chakraborty  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 45  
Hyperspectral Remote Sensing and ML Applications in Agriculture (Contd.)  
(Refe r Slide Time:  0:22)  
 
Welcome friends to this fifth lecture of week 9 of NP TEL Online Certification Course of 
Machine Learning for Soil and Crop M anagement. In this week, we are discussing about and 
very important concept that is H yperspectral Remote Sensing and Machine Learning 
Applications in A griculture.  
In our previous lectures, we have discussed about what is hyperspectral remote sensing, what 
is multispectral remote sensing and also we have discussed about the differences between 
hyperspectral remote sensing and multispectral remote sensing, we have seen the 
hyperspectral remote sensing spectrometers or different set in the in this satellite platform as well as some  airborne hyperspectral sensors.  
We have seen the different types of scanner configura tion, we have seen the data cube and 
also we have seen the differ ent types of data sources . In this  mission as far as hyperspectral 
remote sensing is concerned and also we have seen how to handle the data using different types of approaches. In the last le cture, we have started discussing about one case study 
where hyperspectral remote sensing was applied along with the multispectral remote sensing for predicting the crop nitrogen content in cotton.  And we have seen that how they have extracted the data by  two approaches, and then they 
after extracting the data, they have done some kind of clustering, using supervised and 
unsupervised method. And then after they selected those also they have calculated some 
vegetation , vegetation indices.  
So, they have tri ed both density with scanning and density based clustering. And also they 
have used the principal component analysis. Apart from that they have used the clustering 
analysis and also they have used random forest regression. So, w e will start from there. We  
will start from where we left in our last lecture. And we wi ll try to complete it in this lecture.  
Apart from that, we are also going to discuss some of the other hyperspectral remote sensing 
application in soil. And I would also like to show you hyperspe ctral imaging which is another 
emerging I would say emerging field of have hyperspectral analysi s for crop and soil. And 
also I wi ll show you some applications.  
(Refer Slide Time:  3:31)  
 
So, these are the main concepts which are we are going to discuss i n this lecture. First of all 
hyperspectral remote sensing crop application, a case study and also the hyperspectral remote 
sensing soil application another case study and then we are going to also discuss hyperspectral imaging application to tobacco and al so hyperspectral imaging application to 
soil. So, these are the 4 concepts which we are going to cover in this lecture.  (Refer Slide Time:  3:59)  
 
These are the some of t he keywords like hyperspectral, random forests, PLSR -VIP, tobacco, 
and then S VR. So, these are some of the keywords wh ich we a re going to discuss.  
(Refer Slide Time:  4:11)  
 
So, if you recall in our last lecture, we are discussing about this case study where these 
machine learning and optimized hyperspectral remote sensing was utilized f or retrieving the 
cotton nitrogen status.  (Refer Slide Time:  4:28)  
 
And, we have seen the results of hierarchical clustering as well as density based clustering. 
Now, while they have performed the random forest regression, what is random forest 
regressi on, which is a tree based method, ensemble tree based method.  
Our, so these random forests regression they have tried over the full 91 bands, returned a and 
also returned a similar grouping showing the top 20 bands and showing the top 20 bands are centered on, they have selected these top 20 bands, these random forest regression which 
were range between 540 to 715 nanometers.  
So, you can see here, these are the 91 bands, which were selected by the random forest 
regression. So, all the reflectance when 91 reflectance band and we can see that the first 20 
bands ranges between 514 nanometer and 750 nanometer. Now, the red edge  inflection point 
which also ranges between 705 to 750 nanometer had the based mean reflectance based mean importance across all cross validation increments with 35.8 percent .  
So, we can see here that the top 20 bands were between 540 to 750 nanometer region and the red edge inflection point, which is inflection point which is ranging from 705 to 715 
nanometer, they had the based mean im portance across all cross validation inc rements with 
35.8 percent  total.  
So, that means, again using these random forest, it this random forest regression was able to identify the importance of the red edge band for predicting the nitrogen concentration, this is 
the take home message from this graph. So, I told you what is red edge and why it is important, why it is considered as an important indicator for t he plant nutrition status. So, 
random forests again validated the  fact that these red edge inflectio n point and the 
wavelengths are important for identifying the nitrogen status of the crop.  
(Refer Slide Time:  7:21)  
 
 
When only top 10 important bands were analyzed using the random forests, the predictive 
ability was near identical. So, if  you go back you will see that R  squared value is 0.53 here 
also, when we are using all the 91 bands, we are getting the R squared value of 0.53.  
However, when we are using only 10 important band first and important band, then only we 
also got the R square  values of 4.52 which is almost identical with the top 4 bands.  So, these 1, 2, 3, 4 bands being at these red edge inflection point are 700 to 750 nanometers. 
So, you can see 710, 705, 715, 700. So, all these belong to these red edge inflection points. 
So, that again gives you an information how important these red edge band is for identifying 
the nutrient content.  
(Refer Slide Time:  8:23)  
 
So, based on all these information, they have calculated two novel vegetation indices. One is for the original reflectance or no minal reflectance and the second one is for that derivative 
spectrum. So, the first one , so, the novel these vegetation indices focuses on the inflection 
point from the absorption well in the red region to the reflection peak in the NIR and in case 
of orig inal reflectance it is  named as inflection point ratio vegetation index or IP RVI.  
So, they have calculated two vegetation indices, one is for the original reflectance, second is 
for the derivative reflectance. So, for the first one they have calculated th ese inflection point 
ratio vegetation indices using this formula, this is the reflectance for 695 nanometer , 
reflectance for 700 nanometers by a reflectance of 705 nanometer.  
So, this is called IPR VI and for the derivative spectra, they have calculated th ese derivative 
inflection point ratio vegetation indices or deep RVI. So, here this is the first derivative of reflectance values at 745 nanometer . This the first derivative of the reflectance values of the 
645 nanometer , sorry and this is the first deriva tive of the reflectance values for 685 
nanometer.  And subsequently once they have calculated these vegetation leases they have utilized these 
for calculating these for producing these map of nitrogen concentration, using these novel 
hyperspectral vegetati on indices. So, what we have seen in this research ? We have seen this 
research that they have taken the hyperspectral images after they have taken the hyperspectral 
images, they have extracted those images, the spectral information they have extracted after 
extracting the spectral information, they have calculated, they have done some spectral 
preprocessing like first derivative and smoothing.  
After the spectral preprocessing  they have they did some kind of clustering analysis and also 
density based cluste ring analysis to identify the regions of interest and they also tried to use 
the random forest regression to identify the important spectral bands, which are responsible 
for nitrogen estimation and then they have calculated the novel vegetation indices bas ed on 
those important points. So, this is how this we can see that, how this hyperspectral data can be utilized in a better way for identification of plant nitrogen.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 11:42)  
 
Or plant nutritional , status at the same time you can see her e this table shows the Sentinel 
prediction results using the different vegetation indices, which they have calculated. And so, 
the using different bands and vegetation indices, how the Sentinel was able to predict the 
nitrogen content you can also see from  here. So, this was a very good study which shows the 
application of both hyperspectral remote sensing and multispectral remote sensing for plant nutritional status identification.  (Refer Slide Time:  12:20)  
 
So, guys, let us also discuss another applica tion where these hyperspectral remote sensing 
and visible near infrared diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. I t is a point hyperspectral sensor , 
we have discussed this in our week 5 in details. So, hyperspectral remote sensing gives us the 
special information  along with the spectral information.  
However, the VisNIR DRS  is also a hyperspectral instrument, but it is it gives us only the 
spectral information not the special information. Now, these in this research which is 
published in 2008 Gomez et a l they have  used soil samples and they collected the soil 
samples and they have collected the VisNIR spectra and from 350 to 2500 nanometer and 
also the Hyperion data was collected.  
So, you can see this is in Hyperion data , Hyperion images for the study area. So, they have 
collected the soil spectra using a point porta ble spectrophotometer that is AgriSpec and the 
same time they have gathered they have collected the Hyperion data for that particular region 
also and they predicted the soil organic carbon by partial le ast squares regression using both 
the proximal and remote sensing spectra.  
So, both of them are hyperspectral data, Hyperion is a remote sensing platform however, 
these VisNIR spectroscopy is a proximal sensor approach. So, using the both the spectra, the y 
have tried to predict the soil organic carbon and the spectral resolution.  (Refer Slide Time:  14:23)  
 
So, you can see in this picture, this is the original VisNIR the spectrometer spectroradiometer 
spectra and this is the Hyperion spectrum. And when t he AgriSpec spectrum that is VisNIR 
DRS Spectrum was resampled as per the Hyperion spectral resolution, so hyper based on the 
Hyperion spectral resolution, if we resample the data of these AgriSpec spectrum we wi ll get 
this type of curve.  
So, in this three condition they have tried to predict the model using these three condition, 
they have utilized this AgriSpec spectrum, they have utilized this Hyperion spectrum and also 
they have utilized this AgriSpec spectrum with the Hyperion spectral resolution. So, in these 
three condition they tried to predict the soil organic carbon using the partial least squares regression.  
And they have seen that the spectral resolution of the proximal and remote sensing data did not affect prediction accuracy. However, predic tion of SOC using the Hyperion spectra was 
were less accurate than those of AgriSpec data that is sampled to similar resolution as the 
Hyperion spectra.  
So, if we compare the Hyperion spectrum and if we compare the AgriSpec spectrum with the 
Hyperion spec tral resolution will get better accuracy in this case, where these AgriSpec 
spectroradiometer spectra was resampled to with the with the Hyperion spectral resolution . 
And finally, they have predicted the soil organic carbon and they have mapped the soil organic carbon using these Hyperion data and which shows  the enough similarity with the 
field observation.  
So, this also shows guys , how we can utilize these both satellite as well as air bone as well as 
point hyperspectral data using this point spectroradi ometers to predict important parameters 
of the soil and ultimately we can upscale it to create the map of that particular property or the 
special variability map of that particular property for that region. So, now, you have a clear 
idea, how we can utiliz e this hyperspectral remote sensing data for characterizing the crop as 
well as soil, okay guys.  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:16)  
 
Now, we are going to discuss another emerging and important application of hyperspectral 
data that is hype rspectral imaging. Now, here we wi ll see another case study of hyperspectral 
imaging for tobacco nicotine estimation, that tobacco is a very important crop and tobacco 
nicotine estimation is traditionally done in the laboratories using the cumbersome chemical 
method, time consumi ng chemical methods. So, here, we have tried to use this hyperspectral 
imaging for tobacco nicotine estimation.  (Refer Slide Time:  18:05)  
 
It involves different types of chemical reaction in the process, color development and all 
these things. So, our group tried to develop an alternative way to measure the nicotine content 
of the tobacco and which will have a huge application in the tobacco industry.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:29)  
 
So, this is the flowchar t of the, how we took the hyperspectral images and how we process 
the images for tobacco nicotine content. So initially, the tobacco was powdered and sieved. 
And we have used 57 different types of tobacco samples, we scan them using this spacing FX  
17 hyperspectral camera, which is a spectral range from 90 0 to 700 nanometer and we took the scan using the spacing lab scanner 40 by 20 centimeter dimension, and we took the scan 
from upside. And after taking the scan, we did some kind of spectral preprocessing .  
At the same time, we measured the nicotine contai ned of those samples using the standard 
laboratory estimate. And after we did some kind of spectral processing or image processing, 
we extracted the average reflectance spectra and then we tried to predict the original nicotine 
content or the laboratory nicotine content using those spectral information to develop a 
prediction model.  
So first, we have developed, w e collected this hyperspectral data cube and from this data 
cube, we have isolated the images and then from images, we have selected the region of  
interest or  ROI. From these ROI, we did some processing to get the final image and then we 
have got the average reflectance spectra, and then we use to use this spectrum to predict the 
nicotine content.  
(Refer Slide Time:  20:25)  
  
So, the first what we  did actually, so, first after taking the image using these hyperspectral 
sensor, these RGB image representation of the hyperspectral image was used to derive these 
region of interest. So, you can see here this is the region of interest, these RGB digital images 
was converted to gre yscale image and subsequently binarized using the im2bw  function to 
remove these background.  
So, here, you can see here, these white patches are basically showing the these white patches 
and these black patches are showing the r egion of interest and that discarded background. So, 
these white patches are of importance to us, but these black patches are not interest are not 
our target.  
So, after we selected these ROI or region of interest, these ROI was eroded with a disk 
shaped s tructuring element with a neighborhood of 29 by 29 pixels to restrict the contribution 
of the spectral information of a neighboring background pixel to this process. So, after we 
selected these ROI, we did the final pre processing using the structuring elem ent to get the 
final processed image with a well -defined  ROI.  (Refer Slide Time:  21:56)  
 
And this these ROI selection was  facilitate the elimina tion of the interference of non-
representative pixel in the average spectrum. And the mean spectrum data was collected for 
each sample and calculated by considering the spectra of the corresponding ROI. So, from 
these each ROI, we have calculated their mean reflectance spectrum and we utilize these 
other means reflectance spectrum o r mean reflectance spectra for all the 557 samples and 
they were used for predicting the nicotine content.  
So, what we did again? We took the scan, we develop these data cube from this data cube we 
took the RGB representation of the HSI, then we did the binary segmentation to get the R OI 
and then from these ROI, we use the structuring and structuri ng element to get the final 
preprocess ROI.  (Refer Slide Time:  22:52)  
 
So, you can see here this is the raw image at a wavelength of 14 96 nanometer . This is the 
ROI of tobacco powder sample s obtained by thresholding operation and then we have done 
this is the final process ROI for calculating the mean spectra. So, this from this final process 
ROI we have calculated the mean spectrum to further for further machine learning based 
prediction model.  
(Refer Slide Time:  23:19)  
  
So, this is the hyperspectral these are main spectra from each of these ROI or each of these 
samples , one thing is clear that with the increase in nicotine content, we can see that 
reflectance is getting decreased. So, t his is one pattern we have seen with the increase in 
nutrient content, we are getting reduction in their reflectance pattern, but more or less their 
reflectance shapes are same.  
And then we have tried 3 different regression model , one is actually 4 different regression 
model , one is partially squares regression, second is support vector regression, third is 
random forest regression. And the fourth one is partial least squares regression with VIP  
selected wavelengths, we are going to discuss this later.  
So, once we deal, we have seen that the for the partial least squares regression we have 
selected, we have plotted the 50 Latin factors and we have selected we have identified that 
the optimum number of Latin factors first will discuss Latin factor was 8. So , 8 Latin factor 
was used for par tially squares regression model.  (Refer Slide Time:  24:27)  
 
Then we did the principal component analysis for selecting the important principal 
components and then we included that for random forest regression. So, we hav e, using the 
principal component analysis you can see this a PC s scree plot and also we are selected 10 
principal component analysis for subsequent random forest regression.  
(Refer Slide Time:  24:49)  
 
And also, we have also identified the important as ef fective wavelengths by based on their 
VIP score, VIP stands for variable importance in projection and these variable importance in 
projection was selected based on the VIP value of greater than 1.  So, after we select this VIP value of greater than 1,  we h ave selected 5  important wa velengths 
that is 976 nanometer , 1452 nanometer , 1575 nanometer , 1592 nanometer , 1698 nanometer . 
So, why we go for the VIP method? T here is when we take when you consider all the 
wavelengths , of course, our model becomes complex.  
So, it is always desirable from the model parsimony point of view that, if you have two 
models side by side, you will always go and both these models are giving you the similar 
performance, you will always select the one which is giving you the which are  having the 
lower complexity that means, if you have two models and both of them are giving you the similar accuracy, you will select the model with the less number of predictors that means, you 
always try to simplify your model for better interpretation.  
So, here also instead of using all the wavelengths in the traditional PLSR  model, we have 
tried to select those 5 wavelengths to the VIP method and then we combine them in the PLSR  
and try to compare their accuracy.  
(Refer Slide Time:
 26:31)  
 
So, this i s the model accuracy comparison, we ca n clearly see that the partial  squares 
regression model , random forest regression models , support vector  regression all of them are 
more or les s satisfactory is in comparison. I f we compare the test results of course, PLSR  
gives us the best result with R squared values of 0.93 in the test set. And in case of lever or  
not cross validation also we are getting the highest R squared for PLSR . But if we consider 
the PLSR -VIP also it is also giving us very close R square value.  So, given the less  number of bands, that is only 5 bands in case of this VIP method and in 
case of traditional PLSR  methods, we are using around 130 bands. So, compare one model 
with 130 bands and another model with only 5 bands and we are getting almost similar 
accuracy. Then based on this discussion, we have seen that we this we will select this PLSR -
VIP method for future characterization of nicotine content using the partial least squares 
regression model and hyperspectral imaging.  
So, this is one very good example this result  is recently published in Journal of bio- systems 
engineering and it shows a novel application of hyperspectral imaging for predicting that 
tobacco nicotine content.  
(Refer Slide Time:  28:05)  
 
So, these are the predicted model predicted values, you can see that PLSR -VIP method and 
full PLSR  method, we are getting almost close accuracy in terms of FR square  value. There 
are certain other approaches also where hyperspectral imaging was used for mapping the soil 
nitrogen, one of these research was published by Xu et al  in 2021 where they have used they 
have collected some soil profiles .  
And they have used these hyperspectral i mager scanning system that is Im spector V 10 E to 
collect these HSI data c ube. After they collect these HSI  data cube and the simultaneously 
they made some laboratory analysis . After they did the laboratory analyses of different 
parameter like total nitrogen , availab le nitrogen, ammonium  nitrogen, nitrate  nitrogen and a 
microbial biomass nitrogen.  So, they got  these reference results and after extracting the spectra from the region of interest, 
they combine these result y and x spectra by these target parameters and these ROI spectra by 
using different types of machine Latin  machine learning techniques like par tially squares 
regression, artificial neural  regression , Cubist , extreme learning machine, KNN, S VMR , 
XGB oost.  
So, using different types of calibration validation and then the identified the best model and 
then they have produced the nitrogen maps. So, you can see this is another novel application 
where hyperspectral imaging has been utilized for mapping from the soil nitrogen content .  
(Refer Slide Time:  29:57)  
 
And other research was published Jia et al  in 2017, where they have used these hyperspectral 
images of the soil samples and from three different types of soil and after they collected the 
soil they did some kind of image processing like once they collected the image they have 
done such image correction and then identifying the region of interest, then they have done 
some successive projection algorithm and after that they have classified the images using the 
support vector machine and then they have finally predict develop the prediction model using 
the partial least squares regression.  (Refer Sl ide Time:  30:41)  
 
So, using the partial least squares regression they try to predict the different types of soil 
properties and also you can see here these are the reflectance average spectrum for each of 
the soil type . There are three different soil type, paddy soil, red soil and seashore saline soil 
for each of the soil type, they have got these average spect rum ranging between 975 to 1645 
nanometer , and you can clearly see the difference of their spectral pattern and also they have 
done some grouping of  183 soil sample based on the Fisher LDA we have already discussed 
what is linear discriminant analysis using the first 4 principal components of full spectrum .  
(Refer Slide Time:  31:29)  
  
 
And they have utilizing those utilizing these different types of model, they have classified the 
different types of soil using they do classified different types of soil and you can see for three 
different types of soil and you can see their classification accuracy, which is quite high . 
Using different types of input  variables like full spectrum, effective wavelengths, textural 
features and effective wavelengths and textual features.  
So, they combined different types of input variables in different fashions, and then they used 
the support vector machine model to clas sify the soil types, three different soil types , red soil, 
seashore saline soil, as well as paddy soil and they got the high classification accuracy and 
using the partially squares regression they tried to predict different soil properties also.  So, this is how the guys, these are some of the examples where hyperspectral imaging could 
be an important tool for the upcoming scientist in this domain of crop as well as soil who can 
explore these ideas for further cost effective as well as rapid identification of both plant and 
crop as well as soil properties .  
You can utilize these features, which you can extract from the hyperspectral images for 
predicting different parameters of crop as well as soil and also you can do some classification 
for different types of crop properties as well as you can also classify different types of crop 
based on certain properties.  
So, guys, I hope that you have you have gathered some knowledge ’s important knowledge ’s 
or insights of hyperspectral remote sensing and how nowadays people are using these four 
different types of soil and crop application. O f course, our time is limited, and we cannot go 
beyond that, but there are plenty of information of hyperspectral remote sensing which are available in the internet.  
So, please go a head and explore those ideas and see how you can utilize those novel ideas 
into your own research. T hese are the references which I have used, please explore more 
papers there are numerous papers on application of hyperspectral remote sensing in 
agricultur e, both soil and crop, please go ahead and get more and more confidence because 
the tools which are needed for understanding these we have already more or less discussed. And so, you will get more and more confidence while exploring these new new researche s, 
research ideas and you can develop your own research ideas also.  (Refer Slide Time:  34:43)  
 
So, thank you guys for first for being here. And let us wrap up this week 9 and from next 
week onwards we wi ll be starting the discussion on digital soil mapp ing. Thank you.  
 