Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop  Management   
Professor Somsubhra  Chakraborty 
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department   
Indian Institute  of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 53  
Digital  Soil Mapping  with Continuous  Variables  (Contd.) 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 0:29)   
 
Welcome friends  to this third  lecture of week  11 of this NPTEL online  certification  course  on 
machine learning for soil and crop management . And in this week  our topic  is digital soil 
mapping with  continuous  variables .  
So, we are trying to see how we can model  the continuous  variable starting  from  the simple  
linear  regression  to multiple  linear  regression  and advanced  machine learning models  using is 
specific software, that is R, we have  seen the basic R commands  already , we have  seen the 
some  explor atory  analysis  with R and also we have  seen the basics  GIS operations  in our of 
course  these are very  basics , we can do a lot of things  with  R.  
And also we have seen the mass  preserving spline  and we have  also seen the how to extract  
how to stack  differen t covariates  for digital soil mapping and also how to extract  the 
covariates  value  for particular  point  observation, how to intercept  those  values  we have  seen 
in our previous  lectures . 
Now,  in this lecture, we are going to explore  some  more  exploratory data analysis  and will 
see their interpretation  and also will see how to do trigging interpolation  using R, because  
whenever  our major  objective  for digital soil mapping is producing maps , using different  types  of special  inference models , but if you do not know  how to execute geostatistics  the 
there will not  be any, there  will not  be any fruitful  result  from  the machine learning  models . 
So, whatever  we do, whatever  prediction we make  using machine learning  models , we have  
to map that and for mapping we need  to understand some  geostatistical operations , of course  
these will be again  I am telling  you guys , there are these are very basics  and you need  to 
understand if you want  to be a master  on this geostatistical or digital soil mapping 
applications  you have  to go through several  other  literature  to enrich  yourself , but I am just 
trying to  expose  you to  this new  domain using this  software . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:23)   
 
So, these are the topics , the concepts  which  are going to cover  using R, that is exploratory 
data analysis  using R  and also we are going to  see the Kriging using R.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  3:35)   
 
Now,  these are the some  of the keywords , which  we are going to see in this lecture. Kriging, 
then normality  test, then Skewness , Kurtosis  and Variogram . So, we have  already  seen 
Variogram  before, but  we will see how  to execute  the Variogram  in this lecture. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:59)   
 
So, before  going to  discuss before  going to  execute the  Skewness  and kurtosis  of any data set , 
let us see what  is what  are these  statistics . So, Skewness  basically  shows  us the distortion  or 
asymmetry  that deviates  from  the symmetrical bell curve  or normal  distribution  in a set of 
data, suppose  you have a set of data and you want  to see whether  they match  with a normal  
distribution  or they are deviating  from  a normal  distribution . So, in that case we are going to 
see the  Skewness  of the data set . So, here you can see that this is the Skewness  0 that means  it follows  a proper  normal  
distribution  and here you see that is it is a posit ive Skewness  distribution  and it is the 
negative  Skewness  distribution. Now,  in both this condition, these are deviating  from  the 
original  normal  distribution.  
So, what  are the  value  of Skewness ? So, if  the Skewness  value  is greater  than  1 or less than  1, 
then it indicates  a highly skewed  distribution , so that deviates  significantly  from  a normal  
distribution  and value  between  0.5 to 1 and minus  0.5 to minus  1 is moderately  skewed  and 
value  between  minus  0.5 to 0.5 indicates  that the distribution  is fairly  symmetrical . So, this is 
about  the Skewness . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  5:39)   
 
And Kurtosis  is basically  shows  the sharpness  of the peak  of a frequency  distribution  curve . 
So, there are three different  condition one is called  platykurtic  and then another  is mesokurtic  
and then another  is leptokurtic . So, mesokurtic  generally  follows  the normal  distribution , 
whereas  platykurtic  is generally  blunt  and leptokurtic  has higher  peak  than the normal  
distribution . 
So, what  is the implication  of Kurtosis?  Because , Kurtos is identifies  whether  the tails of a 
given distribution  contain  the extreme values  or not, so this is how this Kurtosis  is important . 
If the value  is greater  than plus 1, then the distribution  is too peaked  likewise  if the Kurtosis  
is less than minus  1, it indicates  the distribution  is too flat. So, you do not need  these two 
extremes , so you already  know  so you know  the ideal  distribution  is the this mesokur tic 
distribution  ok guys . (Refer  Slide  Time:  6:50)   
 
So, let us go ahead  and see another  the semi  variance you already  know  that semi  variance is 
the average variance between  any pair of the sampling  point , it calculates  at semi  variance . 
So, this is the average semi  variance and here this is the formula  of calculating  the semi  
variance 1 by 2 m, then summation  then s x i minus  x x i plus h squares , here this s is a value  
of attribute  under  investigation, x is  the coordinates  of the points . 
And then h is the lag distance  or distance  between  the point  pairs , m is the number  of pairs  of 
sampling  points . So, this is how you calculate the semi  variance and then you plot the semi  
variogram  or variogram . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  7:45)  
  
Now,  let us go and ahead  and see how we can execute this thing in R, so we have  already  
covered  this, the basics  of GIS and some basic data exploratory data analysis  in our previous  week . So, we will do, will see more  exploratory data analysis  in this course . So, will be 
dealing  with this edge  roi covariate underscore c dot txt, which  we have  already  created  in 
our last lecture and it is already  saved  in our working folder . So, we  will start  from  there.  
So, first we will read the table  that is and we will and this table  is edge  roi soil covariate  dot 
underscore  c dot txt. So, let us run this, so this edge roi, so let us see how it looks  like, so this 
is h dot that there are 341 observation of 15 variables , so we know  that this i d easting  
northing, then the organic  carbon  values  for all the depths , then soil depth, then elevation  t w 
i r a d k lens and v 3 lenses  before . So, it is basically  the intersection  of the point  observation  
as well  as the stacked  covariate we  already  know  that. 
Now,  in the next step, so we know  this is the structure , but if we want  to see the structure  and 
their data type we can see here that id is a character  variable, then easting , northing is integer  
are integers  and then all other  are numerical  variable except  the soil depth which  is another  
integer . So, suppose  now we are interested  on interested  to deal with only the top 0 to 5 
centimetre  depth.  
So, the summary  statistics  of this top 0 to 5 centimetre  depth, if you want  to see and at the 
same time if we round off the value  to the to 1 decimal  point , then we will use this round  
function followed by this summary  function and up to which  digit you want  to round up these  
values  you can give here. So, here we are going to round of these values  up to 1 decimal , so 
we are giving 1 here, you  can give  it 2, 2, decimals  also. 
So, here you can see that this gives  us the summary  statistics  of our data minimum is 0.3 and 
first quartile  11.9, medium  value  is 16.4, mean  value  is 18.9, third  quartile  is 23.1 and 
maximum value  is 93.1.  
Now,  for the next set of analysis , for example identifying the Skewness  and Kurtosis, we are 
going to install these packages , we are going to install these packages  like f basics  and nor 
test. So, f basics  are the, f basics  contains  some , a f basics  contains  some  normal  statistical 
analysis , which  and nor test is basically  helps  in normality  test of the data. So, I have  already  
installed  this, so I am not going to further install, I request  you to install these two packages . 
And then  let us call this library  F basics  and library  nor test. 
So, these two required  packages  have been  uploaded and then let us see the Skewness  of this 
0 to 5 centimetre  depth . So, if you see you use, we use the sample  skew  function, so we can 
see this is 0.19,  so it is moderately  positively  Skewness , it is showing  the moderately  positive  Skewness , it is not perfect , it is not very highly deviation is there, but you can see some  
moderate deviation positive  deviation. If you want  to see the Kurtosis , again  the function is 
sample  cut and you can  see here we  are using this  0 to 5 centimetre  depth.  
Now,  so you can see here the Kurtosis  is also pretty  high, it is more  than 1.30. So, if we want  
to test the normality , now normality  can be test by different  test, Shapiro  wilk test is there,  
Anderson darling test is there. So, there are different  types  of test for identifying the 
normality , whether  the data set  is normal  or not. 
So, here we are going to use the Anderson darling  test, so the function we are going to use is 
called  ad dot test and then you give the particular  data set and specify  the variable. So, here it 
is 0 to 5 centimetre , this  is the depth variable, so  here w e are going to  see the  ad test value . 
So, remember  here, if the p value  is less than 0.05 at 95 percent  confidence interval , then 
Anderson darling  test shows  non normal  data, if  it is more  than  0.05, then  it shows  the normal  
data. In other  words , if the state statistics  is less than it will show  normality , but if it is high 
then it will show  deviation from  a normal  distribution . So, here we are getting  it is pretty  low 
then 0.05, so  we can assume  that it is not following  a normal  distribution . 
Now,  let us plot this untransformed data or original  data and let us see how they looks  like. 
So, we are going to use this hist function for producing the histogram  and then we are going 
to produce  this q q normality  plot and then we are going to add this q q line also. So, let us do 
that and let us see how this appears . So, if we do this, then you will see that histogram  of this 
data set is appearing and also here you can see the normal  q q plot and the, from  the normal  q 
q plot and the histogram  you can clearly  see that they are skewed , they are not following the 
normal  distribution  and so for that  we need  to do some  kind of  transformation .  
So, of course  you can see here the data is not arranged  in the 45 degree lining  the q q plot, so 
that shows  the deviation from  the normal  distribution. So, that gives  us the indication  that we 
should go ahead  with data transformation . So, what  type of transformation , there  are different  
types  of transformation  we have  already  covered , we can go with the natural  log 
transformation , we can go with the power  transformation , we can take square  root, so 
different  types  of transformations  are there . 
Now,  let us do the logarithmic  transformation , so let us see now the Skewness  of the data 
when  we transform  it using the natural  logarithm  and you can see here, now the Skewness  has reduce . So, earlier  the Skewness  was 0.19 and right  now it is 0.03, so we are able to 
reduce the  Skewness  by taking the  natural  log of  the data set .  
So, let us see the Kurtosis  also, so if we use this same function sample  Kurt and we use this 
logarithmic  transformed  value  of this 0 to 5 centimetre, let us see it is 1.20, so earlier  it was 
1.30, now it is 1.20, so that shows  there is a quite  improvement , so we are able to make  it to 
reduce this value  of Kurtosis  and in other  words  we are try, we were able to reduce the peak  
of the distribution , so hopefully by running this ad test now it will be possible  to see our data 
is following a  normal  like distribution . 
So, let us run this thing again  and you can clearly  see, so earlier  the value was 10, now it is 
1.82, so you can see that yes it is although it is not perfect  because we are not getting  the now 
p value  greater  than 0.05, but it is still very, high than the earlier  one, where  we are getting  
2.2 10 to the power  minu s 16, but here you can see the p value  has considerably increase at 
the same time  the test statistics  has considerably decreased  from  10 to  1.82,  so that shows  that 
this transformation  helped us  for making the  data more  normal  like. 
Now,  let us see the plot using this  transform  data, so we are going to  rerun  the same  script  but 
this time using the logarithmic  converted  data and let us see how it looks  like, so you can see 
clearly . Now,  the histogram  is showing more  normal  like distribution  and here you can see 
the normal  q q plot, which  is having the q q line is showing the that most  of the observations  
are lying along this q q line. So, that means  if we are taking the data transformation  helps  in 
the conversion of  the non-normal  data to  normal  data.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:41)   
  F
 
Now,  the next step is so we have  we are done  with the exploratory data analysis , next step is 
to do some  special  interpolation . Now,  thus for special  interpolation  it is very important  that 
you should create a grid of points  upon which  you are going to make the interpolation  and 
these grid of points , for example for doing the special  interpolation  you require  it is a study 
area or  boundary of the study area.  
So, how to get that boundary, how to get, so for that you need  to produce a grid of points  
upon which  the interpolation  will be made and it can be done  by extracting  the coordinates  
from  either  of the covariates , 90 meter  resolution raster , which  have further  ro edge roi, 
because  in the edge  roi data we have seen edge roi covariate  data we have  seen there are 4, 
there are  there are  5 covariates , elevation  t w i r a d k, then  landsat  b 3 landsat  b 4.  So, among these five all these are having same resolution, so we can take any of them  for 
example and we can extract  their grid, because whatever  prediction model  will be built, they 
will be built based  on those  covariate data, because these covariate values  will be the 
predictor  for predicting a  particular  soil property. So, we  can check  any one of them . 
So, let us consider  this elevation  and then from  this elevation  we are going to extract  those  
cells which  for which  we have  the values , excluding the cells for which  we have missing  
values . So, after extracting  the cells we are going  to extract  their coordinates  and store  at as a 
we know  will store  their coordinates  and then we are going to interpolate  using Kriging or 
other  methods  for that graded  region. So, you will see that for that we need  to do some  kind 
of operations  I am going to  show  you.  
Now,  for these geostatistical applications  operations  you need  to install this package called  
gstat  and then once  you install this package, then you can call this library  raster  and then 
library  ithir again . So, we  are going to  deal  with  one of the raster  file. So, let  us first call these  
data edge  roi covariates  and then we are going to extract  their the cell values  of those  of the 
elevation  raster  file.  
So, we are going to select  first the elevation  raster  file, then we are going to see for which  
cells it has the values  and then we are going to extract  those  cell values  and after that we are 
going to extract  their coordinates  and save it as a g x y file and then we are going to use this g 
x y file, which  contains  the coordinates  for producing the interpolation  of the organic  carbon 
values  for 0 to 5 centimetre using the normal  Kriging interpolation  or any other  Kriging  
interpolation . 
So, here you can see the script  which  we are going to use for doing this, so you can see first 
we are going to create  a data frame  and we are going to name  it a temporary  data team  D. So, 
data frame  by extracting  the cell numbers  from  the elevation  file and then we are going to get 
the values  get the pixel  for which  we have the values , because there  will be some  pixel  with 
no values . So, we are going to get those  values  for which  pixels  for which  we have  the 
elevation  data and then from  there we are going to keep  only the complete  cases  we are going  
to remove  all those  missing  cases .  
And then we are going  to extract  the cell numbers  and then we are going to extract the 
coordinates  from  those  pixels . So, here for that you can see the for the function is x, y from  
cell, so we first select  the cell for which  we have  data by excluding the cell for which  we do 
not have  the data and after that we take we extract  the cell numbers  and their spatial  coordinates  by and then create a data frame  and give it a name called  g x y and this g x y will 
be used for and this x y g these  coordinates  will be used for further interpolation using 
inverse  distance interpolation  or Krigin g interpolation . 
So, let us start with inverse distance  interpolation, sometime  we call it inverse  distance  
waiting.  So, IDI and IDW  are used synonymously, so for this IDI operation  we are going to 
first call this library  gstat  and then we are going to instruct R that you should understand that 
these x and y's the second  and third  column are  the x, y coordinates . So, we  are specifying  the 
observed data with  their  location  and then  we are going to  use this IDW  for interpolation .  
So, the function is simple  IDW,  we are going to use this log of edge  roi data 0 to 5 centimetre  
and then our locations  are of course  x and y, we have  already  instructed  R and our data is 
edge  dot dat and then our new data for which  we are going to interpolate  is g x y remember  
this g x y is the coordinate . So, for this region of interest  we are going to interpolate  and then 
idp, idp stands  for inverse  distance waiting  parameter . 
So, here we are going to use a default  value of 2, but you can use, you can trial an error  with 
different  other  values  also. So, basically  we are this is the function and arguments  for this 
IDW  and let us see how it looks  like. So, we are going to run that, now remember  this idp 
that is the for which  we have  taken  the value  of 2, this inverse  distance wattage  parameter  the 
default  value is 2, but you can play with it and as we do not have, we do not get any 
uncertainty  estimate  from  IDI and IDW,  we cannot  optimize  this parameter . So, basically  it is 
a trial and  error.  
Now,  that is why IDI is not any more  utilize d in research  and applications , we are we more  
we are nowadays  more  focus  towards  using the  Kriging and  the advanced  variants  of Kriging.  
So, this is how you do the IDI prediction, now you have  predicted  this but the next step is to 
produce  the plot. So, for plot remember  you have  to create  a raster , because only unless  you 
create a raster  file how you are going to plot, so right  now it is in a data frame , so this data 
frame , now this data frame  we have  to convert  this data frame  into raster  file. So, the function  
we are going to  use is raster  from  xyz. 
So, here our data frame is IDW  dot p r e d, so if you click  on it this in the environment  this 
has been  already  created . So, you see x and  y and then variable 1 predicted  and their  variance.  
Now,  since  IDW  cannot have  any variance,  so we are getting  only the predicted  values . So, 
now we are going  to use this first to third  column of course fourth  column has no data values  or is missing , so we are going to use all the third , first, second , third  columns  showing the x 
and y and  predicted  IDI prediction and  then  for all  the observation.  
So, we are going to create the raster  file and once  we create  the raster  file, let us plot this 
raster  by using the simple  plot function. So, you can see this is the IDI predicted  interpolated  
map of organic  carbon  for 0 to 5 centimetre . So, this is how you do the IDI or idp 
interpolation . 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 27:01 )  
 
The next let me just remove  it, so that we can get fresh  plots . So, now the next is Kriging, so 
for Kriging first we are going to develop a an experimental  variogram , because  the Kriging based  on variogram  model , first we have  to develop this variogram  model  and based  on that 
the Kriging will interpolate  the values . So, first you can see we are going to use a 
exper imental variogram , we are going to use some  experimental  variogram  by giving  some  
default  parameters . 
So, here you can see this variogram  is going to develop using this log converted  0 to 5 
centimetre  and then locations  are x and y data set is edge  dot dat, width  is 400, so this width  
parameter  is giving you the idea at which  distance  the interval  you want  your point  pairs  to to 
you want  to average  the point  pairs  to calculate the sami  variance . So, this is the width  
parameter , this will be a crassy  variogr am and the cut off value  we are giving the default  
value  of 10 thousand.  
So, this is an experimental  variogram  once  we have  this experimental  variogram , then we are 
going to fit this experimental  variogram  using a model . So, here we are going to use this 
exponential  model  as you can see here E x p and so once  we fit this, this experimental  model  
with exponential  model . 
So, now you can see we are going to fit our variogram  using this experimental  model  and our 
selected  model , you can of course you can try this with different  other  models  also, like 
spherical  model , bezel  model , there are different  types  of circular  model  and then you can try 
you can compare the results  also, but here I am showing you the example  using the 
exponential  model .  
So, you can run it and you can see the model  results , of course  the model  results  you can see 
this is the nugget  value  0.10 and  then  exponential  model  the p sill stands  for partial  sill. So, of  
course  this is partial  sill is 0.07, the total sill will be nugget  plus partial  sill, so the total sill 
will be  0.17 and  the range is  1010 meter . 
So, we can see here, so if we want  to see the variogram  how do we want  to plot the 
variogram , simple  we are going to use this plot function with v g m 1 and our model  is model  
1, which  is a exponential  model . So, you can see this is a variogram , of course  from  the 
model  we can see it is the nugget  value  is 0.10, which  is quite  high and then the partial  sill 
will be  0.7, so  the total sill will be  10 plus  0.7 it is  0.07, so  it will be  0.17. 
 So, of course  you can see somewhere here we are getting  the sill and the range  parameter  as 
you can see here will be somewhere here,  so that shows  that this is how you can create the variogram  by plotting  the semi  variance along with respect  to the distance  between  the data 
pairs . 
Now,  once  we have created  this variogram , next is producing the prediction values  using the 
Kriging interpolation . So, this Kriging interpolation new data again  g x y for which  we are 
going to predict  model  in our case this model  1 exponential  model . So, let us run it and once 
we have  it once  we run this Kriging prediction, then the next step will be let me just remove  
this, we will do this later, but here you can see after the Kriging prediction we are going to 
create the raster  again from  x y z and also simultaneously  we are going to produce  the raster  
of the Kriging variance also. 
Now,  once  we have  created  you can see there are two rasters  we have created  one Krig dot 
raster  dot p which  is a raster  from  x y z  and this is for the  predicted  values  and this  is from  the 
variance. So, you can see not only we can show  the prediction but also we can show  the 
variance also. So, let us plot both of them  and let us see how they appear . So, you can clearly  
see that ordinary  Kriging predictions  will be there  at the same time ordinary Kriging variants  
you can also see simultaneously. So, this is how you can do the Kriging prediction and 
ordinary and  simultaneously  you can  have  the ordinary  Kriging variance also. 
Now,  if you want  to know  the correlation  between  the target  property  and the covariates  you 
can go with this core function. So, let me show  you suppose  this is an logarithmic  of a 0 x 0, 
0 to 5 centimetre  data, so we have  already  and then let us call let us see their names , so these  
are the variables  which  were there  and then we want  to see the correlation  between  the 
logarithmic  converted  organic  carbon  for all the observation with the elevation  t w i r d k 
landsat  b 3 landsat  b 4. So, for with  the all the variables  if you want  to see then we  can clearly  
see the  elevation  t w i r a d k landsat  b 3, lands at b4.  
And so from  this we can see the correlation  of elevation  is highest  with the organic  carbon  
followed by the  t w i and in case of  r a d k landsat  b 3 landsat  b 4 we  are not getting  very  high  
correlation . So, this is how you can do the Kriging  interpolation , you can do IDI interpolation 
and then  you can  you can do exploratory data analysis .  
So, guys  I think that you have  learnt  something new in this lecture and now you will be able 
to produce  your extract  the grid points  and then do explorative  data analysis  and you can use 
IDI or Kriging to interpolate  the values . And then you can produce  the map and in case of 
Kriging you can produce  a map of prediction  at the same  time you can produce the map of 
the variance.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  33:53)   
 
So, this is the reference for this lecture again  and thank you for joining , let us meet  in our 
next lecture, where  we will start actual  model ling with the simple  linear  regression , multiple  
linear  regression  and so on so forth . Thank you guys  let us meet  in our next  lecture.  