Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop  Management  
Professor Somsubhra  Chakraborty 
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute  of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture 59  
Digital  Soil Mapping  with  Categorical  Variables  (Contd.) 
Welcome friends  to this 59th lecture of NPTEL online  certification  course  of Machine  
Learning  for Soil and Crop Management.  In this week  we are talking  about  Digital Soil 
Mapping with the Categorical  Variables.  In our previous  lectures,  we have already  discussed  
about  different  types of categorical  models  like multinomial logistic  model, then C5 decision  
tree and  we have seen  what  are the  important  steps  of developing the  random  forest.   
We have seen how these  bootstrap samples  are developed  for creating  a tree in the random  
fores t and what  is M try and what  are the features  of this random  forest  model  and then how 
you know  out of bag sample  is being used for validating  the model  performance  we have  
already  seen.   
Now,  in this lecture first we are going  to run the script , R script  of random  forest  and then we 
are going to discuss  another  very important  topic  that is combining the regression  as well as 
classification  model. So, that is called  combined model. Now,  let us first see how to execute  
the random  forest  codes  and then  we will go for the  combined model  discussion.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:57)  
 
So, these are the concepts  which  we are going to cover  in this lecture  apart  from  running the 
script  of the random  forest  regression  model  categorical  model, we are also going to discuss  
the combined continuous  and categorical  model.  (Refer Slide Time: 02:12)  
 
So, in this lecture these are the keywords  like Combined model , Soil Horizon , AP horizon, 
Quantile  regression  forest , nnet these are the 5 keywords  which  we are going to discuss  in 
this lecture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:25)  
  
 
  
For executing  the random  forest  classification  model. Again, you have  to call the library  
random  forest,  we have already  installed  this random  forest  previously, so I am just going to, 
call this library  random  forest  and as you know  our target  is terron . And then we are using 
these covariates  like Altitude Above Channel Network, Drainage Index,  Light Insulation, 
TWI, G amma  Total Count all these for predicting the terron class  and our data is of course,  
the training  data.  And here you can see we are specifying the ntree that is we are going to 
build 500 number  of trees with  a number  of mtry equal  to 5.  
So, in each tree random  tree, we are going to use 5 randomly selected  features  for splitting  
criteria  for identifying the splitting  criteria.  So, here you can see the mtry is 5 and ntree is 
500. So, let us just run it and once  we run it, let us see the output  of the random  forest  model  
diagnostics. So, we are using this print  function to see the model  output  and you can see here 
the, this is the confusion matrix  for all the 12 classes.  And of course,  the class  header  is given 
here.   
Now,  the output  if we want  to check  the output  of the relative importance  of each of these 5 
covariates,  which  we are using like AACN, Dr ainage  Index, Light Insulation and then TWI 
and a Gamma  Total Count these 5 we want  to see their importance  in the classification.  
Again, we are going to use this important  function and then we are going to see that 
according  to the mean  decrease in Gini impurity  criteria,  you can see here that TWI  is having  
the highest  impact  on this model, random  forest  categorical  model  followed by Altitude 
Above Channel N etwork  and then  Drainage Index  and Gamma  Total Count.  (Refer Slide Time: 04:43)  
 
 
  
 
 So, now we have  predicted  the importance  we have  seen the importance  of all the variables.  
Now, the next step is to use the prediction of the classes.  So, for the prediction  of the class,  
we are going to use this type equal  to response  and then we are going to use the same model  
to see the  prediction of  all the classes.   
So, you can see that the 787 observation will have  the fifth terron and then 267th will have 
the eighth terron and then 623 will be having the fourth  terron and so on. And then we are 
going to see the goodness  of fit for the calibration  samples.  So, you can see here we are 
predicting based  on the training samples,  the predicted  values,  and at the same time,  we are 
going to  run this goofcat  function to  see the  goodness  of fit statistics.   
So, here you can see that this is the confusion matrix.  And of course,  the overall  accuracy  
then produce r’s accuracy  and users accuracy and also the Kappa  coefficient.  So, it looks  like 
from  the calibration  model  the model  is almost  perfect.  Now, to check  whether  this 
calibration  model  is okay  or not, we are going to use the categorical  validation or goodness  of 
fit of the validation  data.  So, we are going to use these validation  data that is minus  training  
samples .  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:25)  
  
 
  
And let us see how it looks  like. So, first we are going to predict  the values  and then we are 
going to see the goodness  of fit statistics.  So, will see that the overall  accuracy  is 47 and the 
Kappa  coefficient  is now 0.40. So, there is some  difference between  the calibration  statistics  
as well  as the validation  statistics.   
(Refer Slide Time: 07:09)  
  
 
 Now,  class  prediction  for predict  the class  again  we are going to  run those  scripts  which  using 
the, which  uses the hex colour  codes  as we have seen previous ly, so we are going to use this 
predict  function for the class  prediction and then we are going to map it, now we are going to 
add a new column called  raster in the raster attribute table.  So, you will see this rat you can 
see 12 observation of one variabl e. So, we are going to add these terrons with these 
indicators. So, if  we just click  on this,  you will see that .  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:52)  
 
 
Now,  rat will be developed  with two variables  one is the ID and the second  one is the terron . 
So, from  this ID and terron we can see that these are the indicators.  Now, let us go back  and 
then we have  assigned  these plot colours  using these hex colour  codes.  And then we are going to use this just like previously we are going to use this for predicting  and mapping  the 
properties  of the terrons in  the area of  interest.   
So, guys, what we have  done  again  just like previously, we have  first call the library  of 
random  forest  and we then fitted  the model  random  forest  model  specifying  the number  of 
trees  as well  as the num ber of features  and once we  have  done  that the model  will produce  the 
results  we have seen  they  are variable  importance.   
Apart  from  that, we have produced the predicted  based  on our calibration  data set, we have  
seen the categorical  goodness  of fit and then we have  seen the validation  goodness  of fit by 
predicting their values  and then using these goofcat  function after that, using this random  
forests  module, we have  prepared  the map and also we have included a new raster attribute 
table  where we have  indicated  the serial  numbers  of the terron classes  starting  from  Hunter  
Valley Terron 001 to Hunter Valley  Terron 012.  
And then we assign  them  each of these terron class  we have  assigned  them  a colour  using the 
hex colour  codes  and then we have plotted  them  just like here.  So, this shows  that how we 
can develop this soil classification  map using the random  forest  classification , random  forests  
classification  algorithm.   
(Refer Slide Time: 10:10)  
 
Now,  let us go back  to our Combine  Model, now, what  is the motivation  between  this 
Combine  Model, why we go for the combining this model  here,  I will show  you how we can 
combine  this categorical  model  and then we can also, how we can combine  this categorical  model  and continuous  model  together  in digital soil  mapping using different  types  of machine  
learning  algorithms.   
So, our objective  is to gain insight  into digital soil mapping approach  that uses a combination 
of both continuous  and categorical  attribute  modelling  first of all, we are going to see the 
occurrence that means  presence or absence of particular  soil horizon in a soil profile  and then 
if they are present  then we are going to measure  we are going to predict  their depth using a 
regression  model. So, first we are going to use the categorical  model, then we are going to 
use the continuous  model.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:20)  
 
 
Now,  for this, remember  guys, we have  to use some  files.  So, this file I will attach  in our 
class  forum,  please download it. So, if I go back  to our working folder,  in the working folder , you will see there is a file called  twoStep. So, this twoStep model, I will attach,  I will post it 
in our class  forum,  and then you can extract  this into your working folder.  So, if you open 
this twoStep folder,  you will see there is a data file and also there will be the observation, 
validation  observation as  well  as the validation  outputs.  
So, these will be required for different  operation  in this combined model. So, let me just go 
through and these codes  and walk  you through these codes  and let you know,  how we use 
these things. So, once  you download this code  of this twoStep, you will just download this 
folder  and extract  it in your  working folder,  so that you can  work  with it.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:25)  
 
  
 
So, let me just go ahead  and use the combined model. So, these are the scripts  for the 
combined model.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:42)  
 
 
 So, in this data set of this twoStep model, if you go to the twoStep model, you will see that 
there will be  HV horizons  data.   
(Refer Slide Time: 12:51)  
 
  
 
 So, these HV horizon data is basically  having 1342 soil profile  and code  description. So, we 
are going to use the, this data set and we are going to we want  to predict  the spatial  
distribution  of their occurrence specifically  on, for A1, A2, AP  and then B1, B21, B22, B23, 
B24, BC and C horizons  and where they are presents,  when  they are present  we are going  to 
predict  their  depth. So, let us  call all the required  libraries.   
So, the required  library  already  you know that  is ithir library  is required , the library  sp will be 
required , library  raster will be required. And then  you have  to install this  package called  a aqp 
once  you install then call this library  aqp, aqp is  basically  having the is useful  for doing some  
soil DSMs  calculations.  So, this is very important. Now,  once  we have , call this library  a aqp 
the next is calling  the library  random  forest  because we are going to use this random  forest  
model.  
So, let us call it after this we have  to set our working directory , we can either  manually  go 
and see set the twoStep folder  or we can give directly  the path of this twoStep folder  here I 
have  used the path of this twoStep folder  it is contained  within  this working folder  and for 
this I have used the set working directory  function. So, let me just go and select  this working  
directory  twoStep because all the maps  and all these  outputs  will be produced in this twoStep 
folder  now. Now, in the twoStep folder  there is HV underscore  horizon dot rda file. So, let us 
call these things  and then  let us view  the file.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:52)  
  
 
So, if you see this file, this data set of 1340 observation around so you will see there will be 
easting  northing and then A1, A2, AP, B1, B2 and B22, B23, B24, B3, BC, C and  all these  
horizons. S o, this 1 and  0 basically  shows  the presence and absence.  So, presence is denoted 
by 1 and  absence is  denoted  by 0.  
So, here you can see these  are the samples  the number  of samples  and you can see these A1, 
A2 are basically  this is showing each row is showing a soil profile.  So, this is for soil profile  
these another  soil profile  and the soil profile  it shows  the arrangement  of the horizon. So, the 
first soil profile  gives  you the arrangement  of the depth of these  horizons  and second profile  
gives  you the  arrangement  of these horizons  and so, on.  
And after this C horizon, you will see these A1d, A2d and  all these things, so the d stands  for 
the depth. So, when  there are present  so, for example,  A1 is present,  so, the A1 depth is 21 centimetre,  then A2 is present,  so A2 depth is 27 centimetre  and when  there are  absent  there 
having the any values.  So, for this you can see, this is the dataset.  So, once we have this data 
set, let us go back  and see.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:17)  
 
  
 
 So, you can see here,  the soil profile  data is arranged  in a flat file, where  each row is a soil 
profile,  then there is 11 further  columns  who are, that they are binary indicators  1 or 0 I have  
already  told you whether  horizon is class  is present  or not they indicated  by 1 and 0 and the 
following 11 columns  are showing the binary column after this binary columns  are showing 
the horizon depth.  
Now,  once  we have seen these data  set let us see the structure  of the datasets , so the  structure  
of the data set will be again  very clear  starting  from  the facto r then e and n of course,  these  
are the numerical  variables  and then the integer  variables  are there  and finally,  their depth 
which  is also numerical  variables.  Now,  the next now it is  a tabular  format  it is a data frame  
format  next  we have to  convert  it to the  spatial objects.   
(Refer Slide Time: 17:15)  
 
  
 
So, we must  understand we must  instruct  R that consider  these  e and n as the coordinates.  So, 
R now, you will see there is a spatial points  data frame.  Now,  once  we have converted  this 
into spatial points data frame,  we are downloading these Hunter  Covariates data after we 
download the Hunter Covariates data  of course,  let us see what  are the names  of these there  
will be 5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 ACNN, Drainage Index, L ight Installation  and then TWI and Gamma  
Total Count and let us see this  resolution.  
So, it is a raster  stack  and you will see the resolution is 25 metre  by 25. So, it is a large raster 
stack  where we have  stacked  all these 5 covariate and the resolution is 25 by 25 they are 
having all the comm on spatial  resolution. So, for a quick display, let us first plot these for 
example,  this ACNN and display the points  and overl ay the points, sampling  points  and this 
will look like  this.   So, we are plotting  first the Altitude Above Channel Network raster  file and overlaying the 
samples  over there, the point  samples  over there.  So, 1342 samples  whatever  we may have.  
So, it is yes 1342 samples , so 1342 I did not been  plotted  here.  Now,  once  we have  these the 
next step is to extract  these  covariates .  
So, there are 5 covariates  just like previously, we are going to extract  these covariates  and 
then we are we want  to combine  these  extracted  covariates  with the original  data frame  of 
1342 observation and we are giving this name w dot dat which  will be already  created  here 
and you can see here 1342 observation of 31 variables.  Now,  let us remove  the sides  with the 
missing  covariates . So, where there  are missing  covariates  we are removing  those  sides.  Now,  
our data is  now  prepared  for two  stage model  fitting  and validation.   
(Refer Slide Time: 19:23)  
 
  
Now,  we are going to demonstrate  these two-stage model  fitting  for based  on the A1 horizon.  
But remember  that we can extend  to any other  horizons. So, you can perform  this operation  
with any other  horizon.  Now,  that in the data file 1341 observation so you can see these  are 
considered  as a numerical  variable by R at this point  of time,  but we have to indicate  R that 
these are the character  variables  because one indicates  the presence of a proof  of a horizon  
and 0 indicates  the absence of  that particular  soil horizon.  
So, we are going to first this converting we have  to first convert  this character  variable into 
categorical  variable.  So, for that we are going we are going to use this x dot factor  function 
for these A1 . So, now  it will understand R will understand that  1 and  0 are the two characters.   
Now,  again  just like previously, we are going to set the random  seed 123. We are going to 
now select  75 percent of the data,  you can do it with the 70 percent data also. So, you can use 
the 75 percent of the data as the training  samples  and then you can use this data set and you 
can rename this data set as calibration  data and of course,  the validation  data you can need  a 
name as  dat dot V. So, dat dot  C and  dat dot V are showing the  calibration  data and  validation  
data.  So, once  we did, once  we have separated  this calibration  and validation  file.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:05)  
 
 
Now, suppose  our first objective  is to model  the presence or  absence  in this case  we are going  
to use this a A1 horizon.  So, for this we are going to use the multinomial  logistic  regression  
model. So, we are going  to use this nnet function  and then we are going to install this mass 
package and  then  library  aqp.  
So, for predicting the presence or absence of the predicting the presence  or absence of A1 
horizon, we are going to use this multinom function and let us do this just like previously 
here our target  is A1 presence of A1 or absence of A1 and here AACN, Drainage Index and 
then Light Insulation, TWI, G amma  Total Count all  these are given here.   (Refer Slide Time: 22:15)  
 
And then for the next step we are going to select  the important  variables  using the stepwise  
regression. So, stepwise variable  selection  we are going to use step AIC function and then let 
us see what  are the variables  or features  this algorithm can select.  So, you can see here TWI 
and Gamma  Total Count have  been  selected  as important  predictors  and rest of them  were  
discarded.  So, will go with this mn2 model, which  will be more  parsimonious  model  than 
mn1, for subsequent  statistical operations  and mapping operations.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:50)  
 
So, here you can see we are keeping these mn2 model  and then we are going to predict  the 
values  for these training  samples  and we are going to predict  the class  using this calibration  
data using this mn2 model.  So, we are doing this and then we are using this goofcat  function  to produce  the classification  accuracy  and you can  see here  again  the confusion matrix  overall  
accuracy  produces  accuracy  users  accuracy  and Kappa  coefficient  are generated  and then we 
are also  in the next  step we are doing the  prediction of  the validation  samples.   
(Refer Slide Time: 23:30)  
 
  
So, we are predicting  the validation  samples  and we are again  using this goofcat  function to 
see that is also from  this result , this is the  confusion matrix  overall  accuracy  produces  
accuracy,  users  accuracy  and Kappa  coefficient.  So, we can see clearly  from  this that mn2 to 
model  is not too effective for predicting the sides where even  horizon is absent.  So, here you 
can see when the A1 horizon is absent  in both the cases  these mn2 model  is not very much  
effective for predicting  those  absence of  A1 horizons.  
Now,  once  we have done  this categorical  model, next step is to predict the A1 horizon depth.  
So, we will use a new model  that is called  quantile  regression  forest.  It is generalised  
implementation  of the random  forests  we know  that random  forest,  how to use these random  
forests  to predict  the continuous  properties , contin uous  variables.   
However,  we are going to now use the quantile  regression  for this time,  we are going to show  
you the quantile  regression  for just to give you an idea about  the the variety  of different  types  
of machine learning  models  which  we use for digital soil mapping purposes. So, what  is the 
major  advantage of using these quantile  regression  forest. So, for basic advantage  of this 
quantile  regression  forest is it gives  the full conditional  distribution  of a response  variable.  
So, I  have already  given these these annotations  here  so, you can  follow  these.   (Refer Slide Time: 25:15)  
 
 
  
Now,  for this we need  to install this for this quantile  regression  forest we need to install this 
quant regression  forest,  and then before applying this quant regres sion forest , we have  to do 
some  data preparation.  So, we are going to remove the missing  data from  the model  data as 
well as from  the validation  data,  and then we are going to call the library quant regression 
forest  and then we are going to fit this quant  regression  forest  model  and then we are going to 
predict  there,  here you can see, our x is model  data and our y is also model  data with the 
depth of  A1 horizon.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:59)  
  
So, we are going to run it and let us see how it looks  like. So, the model  has been  
implemented.  Now,  we are going to calibrate based  on our calibration  data.  So, our 
calibration  data we have,  we have  predicted  and now, we are going to use this goof function  
since it is  a continuous  model, we  will be using the  simple  goof function and  the results  are as 
you can  see here,  0.77 concordance 0.284.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:27)  
  
Now,  let us see that, what  is the validation  output ? So, from  this validation  output, you can 
again  we are going to use these goof function to see the results.  So, we can see here from  this 
that our interpretation  should be the calibration  model  seems  a reasonable outcome  for 
predicting the depth of the A1 horizon. However,  it is largely  unpredicted for the validation  
samples.  So, this is this two-stage modelling  is then repeated  for all the horizons, and will see 
table  1 for the  complete  result.   
(Refer Slide Time: 27:08)  
 
So, if we go back  to this table  1 which  I have produced  here,  so, you can see here that this is 
the table  1 and these are the horizons, they are the presence and absence of the horizon you 
can see here and then there depth of the horizon  is predicted  here.  So, from  this table  1 we 
can infer  we can see that some  important  observations  that here you can see the presence is 0 percent  absence is 91 percent, for B21 it is 97 0, B22 73 34, B23 0 to 78 and then B24 0 to 
97.  
So, you can see clearly  that prediction of the presence of an absence of Horizon specifically  
in these horizons  B2 horizons  are not very accurate and it is very chall enging not accurate,  I 
would not say I would say it is very challenging at the same  time the presence and absence  of 
B22 Horizon prediction looks  okay. But at the and also, if you see the Kappa  statics, from  
this kappa  statistics,  we can see that presence and absence of Horizon  BC horizon also looks  
okay. These are the  concordance  correlation  coefficient  and RMSE  values.   
(Refer Slide Time: 28:33)  
 
  
 
So, let us go back  to our script  and see that this table  1 interpretation  I have  given here that 
considerable amount  of uncertainty  overall  in the various  soil horizon model  we have already  
seen, the model  to predict  the presence of BC horizon is quite  good because of the Kappa  
statistics  distinguishing between  the different  B2 horizon is challenging  we know  that and 
predicting the  presence or  absence of  a B22 horizon seems  okay acceptable.   
Now,  another  way to access  or assess the quality of the two-stage modelling  is basically  to 
assess first the number  of soil profile  that have  matching  sequence of soil horizons  types  and 
we can do this by using different  methods. So, let us wrap  up our lecture  here,  and we will 
discuss  this thing, this  part in our upcoming lecture.   
And we will see  how  to use the other  methods  to see the  fidelity  between  the predicted  profile 
as well as the observed profile  whether  how to how to get the matches  how to get the match  between  the observed profile  as well as the predicted  profile,  what  are the different  ways  we 
are going to see in our upcoming lecture.  So, guys  I hope  that you have  learned  something 
new in this lecture and we will meet  in our next lecture to discuss  from  here and we will 
discuss  how  to use this for producing th e maps , thank you very  much.  