Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop  Management   
Professor Somsubhra  Chakraborty 
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department   
Indian Institute  of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 50  
Digital  Soil Mapping  - General  Overview  (Contd.) 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:27)   
 
Welcome  friends  to this 50th lecture  of this NPTEL  Online  Certification  Course  of Machine  
Learning  for Soil and Crop Management . And in this week , we are having some  basic  
overview  of Digital Soil Mapping. In my previous  lectures , I have discussed  about , what is 
DSM , what  are the different  applications  of DSM , why we prefer  the SCORPAN plus e 
model  for DSM  we have discussed .  
At the same time we have  also discussed  the GIS Geostatistics  and all the important  aspects , 
which  are required  for executing differen t types  of DSM  applications . Now,  also we have 
started  discussing about  R and R studio in our previous  lecture. I have  showed you how to 
install R, how to install R studio, what  are the basic  R commands . So, we will continue  from  
there where we left and we will try to finish  this week  using the basic R codes  for digital soil 
mapping. (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:41)   
 
So, these are the concepts  which  we are going to cover  today, we are going to have  some  
basic R operations . And also we will see some  DSM  package  installation  of some  DSM  
packages , which  are required  for DSM  operations . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  1:57)   
  
And these are some  of the keywords , like data frame , vector , package, library , ithir,  so these  
are the  some  of the keywords  for this  for this  lecture . So, let us but before  going to  that I must  
acknowledge  for this DSM  codes  acknowledge  the contribution of Brendan  Malone  and 
Budiman Minasni  and Alex McBratney , who wrote  this book  using R for digital soil 
mapping, I have  gathered  whatever  knowledge  is requi red for using R for digital soil 
mapping from  this book.  
So, I highly recommend  you to get this book buy this book and learn  in details  about  how to 
use R for digital soil mapping not only this book  will give you the extensive  over extensive  
discussion on digital soil mapping but also will give you the practical  application  which  of 
DSM  and you will know  from  the scratch  how you can use this software  for digital soil 
mapping, all the packages  all the data sets are created  and they are already  uploaded in 
different , different  host  websites , I am going to  show  you those . 
But at the same time but if you want  to have more  detailed  knowledge  about  this digital soil 
mapping and how to use R for executing digital soil mapping you should go through this 
book. I  personally thank Professor B udiman M inasni  from  the university of  Sydney who  were 
very helpful  to give me some  the concept  of using some  of the codes  from  this which  they 
have  mentioned in  this book. So, I  am really  thankful  to Professor M inasni . (Refer  Slide Time:  4:14)   
 
So, let me just go back  and show  you some  of the basic R codes . So, in my previous  lecture,  
we have discussed  about  the complex  number  and different  types  of from  the basic 
calculation  like simple  sum and then how we can use R as a calculator  and how to get 
different  types  of values  like infinity  values  in R we have  also discussed .  
And then how to how to remove  an object  from  my workspace , how to get the new line 
separator  or how to get the constants  and how to extract , how to know  what  is actually  there 
in this constant  we have  already  discussed . 
And also we have seen how to use this list command  and also we have seen that how we can 
input  different  types  of data in R, starting  from  numerical  data, then character  data, then 
logical  data as  well  as complex  number . So, we  have  discussed  in our previous  lecture.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  5:22)   
 
 
  
 
Now,  let us start from  here, so R data structure  so will this R data structure  is the platform  for 
all the calculations  and plotting , so we are going to start with the defining the vector , so 
vector  is a simply  an ordered  collection  of elements  for example,  it can be individual , so it is 
basically  order  collection  of individual  numbers .  
So, here you  can see suppose  x is a vector  which  assumes  the value of 1 to 12 and  here  if they  
are they are arranged  like 1, 2, 3, 4, up to 12, then we can just separate them  with this colon  
and express  this like this way. So, if you want  to see what  x means , so you can see that it 
stands  for 1 to  12.  
Then the x matrix, so let us now let us do let us deal with matrix , you all know  what  is 
matrix , now suppose  we want  to develop a matrix  from  the values  of 1 to 12 and the number  
of rows  will be 3, so matrix  remember  these are similar  to the vectors  but they have  some  defined  number  of rows  and columns . So, here if we want  to develop  a matrix  called  x with 
the values  from  1 to 12 and number  of row equal  to 3.  
So, if you want  to see how it looks  like, so you can see that this is the matrix  and by default  
the values  are arranged  in columns  from  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, so this is the 
matrix  of this is a matrix  taking the  values  of 1 to 12 with  the number  of rows  three.  
Now,  next is arrays,  arrays  are similar  to matrices , but they have  more  than two dimensions . 
So, here you can see we are can use this array  function and using this 1 to 30 numerical  
values  and our dimension  is 2, 5, 3. So, if you see what  that means , so if we just run y you 
will see that there are three matrix  and in this three matrix  individual  matrices  individual  
matrix  is having 2 number  of rows  and 5 number  of columns .  
So, by default  the first number  is number  of rows  and second number  is the number  of 
columns . So, then a very important  concept , that is called  data frame . Now,  what  is data 
frame ? So, data frame remember  it is a it is a table  it is a two dimensional  table  it is a kind of 
a array  like structure  and in which  each column contains  values  of one variable and each row 
contains  one set of values  for from  each  column.  
So, this is basically  a two dimensional  table  and this data frame is a basic requirement  for 
performing  any type of statistical calculation , specifically  if we want  to develop  models  using 
R for DSM  we need  to convert  the data any special  data into a specific data frame . I will 
show  you how  to do that , but at this point  of time  I just want  to show  you how  to create a  data  
frame . 
So, to create a data frame  let us we will be using this data dot frame  com function, so let us 
give a name to this data frame  that is dat and we are using this data dot frame  function and 
these are the arguments  within  this data dot frame  function. So, here we have  four different  
variables  profile  id, FID, sorry  five different  variables  profile  id and then FID, then easting  
northing and  whether  you have  visited  that profile  or not.  
So you can see here profile  id since it is a character , so we have  put those  names  it is a 
nominal  variable, so you can see Chromosol , Vertosol , Sodosol  these are different  types  of 
soils, so these are categories . So, since they are categorical  attribute  or character  attribute , 
then that is why we have  kept them  within  code  and FID is also some  identifier  these are also 
characters .  Now,  easting  and northing, easting  northing are basically  they are some  values  and the term 
these easting  and northing are geographic  cartesian  coordinates  for a point  and so easting  
refers  to the eastward , eastward  measure distance or the coordinate  whereas  the northing 
refers  to the northward measured  distance or  the coordinates . 
So, this easting and northing generally  we use to indicate  the geographic  cartesian  coordinate  
or the location  of any given  point . So, while  we are using this easting  and northing you please  
understand that these are showing the location  of these three soil samples  which we are going 
to use for creating  this data  frame . 
And next  is visited , so you can  see true, false, true,  so this is a logical  variable, so  you can see 
either  if you have  visited  that place that soil so it is true, if it is not then it is false. So, this is 
how we create a data frame , let us first create this data frame and once you create this data 
frame  you can see already  in the environment  this data frame  is created . So, you can see the 
data frame profile  id, FID, easting,  northing and  visited . 
So, Chromosol , Vertos ole, sodosole, A1, A10, A11, easting,  northing and visited  or non 
visited . So, you see the data frame has been  created  you can also see this data frame in this R 
console  by just typing  this dat and then running this dat, so you can see that this data frame  is 
created  also you can use this list command  which  is similar  to vector , so list is basically  
showing the  list of  all the all the variables .  
So, here suppose  we are using this list 1.2 which  is a numerical  variable , then x comma  y 
comma  dat, so let us see how it looks  like. So, if we if we see the summary  you will see that 
it will start with the numerical  variable  1.2, then x is a vector  from  1 to 12, then y is of course  
a we have  already  created  y is an array  and the last point  is our dat, which  is the data frame . 
So, all  of them  will be  appeared  in a list when  we use this list function.  
Now,  missing  values  are generally  appeared  in R as na that is not available. So, if you see 
that x is not available  then if you want  to have  x minus  2, then you will see that it is also not 
available, then is dot na so it is basically  making an enquiry whether  x is missing  or not, so if 
we do that you will see that if x is missing  value , so we use is dot na that means  it shows  it is 
a missing  value  when  it is gives  a true output .  
And when  we use this exclamatory  sign before  this is na that is just showing the opposite  that 
means  we are asking R that whether  x is a real value  or not. So, when  you do that then it 
gives  the false, so  that means  it is not a real value it is a missing  value . Now,  function arguments  and different  packages  we are going to use so let us use this sum 
function. So, in  the sum  function you can  see we are having  these  numerical  values , so we are 
getting  the sum and then here 109.83 also let us create a vector  of a using 1 to 10 and let us 
assume  that b is equal  to a, so if you want  to plot this x equal  to a and y equal  to b, so we will 
get a plot like this.  
So, our x variable is a and our y variable is b and if both since both of them  are similar  
therefore we are getting  a linear  graph  while  plotting  that. Now,  once  we do that you 
remember  that when  we use a function the parameters  which  we use inside  a function those  
are known as arguments . So, these arguments  for plot what  are the arguments  for the plot, so 
if you click  if you click  this arguments  of the plot, so you can  see that it is function then  x and  
y and  then  other  things .  
So, basically  the minimum requirement  for creating  a plot is to put the x and y variable and 
then you can use all other  optional  variables  to show  the desired  characters  to show  the 
desired  shape to show  the desired  size of those  markers  and then colour you can give 
different  types  of colo urs for those  markers  are also. 
So, let me show  you one plot where we are creating  100 random  normal  variable with mean  
of 50 and standard deviation of 10. So, here we are using this plot function and then R norm  
followed by this 100, so 100 number  of sample  random  number  normal  number  we are we 
are sampling  and then where the mean  is 50 and standard  deviation  is 10. So, this will look 
like this. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:46)   
  
 
  
 
 Now,  I told you in my previous  lecture also that you need  to install certain  packages  before  
you are able to execute  certain  operation  in R. So, for that we are going to use some  
packages . Now,  before  going to those  installing  packages , let me show  you another  very 
important  thing,  for R you need  to keep  all the input  file as well as the output  file preferably  
in a working folder .  
So you can create  a working folder  in your desktop and then or any other  place  and you can 
keep  all the source  files and also all the inputs  and you can keep  all the outputs  also in that 
particular  folder . So, by default  it will be saved  in those  particular  working folde r. So, all the 
files which  are required  were all the data files which  are required  for running the R you can 
preferably  keep  that in that working folder .  
So, I have  already  created  a working folder  if you see my desktop I will show  you this is my 
working folder  and this working folder  I will be using in this in this in this R program . So, 
how to do that so you will see that in the R studio there is a session  tab, so if you click  on this 
session  tab you will get  a set working directory .  
Now you go  to this choose  directory  and then  you just go to  the desktop and then  you can just 
select  this working folder  and then it will be automatically  selected , although you can also 
use this set w d function and followed by this path, so it is another  way of setting  the working 
directory . 
So, once  you do that let me show  you installing  some  of the packages , so either  you can go to 
this package tab and download the package search  the package and download the package or 
you can directly  use this install dot packages  follow ed by this package within  code . So, we 
are going to use this cubist  package, so you see that when  you are going to install it, it will it 
it will it will take some  time and all the required  files will be downloaded in the R 
environment . 
And similarly  if you want  to install this lattice  package which  also we are I have already  
installed  that so I am not going to reinstall this, so you can you can install. Now,  once  you 
install these packages  you have  to call those  packages  for calling  this packages  the funct ion is 
library , suppose  we want  to do some  cubist  operations  so we have  to call this library  cubist  
each and every  time  we want  to run the cubist . 
So, apart  from  that we also for this for this DSM  we are going to use the data sources . So, 
remember  that the data source  for all the DSM  operation  which  I am going to show  you in this course  are already  been  there  in a package called  ithir package, I t h i r, so I am going to 
show  you how to install  this ithir,  package. So, for installing  this ithir package you need  to 
first install this package called  devtools , so you run this devtool  package it will take some  
time to download once  it is download then  you can  use this ithir  package.  
So, this ithir package is there in the bit bucket  so what  is a bit bucket ? So, bit bucket  is a 
basically  git based  source  code  repository and we can we can we can source  code repository  
and hosting service, so we can we can we can keep  we can host or our codes  gate based  
goods  in this in this bit bucket . 
Now,  the question is what  is git? The git stands  for git, so this gate is basically  a software  for 
tracking  changes  in any set of files which  is usually  used for coordinating work  among 
programmers  collaboratively  developing source  code  during software  development . So, it is a 
kind of a software  for tracking  changes  for any set of files when  different  programmers  
collaboratively  develop  the codes  for developing a developing a software or developing any 
program . So, this  is called  git. 
So, this bit bucket  basically  hosts  the source  code  this git based  source  code and this package  
ithir package this is installed , this is already  hosted in this in the bit bucket  website , so you 
can download  it from  this bitbucket  website , I have  already  downloaded it, so basically  you 
just go here and click the run and you will see it will download. So, I have  already  installed  
this so I am not going to  reinstall this . 
So, once  you installed  this ithir package the next step is to call this library  ithir,  so I am going 
to call this library  ithir and so this is how you install the all the data which  is required  which  
are required  for executing this DSM  operation in this course  will be is contained  in this ithir 
package. So, you can you can download this ithir and you can call the ithir,  remember  for 
doing befo re doing any  operation  you have  to call this library  ithir,  each  and every  time . 
So, each and every  session  I would say so suppose  you are having a session  right  now so you 
are calling  this library  ithir and then you can do some  operations  and in the next session  also 
you have  to use again  call the library , you can install the package once but you have  to call 
the library  in each  session .  
So, please keep  this in keep  this in mind  you if you install any package  once  that will be 
sufficient  but for each session you have  to up you have  to call the library . So, if you if you 
want  to take some  if you want  to get some  more  information  about  this lattice  and polygon  you can use this double  question marks  followed by this package and you will have  more  
idea.  
Now,  let us see one vector  which  we can create from  1 to 5 and then we can create another  
vector  from  minus  10 to 10 with a spacing  of 2. So, generally  when  the spacing  is exactly  1 
we generally  use this colon but when  the spacing  is 2, then we use this minus  10 to 10 with 
the spacing  of 2 and then we can use this rep package to replicate this 4, 5 times  you can see 
here.  
Then c is basically  to combine  all these values . So, you can see when  we are doing this, so it 
will output  like this, now again  c let us consi der a equal  to 2, b equal  to 1, c equal  to 5, d 
equal  to 100 and  e equal  to 2 and  then  you will get  this type  of output .  
And also let us consider  v 1 is another  vector  with the values  of 2, 1, 5, 100, 2, so will 
combine  them  and let us see how this v 1 look like you will see this 2, 1, 5, 100, 2 and then x 
let us consider  that x equal  is equal  to 1, 2, 3, with 1 exactly  spacing , then y equal  to 4 to 10 
with 1 exact  spacing  then  we combine  both x and  y using this  c and then  we are renaming  this 
combined vector  as z, let us see how  this z will look like .  
So, 1, 2, 3, 4, up to 10 you can see. Similarly , if we want  to see that whether  x is greater  than 
5, so if you run it you will see that it is so sorry  if x if we consider  that x equal  to 1 to 10 and 
then if we want  to see that whether  x is greater  than 5 of course  for the values  of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 
it will be false but for the values  of 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, it will be true. So, you see that how these 
logical  outputs  is showing whether  your  variable is  greater  than  5 or not or. 
And then we can create  another  variable  that is a, which  will be a which  is a which  is x 
greater  than 5. So, let us see the similar  output  will get, so if you multiply  it with any value  
then we will get that for false will get 0 for true value will get this particular  value . So, then 
we can use this paste command, so in the paste command  you can see the codes  are basically  
showing the characteristics  and then the logical  parameter  and then 42 is a numerical  
parameter , so you will see  this will be  the output  of the paste command.  
So, just for an example suppose  there is a variable there is a variable called  month, so at this 
time so it is in April and the day equal  to 29, so it is a numerical  variable  and then year is 
1770. So, paste if you use this captain  cook on the, so this is a character  then day is a 
numerical  variable, day of the month is also numerical  variable  month is a character  variable  and then year is of course  a numerical  variable, sailed  into the botany bay and then separator  
is given . 
So, let us just run it and see how it looks  like, so you can see when  you do that then it will 
represent  as captain  cook  on the 29th day of April 1770 cent into botany bay. So, this is one 
command, another  command  is the loop command. So, in the loop command you can group 
the variables  from  you can you can do the loop you can you can rename  the variables  one by 
one using the  letters .  
Here as an example if you run it and you will see that groups  from  1 to 10, so 1 to 10 group  
and then you are giving the id from  a to z using the letters , so it will the the program  will run 
in loops  and it will show  the results . 
Then vectorized arithmetic , so vectorized  arithmetic  you can see that let us consider  a 
variable  x from  6 to 10 and then if we do this x plus 2 then you will see that these  2 will be 
added  to each of these integers  and it will give you the results . So, then y let us consider  is a 
vector  and then z let us consider  it is x and y, so if you if you see that it will be x and y will 
be directly  combined i n the  form  of z.  
So, again  you can express  any equation suppose  x is a vector  from  1 to 10 and m is a slope  
0.8 and b is a value  of 2 that is a offset , so thus the straight  line formula  that y equal  to m x 
plus b, so if you just do that you will see that the value  of y, because  x has the values  from  1 
to 10. So, for all  these values  will get  these values  of y by using this  equation. 
Then if you want  to take some  suppose  this is 1 to 10 and you want  to take the square  root of 
x you can you can go ahead  and see the values  here and then you can use the vector  of square  
root of from  1 to 10 it will get the same result  and then you can just put these  values  by using  
c you will get  the same result , so all these three condition you will get  the same results . 
Now,  let us see a matrix  from  1 to taking the values  of 1 to 15 a number  of rows  5 number  of 
column three,  so x will look like this and another  matrix  let us see, so here you can see that 
by default  they are arranged  in columns  but if you want  to arrange them  in along with the 
rows , so you can  use the byrow  argument , which  is true. 
So, here you can see that they will be arranged  in rows , so 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 
and 13, 14, 15. So, arithmetic  means  arithmetic  with matrices  and arrays  that have  the same 
dimension, so you can use this matrix  command , so you will see that how it matrix  1 matrix  
with a value  of 1 there  will be number  of columns  5 and number  of rows  5 and number  of columns  will be 3, so you can do all these different  types  of calculat ions. So, x plus z you can 
do different  types  of calculation . 
So, when  dimensions  do not  match  you will get  some  error output , so you can  see that  when  x 
and z dimensions  are not matching  you will see these non- confirmable  arrays . So, for mixed  
vectors  array arithmetic , data you will have  these  different  types  of you can play with these  
different  types  of codes , I have already  given  these annotations . 
Now,  let us move  to data frame , so data frame is very important  so let us create a data frame  
which  is the similar  which  I have  created  first, so let us create this and let us see the structure  
so the structure  of the data frame  the command  is very simple . So, str function so you see the 
data frame  three observation five variables  profile  id character  variable , FID character  
variable, easting  numerical  variable, northing numerical  variable  and visited  is a logical  
variable.  
And if you want  to read the data from  the files you call the library  ithir and then you call the 
data USYD  soil data,  so this USYD underscore  soil data is already  there in the in the in this 
in this, in this ithir package.  
So, it is if you click  on it you will see there  are 166 observation with 16 variables  starting  
with profile  land class  upper  depth of the soil lower  depth of the soil, clay silt sand ph, 
measured  with calcium  chloride  total carbon , electrical  conductivity exchangeable  sodium  
percentage, exchangeable  sodium , exchangeable potassium , exchangeable calcium , 
exchangeable magnesium  and cc. 
So, this is a data set for 166 observation which  we have which  we have  just seen and their 
structure  is also, so if you want  to see the structure  just give the structure  command  and it 
will give you all the details  of what  types  of data is there. And if you want  to see if you want  
to use this head command  it will give  you the  first 6 observation of  all the variables . 
So, and also if you want  to see whether  any missing  value  for CEC,  CEC  is a variable, so you 
specify  that variable using this dollar  sign and then you are using that ease dot na comma nd 
again  and you will see that 9th observation 10th observation 45th observation 63 observation  
and 115th observations  are having the  missing  data for CEC.   
If you want  to create the data frame  manually  you create first this you use this c and combine  
this chromosol , vertical , organosol  and anthroposol  and then use create another  variable  
carbon  and you create another  vector  you create  another  vector  of carbon , then you create a data frame by combining the soil type equal  to soil which  you have already  created  and soil 
oc is equal  to carbon.  
So, then you combine  them  together  using in this data frame  and you can see that when  you 
when  you and give you name that date and you will see that the final output  will look like 
this. If you want  to specify  or change  some  names  you can use this names  dot names  of that, 
so you can change  this name to soil and SOC  by using the c command . So, you can see that 
how it looks  like. 
So, specifying so this you can see this the column names  have been  changed  and specifying  
row names  in the data frame  if you want  to specify  the row names  also you can use this row 
names  and then you can give some  row names  and then you can see the data how it look like. 
So, you can see now the row names  are appearing . Working in the data frame  you can use 
this names  command  you can see what  type of variables  are there, work  with a specific 
column. 
So, just like before  I showed  you if I want  to use this ESP,  I will specify  this ESP using this, 
so dollar  sign and you will see all the values  of 166 variables  are appearing  and some  of them  
are missing  values . So, if you want  to see just take the mean  of the ESP it will take the mean  
of the ESP but the problem  is there are some  missing  values , but so if you want  to omit these  
missing  values  and then  take them  in then  it will it  will give  you some  results , so 1.99. 
So, if  you can  you can specify  by name any particular  variable or  you can  specify  the column, 
so suppose  the tenth  column , so the first is always  number  of rows  and then the exact  column 
so tenth column if you want  to see so it is again  it is the tenth  column by default  if you if you 
want  to see that it will be it will be the tenth  is here, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. So, this  will be 
easy values . 
So, if you want  to add a new column you can add this the soil suppose  there  is a new column  
called  upper  another  column is lower , so you can specify  these new names  and you can you 
can you can use this command  by just multiplying  the existing  upper  depth and lower  depth  
and now you want  to see the head of the soil data, so you can see that this upper  and lower  
these two  columns  have  been  added .  
So, you if you want  to omit the missing  values  from  a vector  you first select  this and then 
remove  the all the missing  values  and then you can use this clean  data and then so all these  
type of things  you can do and then you can write  a table  using the soil data that is called  file and give the name file name dot txt and column names  and row names  are also true. So, you 
run this thing and  you can  plot the data.  
Suppose  you want  to plot the random  normal  variable 10 random  number  variable and so this 
is the plot and then if you want  to have  a vector  of minus  15 to plus 15 and then you are 
taking the you are creating  y which  is basically  taking the square  of 2 and then you want  to 
plot these x square . So, plot  this both x and  y, so  as expected  you will get  this type  of plot. 
So, a plot function also have  different  types  of arguments  for example the type of the plots  
you can have  idea about  different  types  of plots  are there , then xlim is the limit of the x axis, 
ylim is the limit of the y axis, pch is different  types  of markers  are there, different  size, 
different  types  of marker .  
So, this plot character  the short  form  is pch, pch 21 will be hollow  circle then the column 
colour you want  to give the red and the background you want  to give the yellow  and x level  
will be x axis level  will be the x variable  and y axis level  will be the x measured . So, if you 
do this  then  you will get  this type  of results . So, guys  let us wrap  up our  lecture  here.  
So, I hope  that you have  some  good knowledge  of these data frame, vector , packages , library  
and ithir,  and so we will in the next week  will start applying these knowledges  for going  for 
different  types  of continuous  model ling as well as in in the week  12 will be also showing the 
how to do the categorical  model ling using R. So, I hope  that this lecture was helpful , let us 
meet  in the week  11, where we will see how to use the R for categorical  for continuous  soil 
property model ling. T hank you very  much .   