Machine Learning  for Soil and Crop  Management  
Professor Somsubhra  Chakraborty 
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute  of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture – 56  
Digital  Soil Mapping  with  Categorical  Variables  
Welcome friends  to this last week of NPTEL online  certification  course  of machine learning 
for soil and crop management.  And in this week,  we are talking  about  digital  soil mapping 
with categorical  variables.  Although there will be some  spillover  from  our last week  of 
lectures.   
So, in the last week  we have  discussed  about  the continuous  modeling  using continuous  
modeling in digital soil mapping. And how to execute those  different  types  of continuous  
modelling  using R. We have  learned  about  simple  linear  regression, we have  learned  about  
multiple  linear  regression,  we have  learned  stepwise  regression,  we have  learned  how to do 
the mapping with multiple  linear  regression  and stepwise  regression. Also  we have  learned  
how to do the soil mapping with decision  tree also with random  forest  so, and also with 
cubist .  
So, we have learned  all these things  apart  from  that we have  also discussed  one hybrid  
approach  that is universal  Kriging. Now,  in the universal  Kriging, remember,  it is a 
combination of both regression and Kriging however,  in univer sal Kriging we generally  
assume  that the regression  is always  linear . And so that universal  Kriging is dependent  on 
some  strict assumptions.  So, in this week,  we are going to focus  on the general  regression  
Kriging.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 2:14)   
 
So, this is the concept  which  we are going to cover  in this week  this regression Kriging. And 
in the regression  Kriging  I am going to show  you what  is regression  Kriging and why it is 
important . And secondly,  how  we execute the  regression  Kriging in  using R  software .  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 2:35)   
 
So, these are the keywords  for these lectures , for this lecture,  lecture  number  56 is the first 
lecture. And these  are the keywords  regression  Kriging, then Vario gram , interpolation, cubist  
goof function. So, of course,  these regression  Kriging it is a spillover  from  our last week  
lectures  it is not actually  the categorical  modeling, but we would like to discuss  it before  
going to  the actual  categorical  modeling in  R or in DSN in  digital soil  mapping.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 3:10)  
 
So, this is the regression  Kriging approach and remember  that regression  Kriging is 
considered  as the best linear  unbiased predi ctor of spatial  data and Mathero n in 1969 propose  
that a value  of a target  variable  at some  location  can be modeled  as a sum of the deterministic  
and stochastic  components  we know  that.  
According to the universal  model  of variation, we know  that the value  of a target  variable  at 
any given location  can be modeled  as a sum of the deterministic  as well as the stochastic  
component . Now,  from  the mapping point  of view,  we may not be very much  interested  to 
deal with  the pure  noise  because this  is, this  can be measurement  error.   
So, this is the deterministic  part and this is a stochastic  part. So, we know  that both 
deterministic  and stochastic  components  of spatial  variation  can be modeled  separately,  we 
can model  the deterministic  component  using regression  model. However,  the stochastic  
component  can be modeled  using Kriging interpolation  or in a Kriging interpolation.  
Now,  combining these two approaches, we obtain this type of representation.  So, this is the 
final prediction. And here you can see we have this is the deterministic  part this is the 
stochastic  part and we can model  this deterministic  part by using the regression  equa tion. 
And here we can fit the stochastic  part using the  ordinary  Kriging interpolation .  
Where in this expression of course,  please understand that this is the fitted  deterministic  part 
and this is the interpolated  residuals.  This B hat k is basically  estimated  deterministic  model  
coefficient  is the deterministic  model  and these are the deterministic  model  coefficient  and then these lambda  i is a Kriging was determined  by the special  dependence structure  of the 
residuals  and where e Si is the residual  at location  Si.  
So, from  here you can understand that using this regression  free hybrid approach, it is 
possible  to capture both the deterministic  component  as well as the stochastic  component  to 
objectively  map the spatial variability  of any continuous  variab le. And this is the most  
appropriate  way to predict  and map  the special  variability  of the soil properties.  
Because it not only takes  care about  the deterministic  component, but also takes  care of the 
stochastic  component  and holistically  it addresses  the special  autocorrelation  or special  
dependence. Due to this special  dependence there  is a we can say that the samples  which  we 
are taking are, can show  some  dependence  up to a certain  distance  after that there  is we can 
consider  after the range distance,  we can consider  that the samples  are more  or less 
independent.  
So, if we want  to make a realistic  representation  of the special  structure,  we have  to take care 
of this dependent  part as well as the independent  part because any sample which  you take 
below  the range distance that will be  considered  as dependent  with  your  initial samples.   
And so, this dependency  will violate  the assumption of linear  regression, which  says that the 
observations  are independent  to each other. So, here observations  are not independent  to each 
other  here observations  are related  up to the range distance and after that of course,  they are 
independent  to each  other.  
So, due to the special  covariation  due to the spatial  autocorrelation  due to the spatial  
dependence it is very import ant that the spatial  structure  of the soil properties  should not be 
consider , should not be captured  using only the simple  the models  which  depends  on the 
independent  target  variable.   
However,  here we can see that the target  variable  is somewhat  both the dependent  as well as 
independent  or observation I would say instead  of observed instead  of variable  I would say 
the observations  are independent  and also dependent  to each other  depending on the spatial  
autocorrelation.  
So, that is why we generally  go for these regression  Kriging and in contemporary DSM  
modeling, this regression  Kriging has been  widely  popular  and you will see that in most  of 
the cases  scientists  are using this regression  Kriging  for capturing the spatial structure  of the 
soil properties.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 8:35)  
 
Now,  if we see the graphical  representation  of this regression  Kriging hybrid approach, we 
can see that if we just represent  the target  variable  the value  of the target  variable  in the y axis 
and the geographical  space the dista nce in the x axis then we can see that these line is 
showing the  field  samples  which  shows  some  noise  that is noise  corrupted this  field  samples.   
Now,  of course,  if we fit a regression  function which  is denoted by this dashed  line the idea 
behind fitting  this regression  function is to detrend  the data because this is a deterministic  
model  and using this deterministic  model  we generally  want  to detrend  the data.  So, if the 
predictive  variables  appeared  somewhere in this regression  function and this is the original  
observation so, of  course,  this distance will be  the error or  the residual .  
Now,  if we interpolate  these residuals  so, this is the field samples  again  and this dashed  line 
is a regression  function. So, the difference linear  difference  between  the any point  to this to 
their corresponding point  on the regression  function is known as the residual.  And so, if we 
interpolate  this residual  and add to this regression  function, you can say that ultimately  we 
will get  this final  estimate  by regression  Krigi ng.  
So, this final estimate  by regression  Kriging will try to model  the variation  using both 
regression  or deterministic  function as well as the stochastic  function. So, this is the 
regression Kriging representation  graphical  representation.  So, again  remember  that this 
deterministic  model  the detrends  the data and  then  leaving  behind the  residuals .  
So, the original  actual  sample  distribution  of the target  variable can be seen more  noise  
corrupted and so, for which  we need  to and these residual  we need  to investigate  for additional  spatial  structure  and then we add to the deterministic  component. So, these  
residuals  are the  random  component  in this SCORPAN plus  e model .  
Remember  we talked  about  SCORPAN plus e model. So, these e or error is basically  this 
residual.  So, this is how we captured  this regression  Kriging in terms  of these this graphic, it 
graphically  we can capture this  regression  Kriging.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 11:45 )  
 
  
 
Now,  let us go ahead  and see how we can execute these regression  Krigin g in R. So, this is 
the code.  So, again  we are going to call these library  ithir.  And then we are going to call this 
library  mass  we have  installed  this package  cubist  we have  already  installed  it previously, so, 
I am going to use it the library  cubist  and then library  gstat  because we are going to fit the 
Variogram , you know  it.  
And then let us call the library  ithir library  raster  because we are going to deal with different  
raster  layers  and also rgdal  a library  rgdal . So, that we can execute different  types of GIS 
operations. So, for this regression  Kriging approach  we are going to use the edgeroi ’s 
spline carbon  data which  we have  used  previously.   
So, let me call these data edgeroi’s  spline carbon  again  and then let us we know  that these  
edgeroi’s  spline carbon is 341 observation with 10 variables.  So, let us instruct  R that the second  and third  column are considered  as x and y are the coordinates.  Now,  we are doing the  
natural  log transformation  of the 0 to 5 centimeter  organic  carbon data we have  done  it 
previously also.   
So, we have  converted  this organic  carbon stock  of 0 to 5 centimeter  by taking  the natural  log 
and then we are going to download the data of the covariates  that is edgeroi  covariates.  So, 
and then we are also we want  to see the coordinat es, we want  to also see the coordinates  of 
the x and  y.  
So, we are instructing  R that you should understand these x and y are the coordinates  of the 
edgeroi’s  spline carbon. Now,  as usual, we are going to stack  the rasters  using the stack  
function and we are going to name  it as covstack.  So, here you can see we are stacking  these  
elevation  twi radk  landsat  b3 landsat  b4 together.  
So, just  like previously using the  stack  function, then  we are going to  as usual  we are going to  
extract  the we are going to extract the data using the extract  function. So, for that, we are 
going to use the extract  function our data set is covstack  and we are going to extract  these  
based  on the edgeroi’s  splinecarbon and the myth  simple  extraction  will be there and then 
DSM  data of  course, once  we do that,  then  we are going to  save this  as a simple  data frame.   
So, if we save this as simple  data frame like previously you can see this is 341 observation  
with ID, x and y of course  coordinates  then all the organic  carbon  values  at different  depths, 
and then we can see soil depth and then finally,  we are going  to see the log converted organic  
carbon  values  of 0 to 5 centimeter  followed  by 5 covariates  just like previous  exercise.  So, 
our data preparatory  step is completed.   
Now,  the next step is to execute the modeling. So, we are going to set the seed at 1, 2, 3 what 
is the meaning  of setting  seed and then just like previously, we are going to fit the training  
model  using 70 percent  of the data by selecting  the 70 percent  of the rows  by that dumbly so, 
this is called  the training  data.   (Refer  Slide  Time: 15:53 )  
 
 
  
 
 We are calling  it a m dat or model  data by 70 percent  training  samples  and then we are going  
to fit the model  deterministic  model  using the Cubist  algorithm.  Now,  in the Cubist  
algorithm,  we have  already  seen previous  lecture  that it is a data mining advanced  machine  
learning  approach,  which  can mind  that nonlinear  regression.  
But also in each of these cluster  or each of this turning node  terminal node  it can fit the 
ordinary least squares  regression. So, it is basically  a hybrid approach between  the nonlinear  
as well as linear  regression.  So, we are going to use these mdat and then our, so, this cubist  
here x is of course  model  data and here our target  our predictor s are elevation  twi radk 
landsat  b3 landsat  b4.  
And of course,  we are going to give the default  parameters  of course  the rules  are we are 
giving 100 but it depends  the model  will select  the number  of rules  based  on its own 
optimization  and then the extrap olation  is 5 and sample  0 and we want  to grow  the 
committee's  up to  1.  
So, here we let us run this and based  on this cubist  prediction, based  on this cubic  prediction, 
we are going to calculate the residuals  how to calculate the residuals , the calculate the 
residuals  this is the model  data. Now, how to calculate the residual ? Residual  is calculated  by 
subtracting the  predicted  values  from  the model  from  the original  values.   
So, here original  values  is mDat  block converted carbon  stock  of 0 to 5 centimeter  we know  
that minus  if we subtract  the predicted  values  by using this particular  model  which  you have  
created  in the previous  step, then we will get the residuals.  So, let us calculate this residual  
because these residuals  are going to  help  us for Kriging interpolation.  
Now,  if you see the mean  of these residuals,  then you will see it is 5.81 10 to the power  
minus  09. So, these are the means  of the residuals.  Now,  in this mDat  if you see, if we click 
on the same data of course  they will see that a 238 observations  and this mDat  since it is a 70 
percent  of the 348, 341 observation, so, it is 238 observations  and you can see these are the, 
their values.   
So, you can see along with this mdat  we have  already  calculated  there,  there is an added  
column with the residual  also. So, once  we do that, we are instructing  so, far it is in tabular  
format.  So, it is in data simple  data frame . Now, to execute special  operation  we need  to 
convert  it to the special  points  data frame.   So, to convert  it to the special  points  data frame,  we are going to instruct  R that you consider  
these x and y as the coordinates. So, we are giving these coordinate  function and these x and 
y and then you will see that the coordinate  reference system  let us see what  is the coordinate  
reference  system  of this. Let us assume  that this coordi nate reference system  of this mDat  is 
UTM  zone  55 South WGS  84.  
So, we are assigning this coordinate  reference system  to the model  data.  So, once  we have  
assigned  the coordinate  reference  system  of this model  data,  now, we are going to fit our 
experimental  Vario gram  and then we are going to fit that experimental  Vario gram  with the 
model.  
So, here you can see we are going to first develop  our experimental  Vario gram  which  is 
called  VGM  1 using the Vario gram  funct ion and we are going to do that using the residual  
because  that this Kriging  interpolation  will be built based  on these residuals.  So, here we are 
going to use this residual  and our data is model  data and then just like previously, we are 
going to fix these default  parameters  like width  250 cressle Variogram  and then cutoff  value  
is 10,000.  
So, we are going to use this. So, this is the experimental  Vario gram  once  we fit the 
experimental  Variogram , next we are going to fit that Variogram  using a spherical  model 
earlier  we use the exponential  model  now, let us use the spherical  model. So, you can see we 
are going  to use this spherical  model  and then and from  that now it has been  fit this 
Variogram  has been  fitted  with  the with  the spherical  model.  
So, we are going to fit this. Now, let us see how this model  looks  like. So, you can see the 
nugget  value  is 0.017 then the partial  6 sill of the spherical  model  is 0.13 and the range  is 
489.58 meter.  So, once  we have developed  this model  once  we have fitted  this model using 
the spherical  model, let  us go ahead  and do the  regression  Kriging.  
So, the residual  Kriging model  you can see we are going to use the gstat  function and then let 
us go ahead  and interpolate  this and let us see the coordinate  reference system  of our model  
data it is  of course  UTM  zone  55 South WGS  84 w e know  that.  (Refer  Slide  Time: 22:25 )  
 
 
Now, external  validation,  so, we will now will do the internal  external  validation. So, for we 
can do the external  validation  for so, we have  built the cubist  model  now,  we have  interp olate  
the residuals.  So, both of the operations  are done. So, now we are going  to do the external  
validation.  
So, external  validation  for the cubist  model  we are going to use this validation  dataset  again  
the minus  trainin g data set just like previously. So, we have  fitted  that now cubist  model  with 
residual  Variogram . So, cubist  model  with the residual  Variogram . So, we are again  using 
these minus  training  samples  so, coordinates  of the it is very important  that the coordinates  of 
the validation  sample  should be  the same.   So, we are going to assign  first that x y are the coordinates  of the vDat  and then we are 
assigning the  same coordinate  which  we have used for the  calibration  data or trading data.  So, 
you can see UTM  zone  55 South WGS  84. Now,  based  on these  validation data set we are 
going to  predict  the residual.   
So, using the validation  data set we are going to predict  the residual  based  on the Kriging 
model. So, we are going to use this as data frame  Kriging and we are going to do the residual  
and our new data is the validation  data.  So, based  on the Kriging model, which  we have  
created,  we are going to now validate  we are going to we are going to predict  our validation  
dataset.   
So, once  we have done  that,  now, we  have we know  both the  predicted  values  from  the model  
using the validation  data.  And now we also know  the predicted  values  of the validation  data 
set using the Kriging interpolation. So, the final outcome  will be the predicted  final outcome  
for the validation  data set will be the cubies  prediction plus the Kriging interpolation  
prediction.  
Because  we know  that regression  Kriging is a hybrid approach  which  combines  both the 
deterministic  component  as well as the stochastic component. So, using the validation  data 
from  the already  developed  cubist  model  we have  predicted  the values  simultaneously  we 
have  used  the same validation  dataset  to predict  their  value  using the  creaking  interpolation.  
Now, we have know  there values  separately  now we are going to combine  them  together  to 
get the final prediction. So, the final prediction  you can see sum the two components  together  
in the regression  Kriging. So, cubist  predicted  validation  and then regression  Kriging  
prediction.  
So, we are going to add this type then let us go for this goof function for doing different  types  
of validat ion. So, using the only the cubist  data cubist  or if we go for the goodness  of 
statistics,  you can see this is the model  results  based  on the validation  data set and then if we 
go for validat ing the regression  Kriging using the cubist  model  then you can see that we are 
going to  based  on our  observed  values  are there.  
And the predicted  values  is these final values  which  are predicted  in our last line. So, we are 
going to run this and we are going to have  this final validation  result  based  on the regression  
based  on the cubist  also cubist  model  also. So, here we are going to here you can see we have  done  two types  of validation t he first one is based  on the  regression  based  on the cubist  model  
only and  the second  one is based  on th e regression  Kriging using the  cubist  model.  
So, you try to understand the logic  how we have  proceeds,  how we have  how these different  
steps  were  implemented.  So, we started  with the point  dataset  and then we downloade d the 
covariate  dataset  after downloading the covariate dataset,  we have done  the stacking  of the 
covariates .  
After stacking  the covariate we extracted  this covariates  we converted  this to simple  data 
frame  after we converted  this to simple  data frame  then we have done  the cubist  model  and 
based  regression  fitting  then we have  calculated  the residuals  after we calculated  the residuals  
we have  made the  Kriging interpolation.  
So, and then we have  used the validation  dataset  to predict  from  this Kriging already  
developed cubist  regression  model  and simultaneously  we have also predicted  based  on the 
Krig residuals  and then combine  them  together  to get the final values  of the prediction. Once  
we get the final value  of the predi ction  then we have  done  the goof function executed  the 
goof function to  see what  is the validation  results .  
When we have done  the validation  in two ways one is using only the  cubist  model  and second  
using the regression  Kriging  model  using the cubist. So, all the operations  of these regression  
Kriging are now  done .  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 28:07 )  
  
Now, we are going to map. So, for development  of the for developing the different  types  of 
map we are going to this is very important  step, this is very important  that the coordinate  
reference  system of covstack  should be always  should be equal  to the coordinate  reference  
system  of our model  data,  we have  to ensure that. Once we have  ensured that now we are 
going to  develop that  map  of we are going to  develop two  maps .  
So, first one is map of the so you are going to see that we are going to get the cubist  model  
predicted  0 to 5 centimeter  lock carbon  stock. So, and then we are going to get two other  
maps.  So, here you can see in the first instance we are going to get that cubist  model  
predicted  0 to 5 centimeter  log carbon stock  in the second  instance  we are going to get the 
krig residuals  and in the final map it will be a combination  of both these. So, it is a regression  
Kriging predicted  0 to 5 centimeter  log carbon stock.   
So, here you can see we are changing some  index. So, here when  we are going to the there 
are three maps.  So, in the first map,  we are going to use the cubist  model  predicted  carbon  
stock  in the second, we are going to interpolate  via the Krig residuals.  And in the third  map,  
we are going to use the regression  Kriging final by combining these two approaches  by 
combining these two outcome. So, this is how guys  you can develop this final map based  on 
the regression  Kriging.  
And so, I think the flow of operation which  we have seen is under  is you have  understood it, 
and please try to execute this, please try to run this thing. I will try to give you an assignment  
home  assignment  based  on this, in our, I will post it in our class  forum  another  homework  
assignment  based  on this regress ion Kriging. So, that you can try these codes  and you can feel much  more  confident  about  running the regression Kriging using your own data set. So, I 
will be posting another  confidence  builders  by for  executing  this regression  Kriging.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 31:21 )  
 
So, just  like previously the  reference  for this  lecture  is this and let us wrap  up this  lecture here  
and let us meet  in our next lecture to see the categorical  model  the mapping the categorical  
variables  using R in digital soil mapping.  So, guys  thank you for listening  this lecture.  I hope  
that you have  learned  something new and let us meet  in our next lecture  to discuss  it in more  
details.  Thank you.  