Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 17
Equipment for Paddy Transplanting
Welcome students, we will now talk of Transplanting. You recall in my previous lecture
I said that we are talking of equipment for seeding, planting and then transplanting. I
give a brief reference while talking there of planting. So, transplanting is that we are
planting certain level of seedlings at one location and then we will remove from there
and then put in a bigger field, where in certain amount we do not want them in groups of
10, 12, 15 like that. But, we want in certain good maybe 2 or 3 seedlings to be put at
certain spacing’s that is what is known as transplanting. Let us see what is the equipment
available, how do we prepare these seedlings.
What are the different processes of that? What are the different equipment available?
Well, you must it may not be that technical in the sense that you may think that there is
no calculation and equation, but lot of scientific methodologies involved in preparing the
seed  seedlings  at  a  in  the  nursery  because,  the  nursery  is  where  you  are  growing
everything. For example, nursery is the place for the children, when in the nursery if they
are not taking care of well then they do not grow up a better human being in the later
parts of their career. So, here if you take care from there the nursery of the seeds also
must be there and the seedlings must be taken very carefully when they are taken from
there and then put some words. So, what are the processes involved?
We will go into details of that you might have some of you those who are aware of this
might have seen, but I would like to put them together. Because, in this lecture of farm
machinery it is very imperative, it is very essential that designer an engineer must have
details of all aspects. And, that is why in my lectures you will find so, far and then even
later that I have tried to encompass everything which is from a basics to the high level
and  high  technology  which  will  give  you  a  information  to  the  designers,  to  the
manufacturers and people who are interested in really designing and contributing in the
design of farm machinery for betterment of crop field and things like that. So, let us go
through this transplanting and learn about the various aspects of this transplanting.(Refer Slide Time: 02:54)
Field preparation very important, what sort of field preparation you should have when
you want the transplanting. Primary plowing is essential no need to tell you so, details 6
to 8 weeks it should be done. Secondary plowing 1 to 2 weeks before yes because, now it
is  nearer  you  would  like  to  do  it,  makes  planting  will  maximum  depth  of  5  to  7
centimetres. See we would like when we are talking of this seed field preparation about 5
to 7.5 centimetre depth the soil must be probably well prepared. The bunds etcetera,
destroy rat burrows, repair holes, cracks quarry compared the burns etcetera. These are
important because, when we are talking of field preparation we must talk of the proper
field.
So, what are the other details? Leveling the field will give better water coverage, the
needless to explain that I have already talked of this particularly equipment which is a
laser line leveller. And hence, this is very important. Soil puddling now, when we are
talking of transplanting particularly with respect to paddy we are talking of puddling soil
puddling which should be done at least 1 to 2 days before seedling ok. Now, this is very
important when we should be doing this because took well allow the water to clear when
direct seeding. Allow the water to clear and direct seedling, when you could be doing
direct seeding.
In fact, there are when I explained the different equipment for transfer or paddy I had
shown you it syndrome cedar also, where we are talking about direct seeding bloomers. Imean small germinated seeds were there and then drums were there in which we had
talked of that. Now, transplanting when we are talking of growing seedlings and doing;
so, when we prepare the field well preparation of the soil after that we maintain that there
should be puddling, churning of the soil with a certain standing of water. Now, what is
this? 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:21)
Puddling, this puddling is mechanical manipulation of the soil in presence of standing
water. So, that it prevents loss of water through percolation. This is the main aim of
churning the puddling and facilitate the transplanting a paddy seedlings by making this
soil softer. So, while we puddle churn the soil and then we create a certain layer of soil
and it is softer; so, that when the seedlings are put in, they will be standing over there.
Now, what should be the quality of puddle? If this is a question which is asked many
times people have done lot of work on that and they say what is the level of puddling, we
should be having? Now, if you see the process by which is done; sample of a soil water
suspension sample of soil water suspension shall be taken by immersing a glass tube to a
depth of about 100 millimetres. The sample should be taken from a number of points, it
should be taken from number of points and then it should be in the vertical.
In fact, you should be put in a vertical direction and then take it inside and take the
sample, it is not that from out from the top you should take like this. So, if the cylinder is
there is just put it like this, takes it first inside the water and then take the amount ofmaterial. And, then that material is allowed to settle down for about 18 hours, you can
see about 18 hours then that will settle down. So, the puddling index is then given as the
volume of the soil settled and total volume of the soil. So, what is the settled soil for the
total volume of the soil? This is the puddling index; the quality of this will talk of the
quality of puddle.
Now, see the operation being done here by this power tiller by these rotary we do the
operation. So, quality of puddling generally if my experience and we have seen that
about 60 to 65 percentage of puddling index or 0.5, 0.66, 0.65 value puddling index will
be acceptable to us; if you talk of the condition in which the seedling should be planted.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:02)
Nursery preparation very important, as I discussed earlier nursery preparation; how do
you prepare that nursery? There could be a nursery bed preparation. Now, a process is
shown here process is shown here 100 square meter for a hectare required in nursery.
Now, these are some thumb rules that how much of area required for 1 hectare, if you
have to sow 1 hectare of area with paddy then what is the area required for preparation of
the seedlings industry seedlings. So, it is about 100 square meters for this, nursery bed
preparation. Now, there are aspects of bed preparation, you can see these are explained
over here. Select a level area near the water source with sufficient efficient drainage
system.Because, then the surface should be covered with banana leaves with mid-rib removed or
polyethylene seats prevent seedling roots from penetrating through this bottom soil layer.
Now, these are some of the important things which the person must do and if you go to
the farmers and now, they have also come across various methodologies and various
ways  by  which  they  do  it.  This  is  a  general  way  that  we  are  talking  of  seedbed
preparation. But then they give the fertilizer also some level of fertilizer also there and
give some organic fertilizer maybe they will give so, that the seedlings are grown in
time.
Now, it dapog or mat dapog here we talk without soil. So, these calls we also grown in
the trays and without any soil. Now, this is another method of growing in the nursery.
But, then for that you need to have another infrastructure and the different level of
infrastructure for creating that dapog necessary, but is another type of nursery format
preparation.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:18)
Preparation of this soil, see the details are all given here; you can if you go through the
details, you will find that what we do the preparation of the soil mixture. What how is the
soil prepared? It is very we have explained over here. In the filling the soil mixture, how
do you feel this while mixture each aspect pre germinating. As seeds soak the seeds for
24 hours drain and incubate. Now, each aspect sees mixing the soil manure fertilizer.Now, you can see that this is what we have tried to do. Then the frame for filling soil
now, these are the frames which are filling the soil.
How the filling is taking place and then the sowing of pre germinated seeds and covering
the soil. Now, you see how they have done this part of it and how they are trying to
cover. Frame for filling soil now, there should be frame for filling of this soil what the
frame has been created, sprinkling water to soak the bed. Yes, some water must be there
so, that bed is and mat type nursery.
So, this is how the nursery will be available to you. So, if you follow these aspects of
preparation,  filling  and  the  pre  germination  as  per  these  aspects  which  we  have
explained,  it is a very self explanatory  in the slide which we have met for you to
understand  the  whole  process. And if you follow  in fact, the  farmers  follow  these
practice several locations we have taken from them. And we have in fact, seen that there
is hardly any deviation from one location to other. These are the standards by which even
all over the world people follow.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:07)
Well, transplanting well needless to say I have told you that the classification of trans
planters. So, manual definitely we discussed earlier which is mostly done by the ladies.
Then you have several devices have come up manually operated transplanters some have
come here. We have to go backward then, some of the power tiller ones which are also
there.  And,  then  self  propelled  ones  which  are  very  popular  in  all  these  countriesparticularly Asian countries very much popular. Then mini tractor operated transplanter
is also there. In fact, you we will also show you may be in NICS due course will show
you the operation of this. But, then on the basis of the power source what are all these
things.
At  one  place  you  will  be  in  a  position  to  understand  to  see  that  what  are  the
methodologies, what are the equipment available. So, this particular slide I feel is very
beneficial to you to have a look at all these aspects at one go and at one location. If you
want to make any changes, if you want to think that why a particular posture is adopted
there are many options, many locations where you can put some design aspect and make
it better. Say for example, you have seen here the ladies this is the posture they are
mentoring. So, it has become essential that there should be a standing posture.
So, from ergonomics point of view this is a posture which is better then, but then this is
being pulled in the backward direction. So, this is another aspect that if I go in the
forward direction I can do a better job, then when I go in the backward direction, but
then there are aspects of this job being done. So, we have to think of this. Then what is
the rate at which this the seedlings are being picked up. And what are the types of
seedlings and what are the mechanisms of picking the seedlings from the mat we will see
in the later slides.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:19)
Well there are two types of seedlings, yes if you have seen earlier and maybe the ones
which are being used about 20-30 years back mostly the transplanting means, from the
nursery they are picked up or then bundled small bundles are made by the ladies in most
of the cases. And, they these bundles are then transported on their head and go to the
location where it has to be transplanted. So, they will stand in row a row and maintain
generally maintain a certain distance of 20 centimetre or so, and then put 2-3 seedlings
and this is what they used to do.
Now, that type of seedling is known in root wash type; that means, we uproot them, wash
their roots and then transplant them fresh in the location where do you want. Now,
another one where I discussed about in the previous slide that we have mats created and
those mats now are kept into the system the equipment which I showed you earlier. For
example, here see this is mats which are kept here soil bearing seedling type mats now,
they call it soil bearing. Now, there are the root was type and this type two types are
there and since the people are very much familiar with the root wash type, they would
like to have equipment for that.
So, many people have come up with the equipment for root was type also, but you can
see the details of such equipment which has been designed. And, some other manual
drawn equipment or also seen in literature you will find. But, then one has to appreciate
the efficiency of the operation to be completely because, that is the essence. We do not
want to prolong for a long duration of time, you get very short duration for doing this
operation. So, choosing this and then planning has to be well in advance and should be
done properly.(Refer Slide Time: 16:31)
Now, we in the transplant is particularly hand filled transplanters, if you know that how
the seedlings when from the mat how they are picked up. Definitely, if you have a hand
like fingers like this you put your finger into a mass, if you want to put a finger into a
mass then you can hold it and then bringing back and leave there in the soil and release.
Now, this sort of action you can do. Same thing is being done by the fingers which are
given, fingers which are there.
One is the tweezer type of seed and then is fixed fork type. Now, the different designers
have given different types of these fingers. Now, here is your ingenuity you can think of
a better design, there are several I will show you there are several ones. Now, which one
is better for which condition, which condition of the soil and which gives you easier
action, which gives you less amount of material required, which is very complicated,
which is less complicated, which gives you approximate amount of the seedling that you
want and things like that. You need to consider when you are thinking of the design.(Refer Slide Time: 17:58)
These are another type the moving finger type, rotating pincet type. Now, these details
we have given, actually from the literature whatever is available from different locations
we have given you. We want that you must have a look at this. Now, you will consider as
a designer, you must consider the pros and cons of a particular design. Why a particular
type of finger should be picked up? Why not the other type? What are the complications
in the design? What is the material of construction? How will be the life of this? How
much cost varies involved in this?
Because, you need to while you are talking of particular operation to be done precisely
you must definitely decide about these types. There are these various types which have
been given I mean I need not go more details into this because, it is already available.
But, then I want to impress upon you that you must have a look at these and try to study
before you want to think of a new one, which as a designer you must think of. You must
see the cost involved, material of construction, their placement etcetera with respect to
the power source. What is the size of the power source which you are taking? What is the
speed at which you want to do and things like that.(Refer Slide Time: 19:18)
The manual operated rise transplanter, well I have shown you earlier also, but one of
these we have just shown you where a fixed type of seedling finger is there; this is what
it is. So, we have just shown you one which is available and generally this is a 2 to row
1. And, number of rows 2 to 4, 2 to 4 actually you can have 2 to 4, but we have seen that
particularly for more than 2, it is it becomes very difficult for walking inside the mud
muddy field or inside the puddle field.
It has become very our own experiences people have tried 4, but the output will be very
less. But, if you want that this should be operated faster and output is more, then even
within 2 and 3 there is a debate and 2 is one which is acceptable even the ladies can use
this machine. And, particularly for lady this is 2 and maybe for a male person 3 is ok.
People have tried 4 rows, but then one has a designer if you go to the field and actual
operation if you see, then you will realize that how much is the time the person is in
position to operate.
Because, the ergonomics which I understand that always we must think of the drudgery
of the person when you are thinking of design of equipment so, that is important. So, we
have just given you here so, that you have a look at the one which is a device where for
small farms. If the people are talking in small forms so, a small farmer can have this 2
row unit or a 3 row unit and is available with the farmers or the manufacturers. So, it ischeaper and you can use it, you can create a small nursery if he has small field for
transplanting.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:25)
Self propelled rice transplanter, well this is the one which I said that we will be talking of
I will be showing you a video also in the actual field conditions. I will just go through the
details of that I have shown you, but then it is very proper for me to have a look have a
look at it and show you what are the details of that. You should have appreciate this
point, see the engine the power source which is there we call self propelled. So, it is this
engine which is giving the power to this. There is a traction wheel which will take, this is
a traction wheel here which will take of the traction while it is moving in the puddle soil
condition.
Then, there is a gearbox we are taking power from the gearbox power from the soil; I
mean power from the unit for operation of the fingers as well as movement of the seed
tray etcetera. Then there is a float here yes float because, that float will allow you to
allow the whole machine to float on the puddle soil, it is very important. Remember if
you have a faulty float, then you have a hell of problem and then the machine will not
operate, you should not operate by the way. Then planting fingers of course, it is a
planting fingers are shown here just for your knowledge and what is the type of fingers
planting fingers, you can we have discussed a lot about these. So, we will see a small
field operation of this particular device.(Refer Slide Time: 23:14)
Another aspect of system of rice intensification; this is as people have been talking of
this for a long time because; there are certain advantages of this. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:35)
What we want is that, see depletion of water resources. We know that water is a source
of scarce commodity which is going to happen. Now, rice productivity is also stagnating
yes, it is stagnating we are not in a position to increase the rice yield for various regions.
We  I  need  not  discuss  that  here,  but  yes  you  have  seen  over  the  years  that  the
productivity is also stagnating, not a markable difference in the yield that we are gettingimportance of organic and growing, importance of organic agriculture. Yes, when we are
thinking  of  organic  agriculture,  organic  everything  because  of  the  ill  effect  of  the
fertilizers  pesticides  etcetera;  now  people  are  thinking  of  the  organic  tea,  organic
everything.
So, organic agriculture is now going in importance. So, from that point of view also SRI
this system for rice intensification gains lot of importance. Increasing production cost,
increasing production cost the is also increasing. So, we would also like to bring down
this cost of production. So, we need best utilization of family labour for a small marginal
farmers. Now, exactly this if you have a small plot of land and you have less people to
work with, system of rice intensification will definitely help you and it will give you
better yield, comparatively a good yield.
Now, if you go back to the previous slide yes, now this you must know a little bit of a
history I just told you what are the benefits of that and now you have a look at it. This
SRI was first synthesized by a person Henri de Laulani , from a French Jesuit priest he
just thought of this. So, we have given you for knowing the history, you must have a
look at these two you must know how it has come for. It is a in fact, SRI is often
describes a high yielding and environment friendly technology. This is very important
that we talk that relies on changing farmers agronomic practices. So, when we are talking
of  a  changing  practices,  when  we  are  talking  of  organic  agriculture,  when  we  are
thinking of minimizing the cost of input etcetera; there is a system of rice intensification
is a very relevant talks.
And, people are now even thinking of what sort of equipment we should decide. I think
as a designer you must look into this, you may think of a redesigning the existing
transplanter some of them and think of SRI equipment. Some people have made some
effort in this line and so, as a designer you must think of this.(Refer Slide Time: 26:52)
There are certain principles of SRI, certain important principles which we must know It
is well worth mentioning here: raising seedling carefully, raising the seedlings carefully,
garden like nursery, but we need to give a good environment for this because, we are
talking of single seed, a single plant, single seedling planting. So, there is very careful
attention has to be given. Very young seedlings are taken generally, for this we take
about 3 to 4 weeks of seedlings are taken for transplanting, we have talked of that earlier.
But here it should not be within 8 to 15 days, you can imagine that as low as 8 days to 15
days. So, people will expect anywhere in between this so, that it gives you a good health
when it is transplanted, when it goes to the other location it has a good health; water
management to promote moist, aerated soil conditions, now including dry periods of 3 to
6 days. Now, it also needs certain actually care that care is that most water management
to  promote  moist  around  the  seedling.  Early  regular  weeding,  well  these  are  very
important things which needs to do typically four times during a regular interval maker
with using whatever you can think of the device by which, if it is a large area you can
think of mechanical. If it is a smaller area you can think of manually and all that, then
fertilization preferably using organic sources.
This is what the source the source says that the 6 key principles of system of rice
intensification are these. Well, these are this is what this gentlemen are these people they
reference from where I have taken. They are talking of once you go into details of this,once you are thinking of what sort of equipment you will design and what we see the size
of this equipment, for whom it will be designed. How to apply the enough moisture
there, how to apply water and how in fact, you should think of creating the nursery itself.
And so, that this could be also taken and done. And, I think this is advanced knowledge
which people are going into and designing the equipment. I think worth knowing about
this therefore.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:31)
Benefits, well if you go back we have talked of what are the things which are required
and if you talk of this then definitely benefits are tremendous, all are listed over here.
They say that with higher yields sure, we are going to get higher yield, and we are going
to get good quality of the grain and straw. Reduced duration of the crop cycle yes could
be reduced direction of crop cycle this is very important. Less chemical inputs, yes we
are not thinking of chemical inputs. In fact, we are advocating that there should be
organic material which should be given.
Less water requirement, yes then less chaffy grain; that means, more of a solid grain you
will you are likely to get. Higher head rice recovery, well these are the off suits of what
you  can  get.  So,  SRI  now  every  advantage  is  loaded  towards  system  of  rice
intensification and as a designer you must look into this, you must think of this how best
we can utilize this technique, because aim is to produce more. And, for this is a staplefood we must think of designing and we must think of contributing in the design of such
equipment.
Thank you very much. 