Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 19
GPS based automatic Variable rate fertilizer applicator
Well welcome students. So, far we have been discussing about seed come fertilizer drills,
seed drill and planters and transplanters etcetera. Now, I will tell you another level of
technology that we have developed at IIT Kharagpur, which is GPS based automatic
variable rate fertilizer application. 
We  know  that  generally  the  nitrogen,  potassium,  phosphorus;  NPK  are  the  most
important nutrients which are applied in the in the crop at various levels. Generally, a
nitrogen is the one which is applied in different doses and potassium phosphorus are not
in those number of doses. Now, question is, how do we know what is the amount of
nitrogen which is already available in the soil?
It is important to know how much of the nutrient is already present in the soil because
the soil is already has another crop previous crop another previous crop there could be
some now nitrogen fixing crops taken. So, it is possible that nitrogen is already there in
that the field. So, it is very important to know what is the amount available at particular
location in the field and how much we should apply; so, that we save there. So, on that
basis we created we have designed one GPS based automatic variable rate fertilizer
application system. (Refer Slide Time: 01:47)
What is the variable rate fertilizer application system? We desire see we would like to
know at a particular as I said at a particular location in the field, what is the amount of
nitrogen there and how much should be applied for the crop. Because it may happen that
if you have large amount of already available and you put certain amount, then excess of
anything is bad. So, you will find that if it is that their amount then there will be a
problem.
Now advantages is, it reduce the cost of production definitely, the input cost minimize
the wastage of fertilizer unnecessary and reduce the risk of environmental pollution yes
and on both counts the environment of the soil also will be hampered. So, these are the
benefits of the variable rate fertilizer application. We would like to apply very fertilizer
at varying rates in the different locations in the and the field. (Refer Slide Time: 02:54)
Two basic methods of implementing site specific inform information for VRFA. In fact,
there are two basic methods of implementing this. See what we want to know how what
is the level available at present and how much we should give, this is what we want to
know. How based we can know? One is that we have a sensor take the sensor and then
go in the field and wherever the sensor tells us that, the value is less than a particular
value we will record and then apply immediately on there that this is on the go or you
can say that sensor based approach.
Now another one is map based approach; that means, we map the whole field and find
out how what is the location of the of that field with respect to the other look other parts
and then what is the content of the nutrients at various locations in that field. This is we
create a map of that and on the basis of the map if we take the map and then use with the
power advanced technology of MATLAB and other software’s through which we will be
in a position to store this information.
And then when we go at that location, the sensor will identify that this is the location
where this much is to be applied and accordingly we can apply. So, this the map based
approach  we have two items;  the  sensor based  approach  and  map  based approach.
Nitrogen requirement of the soil we know, algorithm for managing the fertilizer drop,
sensor based approach, detection of fertilizer present in the soil using sensors and mapbased approaches as I said, detection of the current grid using GPS and then of course,
release of fertilizer for both the system.
So, this is a system by which we you either take this or this, but let, but sensor base
approach is still people are applying or trying in the world and we have not got any on
the lagoons sensor based approach for doing this. But most of the people have done map
based approach and this map base mostly is that the difficulty is that you need to create
map for all the locations wherever you there.
But there are other aspects whether you should when you should create? Whether you
should carry create it after each and every crop or whether you should have a 3 year
period and whether you should have a how much number of samples you should take and
things like that, if you want to create a map based approach. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:29)
Structure of the block; now what will happen? You have a GPS, the GPS base, you can
have that a computer will be there, then microcontroller then the DC motor, a rake and
pinion arrangement, then they feed shaft with their variable rate application, then you can
have the chain and chain drive and then the ground wheel. So, from the ground wheel
you will get here and then the information will be there for variable application of the
seed. (Refer Slide Time: 05:57)
Now, this is the conceptual diagram of a GPS based system here, you can see. This is the
GPS rover here then this is the satellite here information the GPS antenna base which
will be there outside and then the processor, the GPS module in this and then here is the
controlling unit and this is the location which we are going to apply.
So, the tractor movement is taking place in this direction. So, the conceptually this that
we get information connecting these with the GPS, which is there on the tractor itself,
then the base antenna is there and GPS base antenna is there and the processor is there,
where we stored the information and then when we tractor goes to that particular grid or
the location it identifies and goes back to the processor and tells and accordingly this
controlling unit will do the job. (Refer Slide Time: 06:57)
Well, selection mapping of experimental field; you should say for example, 20 × 40
meter field has been chosen here. And you can see the grids which have been made here;
you can if you can see the grids, which are made here and this. So, we are in a position to
map this field. So, whole this is the process by which you should do we have done it at
IIT, Kharagpur and that is why we want to show you this information and for your
knowledge and which you can add and do something better. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:34)
Well, sad way of the experimental field will DGPS; Differential GPS, you can see that
we will survey. This is the one which is there at the base and then antenna and we can go
to different locations and survey the field. Well this is very important to know what are
the locations and what is where at this position we must have. So, the survey of the
experimental field within DGPS that we do. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:03)
In fact, see collection of soil sample; the soil sample collection is very important. From
each of the grids, you can see that these are the grids over here. So, how many samples
we should take as I showed you the field? So, in the field itself we should have different
grids and out of the grids the you should take optimum number of samples.
Maybe in a grid of say 5 meter × 5 meter or 2 meter × 2 meter, you can take from the
centre and from the sides or the corners you can take or if it is a bigger one then you can
take accordingly. Now, this depends on the designer, on your on your ingenuity, on your
own experience etcetera and then this samples have to be taken to the laboratory and you
can see that this is a very tedious task. But we need to do it for having the map, because
until unless you do this in the laboratory at large scale basis you will not have an
information.
And as a designer you must have such studies done for different locations to get a
projected idea about a larger field; this is very important.(Refer Slide Time: 09:18).
Well, locations points experimental field with respect to true north and true east well.
This talks up the survey points of latitude and longitude of the location here. Now this is
the one which we did at IIT, Kharagpur that information is over given over here, how is
the rover when it is going to different locations what are the latitude and longitude at that
place; it is important because this information has to be feed to the computer and the
software, we will read this at the point when the tractor moves and goes to that particular
location. So, it is very important to have this survey points latitude and longitude of that
location this is the one which we have done at Kharagpur.
And accordingly this has been created you need to create this for your requirement and
these are basics information which must be done. (Refer Slide Time: 10:18).
Well, on the same basis I can just tell you that see the latitude longitude of experimental
field at IIT, Kharagpur. This is the location where we have and these are the all details of
that points which have been surveyed here. Now, this is the one which is available
nitrogen selected  field we can have. In fact, we have developed for potassium and
phosphorus I mean P and K as well; that means phosphorus P, but for nitrogen only I
have shown you here that we have developed this particular source that when you have
this colour they were 200 kg of per hectare is available for 150 kg and 100 kg.
Now, this is the field, now in the different grids that we can these are the different grids
and at those different grids this is the availability of nitrogen, available of nitrogen in the
selected field. This is one example of how do we do it, when we take the information of
GPS, differential DGPS, take the soil samples the number of soil samples then take them
into the laboratory and find out the NPK etcetera. So, we have created the maps of NPK
all, but I am showing you only a map of N. (Refer Slide Time: 11:40)
Well, we have also created a graph graphical user interface for grid identification, this is
very important. Well I am not giving you all details of this part because these are all part
of the IPR and all that, but these people have this is very simple one which they students
have developed, our students we have developed here and it is in a position to tell us as
to see what is the current fertilizer rate at a particular grid code say here. Then the
required is this, then the current length is this.
Now  this will talk of how much is the exposure that has to be given. So, you can see
here that when it goes to a particular spot, it will tell us the current location is this and
then at a particular grid and this is the exposure length, we need to; that means, you need
to explain here. So, this shows that calibration curve here, I mean the slope of the
calibration curve all details which shows us in this grid It is a very simple one, this very
effective one for the designer, which we have developed. (Refer Slide Time: 12:56)
This is the flow chart of the algorithm for automatic fertilizer at the flow chart well. It is
what giving the flow chart to you can have an idea about this. See this start of the
program starts here. What inputs it takes the inputs are in the comport, band rate and
fertilizer rate. Certain these are important inputs when you go into details of the electrons
part, you will understand what they are, but this system we have developed at IIT,
Kharagpur and that GPS data equations and processing the GPS data, which we have I
have shown you earlier of latitude and longitude that information.
Then if let you longitude of a current location is matching. So, there are certain aspects
which we will talk of whether it is matching or not depending upon the requirement at
particular ways. Then the DC motor will actuate and set exposure length as I showed you
in the GUI which was shown earlier, this is the flow chart for that. (Refer Slide Time: 14:03).
Power train for VRFA system, well, this is a power train now we know that this is the
metering shaft here and then these are the locations where how we are in a position to
operate this. These are these individual flutes which are there and then this portion has
been large here. You can see the position sensor, there is a position sensor which is
connected over here and then this will operate at this location so that the fluted roll can
be adjusted. This shows the DC motor with rack and pinion arrangement.
So, it will this is the power train of the variable red fertilizer applicator system which is
there. This talks of the one which is existing and if you want to design and have a change
in these, it depends on you can think of a new system whatever for fertilizer, or for seed
etcetera. You can think of that this is system which we have created and want to let you
know. (Refer Slide Time: 15:09).
Well developed electronic circuit we can show that here the just the Servo motor, the
Potentiometer, Relay switch and Arduino Uno all these are shown over here; 1 is the
servo motor here, 2 is the potentiometer in this case, the 3 here is a relay switch and 4th
is the Arduino Uno. So, we are in a position to show you and this is the unit which has
been developed in the field and in fact, we have operated and this has given us a result
which is very close to our acceptability. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:49).
Well, field test we have done field test of this let me have a look at this. The micro
controller, the micro controller is here, the fertilizer applicator is here. Then these the DC
motor at this location and the roller position sensor roller position sensor ok, then base
GPS is here, rover GPS is in this place. 
Now, then we are in a position to see in the field, this has been in fact, we have also
operated this in the field and we have measured this is for experiments. So, we have just
put polythene in order to know that, what is the amount which is falling when the system
is working in the field. So, it is a field test which we have done at this place to see
whether our system has worked or not. So, this is one innovation that we have done at
IIT, Kharagpur and which is compared to anywhere world in fact, system and which is
working. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:57)
Well when we compare this with the output the results of these two we find that we are
not very much off, the fertilizer application system we find that we are in a position to
give application rates between these two vary as low as 5 to about 400 kg; that means,
for a smaller seeds also we can do and as high as high application rate and the variation
in the application rate is not very much, it is very small. 
You can see the graph itself you can see the predicted and actual graph itself which will
give you a good idea about this and the actual fertilizer application and the theoreticalfail. So, you get a very good R square value of this which says that the system has
worked well and there is a promise for this. 
Thank you very much. 