Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 01
Importance of Farm Machines in the Context of Enhance Production, Multiple
Cropping, Labour Scarcity etc.
Dear students welcome to NPTEL course and Farm Machinery. Well my first lecture has
been  designated  at  Importance  of  Farm  Machines  in  the  Context  of  Enhanced
Production, Multiple Cropping, Labour Scarcity etcetera. Now, through this course I
would like to explain here particularly in this first lecture as to what is the importance of
such a course; one must know why he is learning a particular course, which way this
course will be helpful to him in future course of time as well as how he can contribute in
the growth and development of his nation. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:56)
Now, let us have look at what is the in statistics globally and also in India. Now, let us
have a look at the population. Now, we have about 0.37 billion people in 1950-51 and
today we have about 1.342 billion people and the production in 1950-51 was about 50.8.
Million tons and today production is 275.68 million tons. Now, if we compare this we
find that we are much below the requirement of the country although we say that we are
safe sufficiency  in food grain production, but then in order to fulfill  and feed thispopulation we definitely require much higher than what we have and therefore, there are
needs of increasing the production.
Now, how do we increase production have also look at what is the requirement what was
the area in 1950-51 and what is the area at present. So, if you have look at the area net.
So, an area was about 131.89 million hectares and it is at 141.43 million hectares today.
So, there is a comparison the increase in the area is hardly 10 million hectares or so, but
the production has gained tremendously as well as the population has increased a in a
bigger way it is said about 3.7 times than what it was in 1950-51. So, if we compare this
we have to look into what is the requirement today, what we have what are the different
resources that we have and how with the resource set sources, how we can take care of
the production and enhance the production that is the main aim.
Now, how what are the power sources that will be there on the farm? Now, the power
source to start with it is the human being. So, you can have a look at this the agricultural
workers has been increased by 2.7 times from 1950-51. Now, earlier it was 97.2 million
now we have 263.1 million although the figures shows that the values are quite high here
to, but if we say the population is more, but people are not to work in the field. There
could be several reasons for that, may be the agriculture has not given that much of
production or that much of revenue because of which people have shifted from there to
other regions.
You can have a look at this that the percentage of employment in agriculture has been
decreased  from  63.58  percent  to  42.73  percent  in  2017.  There  has  been  decreased
because the people have gone to different other operations which we will see where they
go. Now, globally if you see a situation will come up when today we have about 2.1
billion today and to feed about 7.6 billion people in the whole world. And by 2050 we
will require about 3 billion tons of this food production when we will have a product
population of 9.1 billion.(Refer Slide Time: 04:45)
Now, if we go to the next well we can also have a look at the average size of the different
holdings particularly in the context of this country. We see that from 1970-71 here the
average in different categories say marginal small mediums large and overall size if you
see the 1970-71 the average value was 2.28 hectare whereas, in 2010-2011 the figure is
1.15. Now, this itself indicates that the area has decreased. So, what has happened is first
problem was that the people have been less are for doing the agricultural operations
second is this land is also shrunk and since the population has increased we need more
food. So, the problem is very complex.
Because the resources are diminishing and we need to produce more out of this. So,
when  the  land  area  is  decreasing  the  requirement  of  food  is  more  and  the  people
available for this work is also less then we will have to depend on certain aspects and
certain other sources by which we can get the production. And then we have to think of a
cropping intensity or we have to think of increasing this area because area has been
virtually come from 2.28 to 1.15 ha.
Now we need to increase this area vertically and when we see vertical increase in area
we talk of in increasing the cropping intensity. That means, increasing the same amount
of areas within the same amount of area we would like to produce 2 crops 3 crops or 4
crops depending upon the duration of the crop and depending over the type of crop andthat will give us more and more production. So, the idea is within this we will have to
have more production per unit area.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:06)
Well so; that means, we will definitely require machines which will definitely learn more
power sources which will help us in doing these different operations. What are those?
The operations will they start from preparation of the soil for creating good tilth for
seeding this was seeds, then second will be for inter culture operations after the crop has
grown for certain period of time may be 3 weeks or so, we would require that there
should be some (Refer Time: 07:39) of operation. And after the operation when the crop
has come up if there is requirement of any plant protection in way of some nutrients or
fertilizers or for pesticides we will have to take care of the crop and after that harvesting
and then threshing
Now, we will have to have these operations to be done now if we see that the human
beings are less then what are the other sources the other source is the animal which can
be used for doing these operations. But definitely they require certain implements certain
equipment by which they can they can do this operations in time. And the third is the
power source because more and more power sources will be required for doing this
operations.  As I said that these operations  from field  preparation  to harvesting and
threshing they are totally timed if they are not done within the period of time which is
scheduled for it then definitely there will be losses and. So, we would like to maintain atimeliness of operation of these different operations and for that it is very essential that
you should have the machines for doing these operations within the period of time.
Because then your aim is to have 3 to 4 crops in the same area. So, that is only possible if
we have machines effective machines which can do these operations within the time. So,
that you can after finishing one crop you can take up the next crop. So, then farm
mechanization  is  this  then  that  application  of  engineering  and  technology  in  farm
production for doing all these operations this is how in a very simple way we can define
farm mechanization. Now, the result of that is timeliness for operation timeliness of
operation improves farm crop productivity and definitely if the things are done in well in
time then it will reduce the crop losses as well as the quality of the grain will also be
improved.
Now since the operations you might have seen that the various operations when they are
operated when they are completed by human being the human being assumes different
occurred postures and that will definitely tell on the health of the operator. So, when we
are employing machines we are definitely also reducing human drudgery and enhance
the life of the operator. So, the reduced human drudgery is also another operation of this
farm mechanization.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:21)
Now,  you  can  have  an  idea  about  what  is  the  all  India  average  production  and
productivity of the major crops during the past 60 years it is very essential to have a lookat these values to an appreciate as to what has been the production over the years and
what is the requirement in future of different crops. For example you can look at the food
grains food grains here we will see the area production and the yield. In 1950-51 this is
the requirement 97.321 million hectares 50.82 million tons and then yield is 522 kg per
hectare
Now, in 2015-16 the same value have you can see that 97.32 a million hectare has
become 122.65 million hectares and the yield which was 50.82 million tons has become
2.52 million tons. In fact, this is a figure which is slightly recent figure, but it takes of the
food grains only. So, 252.22 million tons and the yield which has become 2056 kg per
hectare. So, although we have increased this, but there are various reasons for this and
this will be seem for all the crops if you see the rice crop, wheat crop, coarse cereals,
sugarcane crops, pulses oil seeds, milk production we can have a look at all these and
then we will see that there are definitely has been a change in the values from 1950-51
to this.
There are several reasons for that and those reasons are. In fact, the application of
various power sources in during this period of time in different categories for the tillage
operation for seeding operation for harvesting operation for threshing operations and. So,
on well if you see the details of that we may find that the fully the whole may be a
country like India has not been fully mechanized on all respects because the rather areas
in which the crops are not be mechanized, but particularly because I said earlier and we
have shown you that the different categories of farmers.
So, since the category farming about 60 to 65 percent of the farmers are in the area of
less than and within about 2 hectares or so, and only few portions of the percentage is in
the larger hectare. So, that has been the case it is not been possible to mechanize full. So,
certain operations are largely mechanized certain operations are being done on custom
hiring basis which I will tell you some other lecture in during the course of my lecture
itself which will which will be dealt with slightly in greater details when we will be
talking of matching implements; when we talking of other aspects of farm machinery
mechanization we will talk of that later. 
But then here I want to show you that what is the production and productivity of the
different  crops  over  the  last  60  years.  This  is  a  trend  which  indicates  that  themechanization is helping and has helped and continue to help and therefore, there is a
need for the machines there is needs for effective machines there is effective need for
new machines in this area well this is another important information which one must
know.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:56)
Now, you can have a look that in 1975-76 see this is the amount of power available per
hectare and this has grown from and in 2012-13 if the figure is to be taken to be like this
then 1.84 hectare kilowatt per hectare sorry kilowatt per hectare. So, 0.36 kilowatt per
hectare  to 1.84 kilowatt  per hectare and this shows that there is definitely  a direct
relationship between the power on the farm and the productivity because the other line
this line shows the see productivity is here the 0.94 tons per hectare to 2.06 tons per
hectare.
Now, this now there is a production thus by 2020 these this value 2020 this value is
going to be over 2.2 kilowatt and well if you come compare with other countries I think
of the this figure is much lower as compared to Japan. And other countries where the
values is much beyond 7 and 8 kilowatt per hectare something of that figure; But then it
indicates that you need to have more and more farm power in order to have more and
more production.(Refer Slide Time: 15:38)
Now, this further emphasizes that farm power and productivity are well related how they
are related you can have a look at the different states now, we know that in different
states more of people with are length sizes are there you see in Punjab and Haryana up
and Uttaranchal and other eastern I mean the northern part of the country in the eastern
part of the country.
We find that the area is much more smaller and more of small and small land holdings
are there because of which mechanization has not reached to those areas, but then this
also  shows  that  there  is  a  good  direct  relationship  between  farm  power.  And  the
productivity of any crop if you think of food grain production here kg per hectare and
food grain productivity kg per hectare you can see the values which are given for the
different states.(Refer Slide Time: 16:42)
Different power sources in total farm power share how the different power sources which
are adding to the total power on the farm well the as we I said earlier that there could be
a power from the human beings. The human beings are involved in different working
you can say the tasks in the field.
For example, if a small farmer has a small plot of land he will be only doing with this
spade and kurpi and a small tools that he will be a able to do most of the operations
including planking and sowing of the seeds as well including even harvesting with his
own small sickling and all that. So, the agricultural  workers or that, but today the
situation has been changed to a greater extent people are not available for this as I said
earlier, but then we can have a look at it
Now, you see here that the agricultural workers in 1960-61 is, about 14.7 percent. Now
in 2013-14 now this is the figure here. So, you can see that this 2013-14, but the figure is
if you if one considers is not much changed. So, there has been decrease in the people
who are involved in agriculture, this is very important to look at this similarly go to the
draft animal power as I said that on the farm. Although the woman I mean the way
agricultural workers have reduced similarly is the case with the animal there could be
various regions for that, but then if I take the animals we need to have the equipment
which are face efficient equipments and those equipment should be available to be drawn
by the animals on the field.There could be if the crop has grown up then it is very difficult to drive those people
there say for example, other operations, but tillage operations major the utilization of
animal power. So, they have been used, but even then it situation today is that they are
now only 7 percent of what they were about seventy eight percent sometime in sixties or.
So, this has also decreased now when this has decreased this means that the people are
shifting towards more and more of machines  more and more of effective machines
because these animal are not of that much use except for some of the operations may be
threshing  operations  may  be  tillage  operations  and  sometimes  we  need  to  culture
operation when the crop is small.
They could be also utilized for other nonagricultural operations it is not that they are
totally absolute or their power cannot be used definitely they can utilized for that, but
then in agriculture if you are talking of the production agriculture here I think their
percentage is decreasing. And we need to look into this aspect then we come to the other
fuel packed sources here tractor and power tillers involve now you can see this situation
in sixties is was only 2.54% whereas, it has increased over the years and now it is 49.29
percent and it is going to increase.
So, more and more of farm power more in more of machines if we if we utilize then
definitely this power source will increase and as soon earlier definitely this will result
into more of production less of losses etcetera of the crop. So, this is a sign which is
emphasizing that there is need for farm mechanization and there is need for using more
and more machines for production. Now, have a look at other stationary engines which
were required for other operations for threshing or for pumping operations and other you
can see the diesel engines now it will go on 16.7 percent and even electrical motors
which we are 1.88%.
Now they are 22.29 percent here. So, we can see that these 2 sources  particularly
electrical motors and diesel engines which are used for electrical sorry irrigation these
are also for irrigation and sometimes for threshing etcetera the percentage is very close.
Now,  particularly  here  we  I  can  only  add  that  may  be  because  these  are  these
supplemented for such a operations particularly by nonrenewable sources like I mean
may be the renewable energy where we can think of solar we are getting think of wind
power etcetera. So, these are some of the things which may be compensating for thishere, but they trained here is that we have to have more and more power sources; that
means, it is empty clear now that we have to have the machines effective machines for
different operations for different crops cereal crops plantation crops vegetable crops cash
crops for all sorts of this we will required to have machines effective machines, but
different operations each operation.
Now, sometimes there is a question asked that why not have small machines to the small
operators or the small land holdings the person can purchase the machine. Now, here this
is a big debate and that debate is essentially in the sense that for each of the operations
you will have to give him a machine. And if you want to give him a machine if you want
to give him a machine which will have which will require some small power the moment
you give him that machine there will be a cost attached to that, but smaller the machine
smaller will be the output of that now the moment to give him a small machine and
output of that he compares that how much time I will do with this machine why not I do
for manually.
So, there is a comparison and many a times he is right. So, we need to look into this and
the answer comes out that no we have to have certain medium size machines for these
people or a slightly bigger size machines for a group of people. And then we will require
people who can do say cooperative farming or you can think of having a custom hiring
basis use of this machines and possibly those machines will be earlier for a smaller
farmer or farmer who does not have that much of revenue that much of money to
purchase these machines.
So, what he can do he can on rent he can take these things and then get the operations
done he does not have botheration of owning the machine for storing the machine for
repair maintenance etcetera not there. So, the next I mean the requirement is which is
required  is that  he should have custom hiring basis and a may be on the basis  of
cooperative farming is going to be the next answer well. So, when we have proved here
that there is need for machines for different operations now let us see what are the
different.(Refer Slide Time: 24:24)
Yes, horse power tractor production in India; horse power wise. Here we can see that in
the tractors which are being produced particularly in this country we have taken here. In
fact, we are the second largest producer of tractor in the world and we do have larger
players of tractors manufactures like John Deere also in this country. So, we will if you
see right from last 18 years or so, say from 2000 to 2016 today we see that the type of
and the size of horse power tractors that we have been using.
We see that mostly we are using we are using this 31 to 40 horse power, wherein you can
see that these are the requirements here this is this is the trend here that about 31 to 40
horse power has been over the year for a longer time. There had been a small there has
been need for small tractors also for small farms and they are also, but they are not being
a drastic increase in their this less than twenty horse power there has not been increase
except for in some of the areas where it can be use for multiple operations as where in
the gardens in other locations right.
So, we find here that the horse power mostly in the range of 31 to 40 horse power is the
requirement and what we see today is about 41 to 50 horse power. So, 41 to 50 horse
power is the range being used because of larger equipment and machines which are
being used by the people.(Refer Slide Time: 26:17)
Where use farm implements in India there are for each operations of course, definitely
each operations we have the use of tractor and animal power for various operations right
from the beginning as I said earlier. So, you can have a look at this and see that for every
operation from tillage, sowing, harvesting, threshing, and irrigation, plant protection we
require a larger area for larger amount of implements are being used.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:49)
Now, some of the machines which are used for different agricultural operations we are
just given you these right from this land development sowing, weeding, inter cultivation,harvesting, post harvest, operations and some of these machines have been shown to you
here which are for say plough here this was seed drill this is for inter culture operation
this for spraying operation this is for harvesting and then threshing. So, these are some of
the equipments which will be required.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:33)
Now, the present status of mechanization of important crops paddy you can see that all
the  operations  are  mechanized  from  transplanting  cono  weeder  for  inter  culture
operations for harvesting operation and for threshing operations.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:49)
For wheat we have the 0 till drill wheat thresher mini combine, this for this crop also
many of the operations are mechanized.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:00)
For potato crop this is another crop which is of more important in this area we have
machines  which  are  used  and  to  a greater  extent  and these  machines  are  effective
machines which are available in the country today.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:15)
Then for groundnut this is another crop which is available in the country and be used by
farmers in different areas and we have given you the capacity etcetera of this. We canlook at these machines and it emphasizes that for more or less to a greater extent we have
machines which are available and there is need for more adoption of this. Now, one has
to think of what should be the more of adoption of these machines which is important
thing.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:50)
For jute particular in this part of the country we have manual jute seed drill which is here
we have designed a seed drill at IIT Kharagpur, which is self propelled machine for eight
row and this is effectively working.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:06)
Therefore, what we exactly we want to say throughout this first lecture; I wanted to only
emphasize that for global food security and sustainability there has to be have more and
more of food production and that is only possible through farm mechanization.
Therefore, we need to know about the different machines, different designs of these
machines, effective designs of these machines, effective utilization of power, different
power sources on the machine is the talk of the day here and better farm machines better
farm machinery is required on the machines. I think I have convinced and I have tried to
convince  you  why  this  particular  course  is  important  from  view  of  contribution
particularly to the agriculture production.
Thank you.