Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 02
Ploughing and first opening of the soil , the design and component details
Well, in my second lecture here I would like to tell you that Ploughing and first opening
of the soil, the design and component and other component details. Well in the previous
lecture, I have explained you that different implements  and equipment are required.
Now, here I will let you know as to what are the different equipment which are required
for different operations, particularly with respect to tillage we will talk of because first is
a requirement of opening of the soil and then, preparation of the seedbed. So, we will
talk of those equipment now.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:53)
So, what is tillage? It is very important to understand what tillage is. A tillage is the
mechanical manipulation of the soil for proper seedbed preparation in crop production.
Why we need because, if you open the soil immediately, the soil bigger clots will open.
Now, if you sow the seeds on that, these heavier clots will simply dump the small seeds
and they will not allow it to open. So, we would like that there should be a very freeable
and a smooth soil and seedbed preparation for the seed to grow, but need to it must have
an environment which we call as while till, so that small particles of soil need to beprepared from the beginning and for doing that, we will have to apply the different
implements.
Now, the objective of this tillage is to develop a desirable soil structure for a seedbed
root or rootbed; whether it is a seed to be put or for a root crop to be sown, control weeds
or to remove unwanted crops. Yes if we do this operation, definitely you can control the
weeds because although we do not sow the weeds, but the weeds grow on their own and
that is why if we have a proper field preparation, the seeds will grow, but not the weeds.
Manage  plant  residues.  Yes  there  could  be  plants  residues,  there  could  be  a  crop,
previous crop and when we are taking the field operation, first ploughing of the operation
or preparing the field, there could be some of the residues there. Now, we would also like
to manage those residues and conserve the moisture for the second crop. So, this is
another requirement of that.
Minimizing soil erosion by contour tillage, listing and proper placement of trashes; Now,
this also helps us. Erosion of the soil or soil conservation is important here. when we are
operation these equipment, particularly depending upon which type of equipment and for
what operation we want and definitely this also many a times we would like to mix the
fertilizers and amend the soil sometimes by using salt etcetera which mixed with this
soil, so that the condition of the seedbed is better prepared. It depends on the condition of
the soil initially and what we want to do the operation. So, for various these operations,
we require a tillage equipment. Now, what are the equipments?(Refer Slide Time: 03:25)
See the types of tillage equipments. Now, you will see that for tillage we need mainly
two types of equipments. First is the primary tillage operation where we require primary
tillage implements; Now, a mold board plough, a reversible plough, a disk plough, a
chisel plough or a sub soiler.
Now, these are required in different conditions. For example, this mold board plough
will be required for first opening of the land. This plough is also for first opening, but
there is a difference between these two. What happens is that in mold board plough, you
require that the field should not have the stony field or lot of bushes and trunks etcetera
of the trough is etcetera. But, if there are bushes and stones etcetera at that location, disk
plough is the one which is best because it has disk and these disk rotates. So, they will
not be able to get damaged as compared to the disk plough. So, these are the two which
are there.
Sometimes when we want that a chisel plough or a sub soiler where in the lower part of
the plant zone, plant root zone, we find that is hard pan comes and then, in order to cut
that we require sub soilers. These go up to about 1 to 1.5 meters or so. So, these soils are,
this sub soiler is required for that and this is another equipment. Although this is old
equipment, this has become off late it has become very useful because it helps us in
conserving the time at the head lands. So, management of the time at the head lands isvery important in this. This implement is used. So, we can say that these are normally
designed to reduce soil strength, our plant residue and rearrange aggregates.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:33)
Now, we go to the next set of machines where which these are known as secondary
tillage operations. Secondary tillage, that means primary tillage. When we have opened
the soil or just opened the soil, we will have bigger clots as I said earlier. Now, we would
like to create as I said a continued atmosphere for this seeds to grow and for that we will
have to have a smaller particles and that is only possible if the bigger plots are broken
down into smaller and for that we have secondary tillage operation equipment. 
Now, these are a large number say single active disk harrow, then a double acting disk
harrow, offset disk harrow. Similarly, cultivators now, we can see a rigid tyne cultivator,
a spring tyne cultivator and duck foot type cultivator. Then, there is another one which
has become very popular nowadays is a rotavator, then a spike tooth harrow.
Spike tooth harrow is not that much, but yes this rotavator has become very popular and
in fact, this is also operated by the tractor. We see that the PTO gets the maximum power
out of the three power outlets of tractor, but it is the list used one and we have the other
implements. The secondary tillage implements or the primary tillage implements, those
are whole attached to the drawbar or the three point linkage.Although they are mostly used, they are the least effective ones. This is the nomenclature
which we give that we have three power outlets of PTO, the drawbar which is three point
linkage and then, the third outlet is the hydraulic system which is used for lifting and
lower of the equipment and maintaining a certain depth of the soil with respect to the
tractor. So, these are the different operations. You can see that; the operation of single
acting disk harrow, then the double acting disk harrow. The soil will be thrown in one
direction. In the double acting, you will have two rows of the disk which are maintained
and the after disk harrow; it is offset with the line of operation of the tractor here.
The spring tyne one's cultivator, these cultivators generally these are all operated within
a zone of about 4 to 6 inches or may be about 8 to 10 centimeters. So, this is the
operation which, this is the depth at which these are operated.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:10)
Minimum tillage now as there is another concept which is not new one, which is for a
long time is the minimum tillage operation, where the tillage we do not disturb the crop
to a greater extent,  but then these improve the soil condition  and improve the soil
moisture and where we do not have. (Refer Slide Time: 08:53)
It means reducing the row crop production cost by improving this soil conditions. Here
minimum tillage we will not be churning the soil to a greater extent and that we will save
energy at the same time. The moisture content will be there, some of the equipment to
reduce the mechanical energy here, conserve moisture, optimize the soil condition and
minimize the number of trips over the field and hence, time for this we have a very
popular equipment which is being used all over the country is a zero till drill. This
another one which is happy seeder developed in Ludhiana and being used all over the
country. This is one of the very effective tools for this.
Now, another thing for maintaining the soil moisture, we would like to after the crop has
been harvested, we would like to take advantage of the moisture which is there. And for
that we would have, we would like that the same stubbles could be cut and then, left in
the field, so that they will conserve the soil moisture and then, the next crop can be
grown. So, for that stubble mulch tillage equipment, sometimes are used. One is shown
over here as a mulch machine.
With this now, I would like that let us go to the field and have a look at the operation of
these machines under the field conditions and I hope that you will enjoy this operation
and have a look at the different operations. And we look forward to your questions and
queries that you may have. 
Thank you.Dear students, welcome to the course on Farm Machinery. Well, when we talk of farm
machinery, we must talk of the power source which will be driving those machines
which are there for different operations in the field. Well, tractor has been found to be
the biggest and the largest power on the farm and you must have seen in the tractor today
which is available in a very different shape, but I am going to show you a tractor which
was here in IIT Kharagpur and was operated during early 60s and 70s which has some
features which were totally different then what it was at that time. Now, it is essential
only to see that what was there in the history and what were the designs as at those times.
Now, you might have seen the tractor which is well balanced today and which has three
point linkage, but a tractor which we have here which is a Russian tractor and it has two
points, now these you can have a look at this. This is one point and this is two points, this
is two points, the third point is not available here.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:41)
.
So, the implements, generally the implements were larger implements and they were
semi mounted type of implements because the third point if it is there, then it becomes a
mounted implement and if the two points, it becomes certain portion of the weight is
supported by the tractor and the other weight is supported on the road.
Now, another thing is that in this tractor we have seen that the distribution of the engine,
the transmission, the differential and the final drive are totally well distributed, but incase of this tractor we can have a look at this. You see that here, yeah you have seen in
the present tractors, the PTO is a back PTO.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:21)
Here, it is a front PTO. Have a look at this same six spline, but this front PTO and the
weight distribution, you can see here that this is a long beamed where the weights are
kept and the balance of the weight with respect to the rear weight by giving weights on
these.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:36)
.(Refer Slide Time: 12:40)
The steering operated through this is a similar kind of operating system of the steering
which are here the way we have Ackerman type of a steering system.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:47)
If the weight of other portions of the engine transmission, everything is to be just here
where the operator seat is there and you can imagine that what was the condition of the
operation when the engine is vibrating here and the sound is being made, everything the
fuel tank, everything was here and the tractor is operating and this tractor had all the
controls are over here. So, no consideration you know even for the human being. So, it isworth sowing that this particular tractor which was totally different, then what it is at
present and it has front PTO, it has back PTO, you have a two point linkage and all the
subsystems  of the tractor  are concentrated at the back and above which the tractor
operator use to sit. Now, when you go to a new tractor, have a look at that.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:46)
So, you have a look at the new tractor. Today we have two points as I showed you there.
Now, here there are three point linkage and this is the three first point which is a lower
link. Then, this is another lower link, the second point and the third one is the stop
linkage which is stop point. So, these are the three point which are there for attaching the
modern implements in those modern tractors and the PTO is here which is a back PTO.
Now, it has also a single link where you can sow the, attach the trailor where this is the
pin here and we can attach at these three locations. Now, you see the weight distribution
of the present tractor.(Refer Slide Time: 14:28)
We can see here, right from here is our radiator and then, the engine, the transmission,
then differential and final drive.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:37)
All these are well distributed, its say four wheeled drive tractor. Generally when we have
a four wheeled drive tractor, we will have the weight distribution approximately on the
front axle and rear axle, approximately 50-50. But when we have a two wheeled drive as
we have in other tractors, we have about 65 to 70 percent of the weight on the rear axle
and about 30-35 percent weight on the front axle, but this is a four wheeled drive tractor.(Refer Slide Time: 15:10)
Now, when we go to the earlier one, we can have a look at this point which was shown
you earlier. I can have a look at this again that this is the lower links. It has only lower
links.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:17)
This is the one link which has the point here, this another link which has the point here.
Here there is no top link.(Refer Slide Time: 15:24)
The PTO, the back PTO is over here just like ours, but all the locations of everything was
at this position. You can see the exhaust of the other tractor and exhaust over here. Now,
the exhausts are located over here in contrast to the new tractors. The difference here is
that these tractors we were not taught of particularly with respect to the operator because
these were made well in 1940’s or so and this is a Russian tractor.
In the 1960’s only when John Deere had thought of about the tractor operators, then we
had modern tractor seats just like have a look at this, a tractor seat which has suspension
system and which is well balanced, even the controls. We had seen the controls that all
controls were at one location, but here the controls are well distributed on the right hand
side, left hand size and the leg controls the safety which is there. In fact, you can see the
foot rest. The safety is very important here because when the person operates, now how
to get in to the tractor and get out of the tractor, these are very important. So, with
respect to that we can see that for person to get up, this is the location where he can have
a look, he can hold here and then, put his leg over here.
In fact, sometimes you need for the smaller operator; you need another step here by
which he can get into tractor. So, if you see the old tractors and the modern tractors,
there is a large difference which has taken place over the years. Now, when we are
talking of the power out of these tractors, we have three main power outlets. One is PTO
which is in fact of two types. Generally PTO, we will have 6 splines or 21 splines. Theseare for 540 +/- 10 rpm and then, another 21 splines will have about 1000 +/- 20. Now,
when we want to take the power out of this tractor, the outlet as I said PTO which gives
us about 90 percent of the power and then, when we go to the next power outlet, out of
the tractor is the drawbar and this three point linkage is known as the drawbar that has
lower links and the top links. So, we have to attach the implements on these three points
as well as the single point at which we attach the implements which are trail type just
like our trailer or any other implement.
Now, when you attach the implement or any equipment for taking power from PTO, you
get about 90 percent of the power. When you attach to these three point linkages, then
that implement although it becomes a mounted implement where in the total weight of
the tractor, weight of the implement is attached to is virtually taken by the tractor and it
also helps in the traction and the tractability of the tractor, but then trailed implements
which are very less in number nowadays, we have all the most of the weight which is
supported on the ground and a portion of the weight is separated here which are known
as semi mounted type of implements.
Now, in later course of this course, we will let you know as to how they are attached to
the tractor and what are the lines of force which are acting between the different points
and how the implement is interacting with the soil; Now, here I will like to show you
how the implements are attached with the three point linkages. Another thing which I
wanted to show you where many times the students are not aware. Now, the tractor
wheel, the tractor wheel what the size of the tractor wheel. Many times it is asked that:
what do you mean by the size of a particular wheel?(Refer Slide Time: 19:28)
Now, see here it is 16.9-28. Now, this 16.9 - 28, this means that 16.9 is the section width
which we can call from here or even we can take if draw a scale from here and then, this
width is 16.9 which is in inches. Mind you this is very important to be noted that this is
in inches, then 28, these also in inches and this talks of the rim width from here to here. 
Central distance of this particular circle that is in rim width of the tire, these what are the
important points because the students now we are all aware of MKS system and this is
still written in the PS system, where we have 16.9, the section width or the depth here in
inches and 28 inches is a rim width. Now, if you want to get the diameter of the wheel
you can have this 28 which is this to this and then, 16.9 which is generally this width, we
take as this to this here and same thing on these sides.
So, you can add 16.9 - 28 that is 16.9 - 28 plus again 16.9. This way you can convert this
into meters and you can get the diameter of the wheel. This is very important. Sometimes
even the boys would not like to, would not be knowing as to what is meant by wheel
base. We generally think that wheel base is the total length of the tractor which is not.
So, in fact wheel base is the center to center between here from here.(Refer Slide Time: 21:08)
If you call this is the center to center distance between the front wheel and the rear
wheel, so this distance is known as the wheelbase and wheel trade. This another thing
which is important so far as the tractor is concerned is the wheel trade. Now, wheel trade
is the center line. This is a center to center distance between the two rear wheels as well
as the front wheels center to center distance. 
This is wheel trade, this is called wheel trade which I showed there center to center
distance between the two wheels is the wheelbase. This is important to know because
when we want to find out the weight of the tractor and this calculation of the CG as well
as the force employed by the tractor on to the implement, when it is operating in the soil,
it is very important to know these parameters which are very essential portion in finding
out the total draft requirement and hence, the power requirement.
We have a problem of having the total power and the matching of the implement because
tractors depending on the type of the three point linkage we have. In fact, the three point
linkage are having in different categories, the category 1 category 2 and category which
go more mostly dependent on the power of the tractor. Generally higher horse power
tractors ground, the category 3 and we do have about the category 2 which is most of the
time within the 50 horse power tractor that we are using now. It is important that how
much power we are taking from this tractor and how much power is actually required by
the implement is still mystery because when you go to the soil, soil is a viscoelasticmedium that keeps on varying depending upon the soil moisture content and depending
on the depth which is operated and depending upon the type of the soil it is.
So, this is a complex thing which needs to be found out and still people are working on
the matching of the implements with respect to the power source which is still when we
deal with in the treatment of mathematical treatment. I will show you how we are in a
position to find out the matching implements for a particular power source. Now, we will
show you how this is attached to a tractor. Many a times the actual attachment of the
implement to the tractor is not but; let us have a look at this.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:42)
Generally the first two links are attached first, the lower link and then, the top link. The
problem is these only. We generally put the right hand side one and then, go to the left
hand side and later on once these two are met, the top link is easier to be fixed into this.
Now, it is locked by the pins which are given over here and slightly tightening of the top
link, ok. The implement is now attached and now, it can be lifted or lowered depending
on the situation. Yeah we can see that a two bottom mold board plough has been attached
to a tractor. Now, it is very important to understand how the mold board plough acts,
what are the different components of this.
In fact, the cutting edge or the cutting part of this mold board plough is this part. Now,
this is the shear and this is the shear point. It has a mold board. Now, this boards purpose
is to invert the soil. Now, it has the length. This is the shear which is there and in order toconnect this cutting edge as well as the board and the shear, this we have a frog which is
known as this portion which is known as the frog of the component.
Now, the rear one has an additional attachment which is helpful in maintaining a clear
furrow and that is the land side. This is called the land side of the mold board plough. If
you take the center of resistance, the center of resistance will fall in between this line
somewhere here. This will fall in between somewhere here when we consider the forces
application and when we find out the total power requirement. We will deal with the
analytical treatment in a later lecture. Now, this is connected and we will see a short
demonstration of this.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:42)
(Refer Slide Time: 27:03)
Continuation of what I said earlier, the mold board plough and the disk plough, these are
the two primary implements which are used for opening of the soil. When the mold
board plough is generally used for first opening of the soil where the land is not that
stony or very grassy, but when it is very stony land, there the mold boards are not used.
Generally we use these disk ploughs.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:38)
Now, these ploughs in fact if you see the difference between those, the mold board
ploughs and this is that this miniature plough which is generally in front of the moldboard plough is replaced by what we have is till up the mold board. We have a concave
disk, steel disk of about varying between 600 tones to 700 tones diameter of the disk of
both these disks and generally it maintains a certain position with respect to the vertical.
The disk there is one of this angle is known as the tilt angle.
Now, this helps in increasing the depth or maintaining a particular depth which we want.
So, we can change this and the disk angle is now this is the direction of travel with the
direction of travel.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:27)
If you take the disk, this is the angle which we maintain is the disk angle which is here.
Now, this  disk angle  and tilt  angle,  both angles  are very important.  The  tilt  angle
generally varies between about 15 to 25 degrees or so and the disk angle varies between
42 to 45 degrees with respect to the line of travel. These are very important when we
want the total output of these disks.
So, why it is important is in case of the stony ground, this disk rotates. So, since this
rotates, there is no problem in operation of this, but had it been mold board plough, the
plough will actually break if the ground is very stony. That is why for primary tillage,
these two implements. The mold board plough and the disk plough are used for first
ploughing of the field. Now, we will see the operation of this. It is lifted by the hydraulic
system of the tractor as I told earlier and it will be maintained. Its position will also bemaintained with respect to the tractor with the hydraulic system. So, we will see the
operation of this as well.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:34)
As you can see that the disk has thrown, it scooped the soil onto one side from here, you
can see this and the next one which will come here, again it will put on the same scoop
soil. So, this is the way it throws the soil here. The inversion is not to the extent that you
get there, but only because of the disk this implement.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:21)
Although it is not set to be new, but this has started gaining lot of importance, reversible
plough particularly because of time saving. We know that saving in time is going to see
power and then, also maximizing the output of the plough. Here at headlines we do not
have to run the tractor. Again it can be it seeks time in turning and you will not find any
furrow which is an open furrow as you will see the operation of this and while it is lifted,
the furrow is turned and the shift time in turning. 
So, this type of system is very much gaining importance nowadays particularly because
of its efficiency in saving time. No furrow opens I mean no open furrows and saving
unnecessary running around the headlines. So, we will have the operation. Look at the
operation of this particular equipment which is reversible plough, reversible mold board
plough.
(Refer Slide Time: 31:33)
.(Refer Slide Time: 31:44)
As we have seen the operation of this equipment, apart from the primary equipment
which  are  the  mold  board  plough  and  the  disk  plough,  we  have  secondary  tillage
implements. That means, after first opening of the soil we would like to prepare the soil
prepare a soil tilt which is required for preparation and seeding of the seeds in any crops.
So, the secondary tillage of this so, these are known as secondary tillage operations. This
is one of these which is a disk harrow.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:52)
You can see that there are two gangs of disk on the same axle here. One are notched
gang disks; the other notch not smooth disks are there and they are set at certain angle
with respect to the line of motion. Now, these angles are very important so far as the
cutting width, cutting of the soil is concerned. The notch disk helps in if there is a grassy
field or the grasses etcetera are there. It will cut those and these will smoothly take the
soil and put it on to the other side. As we have seen the angle etcetera are changed by
this particular lever here and this is one which is mostly used in preparation of the field.
Another equipment which we will show the operation slightly later is a cultivator. So,
apart from the primary, the secondary implements which are used or the single acting
disk harrows or double acting disk harrows or the tandem disk harrows and those of
course, we have only shown the operation of disk harrow which is similar in action. Only
thing we will find the single action, the soil is being thrown on one side only and in
double action you will see the soil is being thrown on the opposite sides in the same
width which is considered. So, we will see the operation once again.
(Refer Slide Time: 34:25)
We have seen that two types of implements, particularly the primary tillage implements
which are mold board plough and disk plough, there we had seen that the soil, a bigger
clots are coming out. Now, when we operate the secondary tillage implement, the aim is
that these clots will be smaller and the soil will become very friable. So, you can see that
the soil become friable as case of say the big clots which are coming. So, the aim is toprepare the soil in such a way that we have a very friable soil and then, the size of the
clots etcetera very small and it will help in germination of the seeds.
(Refer Slide Time: 35:39)
Now, this is another equipment which is operated by PTO. We can see that the operation
of the PTO.
(Refer Slide Time: 35:48)
It is universal joint here. Current there is a warn gear and this particular equipment is a
rotavator and this has become very popular nowadays because it saves time and energy
because earlier we have to have a primary tillage implement, then secondary tillageimplements and twice or thrice operation of these and so, energy requirement is very
high to prepare the soil before seeding. Now, this has become very popular nowadays
because it does not require several operations and several passes. In fact, after harvesting
of the crop, you can operate this and then prepare the field for sowing so many locating.
We are operating this equipment and particularly where the soil is not very hard, this is
one which is very popular, saves energy and all advantages with this. So, this is another
equipment operated by PTO.
As I said that PTO is the one which has the maximum power outlet, but a maximum
percentage of power outlet, but it is least used, but this equipment has made it to be used
to a greater extent. We will see the operation of this rotavator in the field now.
(Refer Slide Time: 37:11)
(Refer Slide Time: 37:33)
Yeah, we can see the operation of this particular equipment. Let us see. You do not need
any other thing and simply the seedling can be operated and seed can be sown. So, that is
the importance of this particular equipment which has gained over last 10 years or so
very much popular and being out by, preferred by the farmers in a greater way, ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 37:59)
This  is  another  equipment  which  is  secondary  tillage  equipment.  It  is  a  nine  tyne
cultivator. You can see that the four tyne in the front, and the five tyne in the back.(Refer Slide Time: 38:11)
This is the shovel; this is which is called a reversible shovel. Now, there are others which
are spring connected, this rigid one and job of this is to break the clots which have been
prepared by the mold board plough or the disk plough. Now, the operation of this plough
actually preparation of the field will be at least twice operation of this. This will be
required for preparing the field as you have seen in the case of a rotavator.
So, definitely it requires more energy as compared to that, but then in conditions where
we have to prepare the field after first ploughing and second ploughing which has been a
virgin for a long time, then you will require the operation of this. We will see the
operation of this as it is mounted and connected to the tractor.(Refer Slide Time: 39:01)
Now, definitely this particular implement has broken the soils and the big clots, but then
you can see yourself that it will definitely require at least twice operation of this and
then, at least a planking of this. That means, smoothening of the soil, then only the field
will be ready for seeding. But then this has a separate requirement when the field is
virgin and it has been operated by other mold board plough or a disk plough where the
soil has been inverted and then, it needs to be broken into smaller particles and that is
why you require this particular equipment.