Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 24
Design a Tractor Drawn Seed Drill for a 40 hp Tractor – I
Dear students, now so far we have discussed about the seed drills; the various design
factors, parameters and how to design the various components of a seed drill. You have
seen that seed drill. A tractor drawn seed drill has various components. For example,
they have this hopper in which the seed is kept, then there is a metering mechanism
through which the seed is to be metered and then after that we go back down the line and
try to place the seed into the soil. And, for that we have these shovels or the tines or
sweeps different types of tines or furrow openers which are employed in this and then we
have a covering device which covers this seed after it has been put into the soil.
So, we will when we take up the design we in order that you should have some idea
about how to design a particular type of seed drill; for that we have taken an example
here in this particular lecture which is lecture number 24 in the series and we want that
the tractor drawn seed drill should be for a 40 horsepower tractor. Now, let me tell you
that most of the tractors which are available in the country maybe about 10 years back
we are about 35 horsepower or so and now we are talking of 50 horsepower tractors,
slightly because of the use of rotavator in a bigger way. But, then if you design a seed
drill for 35 horsepower tractor or a 50 horsepower tractor I think the number of tines
etcetera will not be that much vary and that is why we have taken a 40 horsepower
tractor take an example of a 40 horsepower tractor because 35 or 30 horsepower and 50
horsepower, so, on an average about 40 horsepower tractor.
Now, we have put this class the session into different parts for example, this is part I
where we will talk about how do we go into details of the power utilization and that what
are the steps we should be taken in sequence and then we will see that how what are the
parameters, what are the equipment, what are the components we design in part I and
what are the things we divide in part II and so on and so forth. So, let us follow the slides
and go ahead about this particular design.(Refer Slide Time: 02:37)
Well, the working width, it is very important because whether it is seed cum fertilizer
drill or if you drill alone you must know what is the working width of the drill this is
very important because the you will have several requirements. For example, if the
tractor you know that the tractor has a certain width and that width mostly we take with
respect to the wheel trade of the tractor, but then wheel trade is the center to center
distance between the wheels of the tractor. And, here we would like to know what is the
maximum working width of a drill or a seed cum fertilizer drill can be taken because the
wheel trade is varying from say 48 to 72 inches in the various orders, but then you will
have to take slightly more than that and finding out as to how much is available, how
much maximum you can take as the width of the seed drill.
So, for that what we do is we would like to know: what is the amount of power that is
available with us. Well, you know that the power available for a tractor is about 40
horsepower that we have assumed. So, 40 horsepower tractor is the power, but the power
which is available at the drawbar is very important and in my previous classes I have
explained to you, that is not possible to get more than about 60 percent of power from
the actual power of the tractor onto the drawbar and that is why we will then assume this
part and it is very reasonable to assume that 60 percent of the power of the tractor is
available for this particular job.So we have assumed here, we have assumed here 60 percent of the bhp, that the 60
percent of power is available with us and hence we will see that the drawbar power
available for this particular tractor of 40 horsepower is about 17.90 kilowatt. Well, we
have converted this into kilowatt, so that you will be you are very much familiar with the
system and that is why you have converted into kilowatt. Now, let us find out the speed.
Well, this also is a point of consideration on the part of the designers because we the
various speeds which are taken over the years if you go through the literature you will
find that is vary between 4 to 5 sometimes 6 kilometer per hour of the seeding speed
depending on what type of seed is there and what is the soil in which the seed drill is
being operated and what is the size of this.
So, we have taken for example, in order to give you an idea we have taken 5 kilometer
per hour is the speed of operation. So, with this speed now we will see: how much is the
draft available. Now, here we assume that the although the three-point linkage is the
connection where drawbar connection where the seed cum fertilizer drill is attached and
we will see that this attachment when it is actually in the field is a straight one and we
are in a position to find out the draft of that. Although, in order to find out the actual
draft for three-point linkage connection is slightly different, but we will then assume that
what is the total draft available on the basis of the power available and the speed at
which we are going.
So, we know that what is the power available and what is the draft with us. So, using this
we are in a position to know that this draft is about 1314 kg. This is an example; you
remember that we are taking an example to tell you as to what are the various aspects of
this particular design. So, you must always consider that this is a designers way of
looking at the various parameters and their values.(Refer Slide Time: 06:39)
Now, let us so, we have found out the draft now we must know because this is the draft
which will be encountered by the total number of the furrow openers which will be there
in  the  seed drill.  So, for that  we need to know  in a particular  soil,  now  we have
considered here is lateritic sandy loam or silt loam soil and in this case the availability of
the unit draft from the literature is about 0.4 kg per centimeter square. This is the value
which is already available 
Now,  depth  of  operation  is  6  centimeters,  we  have  taken  60  millimeter  the  depth
operation because this you have seen that are the these seeds should be below the soil
surface of the soil at reasonable depth, because you cannot put it very high you cannot
put it very very much above and that is why a reasonable value of about 6 or 60
millimeter is taken. Now, you may recall that we had discussed about the furrow openers
and the design of the furrow openers and the shape in which the furrow openers are
there. So, if you see that this is the design which we had considered in our earlier design
discussions and so, from here we will take a clue and then try to find out what will be the
number of tines etcetera that we will design.
Now, you can see here that t 0 is the spacing between the furrow openers, t 0 is the spacing
between the furrow openers. So, this t 0 as per the drawing given here, you can see that
the center to center distance between the two sweeps which are shown to you here. And
the various values which have already we discussed to you we have taken that delta (δ) isabout 45 degrees and the Δt is 4 centimeters you can we are going ahead 4 centimeters
and millimeters. So, please try to understand that either you can take millimeter or a
centimeter. So, you must be careful about these units which we are taking here. So, you
have taken in centimeters and B 0 is about 4 centimeters
Now, these we had discussed when we designed the details of the furrow openers I had
discussed and that is why I am just assuming that you will definitely recall and try to take
these  values.  Accordingly  when  we  put  this  we  get  a  value  of  t 0 is  equal  to  20
centimeters; that means, these is center to center distance between these two will be 20
centimeters, this is one important things.
Because once you know how much is the distance and what is the draft required now,
there you will be in a position to know what will be the size of the furrow and how we
can find about the total number of furrows that has to be created. So, the theoretical draft
on one furrow opener is unit draft into cross sectional area of the furrow. This is very
simple, you can you can have a look at this and then you should be able to and we says
that this unit draft once we know the unit draft value and the cross sectional area of the
furrow we will be in a position to get the draft on one furrow opener. So, that this is what
we have got.
Now, cross sectional area is width of furrow into depth by 2, this is very simple from the
formula which we has been told to earlier and width of furrow is 2a max × B0. So, the using
this then draft on one furrow opener D 0 is given by this because you can see 0.4 and this
is 16 here. So, into depth operation 6 and the divided by 2, hence this comes to from 19.2
kg. Now, this is a theoretical value which we have got 19.2 kg, draft on one furrow
opener. Now, remember that there will be encounters when this when the seed drill is
moving into the soil. So, we need to have some factor of safety. 
So, we will take a higher side factor of safety although may not be essential that you can
go about one say about 1.1, 1.2, 1.5, but we have taken 2 times just to see that where do
we lend up in the total number of furrow openers that we will be there within the draft
capability of the tractor which is going to be used. So, with this factor of safety of 2 we
are getting that the actual draft required is about 38.4 kg; now, this 38.4 kg could you can
take this to be around figure either 40 kg or so. So, about 40 kg taking into consideration
the factor of safety as well as the unit draft of the particular soil which we have thoughtof. Now, we will use this. Not necessary that we can take 40 kg we can take 38.4 kg also,
but we have taken it I will show you what we are doing.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:52)
Well, using that so, once you know that this total draft available from the drawbar and
the actual draft on one tine is known. So, it is very simple you are in a position to do this
now n is 35. Now, you have got a value of the number of furrow openers as 35. Here as
an engineer you would like to have some tradeoff between what should be done. Now, if
we go back to what we discussed earlier we said that if there are 35 or say is said that if
there are 11 in number, then 6 will be at the back and 5 will be in the front like this. So,
if we talk of 35 means there will be 18 at the back and 17 should be in front.
Now, you imagine that if this 35 are to be actually at a distance of 20 centimeter, so,
what is the total width that you are going to get the total width that you are going to get
is a pretty high in number, pretty high in number is it is something about 7 meters or so,
because the 35 tines and then you will multiply by 20 centimeter which is the width. So,
you will get about 7 meters or so. But, what we have seen that in case of as I said earlier
that the width of the tractor back width. We are talking of 48 to a 76 inches is the wheel
trade. Now, if we take that starting point, so, we are finding that about 76 or say 80
inches the roughly this comes to about 200 centimeters or so. Now, then this means that
about 2 meters. So, if you take care of the diameter of the wheel on both sides then
roughly you get about 2.4 – 2.5 meter.Now, this 2.4 – 2.5 meter is the width which will be a width which will be utilized when,
but then you see if you put 7 meters there will be several difficulties. For example, while
transportation it has to be folded then you need to have arrangement for folding and that
will add up unnecessary cost. Then if you think that this has it has to be lesser, then the
total weight which will be there on that on the track tractor will also be slightly more
than that then if you are thinking that we should decrease now how much we should
decrease.
So, an idea is that we have heard of the different types of tines we are getting a tine
which is about 35 in number on the basis of the draft which is available. And, in fact, if
you recall I had also talked of that matching of implements to the power source has a
greater bearing and it is a mystery, still we are not in a position to match as much
possible. Because, you have seen that 60 percent of the power is available of the tractor,
but then we are not in a position to put a 35 tine seed drill seed cum fertilizer drill
because of many it is consideration. So, soil is another consideration in this case.
So, we have to think of fault should be and then headland while rotation, while you are
taking a turn, while turning at the headlands so, much of a down time of the actual work
will be there. So, field efficiency will come down as such the field efficiency of a the
drills which we have found over period is varying between 70 – 75 percent or so. So, if
we consider these into picture we can comfortably say that you can take say a value of
about 19 or 17 or 15 or 13 number of tines. This is this is what you can take 19 17 15 or
13.
Now, in this present case we have taken 13 number of tines just to give you an example
you can take 15 and get a value, you can take 17 and get a value, you can take 19 and
then get a value because then you will have to have 10 in the back and 9 in the front.
And, accordingly the width etcetera you have to see because headland management and
the power loss unnecessary over there is very important, which you should see that a the
moment you go for very large width the headland management will be difficult and then
you will not be in a position to get high field efficiency of the unit. So, the work output
will be reduced.
So, you have to have a tradeoff and in that case that is why you will not get the seed cum
fertilizer drills, not more than 13 or so. So, we have taken a value 13 to explain you here.Now, so, we have taken value of 13. Now, once we know the value of 13. So, by
convention as we explained you earlier in the earlier class that 7 will be at the back and a
front row will be 6 number of tines.
So, working width of the seed drill then here is roughly we are taking about 2.6 meter
because as I said we will take 13 and then the grain box length. Well, this is grain box
length you can take a grain box length which is also equal to 2.6, but then what is
important is we look into the values if you if you recall this figure which we had also
shown you earlier then these two values need to be considered with the respect to the
wheel.
So, while taking into consideration we have found that this value b is generally about 20
to 22 centimeters here we are taking 21 centimeters. For example and therefore, the
length Lb this length of the you can say the working length of the box will be about 2.18
meters this is what is the justifiable and a tradeoff between all factors which we have
considered. Now, let us go ahead.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:02)
So, seed rate for which ok, now, we have taken that what should be the length of this.
Now, we will let us talk about the seed rate. Now, seed rate for which we will take wheat
as the as the crop to be sown and we have already taken 5 kilometer per hour this is seed
rate. So, the actual field capacity of the drill will be speed here the working width and the
field efficiency and I said that field efficiency cannot be more than 70 to 75 on thenormal basis or on the basis of experience and the literature available over the world
people have done. So, we can take comfortably let us take 0. 7 and that is how using this
we are getting. So, much hectare 0.76 hectare per hour; that means, in 1 hour 0.76
hectare will be the covered by this particular drill.
Now, in order to design the hopper for such a capacity it is required to refilling the seed
for 2 hours. Now, we would like to see whether when we have to put so much per hour it
will cover about 0.6 hectare. So, in 2 hours it will cover about twice of this. Now,
generally we would not like that the filling should be either once filled so much then it
will continue for 4 hours because, then human factory is considered into it because there
is a human being who is there on the tractor. And, definitely he would like to get off for
some time and while he is doing the job and that is why a comfortable value from all
considerations we can take the 2 hours is enough time.
So, let us say that for 2 hours he will be in a position to continue and the seed which is
there or the fertilizer which is there also will last for 2 hours. So, if you take that into
consideration what we get is for 2 hours at this rate we are getting about 190 kg. So, 190
kg we need to put and then this 190 kg has to be there inside the hopper. So, what is the
volume of this? Then simple we know the weight of this and then using the density of the
wheat we can get that this is the volume. So, this is the volume which we have got of the
hopper.
So, we know that we need to have see this is the volume, but the moment we are talking
of the actual design which will be there, we have seen out of our experience and you
might have also seen that there has to be a free board. We need to get certain free board
and as we discussed in the theory you found that there are certain level which remains
not filled and it is also helpful for you. So, we need to take care of that little bit of free
board to be added and then which if you add that free board what we get is instead of
0.237 m3 we are getting a value 0.262 m3 using the 10 percent of extra avoid spillage. So,
that there is no spillage and we are in a position to get that.
So, this will be the total volume of the material of the hopper. So, that hopper should be
having this material plus certain free board, so that the spillage does not take place when
it is filled up for 2 hours,.(Refer Slide Time: 21:26)
So,  for  proper  flow  of  seed,  let  us  assume  that  trapezoidal  section.  Well,  we  had
discussed this that trapezoidal section is the one section which is good and it takes care
of the angle of response of the material or the seed. Therefore, we have assumed here
that the trapezoidal section see trapezoidal section is the one which is selected. So, for a
trapezoidal section this is known to you I did not explain again because we have talked
of this earlier and what we assume is we need to have some idea about this, because we
know the total length, but we must know about the base and I remember that in that base
what we do put is either the seed plate or the metering shaft which we which will have
the choro may be small baffles in case of fertilizer.
So, in order to take care of that you need to have about 20 – 25 centimeters the width, the
base of that particular hopper. So, that is why this one we will assume out of the
experience and that is why here we have assumed about 25 centimeter as this. So, this
value is about 25 centimeter this value we have assumed 25 centimeters. Now, taking
this then we are in a position to get h and b from this; just putting those values into this
equation which we know we will be in a position to get these values of h and b. And,
therefore, the specification of the seed hopper which we have designed is bottom width is
taken as this much, the top width is this, then height is 35.3 and the length is 2.18 meters.
So, the this is the value which of our hopper. Now, if you are thinking of this fertilizer
drill a similar arrangement and you can take a similar material of construction also forthe seed fertilizer drilled also. So, I need not explain to you that what will be the size of
the fertilizer drill, but then this is the side. So, we can see that specification of seed
hopper seed cum fertilizer drill hopper that was seed will be one and similar will be
another one because they sit side by side if you have seen the drawing or you have seen
the machine because I have explained to you in the field. So, then we have got the details
of seed hopper.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:00)
Design of seed metering mechanism; well, here I did not go because just previously my
previous lecture was that we had talked of the seed metering mechanism. So, here also
we will talk of the seed metering mechanism where we know that the power is taken
from the ground wheel and then the power transmission goes to the seed metering
mechanism  and  the  seed  metering  mechanism  you  can  have  different  types  of  a
mechanisms, actually which will carry the seed and then put into the seed tube. And, we
had discussed at length about the fluted roll type which is one which is very much
popular. You can take another type also which we have discussed, but then we have
discussed about these.
Now, that is why we will take fluted roll type of the and here the volume is given by this.
I think all are known to you because D g is the ground wheel diameter here the spacing
between furrow, then S r is the seed rate, the bulk density the gear ratio. In fact, the gear
ratio Gr here may be that you will find that the other one was bigger capital G, but heresmaller g does not matter, but then you can this. So, x is the linear spacing of seed on the
ground. This is the linear spacing of seed on the ground.
So, using and solving this we get that V roller is about 40 cm3. Now, number of what will
be the number of fluted rollers is the periphery is given by this, simple because we know
the ratio, we know the spacing that we want. So, we should be in a position to get this on
solving we get Nf is equal to 13. Now, this is the value which we have got, and you will
find that depending upon the size and the tradeoff which you want to have and the total
size of the seed drill you can take various values of this number flutes about varying
from 8 to 12, 13 or so. We have got 13 value, so, we will take this value.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:02)
I need not explain much here because you have gone you have understood all these
details and these are known to you that what is the V here, what is V roller and then the
values of course, these values which we have taken or the extended values which we
have taken from literature. So, we need not describe talk to you or describe this very
much, but because those are all known to you. So, only the values which you can just
check and find out that these are given to you here and subsequent the angle which are
were it is important for this is 27.69. These details are go given over here and this is one
which is known to you. So, I need not explain to you here about working volume
released by fluted roll in one rotation of this, it is just comes as from here.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:54)So, using that the same concept now, we are now in a position to get the radius of
curvature of the flute, this is important. So, using A f here and using the values of A 1, A2
which you know already explained to you. So, you will be in a position to get the value
of r which is the radius of curvature which is of importance to us. So, you will know now
that what is the length of the flute and what is the radius of curvature. You know the total
diameter of the flute when it is made. So, you will be in a position to find out this.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:33)
So, as such the specification if you get then these are the specification design tractor part
and seed cum fertilizer drill, seed drill details are given here, the working width, the
number of furrow openers spacing between the furrow openers, total draft requirement,then the field capacity we have got about 76 0.76 hectare per hour, then the seed box, the
details of seed box we have already discussed. Well, material of construction we have
taken here material of construction to be MS and thickness etcetera, please remember
that these thickness etcetera are dependent what is available to you.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:10)
The seed metering device; well, the seed metering device, the type of seed metering
device we have taken a fluted roller, then the length of the slot, length of the roller, then
the diameter etcetera and radius of curvature which we got earlier is given over here.
Thank you very much.