Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Lecture – 36
Design of Manually Operated Weeding Equipment
Well welcome students to my lecture number 36 where I want to tell you about  design
of a manually operated weeding equipment , well it is a very fascinating thing which I
want to tell you today . Because, you might have seen several types of such devices, but
there is nowhere a proper way of designing this equipment.
We discussed about the tines we have seen the in the earlier lecture and if you want to
design it a full device which is manually operated. But then it has certain components,
how do we design, what are the parameters we think of what considerations we have to
give because the manual device.
Now, this device in fact you know that manually we require a lot of manpower only for
pulling individual by hand. But then the moment same power of the man can be utilized
using these small devices and the output can be increased so and the these devices are
very useful for lowland as well as upland conditions dry land conditions what we call as
a plan and for a small farms and you know that about 60 percent of the farms particularly
in this country in India are small farms. So, for this  operation  which is a arduous
operation and I have told you that these are mainly done by the ladies. So, in order to
bring out the maximum out of the same power of the person, we should have a proper
design what should be the what should be the consideration in the design of such kind
device.
So, that is why I have brought today to let you know about how we design such a
weeding equipment which is manually operated mind. You can think of this when you go
for a mechanic mechanical operated or bigger equipment.But then when you go for a small one how do we do , you might have seen what are the
devices in the which I showed you in my previous other lectures about the small weeding
devices Khurpi, Arsia and then Kudali and things like that which was show on their
spade etc. . 
But then apart from that if it proper design procedure has to be followed what should be
that, so I have come with that to show you and share with you my way of understanding
the design and  let us see how do you appreciate this  .
(Refer Slide Time: 03:03)
Force analysis ok now go first of all we should go back to the weeding tine, see what
should be the tine what should be the design of this particular tine. Now, we have taken a
sweep type of tine in this case for showing you the analysis and how as an engineer you
would appreciate such analysis. Now you see here that this is a sweep in a type of a tine
which we have attached here and this tine what are the forces acting on this how do we
measure these forces.
See the if you consider this part this particular diagram you can see here then what you
get here is Ø, now this Ø is a sweep angle which is there , now this angle is generally
between 12 to 20 degrees . Now  there are certain things  which we need to take it for
granted for that matter if you tell because , it is not possible to go into each and everyaspect of the design for this. But there are certain aspect when we consider a particular
component from no literature, we should instead of redefining and redesigning the wheel
we must gather information which is available at elsewhere and can be used for our
requirement.
So, here this Ø is a sweep angle, so this sweep angle now they root is cut through what is
the root we are talking root of the weeds. Now this when we try to cut the weeds we cut
about  2 to 3 centimeters only of that we are not interested in going for about 6 inches or
so . Because these are tender roots they are generally coming up these weeds coming
after 21 days after sowing. 
So, in 21 days of sowing these weeds are very tender and then it will be they are hardly 2
to 5 centimeters just below the soil and the soil is also not that very hard it is just. So, it
is easier to remove them from there either we cut them or remove them, so when we
damage them they are by there with the sun they dry and then they are controlled they do
not grow further.
So, let us see what the various angle etc. are when we consider such a stand. You can see
the root is cut through and the tangential force F t, now this this is the tangential force F t
over here you can see this is the force tensile force F t which is in this direction here. Now
this force becomes higher than the frictional force F f, so this is the frictional force which
is in this direction. So, then the moment this removed than this it will cut.
Ff < Ft
Ff = P cos α,  Ft= Fn tan Ψ and  Ff = P sin α
So, this is one consideration fine then F how is F this frictional force give P cos α, now
what is this P cos α these this is here. In fact, this is capital one so this is the angle α
which is maintained and this angle alpha is the apex angle, this is also apex angle at this
point of this. So, you are talking of the apex angle it is 30 to 45 degrees, so P cos α is
this, that means P cos α will be working in this direction. So, P cos α is the frictional
force which is acting here then the F t which is the  frictional force no sorry which is the
tangential force, this tensile force is Fn tan Ψ. Now you can see this is F n here this is the
Fn here through this this is F n here and this at an angle psi or in fact this is also an angle
Ψ a similar angle which will get here.So, at this angle then we this tangential force F t, normal load Fn and relief angle ε you
can say . So, the frictional force then the sharpness angle 12 to 15 degree you can see
that here. Details of these are given here sharpness angle ε, the relief angle as well as this
cutting angle 18 to 30. So, these details are given through this you can see a portion of
this has been given and explained.
Now, we are talking about actually Fn tan Ψ a less than P cos α. So therefore, the angle of
setting of the blade should be in this, this is what we say that the apex angle or the angle
at which the setting should be done α < (π/2 – Ψ). So, this talks of what should be the
angle which is given over here. Now this from the literature we have collected just to a to
show it to you that how do we appreciate the different angles which are there while is
cutting the roots of the of the weeds.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:18)
Now, there are certain other considerations see this one thing is, see we are talking of the
tine we had toggle of this tine. In fact, this should be here and then we should be talking
of the handles ok, so something like this the weight is shown over here you see. So, this
is the time we have talked of what else. 
Now, there are 2 other things one is this wheel, now you can have single wheel you can
have double wheel depending upon what you will say. But the purpose of this wheel is togive forward motion and also to maintain the depth of operation because if this is not
there you can imagine that we will you will have simply a device like this and there will
be a tine.
So, if you push this here if you push in this  direction then you will find that this
particular device will keep on going further and further and then it will not be within the
capacity of the human being to do this thing, therefore we this the wheel which is here in
the front. Now this wheel actually with the momentum that we are getting with the
wheel, it will maintain the depth as well as it will help us in going because these devices
are push pull type remember. I had told you in my previous lecture that these are push-
pull type weeders we are pushing certain distance and then pulling back certain distance.
I had also shown you the mechanics of how push pull force comes and then how do you
measure those forces and actually find out the power required for that.
Now, when we have this device like this  and we have talked of the tines. So, we
depending upon the design we you can think of what should be the material construction,
what should be the width of cut that width of cut will depend on  what is their spacing .
Because you cannot take a spacing exactly the equal to the spacing of the crop, you have
to leave certain amount on both sides near the root of the 2 plants and the 2 rows when
you are considering. If you are considering say 2 rows like this there is a plant over here
in the top view.
So, we need to consider see the distance is here this is the effective distance which it
showed, otherwise it will also go near this and try to cut. So, this push and pull pushed
here and then pulled certain distance we had talked of this so push and pull types such
devices. Now question is the human being is using this device.
So, you can see that the human beings are of different sizes and strength parameters
hands etc. are of capacity of application of force. Several things are varying from men to
men from women and all that and in fact from a small women’s to a large male. If you
find that there is a large variation and this variation known as the anthropometry because,
about the body dimensions and the strength parameters.
So, ergonomics I have just to introduce here because this itself is a science which should
talks of the application of the application of the capability of the application of the
capability of the man with the engineering knowledge that he has. So, that he designsmachines equipment and  processes which are comfortable to operate and  which are
giving maximum output and safe to operate comfortable or safe to operate and gives
maximum output .
So, the science is talking about the ergonomics that the ergo means work nomos is means
law. So, there should be a certain law followed for doing this particular work or any
work for that matter and that work because the human being is involved, it must be such
that it is comfortable safe and he should be able to work for a longer duration of tine
without harming his body or harming his own physic.
So, that is why ergonomics considerations are very important so far as the design of the
handle is concerned, because this handle height will vary from human to person to
person . Now because he does not have to hold it here he has to hold at a certain location,
so the moment is you need to have the different dimensions. So, there has to be in this
one, there has to be some device by which and there is in fact there are locations here by
which you can adjust the position of this so this is important. So, that when the person is
walking he should not his leg should be in such a position that he should not come and
hit this blade, so this is very important. So, weeding tool should be such that the operator
does not have to exert more than 60 nutrients push or pull.
In fact, pulling he will not require man of force because, then he has to only pull the
weight this weight of the equipment. But pushing he has to exert force because it has to
cut the soil and cut the widths. But then from literature we have found out that it should
not be more than 6 kg or so because, this has to be operated for a longer durational tine
and we need to also work out because when you have these designs you need to work out
what should be work recycles how long the person should be able to operate that and
when should we take rest. So, that the output  is also more and the person is  also
comfortable he is safe.
Well a static loading unavoid a static efforts should not be more than 50 percent of
maximum,  see static  loading on the muscles  definitely  because when the person is
holding them and tries to operate the these muscles actually come into picture and this
loading should not be from literature, we have found out this should not be 37.5 N see
less than that. So, it should not be more than that these are the values which has been
which have been found , now the frequency of operation.Now, this of course depends from person to person and his ability depending upon the
ability of the person who is operating the device. So, about 30 to 50 strokes per minute
have been found to be most optimum, when he is doing this job which will also give you
enough rest and work output. The length of the stroke is about 300 to 500 mm which we
have seen because , in my equation which I showed you the mechanics while  showing
the mechanics of push and pull , I had indicated that  the length of the stroke should be
300 to 500 mm .
Now, handle height well this is the one which is dependent on this ergonomics, then the
handle height should be this this is very important. So, it is tells 0.7 tines the shoulder
height now this will vary from here to here depending upon the height of the person,
height is we call in ergonomics because the structure of the person total height of the
person from the foot to the top here what is the total height and then this h 0.7 tines of
the shoulder height, now this is the total height now shoulder height. So, 0.7 tines from
shoulder height  depending upon the height of the person is the one where the handle
height should be there and accordingly therefore then you have to design here what
should be the distances, what should be the places where it should be  bolted. So, that
you get this particular one comfortable for a shorter person also for a longer person, this
we have done lot of studies. You will find particularly this a new in science and it has
been used for many things in your daily life you might have seen.
If I give you an example that right from the toothbrush which you use in the morning to
the bed etc. and recycle, now you can see everything has been thought of keeping in
view the requirement the capabilities and the liking and the feeling of the human being
that is why those things have been designed . This is another science now we have
utilized that science into design of the handle of this. So, that is one which has to be
taken into consideration when you are designing. So, what the element is the cutting
element next is this and the wheel which I said that wheel has to be enough diameter of
the wheel. If you have a very big diameter of the wheel then also it will not help because,Well the handle lengths with these are certain things which have been. In fact, see the
handle length Ih is this handle length. Now this will again depend on what is the height
that  you  want  to  maintain.  If you are  maintaining  a  height  800  here  to  1000  mm
depending on this and  this distance . So, the when you are this you need to know what is
this Ig what it is this Ih these are, see Ig is the handle cross bar length this is this one  it
depends on the elbow to elbow breadth.
Because how much the distance between these 2 tool dependent then handle length, well
length of the handle will depend  what is the geometry of the tool and how much height
we want to measure .
Now, what should the grip here in fact the handle grip see the handle grip here this is
these the grip. So, this grip is also important because a grip of person is smaller person
and the taller person will vary. So, the grip has to be such that he is in a position to grip it
properly and it should not be rough also because otherwise he will have problems here.
So, it should be smooth and he should be able to hold it properly, larger person will have
a bigger grip and for a smaller person smaller grip. So, this also is very important and
that  is  way we are  saying that  you can see the  handle  grip vary from  25 to 37.5
millimeter.Now, these are data from the anthropometric  analysis which we have done for the whole
country and in fact these are worldwide data available and for India we have developed
at IIT Kharagpur and from there I am in a position to give you that this handle grip is this
to this  vary a variation . Which in fact depending upon the height of the person can be
utilized. Handle material well the material of the handle simple is very simple, handle of
material will depend on what you want, it should be a lighter one. So, lighter mild steel
pipes or enough or you can have wood if you are thinking to have a device which will be
easier fine you can have we use our strong bamboo sheet .
You can see that bamboo rods you can see or wood whatever, but I would say that if you
put wood and all that maybe the cost will be higher than having a simple pipe, which is a
worth enough a mild steel pipe will do the job the cost of operation . Now, we need to
also think about this part see I had just talked earlier that these are a design within the
capacity and capability of the man or the human being. So, when we are talking of the
amount of work done definitely a person when he starts muscles starts working, then he
will start getting fatigued after some tine.
So, we need to have a control on this and that is why this physiological cost of operation
what is the physiological cost operation, that means how much this heart beat and then
we do measure all these things over a period of time and that is why a recalls a rest and
work cycle  has to be created . So, rest and work cycle has to be created for operation of
such devices, then only you can get an output and enough load or you can say that
enough good design and work output.Well power developed by the operator well this is one thing which we which we have
done at IIT Kharagpur and in fact for this I will not tell you what are the instrumentation
we required . But then  very nutshell in nutshell I would like to explain , that  how did we
measure the power of the person  as such the maximum power that a person can develop
is  very  high   it  has  been  found  to  be  about  5  horsepower  so  and  what  is  that  5
horsepower?
In fact, you might have seen that the weightlifters. So, when they lift the weight of say
200 to 250 kg suddenly up to a distance of that, so in that short duration of tine that
weight is lifted. So, m×g×h and from there you can convert and say maximum of 5
horsepower so they can develop.
But that those power are very instants instantaneous powers or instant powers we cannot
use them. But what we want is the power which can be utilized over a period of time
without hurting the physic of the person health of the person and maintaining every
safety of that person in the device or in the task which has been given to him  .
So, here I just want to ergonomically requirement of power developed by the man is 0.1
hp that is what we take is just one-tenth of a horsepower that we take and   so unit draft
of soil if the unit depth of soil is 0.2 kg. Depending upon the type of soil that we are
using, see this is will vary generally soil where you are talking of first opening the soil. But this is a condition where the soil is rather very softer not very moist as such, but
softer and it is easier to move through this, that is why the unit draft considered here. A
consideration has to be given on this value whether you want to be 0.2 or or 0.4, say
maybe for a particular soil here we take 0.4. But here we have taken 0.2 because that
much of force is not required at that condition of cutting of the width. 
Now,  depth  operation  is   slightly  higher  we  are  considering,  but  then  even  depth
operation is  up to 5 centimeters maybe 2 inches which is not so in the case. But then up
even if it is 5 centimeters  the operation is about 1 kilometer per hour or 1 to 1.5
kilometer per hour . So, the total power developed total draft into is speed , this comes to
be this is the D which comes as 27.37 kg this is the total draft  that we get here  power
developed by the switch . So, much of is the draft which we can think of out of the
human being over here.
Well when we are talking of the designs of the tines, how do you tines to work in and if
in the soil and what is this a zone of working. So, this has already been shown to you if
you recall   I had deal it with this treatment of the tines working and the width of
operation as well as the  spacing between these, these if you recall I had talked up. But
then it is quite relative and relevance here that is why I have brought it back here to to
and to tell you that what considerations we do give, because the zone of working is very
important. Why you get 2 tines why we have 3 tines in that any particular width row to row is
spacing of the crop, that is the one where this will be utilized for how many types you
want to have this is one where it is right and therefore the width of this, therefore the
width of this is see width of w here then this is the width 110 mm. Now spacing between
the tines well we have talked of the spacing’s and then this is the value which is shown
over here this is the value so the spacing is this. Now, therefore t 0 is about 120 millimeter
draft on 1 tyne we had talked of the value of draft which we got there.
So, unit draft into cross sectional area of the furrow  , so cross sectional area of the
furrow width of the furrow into depth of furrow by 2 here takes cross sectional area of
the flow actually this value and actually draft on one tine  is something like this this is
the value  .
Now,  where we can say that the force that was talked of should not be more than 60
Newton or 6 kg , so here you can see that more or less we are in a  position to show that
the  requirement of this tine also  is within this range . Of course, then therefore of course
we have thought that the width depth operation is about 5 centimeters or so.
But then this is not that much, but even then if you take that to be on the higher side well
with this is well within our requirement or well within the capacity of the person and of
course this will vary from person to person if the stronger person is here, you may do it
more and their output will be more as compared to another person.Actual draft then what is the actual draft then, the factor of safety you need to attend a
factor of safety always when you have the design here. So, the factor using factor of
safety then you are getting here that this value is about 8.25 kg, so well the value is
swelling a bit.
But then  you have to control with the number of tines a number of tines and the design
of  the tines and  spacing etc.  and  you have to see  whether which crop you have taken .
These are some of the things which we need to be thought of and we found that the
number of tines there are 3 tines which can be utilized because, this is the draft that you
got and this is the draft per a unit. So, therefore it is well within and you can go up to a
maximum of 3 tines.
Now, you can go up to 3 tine this is what theoretically we have a got, but depending on
the spacing you can think of whether you have 2 or 3 or you have 2 in the front and 3
back depending upon what you are how much is the width of the tine and so what details
are there how do we go it about the strength of those. We have to follow the similar
machine designed values machine design theory and from there you can know that the
moment on the tine is required what the bending moment on the tine is. So, we can find
out that this bonding moment is finding a appear to be about 124 kg of centimeter for a
given value for a given value or given size of the tine that we have considered in this
case.(Refer Slide Time: 28:37)
So, similarly bending stress you will be in a position to get  the bending stress  here ,
bending stress is known and then this  bending stress you . Bending stress is here now
the ratio between how do we get once we get this because, we are not getting torsional
here we are talking of only the bending part. So, what we do here is t is to be a width
which you had discussed earlier, your similar thing can be taken about 1:4 and then you
are getting t the thickness of this  tine and the width of this tine here .
So, thickness is this and the width is about approximately this now although we have got
3.5 millimeter. But then you have to choose this what is available in the market, what is
the size of the material which is available for making it to this type of a tine which you
have  ok  and  then  of course  these  are  ones  which  come  from  the  machine  design,
formally which have been utilized here you can see this is the one which is here .
So, these are the designs which I have already discussed, but then they are relevant here
because although it is a very small equipment. But kindly appreciate that what sort of a
you can say assumptions and considerations are required for giving a proper shape of a
design for a weeding tool particularly a manual drawn push pull type of weeding tool
design of the handle.Well we have talked of the design of the handle earlier already and I have talked of the
what should be the material, I have said that well material in the length etc . Depending
upon the angle that you are trying to maintain actually this should be not here this should
be like this and then it goes like this here.
So, depending upon the angle which we are trying to maintain, this angle the length etc.
This length as well as the height here and the distance from this point. So, these are to be
considered as I have said earlier and it has to be at the holding etc. everything has to be
considered. We have discussed this and a representative value comes 1482 millimeter.
So, this can be developed I have discussed it in detail about this part.So, actually then if I say that how you have designed, we can see that what we have got a
weeding device. Weeding device which can operate maximum 5 centimeter depth, speed
operation could be 1 kilometer per hour and the draft on one tine will be this width of
furrow is taken to be this much and then spacing between  the tines is 120 thickness of
the tine is this. Then the width of the tine is this much the angle of inclination of the
handle between to 30 to 45 degree and the length of this. A representative design has
been  shown from mechanical  as  well  as  ergonomic  points  of view  for a manually
operated wheel hoe which is a push pull type of a weeder.
Now, you can so here this is the design which we are given as a representative one, you
can use this concept and the consideration and the procedure what is important here I
want to emphasize is that. The procedure that we have followed for each and every
component  for giving a good design which can be done for if you want a mechanical
device if you want to have a power source. 
Then accordingly, but these considerations will be definitely there and power may be
utilized for only moving or power may be applied for a rotation of the device etc. Many
derivations or many  you can say that many models could be created using this, I think  I
have discussed at length and your questions will be most welcome as and when required.
Thank you.