Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 32
Farm Machines for Interculture Operation
Welcome,  students  to  my  lecture  number  –  32,  Farm  Machines  for  Interculture
Operation.  Well,  it is essential  to tell  you that so far we have been talking  of the
preparation field preparation and then we talk of the seeding of this and we have seen
different types of seeding equipment which are available and their operation and their
different features etcetera. We have talked of their performance and the advanced level
which are they are developed at our place, then we have also talked of the testing of
some of these equipment whether it is a tillage equipment or for a seeding equipment.
Now, the biggest emissions which is there in the crop production is weeds and we will
talk of that today. See, the we call interculture operation because between the crops you
have seen that the crops are shown and if you go back to the ancient time when we were
talking of sowing of the seeds people were having animal and they were never had even
the plow. So, earlier they used to throw away the seeds and then whatever seeds and
weeds are coming in fact, they would like to try to clean by manually or through other
some means of clearing one row by which the crop grows.
Now, these were the things which were then quiet ancient when nothing was there.
Slowly people developed a small plows, they wooden frame in which a small steel blade
you can say and that was used behind the animals and power of animal was used. Now,
that in fact, that became a multipurpose tool because that was used for your preparation
of the field, as well as even for seeding as well as for interculture operation; that means,
cleaning the weeds. Now, what are these weeds? Supposing in a paddy crop you have
which you have a wheat plant, so, I will call that as a weed because I have not shown
wheat in paddy. So, I will call that as weed.
So, in fact, it is said that unwanted plants in a wanted crop a or weeds. So, weeds are
those which are not wanted in a particular crop and in fact, when we go into the details
we do not have a wheat grown into paddy or wheat which I give an example, but what
exactly happens is certain types of weeds are there and those weeds grow because theyhave affinities with certain crop. And, this affinity is say for example, in paddy one type
of weed will come up, in wheat another type of weed will come up in the same field. So,
this is a very interesting.
Now, we would like to remove them, why because, they also compete with the crop with
the plants and take away the nutrients. So, we would like to remove them and clean the
them, so that they do not compete with the plant and our plant gets the maximum nutrient
from the field and it grows. So, that is the job which is known as intercultural operation
or cleaning of those weeds. So, we will see today what are the different types, what are
the different mechanisms, what are the different ways by which we do these operations
through this slides.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:50)
Well, I as I said the interculture operation; removal of unwanted plants or weeds from
the field is known as inter culture or weeding operation. Very commonly known as
weeding operation, you must have heard. It has been seen that depending upon the
infestation which is there as low as 300 man-hours to as high as 1200 man hours per
hectare. This is from literature I am telling you that so much of man hours are involved
for weeding operation. Since it takes was 25 to 30 percent of the total energy and even
the cost involved on the total production of a crop is of for weeding itself and this is a
very arduous task, it is very manual intensive, human intensive operation that is why thethis menace has to be controlled and that is why we call control of weeds interculture
operations.
Remember, that it is not possible to totally eradicate the weeds that is why we always
talk of methods for controlling the weeds; that means, within the period because the crop
has about 60 to 90 days of crop or 120 days crop. So, within those period we will not
allow them to grow at the same pace at which the crop is actual crop is growing. So, we
will control their wills we will remove them and then again they will come up back then
again we will remove them in between. So, we do about 2 to 3 weedings over the course
of the length of the crops growth period and that is why we are controlling them. So, we
cannot eradicate, but we control and that is why we call weed control.
Now, what are the different methods? Well, one is definitely the most simple and known
to everyone is the manual method; that manually I go to the field and see that this is not
the right crop which is which has been grown. So, I will take out that plant. So, those
manual weeding, manually they take out. Everything you can have a look at this that
manually a manually these people are you can see that they are manually removing these
sitting in a seated posture.
And, it is very interesting that this particular operation along with another operation of
transplanting which I have said you in my previous lecture that these are all dedicated to
the ladies. You can see here and now within equipment of course, you can see here that a
man is here, but then with this operation the arduous one are all left to the ladies. Well,
with due respect to everyone then and with due respect to them because they have been
doing this and in fact, if you see the statistics today the number of people in agriculture
operations of human particularly male persons is decreasing whereas, participation of
female is increasing in this case.
So, the second is chemical weeding. Yes, chemically what we can have those if you can
take a selective type of herbicide or a weedicide the chemicals which are available and
spray that then the plant will not die, but that particular weed will die because it is a
selective type. It will have taken for that particular weed only and that is why the
selective type of herbicide. So, if you take a selective type of herbicide or weedicide or a
chemical that is called chemical weeding. So, spraying that will clean these weeds.
Those will not be totally removed, but definitely they will again emerge after about 3 to4 weeks or so, by the time your crop has grown and so, the which will be you can say
that trumped or there which will be virtually removed.
The next is a mechanical weeding. Now, you see that chemical is one way where while
chemically is killing the weeds, but then it is also being deposited in the soil and it also
creates problem for the soil. So, we would not like to have more of chemical and that is
why mechanical weeding is in found, where we have the mechanical linkages used for
designing in the machines and equipment which may which will be able to do this job.
Another way is that biological weeding, sometimes you can see that some of these I will
tells details slightly later, but then some of the bacteria which is there which grows.
Now, if you can use that because of which these the weeds will be they will kill these
weeds by that particular bacteria. So, this is another way of biological controlling of this
which are used in some of the crops here. You will not find this in very widely used, but
these are being used in some of the crops particularly you flowers may be some of the
cash crops some locations in the world they are being used.
Then other is a flame weeding. Of course, I just wanted to mention here because flame
weeding is one where we burn these small weeds which are by the side of the plant itself.
Now, this well you are burning them. So, you can understand that you have to create that
the flame etcetera. So, creating the flame and all that, but this was one method which
may be about 50 – 60 years back some people employed and clean these weeds. So,
because anyway we are controlling them, but then this is no more in vogue and not in
vogue at all and that is why you will only find in the books, but they are not in practice
nowadays.
Now, another one is the one which is involving high technology we are talking of use of
more and more technology into the agricultural equipment design which are going to
give us a minimum input cost and maximum output. The use of technology is definitely
going to reduce this and this is what we call precision agriculture. So, when we talk of
precision agriculture we are talking of using advanced technology, so that the inputs
which are giving in the form of machine time, in the form of fuels, in the form of you can
say the total use of the whole machine etcetera are reduced you can say that more and
more nutrients are being utilized by the plant and then we do not have these losses.So, losses are reduced and we can use as much as required. Suppose, you want to give
certain amount of nutrient say fertilizer nutrient for the growth of the crop then we
should be in a position to identify how much is that and then only we should apply. So,
this precision agriculture of late for last 10 to 12 years or so, has taken because then we
are thinking of economizing on this maximizing the output and minimizing the input. 
In that case the sensor based mechatronic weeding is an equipment which we have
developed at IIT, Kharagpur and, also some locations people have developed different
types. So, we will show you the one which we have developed at IIT, Kharagpur also
and now let us see some details of these in our subsequent slides.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:24)
See weeding operations. You can see here that they how the different weeding operations
are on the basis of power source. Well, we say that how do you classify them all human
being is involved, but how do you classify them. Now, you can see at each location that
human being is involved, here the animal is there human being is there, here machine is
there tractor is there, but human being are also there, here also there is a machine, but
human being is there. Now, this is one which we are talking of mechatronics which will
we will discuss later.
But, then you can see here this is a small machine which has been used this is another
small machine in lowland condition and these are the particular ladies which. In fact, this
is a device which has been given to them and they are operating here otherwise this wasto be done in a stooping posture and all in this squatting posture they were trying to
remove this. So, you can understand the total output per day will be very less and it is
very strenuous job.
So, on the basis of power source manual weeding tools are graded, then animal drawn
weeding tools, then power tiller drawn those weeds are power tiller drawn you can say
here, then tractor operated weeding tools you can see the tractor operated ones here,
power tiller drawn operated ones here, small machine operated once here.
On the basis of soil condition, what is the condition? Have a dry land condition or wet
land. See, particularly for wetland we are talking with respect to paddy production. So,
we have this. So, in paddy you can see that which are there and that being that is very
very arduous because the manual when we are talking about the ladies, these ladies have
to stand in that water and then remove each and every weed like this otherwise the yield
will be reduced and that is why the lowland weeding. So, for low land we are talking
with respect to paddy and the dry land different types of dry land weeders are available.
These are some of the types which are shown over here, then on the basis of the weeding
pattern.
Now, as let me tell you that the total weeds which are available in a particular crop they
are all over the whole crop along with the actual crop. Now, but if you go into the rows
in which the crop has been grown you will find that you are finding them in between the
rows as well as between the row itself; that means, plant to plant in between the rows and
in the row itself. In the row itself is known as intra row weeding. So, intra row means
between in one row there will be one plant here another plant there third plant like this.
So, in between there will be weeds.
Now, it has been found that 80 percent of the weeds 75 to 80 percent of the weeds are
there in the in the in between the rows and about 15 to 20 percent are there or 25 percent
are available in the intra rows. Now, in order to have a tradeoff between the yield loss
and how much are there in this, we do not particularly if the different methods do not
employ for weeding in the intra row weeds.
But, then as I told you that there are methods by which we can also do inter row weeding
as well as intra row weeding and inter and intra row weeding tools. So, this is the one
which we have developed it is here which will show you in an different lecture alltogether. But, these are the different types of the conditions in which these are operated
and you can see that animal being also used here.
So, this is these are the different types of equipment and this is these are the ones which
are used all over the country and even in all countries you will find these. The more
advanced countries  you will find most of the tractor drawn units, but in the Asian
countries and other countries where there are small fields etcetera then we would like to
get all these which will be available.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:29)
These are the tools, what are these manual tools? It is worth as an engineer you must
have a look at it since you are whether if you are a PG student you must have seen at
UG, if you are UG student this is first for you. And, those who are working industries
and other places it is worth having to know the different types of these tools many of the
industries mechanical engineers are working even sometimes electronics engineers are
also working in some of the tractor industries.
So, for them I can tell you that for them this is new information they are not seeing these
tools. So, they worth showing them what are these in fact, all the manual operations.
What we want to emphasize here is that the capacity is very less the capacity of these is
less because they are manually powered; that means, human being power is used for this.So, let us have a look at this, you can see here that hand how these are the ones which are
used. So, man the these are the hand this is the handle and this is a these are the place
where it is cut and this is place where it is cut. This is a spade; now, this is one of the
most you can say this robust and very all rounder you can say device which is used for
various operations you will find this for weeding, you will find this for even preparing
the field, you will find this for preparing bunds and so much.
So, most dynamic you can say this device. Then the push pull weeders now some of the
devices which have been developed in order to change posture, as I said that this is a
very arduous and drudgery involved operation because you have seen that either the
ladies were bent or in a squatted posture in one of the photographs. So, in order that you
have a standing posture because from agronomics point of view we know that if you
have a standing posture you can do the work better and for a long duration of time; that
means, the output will be more. So, some devices have been developed some about 30
years back or we have also developed at IIT, Kharagpur and other locations.
Now, we would like to show you those. This is a single blade here this is a 3-tine blade
here, this is also a 4-tine blade here different types of these arrangements have been done
by different designers, but everybody’s aim is to see that it fits the requirement of the
person or the ladies or the gents whoever is operating this. These devices are known as
push-pull; that means, you cannot keep pulling, but they are pushed short distances then
pulled. We will show you what is the mechanics behind this in the next maybe lecture,
but then here I want to see you that these are known as push-pull weeder, either it is in
the low land or in the upland both conditions they are known. 
And, the of course, the capacity of the manual ones are over here they here the capacity
has slightly increased in this case and these are very light ones about 10 to 12 kg or so.
And, the material of constriction of these are in fact, very local materials where some
sort of a heating is given to strengthen these materials, do not use very spare very
sophisticated materials are used for this but, then still there have been very widely used
for last 50 years or so. So, worth having an information about what they are and where
they are used.(Refer Slide Time: 19:03)
Cono weeder. Well, this is a device which is generally used for lowland conditions
because particularly for paddy. So, you will see that for paddy we use this thing and
since these also a push-pull type of device, but then it has the two different types of
cutters or the cutting element which is there.
Now, you can see the cutting element you can see here that these one cutting element this
is another cutting element there are two cones and they are in fact, just opposite to each
other these cones and they are sharp edges on that those sharp edges. So, that when they
move when you move to and fro then they entangle the weeds and those weeds are
uprooted from there and once they are uprooted and they are floating by the sun they will
simply burn and then they will go away. So, this is how operates in the field condition
maybe we will show you the operation of this.
And, the capacity is also slightly higher because we are operating in a standing posture.
Here there are arrangement by which you can change the height of this crop because the
person can hold at certain location a taller person will hold at a different location. So,
there arrangements made in this design so, that the he can adjust to his way and then he
can operate the device.(Refer Slide Time: 20:41)
Now, let us see how it operates. Yes, you have a look at it you can see how it is operated
push and pull. This is the way it is push and pull in the actual crop condition this. So, it is
operated now this is done by a male person which is being shown to you here and it can
be done by anybody male or a female person, but then this is how it is operated in the
field. It is a worth showing you here. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:18)
This keeps on going on in fact well, animal drawn weeding tools. Now, see once you go
to this now we will tell you some more details about these when you have animal drawnweed. So, the animal number of sweeps in cultivators you can see here that 3 to 5 you
can have 2 to 3 in between and then we have you can you have to see that in the mouth
of these animal and they are closed otherwise they will eat the crops the that is done
here.
And, labour saving this about 80 % as per the hand how or by manually when you do
about 80 percent of saving is done here. In power tiller per self propelled weeding tools,
now power tiller is used power tiller or small powered machines are used like this.
Whereas where it is possible and in fact, the rows are wider then it is easy to use. Here
the field capacity is you can say very high field capacity 0.2 hectare per hour and field
efficiency about 60 percent. Well, you can see here that the field efficiency of these
machines do not go about more than 60 – 70 percent at the max and for particularly
weeding in this case.
There are many losses in that and there first one is that we do not do between the in intra
row between the rows. We do between the rows, but we do not do in the rows. So, in the
rows we are losing. So, that is why we cannot. So, we cannot say that the field efficiency
is more than 80 – 90 percent or so, because some of the weeds are left and when it is
done in fact, a quadrant is use about 1 meter by 1 meter or 0.5 meter by 5 meter size.
Something like this is a quadrant here either 1 meter by 1 meter or this and this is thrown
into the crop at one time and counted number of weeds are counted and later on when the
weeding operation is over we count them.
So, you will find that some of these which are between I mean they in the rows they are
left and that is why you do not get more than 60 sometimes 70 percent or so at the
maximum value. But, then these some of these devices they self propelled weeding tools
etcetera they save a lot of man hours per hectare. You can see that this much compared
to a hoe it is saving. So, the we have to use some of these because as I have told you in
my  previous  lectures  that  the  human  the  people  available  in  the  agriculture  are
diminishing here and that is why you have to go to the technology and hence you go to
the equipment. So, we will have to use these small tools and devices for doing this
particular operation.(Refer Slide Time: 24:11)
Now, these are the tractor drawn units. Well, tractor drawn units various types of tractor
drawn units have been used by different locations and you can see that what are their
names etcetera you can see row crop cultivator. See between the rows how this tractor
drawn unit is going and it is cleaning this very nicely. It is earthling up doing earthling
up because you create some sort of a when you do this cleaning of the weeds you also
create remove the hard crust after three weeks of operation.
Generally this weeding mechanical weeding or this weeding is done after three weeks of
the sowing of the seeds we call the three weeks 21 days of after sowing which is done.
So, generally a crust is created and that crust is to be removed. So, the plant starts
breathing and that is why the you can see that these operations by lister cultivator. You
can see that by lister cultivator here this is lister one is used and then you are in a
position to clean this.
You may this is a rotary weeder. Rotary weeders are used 3 rows. You can see how these
used in a black soil. So, you can see this that these machines are available which are
faster and then they are giving us better output etcetera. You can see that field capacity is
here the weeding efficiency has increased here because in a position to do more and of
course, a lot of labour saving and cost of operation you can see about 75 percent as
compared to traditional method. How much is the cost saving this we have to see here
field capacity is also higher here and also higher here.So, we can see that as and as we are going towards mechanization and higher machines
we are in a position to save lot of labour as well as cost. We are not displacing the
labour. Please understand here that we are not talking of displacing the labour. What we
are talking is we are talking of how to use the technology, so that we can do the jobs in
faster duration of time and then you we should be in a position to take more and more
crops from the same plot. So, that cropping intensity is higher and the output is higher
and that is the main aim.
So, no question of by mechanization we are in fact, trying to create more and more job
opportunities. There could be several aspects of job opportunities which are there and
which will be there if the equipment and machines are being used more and more into
agriculture. Of course this requires a different change in a mentality and mindset of the
farmers as well because the farmers of the particularly in our country in India here 60
percent of the people are small land holdings. So, they need to come together at least
small groups can come together, so that instead of 1 hectare if 5 farmers come together
there will be 5 hector field.
And, there at the machines can be used it will be economic to use that or in a custom
hiring basis these machines can be utilized. So, a mindset has to change, but then this is
the necessity of the country and it has to be done in order to produce more and more to
feed lot of people growing population on the world.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:30)
Biological weeding, as I said here biological weeding actually it is worth telling you, but
not very much followed in this country and all that, but then this biological is what
exactly is doing see. We have talked about the pest and the weeds etcetera what they are,
but then how you do it. See, in nature plants are controlled biologically by naturally
occurring organisms. Yes, this is very important. So, when there is a deficit of those in
the natural cycle may be interrupted when a plant is introduced into a new environment.
This is the thing which happens and or when humans disrupt the ecology of the system. 
Well,  when this  happens  we have  to  be careful  about  that and there  why. So, we
purposefully  introduce  biological  control  agents  which  are  attempting  to  restore  or
enhance nature systems. So, we can see that by we are by humans or by when you
introducing plants at different locations you are creating an imbalance into the nature’s
ecosystem. So, for that you have to bring those because then here you see the control
biologically, you can see the plants are in nature plants are controlled biologically. So,
whenever there is a disturbance here you need to see that that is taken care of and
therefore, we need to use biological weed control where the living organisms such as
insects nematodes bacteria or fungi to reduce the weed population.
So, this is what exactly you have to do, because the ecosystem is getting disturbed when
you do this or when human being are involved and since they are doing we need to
introduce and you have seen that some of these ones which are going shown here in
University of Missouri Columbia now. These are some of the locations where they have
used this is in Canada some of the types which have been used here. The systems are
being used and it has a future, but then there are various ways and various trade off you
have to do when you are trying to use such systems. Not very much used in India so
much.(Refer Slide Time: 29:57)
Well, flame weeding: this is another I said that frame weeding although we are trying to
burn this weeds which are very close to them and in order to burn you see that. You will
have to have the fuel tank, you will have to have the delivery burner etcetera and they are
carry some of the sort burners which are used for which the smithy people used to use for
soldiering etcetera, those things were used sometimes.
But, then it would require a complete system you can see here what we have shown you
here is a complete system. You can see here that so much this has to be created and you
require a certain power of these units the gases which we require. You need a delivery
system, you need a control system; that means, a complete sort of system has to be
created. And, now of course, this system not in vogue very much in vogue, but for as an
information to any person who is in agricultural engineering or who is dealing with the
equipment and instruments etcetera you must have an idea that yes, this type of weeding
also existed well in the books you may find, but not that.
So, in nutshell we have talked of the weeds which are the menace, which take lot of
energy and which are which are manually intensive. So, what are the types, what are they
different methodologies \to remove them. We do not say remove we say control them,
we have discussed this today and then if we have we will have the questions etcetera if
you have anything we would like to answer you and I think we close this first part of this
weeding operation here.Thank you, very much.