Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 03
Tractor, implement and soil force consideration for tillage implement design
Dear students, you have seen the operation of the different implements in the field, in my
previous class. Now we would like to let you know as to how the implements  are
attached to the tractor and what are the different forces which are acting on them, and
what  are  the  more  details  of  those  implements,  which  are  responsible  for  various
performance, attributes of the implements.
Now, so that is why I have named this lecture as the Tractor implement and soil force
consideration for tillage implement design.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:59)
Now, let us have some of the important things which are there, well in this slide I have
given a very simple diagram, which we will tell you as to how the tractor is connected to
a two bottom mold board plough. Certain forces which have acting for example, the
forces at the reaction forces at front axle and the rear axle I have not shown them
purposely, I just want to show some of the important things which hare there and then
subsequently when we will go to different slides and different analytical treatments we
will know about more details of these.Now, let us have first item when the implement is connected, what is the pull that we
would like to know about the pull of the implement. So, if you can look at this, pull of an
implement this is a total force exerted upon the implement by the power source this is the
force which is so, pull as described here is an implement pull of an implement is the total
force exerted upon the implement by the power source, similarly the draft. Now as you
we have connected the tractor to this particular implement or the vice versa we have
certain aspects to be considered.
For example what is the line of pull; that means how the point is connected. See this is a
point where we are talking up about the center of resistance the or the point of resistance;
at this point the three forces you can see the W which is the weight of the implement, P x
is the force along the line of pull and R x is the soil reaction forces which are over there.
So, these are concentrated at this particular point.In fact, here I have shown you that the
line virtual hitch point in case of a three point linkage, the hitch point is slightly different
and it is not a one particular point. In fact, it keeps on varying.
For example the point obtained in case of a three point linkage is if you extend the top
linkage by backward, and similarly the lower links by backward it will meet at some
point. Now this point is the point which is the hitch point. But now since it is an
imaginary point we call it virtual hitch point and then this hitch point is in case of a real
situation we will fall somewhere below, somewhere this point below the transmission
line of the tractor. So, we take that point as the second point and then we draw a line
imaginary line, which is this line and this is called the line of pull. So, the line of pull is
the line which is drawn or which is obtained by joining the point of which to the center
of resistance in this case.
So, the draft is the force which is acting along this line is P v here and the horizontal
component of this. So, the draft is the horizontal component of the pull which is parallel
to the line of motion is the draft. So, we describe this as the draft similarly specific draft.
When  we  generally  when  we  want  to  compare  particular  implement  the  another
implement, we would like to compare certain specific failure which is independent of the
weights etcetera of the equipment. So, we will talk with respect to specific draft; that
means, what is the draft force per unit of area of cross section of the soil handle, and
generally this is expressed as just a N/cm2. So, this is specific draft.Now, side draft well definitely when the implement is a being pulled by the tractor there
will be a side draft which will come into picture. You might have seen in the field that
we have a land side and on the second mold board plough you must have seen. So, the
second mold board plough you had seen that there was a longer land side. Now the
purpose of that land side is to take the side thrust. And here so, the side draft which we
are going to sow over here is the horizontal component of the pull which is perpendicular
to the line of motion is known as the side draft. So, this is the value which is shown here
is Rx.
So, if we see in totality the definitions which I wanted to show over here are what where
is this CG of the particular tractor, which lies somewhere here this point is also not
exactly known, but then we find calculate depending upon the weight distribution on the
rear axle as well as the front axle and the total weight of the tractor, by taking moment
about this point as well as or this point, and then we try to find out what would be the
approximate location on the CG of the tractor.
There are various methods of finding out the CG of this particular tractor, but then this is
what  we  want  to  show.  The  second  is  the  wheelbase  I  have  also  shown  you  the
wheelbase in the in the field, but again I would like to say that this is the distance
between the center to center; that means, this to this, this L is this wheelbase. And L 1 is
given that the CG distance from the center line of the rear axle. So, this is the value L 1
which is a value which will be required when we want to find out the total force required
as well as we want to find out the total power required, in case of an implement which is
connected to it.(Refer Slide Time: 09:09)
Well the second series of definitions here the drawbar power. When I have already said
the in tractor the drawbar is the linkages particularly the single point link or the double
point link or the three pointage link your linkage, and when generally those two point
linkage are not so much used in our country as such. But then these are those are used for
very large implements, which are trail type of implement which are supported a portion
of which is supported on the tractor and other portion supported on the ground. So, for
that the second two point hitches are used.
For the three point hitches are very much used and so, we when we talk of drawbar
virtually we will be talking of the three point link only. So, the drawbar power, what is
this drawbar power what is power by the way? So, power we know that rate of doing
work is power we you are very much aware. So, here when we want to find the drawbar
or that means, if the implement is pulled by the tractor then how much is the power
involved in that doing that task.
So, that is given in draft here yes. So, here this is the draft and the speed. So, if you
multiply the draft with the speed you can get the drawbar power, and drawbar power
when you see the draft is given as the kg of force and the speed here and you can get
drawbar horse power.
Generally we get a present in terms of horse power or kilowatt as you wish, this can be
done now the line of pull. As I have already shown you this line of pull; it is theimaginary line straight line passing through the center of resistance and the point at
which this hitched. I have explained already that this is the location which is there and
then this. So, between this is a line of pull. So, the center of resistance is definitely the
point as I said earlier at which, we have the total weight of the implement then the
horizontal and vertical forces including parasitic forces are acting at that in this particular
location.
So, joining this two points is the line of pull, and I talked about the vertical hitched point
and the weight of the tractor now we go to the next slide.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:20)
When well now I just stopped off the draft, because the moment we want to find out the
force requirement and how much is the power involved, all these jugglery is important
because we are interested to utilize the maximum power on the tractor. The tractors are
35 to 40 horse power tractor, 50 horse power tractor, but the implements which are being
attached to that are not in a position to utilize that much of power. And that is why we
would  like  to  find out  and  design  and have  methods  by  which  we  can  utilize  the
maximum as much possible the maximum power of the tractor.
Particularly because the soil is a viscous restrict material and then it changes with this
moisture, it change with the structure and many other things with the climate it changes.
So, you would require all these considerations to be taken while you want to design a
particular matching implement for a particular tractor.Now, there has been various methods of finding out the draft, particularly if you have a
draft in case of the single point. Yes it is easier because the single the tractor is pulling
the either trailer or a small implement just pulling it. So, we have just the horizontal
force  and  that  draft  is  known,  but  when  we  have  the  three  point  linkage  of  this
implement, there are complications  rise where we need to consider several aspects.
Example  we need to consider  the type of the soil which is there  the width of the
implement and then we would like to see what is the depth that which this implement is
operating and in different considerations are given.
So, the American society of agricultural biological engineers, they have devised or they
have obtained a very universal draft equation which is given in front of you here. The
various parameters D is the implement draft which has I have already explained to you
by the way that the draft is the horizontal component of the pull, and pull is along the
line  which  is  joining  the  center  of  resistance  to  the  point  of  hitch.  So,  this  draft
represented in Newton N.
A, B, C, these are the machine in soil parameters and S is the speed of operation, W is
the width of the you implement or the number of tools or times which may be there in
some of the cases and T is the tillage depth at which the whole thing is the implement is
operating.
So, using this equation it is possible and all over the world scientist and engineering
agricultural engineers are trying to find out the draft. Now these are predictions and these
are analytical values which have been found out over large experimentation, with respect
to different types of soils you can see the soil parameters and the machine parameters.
The machine parameters here A, B, C and the soil parameters F 1 , F2 and F3 here. Now
they will come depending upon see F j talks about a dimension of the soil structure the F j
is equal to 1 is for fine soil, 2 for medium and 3 for course structure soil now for the
machine  parameters  A, B, C. So, a suppose mold board plough was  width is  may
assumed in meters, then the value is 652. Now if the for a offset disc harrow if it is being
used for a primary tillage, then the value is 364, secondary tillage it is value is thissimilar for cultivator if you it is the primary tillage, secondary accordingly the values are
changed.
Now, the soil parameters are more or less same you can have a look at this that is more
or less. Now what has been found out and what has been said by the researchers and the
scientist who have revised this formula the equation is that, there is a percent variation if
you find because of the take they have taken soil from various tribes and locations. So,
we will find that this value varies from as low as about 25 percent to as high as about 50
percent both ways plus and minus. So, this will be the variation you will get; that means,
this although which is said to be a universal draft equation this need not be one which
will give you exactly the draft of an implement and it is has to be a tractor.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:41)
Well a similar equation has been developed a IIT Kharagpur some of our colleagues in
the department of agricultural and food engineering have developed, a similar equation
which we call that s modified ASABE draft equation, and which has been published and
the authors  Tiwari and Pandey that deals  you can get if you look through for this
particular paper.
Now, here also you can see that the equation is more or less similar except that certain
parameters have been added here. For example, there is a factor K 1 which has been added
over here, there is another factor K 2 has been added. Why so, because when wanted to
actual measure the draft of a particular equipment, and then use this equation we foundthat there was a large difference this was not protecting as close as was the actual value.
So, that is why the after a large number of experimentation in lateritic sandy loam soil,
sandy clay, loam soil they found out that there is need for adjustment of this particular
ASABE equation to suit to Indian conditions and therefore, this K 1 and K2 were added.
Now K1, this correction coefficients K 1 is these are the values for K 2 these are the values.
Now they have accordingly as per the equation which remains same initially we need to
add this K1 and K2  to suit the conditions of hours valve. We can see here that we have
written K1 and K2 are in the additional correction coefficients for Indian soil conditions.
That  means  the  value  which  will  get  for  draft  using  the  ASABE  equation  is  not
necessarily the value which will be there in a condition for Indian soils and that is why
this is has been made now it remains to be a question as to whether this will be can be
called universal or whether this will be suited to any other country or not that is the
question mark. So, we will leave it to at this state itself saying that a modification has
been made at IIT Kharagpur by large number of experimentation, and these values
depending on the Indian soils the value is K 1 and K2 the factors or the coefficients K 1 and
K2 had been added to this equation which is given like this.
So, this definitely gives as close as possible to the data or the drafts  measured by
implements which are used in India here with the tractors well.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:37)
Now, we have seen that the two equations, I would like to place in front of you a
problem which we will talk of how these can be used and what will be the difference. In
fact, it is very amazing that you will get if you use the original ASABE equation you will
get a value virtually half the value which is there for Indian conditions.
Well you can see that the draft is to be calculated for a two bottom mold board plough, it
is operated in fine soil conditions. So, we know about the soil condition and the machine
parameters have been taken from the table, the table which I showed you earlier. So, it
has been taken from the table as A is 652, B is 0 and C is 5.1. According the coefficients
also  now  the  researchers  Tiwari  and  Pandey have  also  given  this  for the  different
machine parameters K 1 and K2.
So, using this we find that the value of D for two bottom mold board plough operating in
soil with all conditions this value will be there, but if it is used with the modified
equation we find the value in this. So, virtually you can say that more than about 50
percent increase in the value. Now this remains to be questioned if somebody wants, but
otherwise if we have to say that under Indian conditions we would take these values.
Because then when we want to design the implements or decide the power source for
these we will have to take this value itself and that is why we would like you to
understand that this equations for Indian conditions you may use this equation and then
does not matter the value is some high, but you can use this for design of the equipment. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:46)
.Well now we will talk of mold board plough, now I wanted that you should have some
idea about, we have seen the mold board plough in the field and you have seen its
operation also and you have seen that how it was operating in inverting the soil. But
then, you must know what are its components many times the students not aware of the
different components as the purposes of those elements or the components are there in
the tractor it is just for your knowledge, which will help you in appreciating the size and
appreciating the design of mold board plough.
Now, you see that we have cutting edge here. Now this is the cutting edge, but this. Now
this is the cutting this is the shear point, but the depth is the cutting edge is through this
here now the cutting edge furrow slice for the purpose of this the type or the this is the
shear here now you can see this portion or this portion is to ca cut the furrow slice.
Then lifting the soil and turning the furrow slice is done by the mold board, now this is
mold board here. So, this is this portion in job is to lift and turn this. So, it goes like this
and then falls like this falls on the. Now a three point hitch you we have discussed that
this is the attachment for the implement to the tractor these are the three points, you will
require to be attached then this is the main frame of that.
Now, we have a component which is frog, now this component is very important. In fact,
we have said that we have this share here this is the shear, now we have the mold board
and then we have the the share and the cutting blade and the mold board. So, the land
side. So, in order to connect these we have a frog over here, we have a frog over here.
So, this frog this frog is the one which attaches these three together, and the purpose of
this land side is very important. You can see that in the front one this is the slightly
smaller as compared to the real one.
The purpose of this is the land side is make the clear furrow wall and take the side thrust
of the soil this is very important.(Refer Slide Time: 25:41)
Well different types of mold board actually although these are not very much used in
now a days you might have seen that the mold board itself is not very much used,
because of other types of equipment  which has been available and the farmers are
farmers are using mostly even the cultivator is most of the time used as a primary tillage
equipment. Because we are trying to conserve the soil moisture and that is why do not go
to first opening of the tract by the by the mold board plough.
So, but we would like to just tell you that these are the different types in general purpose
type, then the sod or breaker or sod mold board plough then the stubble mold board
plough and the slat mould board. These have their requirements particularly the general
one purpose is mostly used for all sorts of operations is to find here then the breaker type
is for able for. 
Yes, but the this is for in inverting the furrow, then slat bottom type this is for extremely
used for sticky soil conditions, and the stubble bottom is for mold boards that is curved
and  rather abruptly  near  the resulting  near  the top  resulting  in a greater  degree  of
pulverization, is increased a the pulverization this type of the mold board plough. Well
these are the different types, but generally they are not very much used now.(Refer Slide Time: 28:24)
Yes attachments to the plough where there are important attachments when you have
might have seen this jointer and coulter, the purpose of jointer is a small miniature
plough just like that, and it cuts the soil top portion of this slice, and coulter is also
cutting the soil and it moves ahead of the plough bottom, it moves ahead of the plough
bottom. But you may not find this a in the that tractors which are there now, adjustments
in the mold board plough.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:59)
These are two very important adjustments sometimes when I want to increase the depth
then the adjustment is vertical section which is over here.
Vertical section here and then horizontal section at this place. So, the horizontal section
vertical section which is about 3 to 5 millimeter is helpful in increasing the depth and
this is one which is important for giving a proper width of the furrow slice, this is
important for that.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:34)
Forces on mold board plough well we have shown already these forces on mold board
plough, generally as I showed that force of gravity or the implement which is there, the
weight of the implement and the soil reaction forces and the forces exerted by the prime
member  in case of a rotary  power source is  the power rotary power source is  not
involved, the resultant of these forces is the pull or the power unit upon the implement.
Otherwise we have the soil reaction forces which talk of two items, the soil forces and
parasitic forces. So, the useful soil forces those which are tool for cutting then for
breaking and moving the soil. While the parasitic forces talk of the friction and rolled in
resistance of this. So, these are the different types of forces which will act the when the
implement is connected to a; well the problem has been also shown to you.(Refer Slide Time: 30:24)
And the is a very simple problem, once you know what is the type of the cross section
with a mold board plough goes through in this furrow, you should be in a position to find
out what is the total cross section of this, and once you know the soil resistance you
should be in a position to find out what much is the draft. And once you know the draft
you should be in a position to find out power because we have already said that draft and
pa and speed once multiplied will give you the total power here.
Well students I have now explained in detail about mold board plough along with a small
problem, now I will continue with the details of other tillage equipment like this plough,
cultivator etcetera in my next class.
Thank you.