Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 38
Selection and Design of Plant Protection Equipment/ Machinery
Well, students we have already discussed in the my previous lecture about these sprayers
and dusters. Now, we will go into some more details of how to design and how to select
plant protection equipment, keeping in view the requirement of the crop, requirement of
the situation and the other parameters which are there at the hand of the designer. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:39)
So, see the chemical tank, as I said this is the first item which is to be there, now how
what should be the capacity of this? How do you get the capacity of this? Will be it will
depend on certain aspects whether you are talking of the power source? What is the
power source? If the power source is manual then what will happen? If the power source
is mechanical then what will happen and what should be size? This is what is important.
Now, how do you get this capacity? See the actual capacity generally 5 to 15 percent
more than the required capacity to ensure there is always liquid for agitation. Now, you
see sometimes when the agitator is there it will keep that the liquid which we have
created is in the right composition. It should not be that the particles settle down and then
water is there on the top. So, there should be the agitation should be sufficient so, inorder that this happens actual capacity should be 10 to 15 or 5 to 15 percent more now
we need to know what is the capacity of the tank? 
So, for knowing the capacity tank it is very simple it you do not require such big
mechanics for that, you should know what is the length of the plot that you have at your
disposal and what is the width of coverage which you want to do. So, if you know these
two things the application rate is known to you because depending upon the inter station
or depending upon the earlier data that you have you will utilize this. 
And once this is there you can get this formula. This is very simple you can just multiply
this should be in the area this is the application rate in liquid I mean liters per hectare.
So, with this area I got you are getting actually liters or, you can get into meter cube,
here it will be in meter cube because we have given the units accordingly and that is why
state 10-7 is so, the capacity of the tank can we know. 
Now, what is the material of the tank? See, you know that these materials could be
corrosive. So, it will finish, virtually the tank will not last long so, we have to away
careful about the material of construction on the tank which is thought off. 
Generally, the aluminium is one which is fair enough then galvanized steel which is
used, stainless steel and polyethylene plastics are commonly used for construction of
sprayer tanks. Yes, these are ones which are used and we find that these plastics are
coming up in a big way particularly with regard to the weight as well as non-corrosive. 
So, these are ones which are coming up you do require a technology for creating those
big tanks of plastic and all that, but that now very much in use and various types all in
fact, all the sprayers which might have seen or all use of plastics. Hardly anybody uses
aluminium or galvanized all, but these are the materials one can use depending upon the
situation depending upon what you wants so, these are the materials. 
And you can see that we have shown you the is one which is there with us at IIT,
Kharagpur which is of course, procured one, but then this is the one which we have for
the for orchards we are trying this testing is for orchards. 
So, and upon the capacity generally or the types of for sprayers the capacity generally for
hand operated small sprayers could be 1 liter, could be 14 liter, knapsack sprayers are 15liters, 14 liters, 16 liters sometime depending on the size and the tractor operated once a
400 to 2500 liter capacity. 
Now, because once it is in the power source which is very high in that case then you can
use this big ones and ultimately you will be in a position to minimize the time for
completing this particular operations so, that is very important. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:44)
Well, the heart of this particular this sprayer is the pump here because, these the one
which is in fact, delivering the energy for creating the droplet us. Now, let us have a look
at these what are the different types of the pumps which are used and how they are
constructed what is the pressure which is required and all these things. So, if generally
you know  that  when you are talking  of high pressure  pumps, generally  these  high
pressure pumps  are piston pumps or plunger pumps or diaphragm pumps or rotary
pumps. 
Now, this the pressure you can see we have talked of this pressure, but then it is worth
mentioning here also the operating pressure is varying from 4.1 to 5.5 MegaPascal or
600 to 800 PSI, then the flow rate is about 75 to 225 liter per minute. So, this much is the
flow rate. 
Now, plunger pumps high pressure applications as I said earlier then rotary pumps when
slightly low pressure once maximum pressure goes between 1 to 3 MegaPascal, and theflow rate is 19 to 114 liter per minute. Well, these are the informations which we are
from the literature available and from the experience that we have observed in testing of
various types of sprayers. 
The diaphragm once also lowest sprayers ones and these have about 3.4 Mega Pascal up
to this and up to 90 to 23 liter per minute, of the these are sometimes these diaphragm
ones are better for particularly for abrasive materials you can use them. Now, each has it
is own requirement and each has it is own uniqueness particularly with regards to use. 
So, we can see that what are these piston pumps? You the piston pumps are very simple
once, you have seen all the pumps which we are used for our water lifting and all that
there are all piston pumps or plunger pumps. You can see here that this is the plunger
here and inside this pump this is the one which when it goes here, you can see that
suction will take place from this location here, and that the liquid will be discharged
from here. 
So, these are the walls which are closed once you pull it the suction is created, vacuum is
created then the liquid will be sucked in and after the moment it is pressed when the
valves will open. And the vent is created the valves will open and the liquid will go
through this here. 
Now, the diaphragm type, the types of membrane is there so, this is the membrane which
is there, and then the inlet and outlet very simple you can see the inlet covers from here
and because of the movement of this you will see here. The movement of this diaphragm
is to and fro so, as it is moving out so, inside then it sucks in and moves the reverse
direction and it is pushes out. 
So, during that pressure see this in check valves. This check valves are direction, check
valves are only talking of unidirection because, here check valve is inlet one when it is
only putting inside there, the other one which is only for outside. So, these two check
valves are they are very simple type of diaphragm and as I said these are good for
abrasive materials. Then rotary pumps are also low pressure pumps but then they are also
positive displacement. Now, what is this positive displacement? Remember that it is not affected because of the
pressure as such the discharge, ok. But there are other pumps which are affected because
of the pressure which we call the non-positive displacement pumps. 
So, the rotary pumps you can see here that these rotary pumps where there is a rollers are
there, then the rotor is there, and PTO driven, here is the inlet. Now, the moment you
have been see this rollers they move to and fro so, when they move to and fro while
moving inside they suck in and while pushing that and this particular rotor keeps on
rotating. 
So, when keeps on rotating they will go to the location where the outlet is there, they will
and deliver it. From the inlet point they will be sucked it so, these rollers are moving to
and fro and then they do the job of suction and forcing it out this is what is in the rotary
pumps is a very concept is very simple if you are open you would be able to understand
what are this. 
But, it as a designer you must know what is happening inside the pump then only you
will be able to change the pump, you will be able to design a new pump and see that the
losses in the pump are lesser. And then you are in a position to choose a particular pump
for a particular application part. 
So, these are the positive displacement pumps that we have talked the piston pumps, the
rotary pumps, in the diaphragm pumps and the pressures and volumes which are there I
have talked of these. Then let us know which the non-positive are and what are their
behavior? (Refer Slide Time: 09:50)
See  here,  the  non-positive,  variable  displacement  pumps  simple  as  that.  The  very
displacement will vary as the pressure you can see here that this centrifugal pump here.
So, see these pumps generally for high volume and the essentially high speed once 3000
to 4000 rpm, and the these are for low in a operating pressures you can see that low
operating  pressures,  but  they  are  high  volume.  And  they  are  not  suitable  for  high
pressure applications  of course, as I said these are meant for but high volume low
pressure. 
Now, here you can see that the inlet is here, this is the air location of the inlet here when
it is sucked in and this is the outlet here and the impeller is the here. So, these sucked
from here as the shaft is connected to the impeller. So, at the shaft rotates the impeller is
in a position to suck in and then it is thrown from the periphery you can see that this is
this is how it is taken here and then this is thrown out from this side. So, this is the way it
will be thrown out outlet. 
Now, these are why they are called a non positive? Because of the variable displacement,
what is so variable? You here you see that centre when the pump is speed is 6000 rpm,
4500 rpm, 2400 rpm each case see what is there. See when you plotting here pressure
and this says pump outlet, you see here as the pressure see 20 PSI, if I say PSI well;
please excuse me because we have not changed the nomenclature of this which wasgiven because we have taken from the literature and it is worth telling about exactly what
they have given. 
So, you know that 1 PSI is equal to 6.9 kilo Pascal so, you can just know this. So, using
this is of course, gallon per minute here, this also one gallon generally British gallon
about 4.5 meter. So, 1 gpm this is gallon per this is nothing but about 4.5 liter per minute
this can be taken. 
So, irrespective of the units that you are talking of you can see it for each of the speeds
of these centrifugal pumps. See as the pressure changes increases here there is a drop on
all  these  things  so and although  the  volume  handled  by  this  is  very high.  So, the
importance is that the volume handle is the high but they are affected because of the
change in pressure. So, these are not used for constant at high pressure locations, where
it is required where your are using the other pumps as I discuss about piston pumps or
plunger pumps, diaphragm pumps, rotary pumps etcetera. 
Now, what is the power requirement in a pump? It is important you should have the how
do you get the power source for running the pump because pump is the heart. So, for that
itself you need some energy and that energy can be provided by the PTO of the tractor or
if you have an engine or whatever is the power source that you can think off. So, how do
you get the power? Which is very simple you can see
P = Q × p
, where, Q is the flow rate and p is the pressure. 
So, once you know this you are in position to find out what is the power requirement of a
particular pump. So, this is important so far as the different type of the non-positive
displacement pumps are there, we had talked first individual pumps we have talked non-
positive different pump what else is there? Now, we will go we are going ahead with the
different components you had seen we are talked of the tank. Now, we are talking about
the pump and then we are talking we will talk about the droplet us to be created and so
on and so forth let us go ahead. (Refer Slide Time: 14:06)
Preparation of spray solution, how do you prepare this spray solution? This is important,
sometimes you have the emulsion which are oil emulsion liquids which need a constant
stirring, otherwise the solution will not remain colloidal throughout on the process, and
otherwise when you want to apply you will find that the chemical is not actually in the
same concentration which it should be there. 
So, you see here that  many  spray materials  are suspensions  in soluble  powders  or
emulsions. So, we need to have agitating system in that spray whether mechanical or
hydraulic whatever we need to have the agitation how do we do it? If it is a very large
one and handling large amount of chemical, then in the tank there has to be mechanism
created. You can create that mechanism as it is a mechanical or hydraulic system. 
So, mechanical agitation employed for pressures above of 2.5 MegaPascal, these are
some of the informations which are given and the lower pressure hydraulic agitators are
employed. Well, these are some of the literature informations which are worth knowing
because then once as a designer when you want to choose a particular type of agitation
system you should know what is the requirement and what is the device or what is the
method which will be suitable for you that you can take. 
So, when you are talking of mechanical agitators well in the mechanical agitators what
will be there in mechanical agitator we definitely, this is the one, see this particular these
are the pedals as shown here, these are the pedals. So, when this shaft rotates and youcan give power to this pulley here. So, when you will give power to this pulley you will
be rotation and then these baffles will move inside so, the size of the baffles their
diameter etcetera has to be very carefully chosen and then for this you will require power
for operation of these. 
Now, in the tank, now you can see that there should be a entry of here and then there will
be a screen for putting the chemical here. So, this where you will get the agitation from?
Now, some of the information which is available in literature is worth mentioning to you
empirical equations people have developed using these pedals. 
For example, they have used the minimum peripheral velocity of the pedals which are to
be there, then the depth of liquid which is essential above the soft centerline which is
important, then R is the total combined width of pedals divided by tank length. See these
are  some  of  the  empirical  equations  so,  all  these  parameters  have  been  taken  into
consideration. 
Sm = 5.39×A0.422×R-0.531×Fe0.293
Ps = 3.26×10-11×R0.532×Sm3.41×L
Then Fe is agitation factor, then P s the shaft input power and L is the length of the tank.
So, these are the two expressions which are available for you. So, minimum peripheral
speed how will you get the minimum peripheral speed, then how will you get the shaft
input power at a particular given peripheral speed and kilowatt.
 So, these you have to use these in fact, what is important it you have to be careful about
the units of this. So, these are you the proper units are to be definitely followed then only
these powers which are given here will be effective, otherwise they will not be effective
and they will give a wrong value.
So,  when you are  talking  of the  spray  volume  solution  to  be  created  it  has  to  be
particularly for larger units it has to be stirred or agitated over throughout the course of
the application part. And it could be depending upon the it has been given a pressure is
very high never press it is then we are will go for mechanical and lower pressures
slightly lower than that maybe you can go for hydraulic one.Now, what we do in these? In the mechanical one we have seen like this, in hydraulic
system what we do so, we will have what is there in this. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:26)
See, in the hydraulic agitation as it is said that is for a low slightly lower pressure as say
2.1 MegaPascal in case of that and lower pressure should be here. A portion of what is
done, a portion of the pumps output is discharged into the spray tank. This is beauty of
this that when the tanks output a portion of that may be about say 10 percent, 15 percent
of that is diverted back into the tank. And where it is diverted? Through a series of jet
nozzles or orifices located in a pipe along the bottom of the tank.
So, at the bottom of the tank if you have small nozzles are or orifices created, so bring
back the output certain portion of the output back into it. So, it will keep on delivering
through this nozzles or the orifices at the bottom. So, each time there will be a rotation I
mean there will be a stirring of the whole chemical and that is why, then you will be able
to achieve that. 
Beauty  of  this  is  particularly  this  is  good  for  the  sea  oil  emulsions,  where  if  the
mechanical ones who will have the metal part and all that the pedals. So, they may get
deposited onto that. So, but this system is beautiful particularly for this emulsions. A
some we have given some information this table you can see a table 1, this since we have
picked up from there table 1 say. So, value of agitating factor now I said you that what isthis  agitation  factor  now  that  agitation  factor  has  been  has  to  be taken  this  is  the
empirical information available from literature. 
So, it is worth mentioning who here and you should take up these depending upon the
type of emulsion which is going to be used you should take this thing. And then only you
will be in a position to find out the emulsion and the wettable powder for those what is
the amount of minimum total circulation rate that you will have to rap this in these are
given. So, you can use this and find out the rates minimum total circulation rates and
here is the hydraulic power. 
Pn = (Qm×p) / 60000
So, once in the hydraulic power in order to find the hydraulic power you will have to
have Qm which is nothing, but the minimum total circulation rate and the pressure that
you are talking of pressure at the agitation nozzles. So, with these you will be in a
position to find out what is the pressure power; hydraulic power which will be required. 
So, if you are talking of the different selection and design of this we have slowly you are
coming from the tank, we are talking for of the pump, well anyway talking of the
agitators in that system and then we will talk of small you can say that droplet us how to
create an droplet us and definitely they will require some nozzles so, what are all these. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:37)
These  nozzles  are  atomizer;  yes,  these  nozzles  are  the  ones  which  will  create  the
atomization which will create the smaller particles of the size which you want. So, these
the basic purpose of it is I have already explained here if you go through that you will
know. The basic purpose of atomization is to create small as small spurts you will this
the particles which will then be in virtually it will increase the surface area and then
when it gets deposited on through the whole canopy it will get spread here. 
So, with the lesser amount with if you have better atomization or a good amount of
increase in surface area that is what it is in fact, increase the surface area of the liquid,
but I breaking into many small droplet us to cover the whole plant. So, this is the basic
thing. 
Now, the during atomization energy is imparted at to liquid to break into small particles
and  by  overcoming  surface  tension  viscosity  and  inertia,  of  course,  these  are  the
mechanics of it this in the system which happens inside is given here. So, the atomization
is important how do you do it? You got to create pressure you got to create circulation,
you got to have the particular type of the nozzle which will give you that. 
So, but where should we keep the nozzles? We have also given this I will come to this
slightly later, you talk of the different types of nozzles, what is there in the nozzle? See
the nozzle could be flat fan nozzles that means, when the deposition takes place it will be
like this you can see that the fan just like a fan if you have you have seen that flat fan
nozzles, where the overlap now well is spray pattern is flat sheet type. 
Now, the moment you have these what is the level of overlap? Say when you are talking
about  supposing  the  oil  I  mean  the  solution  comes  to  this  and  then  we  have  this
arrangement or we have this arrangement here. So, there should be a overlap in order to
that the uniformity is there. If you do not have then there is a possibility that the spread
which you get for coverage of all may not be sufficient enough, and that is why we need
certain level of overlap. These overlap varies from as low as 15, 20, 25 percent to as high
about 50 percent or so, depending upon the requirement depending for the type of nozzle
you have used. 
So, here for spray angles 60 to 110 with 80 degree with the most common one, so, what
is the spray angle? This angle in fact, we are talking of this angle so, when this angle
depending upon this angle which is over here say 65 to 110 and with 80 being the mostprominent which you use, you will get a overlap above 40 percent you obtain uniform
coverage in case of a flat fan nozzle. 
In case of a flooding or this type of nozzle you see that for overlapping of patterns to
obtain uniform coverage 100 percent overlapping, this is different  because, you are
virtually you can see this is what happens. Spray angle is 100 to 150 degrees and the
operating pressure, where 55 to 170 kPa or so, here also 100 to 200 kPa. 
So, what happens in the atomization? We are talking of having small particles and then
these particles were actually once they are of a particular size then we need to know
where this would be the overlap, and what should be the angle of these spray which
should be maintained of these nozzles. So, the angle has to be, the spray angle has to be
designed or selected then the pressure has to be selected and then only you can know
what is the required overlap for getting uniform coverage, these are important when you
are talking of the different types of nozzles. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:41)
Well, hollow cone nozzles, sometimes we require that we do not want this to be there so
we require hollow cone nozzles. So, you can see that this is the cone which is hollow
inside, so, this is the type of pattern which you will find in case of a hollow cone nozzle.
And the other details are very simple, the spray angle is varying from 60 to 95 degrees
the overlap is as since a low 25 percent overlap it is able to cover. And the operating
pressure is 270 to 550 kPa or so hollow conical sheet as I said this will look like this.Solid cone, well it is hollow and that is solid, you can see here that this is a solid cone.
This will be required because then you want that this should happen and this will be
virtually covering the over area. So, then you will have this, so this will be overlap is
your 25 percent overlap, spray angle is about 130 degrees spray pattern and solid contact
and the application pressure is this. 
The rotary nozzles, we are also talked of fruitiness control droplet atomizers they are
called CDA. Then there are triple action nozzles which are jet type solid cone hollow
cone they can produce three types of patterns. So, these are different types of nozzles
which are used and depending upon the requirement, these are very much used and
depending upon your requirement you should select these nozzles. 
See each and everything when we talk of design the selection proper selection is also
designed, it is not necessary that you will start fabricating you will design each and every
aspect and then you will fabricate and then casting etcetera and then you will use no. We
are talking of what are the things which are minimum requirements and correspondingly
what is available in the market which we have to choose for our system. 
So, that is why I have listed that this particular topic what we are discussing selection
and design, we will select the pumps, we will select the nozzles which are available
depending upon our requirement, depending upon what sort of overlap I want, what is
the crop which is there with me for to be spread and things like that. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:05)
So, like these nozzles what are there in the nozzles; we thought that these are some of
things which we have and you wanted to show you many locations you may not find. So,
it is worth showing you here that see the nozzle body these are the nozzle body here,
then swirl type the swirling action takes place through these, then the washer or gasket is
required for order. So, that there is not losses do not take place, then there is a orifice
disc which will help you to deliver that and there is a cap for closing it. 
So, this is the details of the two type two nozzles which we have shown you these are the
smaller components which are there inside. Selection of these, now how do you select?
Well, I have discussed a lot about this it will depend on these insecticides, fungicides or
the herbicides. 
What is the chemical or what is the type, nature of the liquid or the powder whatever it is
to beat them? So, if it is powder we do not need these more nozzles, but definitely when
the powder has to made into a liquid and to use so, you have to think of depending on the
application rate, crop row spacing and operating pressure and speeds you will have to
select these nozzles. Because, these nozzles a specifications are given that these are fit
for what is the pressure ranges on which it this should be work so, you should select that.
What sometimes is furious design nozzles and sometimes, these are nozzles which are
defective and not good quality ones of course, particularly with regard to material and it
is life. 
Otherwise, you should be able to pick up these nozzles from the market and from good
manufacturer who does this, reputed manufactures who will have all these specifications,
and you will also see what is the type of pump, and what pressure you will definitely get
and all that and mention and the size of the particles which you will get. 
Nozzles  materials  well  these  different  materials  you  start  from  aluminium,  brass,
stainless, ceramic, tungsten, carbide you will find in brass and stainless steels are very
commonly chassed the of these you can see here. So, you will find that these materials
are used for the atomizers. (Refer Slide Time: 30:32)
Design considered, for nozzles are atomizers, what are the design considerations? What
you are talking? So, you need to know how much is the velocity which will come out so
that you get the proper atomized particles of that size. So, with this out of literature the
people  which  have  research  and  found  out  the  empirical  relationships  between  the
various properties of the liquid for example, the density of this with the viscosity and the
material the surface tension of that liquid and what is the pressure at which and what sort
of flow we want.
So,  depending  upon  all  these  parameters  then  the  empirical  equations  have  been
developed and it is worth choosing these equations. It is not that one has to again start
and do it for that, until unless there is a special requirement. You must use this and check
how far is the is it from the reality so, it is worth utilizing these. 
For example, you can see here that, see here the jet diameter, this the jet diameter d j that
vj is the velocity of the jet and rho is the density in kg per meter cube is this one. Then
this is the viscosity this should be greater than equal 280 times this where again you have
rho here which is the surface tension, and this is the density, this is the diameter and this
viscosity so, there is a relationship here.
Then vj talks of the jet velocity so, this v j is given by something like this, where ∆p is the
pressure and n is the turbulent flow for a 0.5 for turbulent, that is talks of what type of
flow will take place in the nozzle system when it is working. So, this is one available
information about jet velocity for atomizers and nozzles, which we which can be used,
which can be selected for our use. 
So, what are the different things that we have learned with regard to particular with
regard to the flow rates, with regard to the nozzles, and with regard to the discharge of
these nozzles, etcetera. See, we have the volume flow rate this nozzles is given by this,
where vj is we have seen it, our jet velocity, then A is a nozzle area and C is the area
coefficient here. 
Then we are talking of what is this relationship between C and C Dthat is 
CD = CA ×Cv
Where: CD is the discharge coefficient and C A is area coefficient. 
So, discharge coefficient area coefficient are related like this, where C v is the one which
we are talking of the volume, ok. So, using this what we get here is Q is given by this
formula and then ultimately using these you get v j to be given as
where A is the nozzle orifice area where nozzle orifice area. So, this has to be in meter
square because this is an area. 
So, you can see that every jet velocity may be computed from this particular equation.
So, if you know these, these details it is possible that you will be in a position to design a
sprayer, and for a particular applications the pump you can select with the pressure and
the fluid rate that you want the low volume, ultra volume, over in higher volume etcetera
and the type of application with is for orchards or where ever. 
So, with these information I think it is worth knowing and selecting etcetera particularly
with regard to sprayers. So, I think if you have further questions we will definitely try to
answer at the point of time when it is required. But I think this is sufficed for the time
being. 
Thank you. 