Farm Machinery
Prof. V.K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture -37
Plant Protection Equipment/Machinery
Well,  dear  students  welcome  to  the 37th lecture  of these  series  on Plant  Protection
Equipment Machinery. Well, you know that the crop has to be protected from various
elements; for example, from the weeds, from insects, pests and other harmful effects,
otherwise the crop will not give us a good yield. So, what are the protection devices;
what are the protection processes that we take up for any crop for that matter whether it
is a cereal crop or a plantation crop or a orchard crop, whatever it is? 
In fact, when we talk of this, the protection is mainly from the insect’s pest. Here, we had
already discussed about the weeds. We have discussed about different types of weeding
devices and weeding equipment and different methods of controlling the weeds, which
are unwanted plants in a in a particular crop. But when you want to protect them from
other  elements  like  diseases  etcetera;  then,  insect  pest  attack  and then diseases  are
infested these plants, are infested with the diseases and ultimately it leads to damage of
the plant and the plant dies and ultimately, we do not get the yield. 
So, this particular section will be dealing more on the chemical or the protection of the
plant or the crop from insect’s pests and sometimes when we also want that some of the
growth hormones are to be applied, then how do we apply them? So, the equipment
etcetera and the devices processes which are involved in these, we will discuss under this
section. Let us go through the various slides, which I have prepared for you. (Refer Slide Time: 02:13)
Well, what is plant protection? As I said, in fact, this has already been told what I was
explaining here that see a photograph has also been shown on the side, stalks of in
pomegranate a particular device which have been developed at IIT, Kharagpur.
We will talk of this slightly later. Then, this is the device which has been developed at
IIT, Kharagpur and then the tested at location in Maharashtra. Well, we are trying to as I
said earlier that, to we are trying to save the crop from the pest attack etcetera.
Now, the need to be applied on plants and soil in the form of spray, sometimes when the
chemical is there need to be applied. We are talking of the plants, sometimes on the soil;
in fact, these are not for the soil. But then, when we apply they will fall on to the plants
as well as on the soil.
Now, what are the various methods that by which we do and the therefore, the equipment
for a uniform effective application is essential. What we do is we want that it should be
very effectively and correctly applied on to the targeted plants. If the, if it is only a
growth organ say item which has to be given to all the plants, then there is no problem
we can uniformly spread over it. But then, if it is only insect pest control.
So, there may be a case where this is not infected at all over the place, maybe an progress
certain localized locations. So, there we would have to apply and that is why it is very
essential to go judiciously and uniformly at the location where it is done and for these,the Sprayers and Dusters are the ones devices or the equipment which are used; we call
them sprayers and dusters for applying these chemicals. When you dusters, the name
itself tells you that dust means there are dust powders which you need to be spread.
Now, what are the mechanism; what are the devices; what we do for the spraying of the
chemical or the dusters, we will talk of them later. But this is what are the 2 important
things; one is the Sprayer which is a equipment used for applying chemicals and the
liquid droplet form and the Duster is the machine which is equipment for powder form
for replication in the powder form. 
So, these are the main things which we are talking with respect to plant protection. And
in this section, as I said earlier we will be only talking of the plant protection of the plant
from insect pests that is only. So, if you go to the next slide, what do we get? See
Dusters.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:08)
We talk of Dusters first, let does not matter which order you follow, but let us talk of
Dusters, is an equipment for applying chemicals which are in powder form. Yes, what do
you do for these? Well, there are certain features for this because one is you can very
simple one is that you can take this and spread by hand may be that if it is infected in
your hand, possibly there may be a problem in your hand, that is why maybe you will
have used gloves and then, spread manually even a small area if it is required.But when we are talking of large area, definitely we have to have a mechanism by which
we should be able to apply and there not only this, we should be able to apply very
uniformly. We want that it should not be one place more, the other place less and all that,
there should be a uniform application of this. 
So, and this that is why; so, what is done? Well, the idea is the small particle say number
mean diameter go to 1 to 10 micrometer may be advantages where complete coverage
within the foliage is important. Yes, in fact, then what we have to do? This dust or even
the chemicals; so, we talk of dust here. Now, the diameter of the particles which will be
there, those powder particles varying from 1 to 10 micrometer.
So, these are advantage. So, it has to reach to every location in the foliage in the canopy
of the plant which we are thinking of and the application rate is usually actually these are
not meant for very high application rates. But the application rate which are generally
followed is 22 to 55 kg per hectare.
This is the amount generally we do if it has to be given only in the powder form. If it has
to be given something else, then maybe this powder has to be made into a liquid and with
water and then, its relation has to be given. It depends on what we want and what is the
type, nature of the crop; what is the type of infestation and what is the type of the
chemical powder which is available with us?
Because many aspects are to be looked into before we go into application of this. Now
generally this, see what will happen? If this is applied may be that if wind is blowing you
should avoid that, but then if the wind you are not applying at a very high level, you are
applying at the say 11.5 meter or the plant height. So, up to when you find that the wind
speed is low particularly say about up to 3 meter/sec or so. 
So, 3 meter per second when moderate air temperature at that time, you can apply.
Generally, these chemical applications are generally done in the early hours and in the
late afternoons because to avoid many things. For example, even if it is a say daytime
and it is very hot, then those the insects go underneath the leaf and they sit there.
So, if you where the whole foliage also they will not be getting effective; that is why it is
done during the morning hours and then, the afternoon hours where the temperature iscomfortable, they can be all over the plant and so you can apply. That is why it says that
say the air velocity or wind velocity should not be very high.
There are 2 aspects of it; one is that it will not the insects because insects will be also all
around and it will not be lost because these weed is, if the wind is high, then even if you
apply certain amount; of course, it will be spread and the wind will take away take this to
another location.
So, wherever they it is not to be applied, it will be applied and in that case it may happen
that there could be damage to the other plant as well, it may fall on the soil. So, there are
various problems which may occur because of this and that is why we would like that the
wind velocity should not be more and a moderate air temperature, we are talking of; not
very high temperature, not very low temperature also.
Generally, these are equipment which have been shown and which has been made so far
or with or generally manually operated or a power operated. So, you can have manually
operated power operated both depending upon what you are handling. As you said that
maybe the capacity is 22 to 25 kg per hectare.
So, if it is thus, then you may not like to have a manually operated one because then that
has to be carried by the man; either he will carry about 15 kg and then, finish and then
come back and keep filling up and all that or you can have a equipment in which a power
operated which can carry that amount once and then, the application can be given when
the powder can be spread wherever it is liked and wherever; whatever be the location
whatever be the height of the spread to be given, it can be done. So, this is about the
dusters.(Refer Slide Time: 10:27)
Now, this sprayers; well, this is slightly different from there from those powders because
there we have a fear that with wind, it will go away. It is not that when you have a
chemical, it will not go away if the wind is high. Yes, these chemicals will also go away;
but then, it has some other requirements of this sprayer.
Sprayer we spray the liquid, we spray the chemical which is there and now generally we
do not want to spray that chemical in the raw form. This has to be diluted to a certain
percentage of dilution which is required for that particularly, because that will be a
effective one, certain active ingredients are there in each chemical. And accordingly, that
has to be multiplied particularly the in the volume form and hence, several 100 liters of
solution have to be prepared with those chemicals. 
Now, what are the ways by which this sprayer; where these sprayer are used. I have just
listed them here, you can have a look at this, well these are herbicides well. So, the
herbicides, in order to reduce competition from weeds, this sprayer are used have we
have talked of this earlier already. Then, protection of the crop from fungicides and then,
the fungal diseases, fungicides are used fungal diseases then, the control of insects and
pests which is of concern to us in this particular lecture here.
And then, micronutrients yes, this is another important thing because sometimes as I said
earlier that may be that we would like to apply certain nutrients or growth enhancing
materials. Then, in that case also hormones, we call. So, micronutrients are to be applied.In that case also, you can use the sprayer, but then a proper volume of solution has to be
prepared. So, what are the functions of the sprayer then? 
Now, you see this liquid has to be applied. It must be applied uniformly. Well and then,
it cannot be poured simply you have say 2 liter per hour or per minute. But it has to be
spread in the form of small droplets, we are talked of the droplets. So, this is important
how what sort of things are done; what are the functions that the sprayer does? Sprayer
what does it do? It breaks the liquid into droplets forms. Yes, this is important because it
has to broken into small particles. This droplets when they get deposited they will be
effective in that. 
So, how to create that this is one challenge, when you design a sprayer, how to create
that so that effective size and distribute them uniformly over the surface or the space to
be protected. So, this is the main function of the sprayer which you will design.
In now it is a different thing that what mechanism you apply to design and so, such that
the droplets are of a particular size. Another function is to regulate the amount of the
chemical in the insecticide pesticide or fungicide that we want to apply so, that to avoid
excessive application.
So, this is very important. So, when a duster is there; what we are trying to do? We are
trying to spread the dust, dust particles in a certain sized form and so, uniformly to the
targeted places. When we talk of sprayers, we are talking of these droplets to be created
and those droplets and it must be created in a exact amount. So, that we do not lose this.
So, this is the job of the spray. Now, what are the other components of this, let us have a
look at it.(Refer Slide Time: 14:30)
Well, you we know that we have to try, we have to make the droplets, we have to create
droplets out of the liquid solution which we have. How do we do it you must have read
already earlier that an you will have to have pressure, you must have thought heard about
the engine, in the engine what we do when the diesel or petrol is thrown into the engine
combustion chamber. How it is thrown?
In fact, it is atomized over there and through high pressure when it is pushed through
high pressure through a particular nozzle, then it comes into various into in the dust in
the very you can say a particle form, smaller particles and that atomized particles will get
connected and mixed with the whole heated gas and the actually things happen in the
engine. 
Now, similar thing happens here. You need to have a pressure created. So, what are the
different types of systems which are employed for a pest sprayers, will have a look at
this. See, the Hydraulic energy; what sort of energy? You can say that Lever operated
knapsack sprayers, you must have seen this sprayer which are carried at the back and
then the person operates with the lever; it could be a foot operated, it could be a rocker
operated and Hand compression, Tractor operated boom sprayers, these are the sprayers
which are there say this Hydraulic energy sprayers. 
Now then, Gaseous energy. Now, this is very important actually some of these particles,
we would like to use the air blowers so that like a mist it comes out in the. So, there alsothe particle size will very small and it will go and cover the whole plant. So, many times
it has been found particularly orchards once that the air carrier particularly the mist
blowers are the ones which are very effective this.
The second in the Spinning disc type of your centrifugal energy is used. Well the this is
one even similar thing can be also used for the dusters as well; some of them are made
manual dusters are there, where centrifugal energy is used and you can spray the dust. 
Now, do we need to have a certain a pressure or that what are the different pressures
which are followed in that for crops depending upon whether it is a cereal crop or a
orchard crop or a plantation crop or high trees when you have to spray. So, there you can
see the volume on the basis of the, you can see the application rate, the on the basis of
power and also on the basis of the pressure that we create.
So, we will talk of pressure slightly later. Let us see about the application rate and the
source of power. So, source of power could be say manually operated; yes, manually
operated one you can have, where it could be a liberal as I said manually operated levers,
rockers, foot operated all these. Then, animal operated; yes, you could have a animal
operated system which is of course, in some locations you might see, but because the
situation is changing over now. So, these are not very much in vogue now but thus, yes
can use the animal energy. It is a question of only using the source of power.
So, the high volume ones are 400 liters per hectare. Then, the low volume ones are less
than 400, 5 to 400 liters per hectare and then, ultra lower you can have as low as say 1 to
5 liters per hectare or so. So, these are on the basis of the application rate and on the
basis of the source of power, you can say that manually animal energy and then, powers;
whether you use a tractor of power or a power tiller or you can you can also think of the
electrical power used.
Many of the devices, which are coming on the electrical power use where electrostatic
because there we will discuss this later but then, here I can only say that these this
particles actually are charged. So, when the negative charge is on to the plant so, they get
deposited. So, their efficiency deposition efficiency is very high and that means the
effectiveness of the chemical when it is put in the electrostatic charged particles, it is
very high.So, one way it is very good, but there are other difficulties with this and drawbacks and
limitations because which it is not very extensively used, but yes it is also used. And
now, it has come back. Well, it was started long back and now, it has come back. People
are using it and several modifications of this have come up.
Now, when the large areas particularly you might have seen in west in US and other
places  where the farm are very large and you have to apply these chemicals, then
airplanes are fly and they carry the chemical and maybe the height above the ground
particularly from the plant you will say about 1 to 8 meters.
The whole aircraft moves and then, it will spray over the whole area and it has an
weightage from the point of view of the economics is because of the large areas say
about 50, 60, 100 hectares, 200 hectares like that. And hence, the plane can go and cover
the whole area very short duration of time and there may not be losses because they can
adjust the time. 
Now, but over maybe about last 10 years or so, people are thinking of few this is a small
planes which are in fact, are called as Drones. So, these Drones can also do the same task
and that’s why we have written here that you can also think of the Drone operated
sprayers.
The drone can do the task we will discuss this in another lecture; what drones can do?
They can do wonders and this will be useful for small forms and particularly a elevated
locations, where the person cannot go on. Orchards which are there on elevations, they
this drones can help us and they have been helping. 
So, it is possible that you can think of these high technology to be used for use of these
sprayers drone operated sprayers or road operated sprayers, we can think of. So, on the
basis  of  the  classification  of the  sprayers,  we  can  see that  it  could  be  a  manually
operated, animal operated or power operated; you can think of tractor or power tiller or
you can think of motor operated electrical motors or electrical energy could be applied.
Then, on the basis of the volume; yes, over even larger volumes, medium volumes and
ultra low volumes, small volumes where the some of the chemicals are needed to be
applied in large volume only, those active indirectly they are applied, no solution, I mean
no mixing of water. Those are some of them are applied sometimes and then, if you aretalking of the energy, type of energy used. One is the hydraulic energy where you are
using have the hand compression is sprayers and maybe tractor operated system or you
can think of air carriers you have so, that you get in the form of mist. So, this is what we
are talking with respect to this sprayer and dusters as a concept of understanding what
they are.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:13)
Well, the pressures which I wanted to show you in the other one we have kept here now,
you can see that the pressures what are the because for creating those small particles you
need pressure as I said earlier. So, lever operated sprayers the pressure operating pressure
is maintained about 1 to 3 kg per centimeter square and the discharge rate is normally
500 ml per minute. Then, stirrup pump sprayers, these are also of a similar type and a
similar discharge and pressure is also required.
Rocker type ones slightly higher because they are the discharge rate is high and the
pressure at the moment the discharge is high and you want to make the same type of
particles. Then there you will have to have a high pressure and now the pressure is about
14 to 18 atmosphere or kg per centimeter square which we say. Then, foot operated
sprayers could be, because foot operators operated sprayers or many which are used for
even big orchards or big trees, where about 20-30 feet, you want to push the chemical. 
So, there you move the optimum pressure is very high. But 17 to 21 or even 21 to 55 kg/
cm2 when you are thinking of a tractor operated sprayer because we are we are thinkingof high 150 to 190 liters per minute. So, much of volume, these are required particularly
for tall trees and all that. So, various methods have been employed for all this and then,
what we are getting is that on the basis of this pressure, on the basis of the volume and
on the basis of the energy employed and the type of power source, these sprayers and
dusters etcetera are all classified and understood.
Now, the main thing in this what I want to say you is that it is the droplets; whether you
are talking of liquid or you are talking a powder, you have to think of what is the size of
the droplet or the size of dust particle which is powder in case of a powder which will go
and get deposited. And once it is deposited appropriately at the right place and in the
right quantity, you will get the benefit of that.
And that is why these are various types of are available. I have shown you one of the one
which is available here and we are trying to modify into electronic one. This is one
which is available mist type, but then we want to see whether it is possible to use this so
that we can economize on the total chemical which is being applied. 
This is important because you may have the system which is applying such that the
volume is too high and in fact, the ones which are available in the market are like that
that once you start the system and the pressure is pressure is created because of the
power source then it continues until you stop it. Now, that way it may not it may be good
for a continuous cereal crop, where the tractor can go.
But if you are talking of orchard crops, where the plants are at a certain distance; then, it
has been seen many cases that the canopy and the next canopy there is a difference and
there those areas, if it when it when it applies those are waste.
So, that is why we have to think of the power source and think of this. So, as an engineer
what is your knowledge; what you should contribute? You should try to design keeping
in view the requirement of the plant or the tree which is there or the orchard which is to
be considered and then, the power source and the total quantity to be applied and the type
of the chemical or the powder to be applied. 
So, you need  to consider all  these  things  and then, this  design which  one  will  be
beneficial. So, that we are all talking today about precision agriculture. We are talking ofhow we can minimize on the inputs and get maximized. So, for production protection of
the plants, these are very important. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:29)
Well, I have shown you manually operated sprayer where all these details are given to
you. You can see this that all details are explained over here. You definitely it will have a
tank sure where the chemical will be there, then there will be a lever which has to be
operated and there will be a plunger. Now, we will talk of what are the different types of
components will talk slightly later. 
But these are the ones which are there the Tank, the Nozzle, the Filter, the Valves which
will there, the Pressure regulator, the Hose pipes, the handle, Spray gun and the Spray
lance which are there these are all shown here. So you, if you look into it, you will be
able to understand; here, not much to explain and discuss so, that is why I have given
you we have taken from the literature.
Remember that what we are discussing here is we are talking whatever is available in
some of the books as well as the research publications and some of the look work that we
have done at IIT, Kharagpur and done elsewhere which are beneficial for different types
of crops; cereal or plantation or whatever. So, those are the things which we are. So, I request you that you must also go into the
literature available to have sufficient and you can say that add up to the knowledge
which we are trying to give you here. Let us go to the other slides.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:01)
Well, some of the details of this Hydraulics spray lance, the Hydraulics spray gun; what
are  the  details  these  are  also  very  self  explanatory  because  we  have  given  the
dimensions, we have given the values etcetera in such a way that anyone can understand
these concepts and these types which are available and it also helps you because once
you understand where is the nozzle disk whether in nozzle cap and what where is the
nozzle body and what is the barrel and things like that. For all these trigger type and
screw type, then these designs help you in understanding what is the way by which we
are able to make the droplets of different sizes, this is this very important.
Now, the references we have given the reference because these are things which we have
taken from proper references of the course and it is worth mention that those should be
told to you where we have taken it from.(Refer Slide Time: 29:02)
Well, the major components are power operated; you will see whether it is a power
operated or a manually  operated. The components  will remain more or less simply
except that the because of the power source. 
So, the chemical tank, definitely a tank has to be there where you will keep now what
will be the size of the tank, this will vary from the power source. Then, what is the type
of pump; how what should be the size of the pump; what should be specification of the
pump;  then,  type  of  nozzle  that  we  would  like  to  say  the  Filters,  Valves  Pressure
regulators, Spray boom and the Agitator. Now some cases you will write to agitate the
whole chemical if it is there because sometimes the oil emulsions are there which are not
directly they cannot be put. So, I think these are the components which you require.
So, just as in a representative, we have given you here and then I wanted to through this
lecture, I wanted to introduce to you what is spraying and water is a dusting and what are
the various types of devices which are available and where you can think about; what is
the design portion? Design portion is the pressure to be maintained the volume to be
taken and the particle size.
So,  we  will  discuss  about  the  different  particle  size.  But  then,  you  need  to  create
particles, you need to atomize you need to create mist, which will go and spread on to the
plant or the canopy and then, it will be effective in controlling the insect pest whatever isthere. So, that is why so, this we have discussed I think we will discuss other things later
so.
Thank you for this.