Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 33
Performance of Weeding Blades of a Push-Pull Weeder
Well students, welcome to my lecture number 33. Here, I would like to tell you about,
the performance of a weeding blade of different types of Weeding Blades of a Push Pull
Weeder. Now, you know that in the previous lecture, I discussed about that what are
these push-pull Weeders and in fact, these devices which are manually operated we
cannot keep pushing or we have to push and pull, this way we are in a position to
conserve energy and we are in a position to do the work faster.
So, these push pull weeders are widely used. Now, we will see how we measure the
performance? What are the, various attributes to measure this performance? What is the
mechanics behind working with these tools? Let us have a look at this through this
particular lecture.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:05)
See, the relative grading of performance of different blades. Now, what is the cutting
element? In fact, if you recall in the previous lecture which I have said that the cutting
elements are different types of cutting elements which are employed. There is a wheel infront and the wheel is for maintaining the depth of operation and for forward movement
and you have a handled on the which the person is applying the force.
So, the performance is on what? We will see the performance of that device on the basis
of what is the quality of work it has done? How much is the quantity of work that it has
done? And what is the power that it has consumed. So, on the basis of the quantity of
work and the power consumed we will try to judge it is performance and that is how we
have defined the performance of this particular device as, this is here. 
Where, Q1 is the, quality of weeding work then, Q 2 talks of the quantity of weeding work
and that Pu is the average, power used and K is the, constant proportion proportionality
because this performance is proportional to because the performance P is definitely
proportional to Q1 and Q2 and, the  power used.
So, on the basis of this if we and we can find out these we will be in a position to, find
the performance of this blades. Now, how do you find the quality of work done? This is
very important because this quality of work done has certain attributes in this. See, this
Pd and Pt you see, you know the total number of plants, along the crop row length before
the weeding operations you we know that what are these. These are we are talking with
respect to how many plants are there in a particular row? So, we have the number of
plants.
Now, as I told you how they are how the weeding operation is measured that I talked of
the quadrant with whether it is 1 meter × 1 meter or 0.5 meter × 0.5 meter quadrant. So,
that quadrant is the one which tells us how much of weed is already there and what is the
weed which is going to be removed from there after the device has been, operated in the
field. So, here this P d will talk of the total number of plants along the crop row and the
other one we will talk of the total number of plants completely damaged.
Now, this damage, I must tell you at this point that, this damage could be superficial
damage, wherein they it will appear that the plant, has got cut here and there, but it later
period of time it may recuperate and it may not, lead into yield loss and that is called thesuperficial damage. Now, one is yield critical damage, where it is cut in such a way or
maybe completely the plant is cut. So, they are that damage will be called as yield
critical damage.
So, the depending upon we will talk of only the yield critical damage, not the superficial
damage because superficial damage is as weeder saying that is not damage, because this
will be, later on it will revive and the plant will grow over a period of time. So, then we
need to know these two P d and Pt over here. So, once we know, P d and Pt and of course, 1
minus that where we do not want that see P t minus Pd; that means, there should not this
should be divide by d. So, 1 minus this will give us, what is the quality of work done.
Now, this quality with respect to the efficiency now, this is the weeding efficiency as I
told you that how much was there and, how many weeds were there before and how
many weeds are left after the operation. So, the ratio of this you can see the weeds total
number of weeds present in the two row crops and then, the total number of weeds in
remaining after the row operation in the same area.
So, if you have these then using this you were going to get a total quality of work done.
Now, we want this to be more this quality of work done to be more. So, more or good
quality of work done per unit of power is what the performance we are talking with
respect to a particular blade which is used. So, we are in the here we are only talking in a
push pull type of weeder what are the different blades which are employed and which
blade  is  better.  We  would  like  to  see  this,  and what  is  the  mechanics  behind  this
operation.See, it is worth knowing the operation you have seen that, the push pull type of device is
that,  we are pushing some distance  and then putting it back, not exactly  the same
distance, but little distance and then again. So, push and pull now, how it happens you
can see that, if we consider several cycles of such push and pull then, you will get ayou
can say is, a stage like this, which I have created here. You can see that this is what you
will have you can say that initially this is the location where the your blade is working
and the person will be now, this is the position on the blade here.
When you operate push and pull it will have there will be force which will be acting here
this force F. Now, this force is act at a certain angle alpha. So, this F cos α will be acting
in the forward direction and F sin α will be acting in the directly below. So, what
happens  is  the  a  horizontal  direction  and  this  is  the  vertical  direction  particularly
downwards.
Now, here this will help us in increasing depth because then, we need to cuts, these
weeds are cut not exactly about 5 or 6 inches, but about 2 to 2.5 inches or 3 inches or so
only they are cut. So, for that this force is responsibility F sin α  and F cos α talks of
giving momentum in the forward direction the wheel is there. So, wheel helps us in
giving the momentum forward direction as well as maintaining the depth because if the
wheel is not there then the depth will be varying and it would be difficult for the human
being to operate and that is why wheel has this versions of because it gives  omega a
square where it will give forward motion, energy for forward motion as well mentoring
the depth.And then, this short cycles of a push and pull will give us the total speed at which
because, it is not possible  to measure the speed here just like, measuring the total
distance in particular time because the action is slightly different. So, what we have done
is we have broken this into a small cycles and these cycles you can see here then theta i
you talks of the time taken for the push pull cycle is 1. So, forward displacement in the i-
th cycle say, i it is equal to 1 to i is equal to 99, i is equal to 100 or whatever or n.
So, forward direction  there  is  a  displacement  and the i-th cycle  then the  backward
direction in the, same i-th cycle so, in cycle in this; so, x if and xib. So, this here; that
means, we will know actually what distance I have moved. And during x if, xib this period
what is the time which has taken during the cycle you can see it say from i-th cycle to as
say n cycle if you are talking of there are n such cycles. So, total forward distance T,
total time T during a weeding trail is you can say that the total forward displacement S
can be given as this, where S is over a period of cycles from 1 to n that is x if - xib and then
what is the total time we have to take the cycles times during the period.
So, this time has to be from the time it has pushed and then pulled back. So, one cycle is
completed. So, there is no detection here that no deduction here, but it will be the total
time theta I which talks off the time taken for the i th push pull cycle. In one case, we are
talking of push and then, pull and. So, the difference is the one which is the forward,
displacement, but the time here is taken as the full push full cycle time.
So, this is the, distance trouble and this is the time taken over here. So, if we know the
total quantity of work done. So, this quantity of work done is in fact, quantity of work
done Q2 is given by Wb into S / T. Now, this W b is the, work which has been done earlier
and S by T is talking of the time and f is the frequency, is the efficiency.
So, this, total area per unit of time what will be the total area per unit of time, which we
have done already here. So, you can get this here W band then this is what exactly is
shown in this case. So, this is the quantity of work done.
Now, slight mechanics has been, given here to understand because it is a push pull type
of operation and not a continuous push type of operation not a continuous pull type
operation. And we know that, pulling is better than pushing, but here in this case, we
cannot move forward by pulling and that is why we are talking of push pull operation
pushing, remember that that mechanic says that, pushing is better than and pulling isbetter  than  pushing  because  in  pushing  you  are  in case  in  depth.  So, there  this  is
decreased, but in pulling what we have it helps him taking the, it goes this sinα which
has gone below is goes up when you are pulling it and that is why it is said that pulling is
better than pushing.
But, in this case before waiting we are going forward and this is the best operation this is
the best mode of operation and that is why push pull weeder and that is why push pull
type of cycles has been created to understand the mechanics of this and. So, we havedoes
we discussed this the width of cut W b talks of the width of the cut W weeding blade total
width of the cut W weeding blade S is the total forward T as I said and field efficiency of
the weeder.
So, these are the details of how the mechanics of push pull weeder works. Let us, go
forward and have a look at what exactly we are talking and how we are measuring
different type of blades performance.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:50)
.
Well, average power used in the weeding operation, what is the average power used well
if you talk of the cycles, we have talked of various cycles when we saw in this that
various cycles have been used, from cycle i = 1 to i = n. Then average power used in the
weeding operation will be then you the average power here will be, this is the X if talks of
the forward in the distance displacement and F if we talk of the forward force applied.So, force into distance is giving you this energy this energy and it is it has to be in the
cosα direction because it is talking of the, force which we have, applied in that direction.
So, this component and then, this now, this although it is d sinα we are talking in the
other direction, but then we have to take care of this there because we are talking of the
total energy because energy it is here, we are not only talking of push and pull. But we
are when we are doing this operation we are, utilizing some of the energy for depth also
and that is why this d is, kept here and the total energy used in a cycle in the ith cycle say
is given by this.
So, over the power we proved for ith cycle is definitely this P ui is given by this where. If,
we go back to this here we have talked of the force that we push force F if backward force
is this here d is the depth operation a mean angle of operation which we have shown here
and also in the previous, diagram I had shown you. Then X ib forward displacement ith
cycle and Xib is the, forward at a backward displacement and this cycle.
So, using these we are in a position, to get the average power employed during n cycle.
So, if there are n cycles this is the average power here, average power these talks of the
average power and these are the, cycles which have been used and you can see that we
say so many of these cycles. If you have added distance the these distances are, like this
here and then this here, like this how we are adding these small distances and ultimately
we are reaching to the total maximum distance that we have covered, and the total area
that we have covered. So, this talks of the average power used. So, once we have known
these things, we have given the mechanics of push pull weeder.(Refer Slide Time: 14:35)
Well, different types of weeding blades using this because we have given what we
wanted to do. These are all the, push pull type of weeders which are employed. But, then
different designs are used, why? Because the each has, each has it is own, advantage and
disadvantage; that is why we have given you these different types and they are named as
you can see the straight blade type B1 here the straight blade type which is. in fact, if you
have seen a small weeding device manual this kurpa which was, shown to you, it is just
this blade which we which is their similar blade which is taken about 200 mm.
Then, this is a serrated type now this serrated type image helps us in entangled weeds it
is, to clear and share of the weeds, it has a given 15 degree, the sharpness angle and 20
degrees the cutting angle. So, each has been maintained by that now, here there are 5 tine
blade. There are 5 tines of blades, they gave, some sort of farting operation where you
find the divisions not that much, but then you would require to remove the upper crust,
so that the aeration takes place the soil will start breathing which is essential for the
plants to grow at that moment.
So, there we have found that these ones are, very good the and in fact out of these two
this is another, sweep type one where a 200 mm again, but then these are all of the same
size, but different, different shapes etcetera depending of where they are used. So, these
ones give us, you can say that where, the row to wise spacing is slightly smaller and
there you want to go in between and cut.Now, this is the one which has something, in similarity to this, but then it also, puts the
soil on to the, plant which when it is operating between the row crops what will it do it
will put the soils on this side on the beneath, plants and that is why, this is advantage
over there.
So, it all these 5 types of tines have been used. They have the same width they have
same, cutting angle and same the sharpness angle. Now, but they are various, ways now,
out of these we would like to find out which one is best for our operation this is what is
the, job for this particular lecture that I want to explain to you.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:08)
Now, how do we do this, how do we measure these forces etcetera which I talked off, but
how do you measure the force. So, we developed this is a one which we have been
developed at IIT, Kharagpur. See in fact, then the here you can see here that this, there is
a device here there is a bevel gear arrangement in this a small field then, this is the front
wheel of the weeder this is the tine which has been kept here and this is a graph and
some arrangement has been made that the moment, there is a, pushing of this the, the
graph will move on to this a we are maintaining an angle of 48.56 degree.
If the edge, is the inclined handles in total length here, then the recording needle, N is the
recording needle over here, this is the recording needle which works in this case. Then
compression ring is spring, there is a compression spring which is, here now in this isthis is location where the compression ring is, the compression spring is kept. Then,
transport wheel of course, W is the transport wheel.
Well, while we say that this transport wheel, but then remember what we have done. In
fact, this has been modified the weeder the push pull weeder has been modified into a
measuring device force metering device. So, you can see here that, everything else is
there what we have done we have used this portion and we have used this portion by
which we are in a position to measure what is the force required for operation of this
particular one.
So, this is a device also developed at our place and in fact, you will find, my paper,
published long back and you will find the details of this unit which has been used since
then. It is not available, but we have made it long back and then published and it is being
used you can see more details of this unit. So, this is the way we are in a position to get
the force. How it comes like that, what is the way by which we see that this force has is
available and we are in a position to use this we will see in next slide.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:16)
Well, this is how it looks, you can see that this record which we have got this is the
record which we have got here this record, looks like, this looks like this you can say any
blade B1 blade. Now, this blade now is there and you can see here these are talking of
how forward and backward movement  you can see forward and backward moment
straight one of the blades you know just in order to show you that in one of the bladeswhat were the, particular graph that we got we have shown, you here you can see that,
the forward looking force is higher than, it is pulling it.
So, while pulling you are not, exerting any floors except that the you are pulling the
whole thing back and since the wheel is there it is easier. So, that is why you will find
than each case you can find that these are the small, portions where you are applying the,
virtually the force for pulling back and these are the front ones. So, you can for a
particular blade. So, this is, the inside on this particular graph, we are getting something
like this with a particular type of blade.
Now, so if we change this blade we can find out the this particular graph and hence the
force. What we wanted there is the power requirement. So, in order to get the power
requirement we wanted to get the force as I have discussed earlier. So, where to measure
the force so, we have had this device developed and then we have measured. It looks like
this on the graph and from this graph we are in a position as you can see here we are in
position to measure what is the force because we know the spring constant of this
particular  spring.  So, we are in a position  to  find  out how  much  is  the deflection
accordingly of this and then we can say how much is the force over here.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:05)
Well, weeding force, during field trials. So, different field trials were done for with these,
devices in the actual field conditions these are done under actual field conditions I can
tell you. And we have here the different blades the different blade, different blades werehere B1, B2, B3, B4 and B5 different blades are available with us and in these blades then,
I have already shown you what are the types and where they are used and what are the
different, features of those blades how they are, beneficial in your condition, so on and
so forth.
And, we have talked of the device we I we showed you that only 200 millimeter is the
width of cut off each one of them. Now, in this we have employed 2 types of these with 2
weeds one is 15 centimeter that is 150 mm, the other is 200 mm or 20 centimeter. So,
with this we have measured all the details. You can have a look at this, what we have
measured. The mean weeding force per cycle, mean weeding force per cycle, mean
weeding force per cycle, mean weeding force per cycle, mean weeding force per cycle
for each of these B 1, B2, B3, B4 and B5. This is what we have measured.
What we got here? We got these values you can see here. Now, you can see this varies
this, the ones which are given these are, the possibly the variations, standard deviations
standard deviations here which are given from there because we are talking of the mean
weeding force. So, from the mean these are in the brackets we have given the standard
deviations. So, mean plus standard deviations in the brackets given here. So, we can see
that, B1, B2, B3, B4 and B5 and if you see the, N by a centimeters that is this force we can
see here this, then this here; then this here; then this here and this.
In fact, these a small a, cc etcetera because we had used here, Duncan's, new multiple
range,  technique  DNMRT  which  was  used  here,  technique  DNMRT  Duncan's  new
multiple range technique was used for comparing the means this techniques which is,
available. And, that technique I had used that time to compare these mean values of B 1,
B2, B3, and B4. So, the ones which are closer; that means, they are very close to this ones
are varying that means, they are mark different from those values there is a difference
between this.
So, statistically we also found out whether the values which have we have got for B 1, B2,
B3, B4 and the values which we are comparing they are, how close, statistically and that is
why, we use this statical test to find out these details for the two types of the, weeding
you can say width of cut of these blades. (Refer Slide Time: 24:25)
Field testing with different blades of a push pull type weeder now, we have used this,
weeder 15 centimeter wide, as I told that we have used for 15 centimeter and then we are
talking of 1 for 20 centimeter.
So, we have used all the details. What are those details you, if you see we had talked of
the performance when we are talking of the performance of this, in this in fact, we are
talking of see man days per hectare is one consideration just to have it and look at it. You
see that, man days per is for B 2 we require 24 mandates per hectare. Then B 3 we require
19 and B4 18, B5 18 and B1 we require only 16, man days per hectare.
Field efficiency, we can see that field efficiency is also higher in this case, as compared
to, the other, blades 62 here 67, 70 and 71. So, the field efficiency is also here, higher in
case of B1. We then weeding efficiency see we very high level of weeding efficiency
which we got in this case. There is also very high. Quality of work done, is a good
quality of work done using the same, formula which I had given earlier we are in a
position  to  do  this.  Power  consumed,  well  this  is  the  power  consumed  here  and
performance index see you this is the one 0.082.
Although for B2 also we got 0.082, but then you can see these, here, the power consumed
is higher as compared to this and therefore, we can say that at 15 centimeter wide row
here  the B1 blade  is  giving better  performance.  Now, it  depends  on when you are
thinking of different types of situations and conditions in which those blades because Ihave described why you why a 5 tine blade or 3 tines sweep or this or a with or a
particular type is used.
They have their requirements in different conditions. We have compared here for one
condition and their B 1 is found to be the best, but then all these need to be operated under
varying  conditions.  So,  you  can  see  that  the  performance  of  all  these  are  here  as
compared to B1 in a condition they are they are disadvantages, but otherwise they need to
be operated.
So, at 15 centimeter weed this is the operation over here for both, for all of them this is
B1 is a straight flat blade type which I have shown you, B 2 is straight flat blade type with
serrated edges, this then B 3 is, 5 tine blade, B 4 sweep type of blade and 5 to double
plough type of blade I very easy and very nice. Sometimes, as I told earlier that, this
helps in putting up a little bit of earth on to the, roots of this, particular plants which is
helpful particular and say orchard crops or in vegetable crops like potato and all that you
would like to put some sort of. So, there this will be very, beneficial.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:39)
Now, you can see, at the 20 centimeter wide, a similar situation we see here if you
compare, the 15 centimeters of, width and 20 centimeter width in the same condition we
find that B1 is advantageous, well one may think that I am biased towards, B 1, not so, but
in the condition in which, B 3, B4, B5 all were used. Now, if they are used in, saycondition which is suitable for B 5. Then you will find that B 5 giving is giving better
performance as compared to B 1, B2, B3.
So, although in a given condition we find that B 1 is better see for all these parameters,
man days per hectare 15 here, he 22 here, 16, 17, 18 here then field efficiency is higher
here and all less are lesser than these. The weeding efficiency is also very high the
quality of work done is also very high here.
This is one curve, this has straight blades. The selected ones, in sometimes they leave
the, blades and not particular sharpening is taking place that is why, you find, but the
quality of work done, quality of work done for B 1 is very high the power consumed is
less also you can see here, in this case with 20 centimeter wide we do not find the
difference which we were seeing earlier that, the performance was better performance
index.
So, performance index is 0.09 here or you can say that, maybe, 9, out of 100. We can
give here, possibly we are talking with respect to the performance mostly with respect to
how much of the quality of work done good quality of work done we got per unit of
power that we have utilized. This is what is the one, which we were more interested.
So, as such now in this particular lecture what I wanted to show you is, that a push pull
weeder when I did with different cutting elements the cutting elements are those blades
which have been used of the same size but of different, configurations. And, of course,
each one has it is own applications and suitability in, different conditions of the crop or
whether it is a, orchard crop or a cereal crop depending upon what it is, you will find that
each has its advantage and that is why all these were tried and we have found out the
performance of them. We have found out a mechanics of cutting of push pull type
Weeder, which can be utilized anywhere, it is also published as I said and I think we
have in a position to give you, the mechanical weeding as such and we have talked of.
Now,  we  will  talk  of,  the  advanced  level  of,  mechanization  particularly  for  these
operations  in  our  next  lecture  where,  the  idea  is  to  use  advanced  technology  for
minimizing, the inputs and maximizing the outputs because we are not getting, labor
etcetera. And that is why, up to this we have considered the mechanical, biological
system and flame weeding etcetera and now we will talk of the advanced level where
sensors electronics and mechatronics things could be used in that will be taken in mynext lecture. And if you have any questions etcetera we are very open, you can send us
details to us and we will in position to answer to you and I will thank you for this
particular.
Thank you.