Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 39
Manually Operated Knapsack-Cum-boom Sprayer
Welcome  students,  to  my  lecture  number  39  here.  We  have  discussed  about  these
sprayers and the dusters and the nozzles atomizers and the various aspects earlier. Now
here I would like to say and show to you that what we have designed at IIT Kharagpur
particularly from the knapsack type’s sprayers.
You have seen that the knap knapsack type sprayer, which are carried at the back, may
be manually operated lever or it could be a small battery operated system motor. Where
it can spray the liquid and all that and type of nozzle which is used. We wanted to see if
we can increase the output of the person here, he what he has to do, is he has to carry the
chemical about 15 liter for some may at least 1 hour or so till the whole chemical is
removed.
So, even if 1 liter is carrying and moving inside this and the plant. So, we thought why
not  utilize  the  power of the  man, in a  different  form instead  of carrying  and then
operating by one hand it is very start arduous. And may be in earlier I have in my
lectures I have said that the constitution about human being or the operator is very
important. And that is why you cannot have a device which does not match the require
capabilities of the man. 
So, in order to have this system, which matches the capability as well as which enhances
the output of that man. So, we wanted to virtually transform a manually operated natural
sprayer into a boom sprayer. And which can be simply carried inside the rows of the
plants and then sprayer a spraying could be done. And we have slightly by ambitious
project we took and I will show you what we have achieved so far. (Refer Slide Time: 02:22)
See men will operated one as I said here the sprayers are regulation is it means is not
there. Therefore, accurate and pesticide applications are difficult to manage this what is
written some. Some sort of a justification is given for this, but then justification is very
simple. In fact, when you talk of these it is definitely difficult and arduous are not
comfortable  for the  person to carry 15 liter  and then keep  one operating  and  then
moving. Not only that he keeps on operating by one left hand and maybe by right hand is
moving the nozzle.
So, that a particular swath is covered and then he moves forward. It is very strenuous
task, if the same person is given a device which can be imposed inside or may be pulled
in the in the whole plant area and a spreads onto that. So, we just employed this for that
we need to do certain changes in the design because here the person is utilizing his hand
left or right whatever depending upon whether it left lefty person and right hand person
he will do it. So, we have utilized three point linkage, which is the crux of this particular
design. (Refer Slide Time: 03:52)
What are the design considerations? Well you can see here the different crops medium
height I mean height of the crops should 10 to 80 centimeter. It varies depending on the
crop and different row spacing. Now these are some of the agronomical requirements for
a particular crop. Now it should be easy to pulled simple in design durable easy. These
are  the  certain  things  which  your  one  would  like  to  have.  That  agronomic  from
agronomical point of view it must fit in the row to row spacing and then the height of the
plant so your designs will be said that you above the plant you are in a position to agree.
Then physical and economic considerations so it should be low cost material value these
are all they minimum requirements that we think and maintenance should be low fine.
Now functional requirements what is this is very important we have in fact, you have
seen that we have operated hand operated which we call lever operated most sprayer
locum so knapsack type. Now the developed pressure should be in the range of this
because this is the one which we had about 1.1 to 1.5 kg per centimeter square is the
pressure which we maintain in the knapsack type. 
So, we have to maintain that much pressure and the nozzles which we have taken is 8
nozzles in fact, as I told you that we are slightly ambitious and we wanted to have 8
nozzles spread boom, and that boom can be pulled. Once you were in a position to walk
inside a crop I think with the same power of the band we can do 8 times the worth, this iswhat we thought. And we have been in a position to do this. But how do we achieve this
part, this is one thing which is very important.
So, what we did is that we have here used here see instead of the when the rotary action;
the rotary action which is available from this rotor here has been converted into the
reciprocating action. And there for that we have used linkage arrangement I mean 4 bar
linkage mechanisms. So, 4 bar linkage mechanism has been as used here and the rotary
power which we have got from the operation and converted into the reciprocating motion
of that which is in the done by the hand. 
So, you must say here that it will depend on the speed at which the person moves. Sure it
will depend on that, but then the pump remains same. So, we have used the same you can
see here that the tank which is here with the same tank which the person uses for his
knapsack type. So, same pump has been used, what has been done is? The only the
operation, which the man was doing by carrying it is being carried on a small frame
which is made here and then we have a handle here. So, the handle can be adjusted and
the person can push this inside wherever he wants. And the rotary motion is converted
into reciprocating motion of the movement of the lever. And we are maintaining a
pressure between this to this. So, by using the 4 bar linkage mechanism the, this has been
achieved. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:37)
So, the different parts now, these are some of the details of the one which we have done
here you can you can see here. The chemical tank about a 15 liters capacity of course, as
I said that this is the one which is available already. So, we do not have to do anything.
Then the main frame, frame has been created so that the frame as we so that we can keep
the tank over there and then this tank can be transported. So, for transportation of that
tank we have the wheel over here. So, the boom stand for creating the boom because
now this boom should be maybe if you are talking of 8 nozzles.
So, there is a spacing of the nozzles and then it is not good to carry that weight. So, we
have made it in such a way that it can be folded or maybe in this frame. So, that it
becomes in the same frame and it can be taken inside and once you go inside the field
you can spread it over. So, the frame has is has been created and the boom length total
boom length is about 800 millimeter. So, this length is worth to cover that much of swath
and in the earlier case swath was not possible you have only 1 nozzle and the swath is
not more than about 40, 50 centimeters or so 400 millimeters 
 At the same time the person has to have all this thing carried on him. So, this is the
beauty of this particular device or what we are calling is knapsack cum boom sprayer
which we have developed at IIT Kharagpur. And it is what is showing you this is good
for small fields and good for a small farmers and also a cheaper device. Now you can see
a here the never a sprocket, which is shown for with which we have made the rotary
arrangement and converted to reciprocating arrangement which has been shown. (Refer Slide Time: 09:41)
Well you can see here the power transmission they spray nozzle the host pipes some
more details are given here. The power transmission the power transmission system is
chain and sprocket. Yes, while it is said that this chain is sprocket no arrangement is
there. We have to think of how this chain sprocket arrangement can be made constant
can be utilized for giving a constant pressure and constant rotation of movement of the
lever because this believer when the person is operating with the hand the similar aspect
similar effect has to be there in this case also.
And we have may been in a position to attempt there is a small stand also we have made.
So, that it where it is there it can stand all that since it is only one wheel that arrangement
has  been  made.  Then  these  particular  handle  see  this  handle  has  been  designed
argonomically. So, that if an persons of different heights can be incorporated because
you the you will hold the handle here. So, you have to know what is the height of the
person, what changes if a tall person is there if a shorter person is there so accordingly
there has to be change in the inclination of this handle.
 So, this handle can be changed. May be that if I show you here, this is one location it
could be another location could be something like this may be another location could be
this. So, depending upon the requirement these things can be changed these can be
changed the handle can be changed here handle can be change here. This is another thing
which has been incorporated in this.So, from argonomics and from human consideration point of view we have considered
several things one is that we have reduced the fatigue or reduced the total load on the
man which was carried on the back, second the person does not have to operate this and
both the hands. 
So, you can see how much strenuousities on the task we have removed that. And while in
a standing posture he can just push the liquid push the tank which is there on a frame.
And it is easier to push that through the system because there is a field which is there So,
once it is on a wheel it is easier to push and the system will work.
Because power we have taken the spray nozzle this the see it spacing is 20 centimeter
and the spray nozzles are put at 20centimeter apart. These output we are getting is this at
a pressure of 2.25 kg per centimeter square. So, this has been are tested in fact, and we
have found that the pressure. Well you may height might have certain questions we have
given an overlap of about 30 percent or so as you can see from here certain percent of
overlap is given here.
Well there could be questions as to what is the affectivity of this? We are testing this and
we have found very encouraging results, as you can see here that you are getting 1 liter
per meter at 2.25 kg per centimeter square  a slightly higher pressure. But then we are in a
position to get this pressure. We can get this pressure at 20 centimeter spacing. So, and
host pipes are used 15 meter diameter length and length is 2000 millimeter Selected for
mounting of the nozzle. So, well these are details of so how do you select this nozzles
how to keep it. 
In fact, initial hiccups could be there when you are this is the first prototype which has
been in fact; it is laboratory prototype which we can say. So, the we are working into
more details of making it is a field prototype machine. And so that we can rigorous test it
to  under  the  actual  field  conditions  in  different  crops  and  then  gets  there.  So,  so
preliminary information which we have we will like to show you. (Refer Slide Time: 14:08)
Well this is what it is you can have a look at this that this is one diagram, which is given
for the autocad diagram  and this  is the actual  unit here. Now, if I show you here
laboratory test you can see you have a look at this that the person is simply pushing this
you can see and from all the all the four here and all the four on this side there is a
discharge taking place. You may question that this discharge is reducing as it goes on
that side? Yes, we have we have tested this and we are trying to optimize the one’s. Now
you can see that how much of area see about 1800 mm, it is about 1.8 meter swath you
can cover and it is very easy for the person to cover this thing. 
You can have a look at the second, so this is what the system which works in the
laboratory model or laboratory. You can say yes laboratory fabricated device which
needs to be tested rigorously under laboratory as well as under this with the different
nozzles. We have used a actually fan both the several nozzles have been used in this case
ah. You will see depending upon there is a solid cone or hollow cone or fan spray
nozzles various things are there. But then each a nozzle each thing needs to be tested.
And the if these need to be tested so various things are required. For example, we need to
test with the different types of nozzles; different spacing’s of the nozzles, and then the
pressures what we are getting,  and what is the speed at which we are getting that
pressure. Because and that will help us in operation of this because the same tank you
can see the same tank has been used. So, a you can say a slightly innovation for a smalldevice small plots it can be used you the height can be elevated depending upon at what
stage of the crop you are applying so this can be lifted. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:36)
So, some of the details of this actually, what are the details of this particular device and
how much is the discharge that we get? We had tested under various conditions. Well as
I told you that maybe that from each nozzle if you want a particular nozzle tested, then
you will find the here just have a look at this that the nozzles are from 1 to 8 all the
nozzles.
Now, you can see here that the discharge which we are getting here the discharge is
something like this. So, that mean then we are not getting uniform discharge. So, our
claim that we have virtually replaced what we are doing its not fully acceptable to the
extent that. Well this was there was only 1 nozzle here there are 8 nozzles, but then if
you maybe if you can check up maybe somewhere this you can say that this area could
be said to be covered.
So, maybe you can say here that this is the length that you are in a position to cover you
may not be in a position to cover say one here one here gone. So, effectively you can say
it in a very comfortably that this is the area which can be covered with the discharge
which we have got. Now other thing which has not been mentioned here I would like to
tell you is the speed at which the person moves, now there are certain problems when the
person is there in the field depending upon which crop. If you are talking of wider rowcrops if you are talking of orchard crops where the these are at certain distance, then it is
easier for the person to carry this.
But if you are talking of cereal crops where the it is very difficult then you have to
consider, what stage it is there? And how much is the spacing between that cropn? or
maybe that  we have to shorten the distance between the row to distance between the two
wheels the two transport wheels which are there and connected the four bar linkage
mechanism for designing the lift the operation of the lever.
So, this we need to look into these design and by the crop to which crop we are talking
for. So, there are certain aspects which need to be done. So, if we go back to the
discharge values. So, mean discharge now we see here then there are various tests we
did. So, you just have a look at these tests well there is not a single maintain mention of
the speed at which it is mean. But if you say the speed of operation about say 1.5 to 2
kilometer per hour. 
So, depending upon 1.5 to 2 kilometer per hour then this information needs to be further
investigated as to how much. Now let us have a look at this data see a test one what we
are getting is see from nozzle 1 to nozzle 8 the variation is this. So, the variation is from
the lowest you can see is about 119 and the highest is about 125. So, this is what you get
the forth one you get 125, but this is not so. 
The last two roughly you can say as it is very clear from here that they are not getting.
So, maybe that if you can increase the pressure possibly you will get uniform, we are
thinking that if you have maybe the speed can be increased or the mechanism which has
been developed if that mechanism can be made efficient and made more robust then we
are in a position to get high discharge and at the same time high pressure.
So, slightly higher pressure may be that this will be a flatter one here and then we will be
able to cover this. And the moment we can cover this you have increase the capacity of
the man same person with a one knapsack type he is able to do this. And the same person
when he different device is given he will be able to do this much. They you can see
another test. 
So, more or less each of the tests you can see this is the variation here this is and say
another one this is a variation here. Each of these from 122.8, 122.4 now mean valuesthen have T6 this is T7 is these are all, but mind you these are all tests which are which
are at laboratory level we are not talking of the field level at this point of time. 
 So, the average that you get from N1 is about 120 and this is about 121 or so. And
roughly you can get in the centers those is what I wanted to show you here. So, the mean
discharge from each one of this milliliter per minute you can get is these values which
we have got. So, although it appears that from each of the tests mean discharge milliliter
you get. So, I think these needs to be looked into for how many such he has got this thing
we may cancel this. We can this is the discharge which we can think of 
So, the preliminary testing of this beauty of this device side I can again emphasize is
that, we are employing the same person and increasing his capacity. By the knowledge
that you have about 4-bar linkage mechanism which can be used for converting the
rotary power to a reciprocating one and get this thing done. So, more and more testing of
this unit is required under field conditions, before we can say that yes this machine is.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:40)
The comparison between knapsack sprayer and develop manually operating knapsack
cum boom. Now what is the comparison? Well it is worth comparing here because as I
said that the one in the knapsack type here the agronomic considerations. No agronomic
consideration has been thought of here, but then that is the first consideration which has
to be done. The person if the person is very comfortable in this operation, the person is
not comfortable in that operation, but because is all both the hands are brave in action heis walking he is carrying that load so there is hardly any comparison. So, far as the
comfort and safety of the person is concerned.
So, apart from that if you compare the other part of it definitely we should be getting
because the speed you can that see the unit kilometer per hour this is the speed of travel.
Now speed of travel is about 2.5 and 2.5, if we find out the same speed I wonder whether
we can achieve 2.5 or not or maybe 3 in the depending upon the type and condition of
the crop if the crop is at a tender stage, maybe 3 weeks, 4 weeks or so it is possible. But
when the crop has gone more than 6 weeks, 8 weeks and there we need to spray for
currently control of pesticide in six bits maybe throughout then it is ok.
Now  here  the  drawback  one  you  can  think  of  is  that  since  the  we  are  spreading
everywhere. So, we cannot control it has it will come out at all locations or we might
have to plug these nozzles wherever we do not require. And it can used cannot be used
that way we have to think of how it can be used for a spot location.
So, in a spot if you require how do we do this part. So, that is one thing which is still a
question mark for this particular device and width of coverage meter here the meter of
coverage is high. Yes, so we have a high width of coverage the efficiency is better of
course. Efficiency in both the systems are more or less same hectare per hour you can see
you get a very high one. Then here 0.37 then operating time well 2.7 hour for say per
hectare this is very good. 
And time saving what do you do in this time saving in fact, is that 73 percent of the time
is save. Yes you saved even 73 percent out of time. And what is not mentioned as I said
is definitely the agronomic considerations which move on the designer must think for
such devices. And it will be a unit which is very good for small plots and a small area
and the cost is also not very high. Yes you will need to add the cost of the nozzles you
are the other setup which has been given. This cost will be addition to the cost of the
device you will have to purchase the tank which is there and use this. 
So, slightly cost would be higher, but then you can have a tradeoff between the total
output and this. So, if we consider these I think this is a promising device which will be
tested which is being tested IIT Kharagpur. And we will be in a position to come out
with a much better unit field unit in future. Thank you very much for this and if you have
any other questions and then queries, we are most welcome.Thank you. 