Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 49
Advanced Technology Approach for Cotton Harvesting
Well, welcome students to my lecture number 49 which I have particularly wanted that
we should give you some  technology which has an advanced  level particularly  for
harvesting. Now, harvesting of cotton has been the case in this particular lecture, why?
We wanted that we have, so far I have discussed about the different technology used for
harvesting of cereal crops, for root crops, fruit crops all we have discussed. And we have
also discussed the various equipment which are used various machines which are used,
what  are  their  power  sources,  what  are  their  capacities  and  what  are  their  special
features, what material they are made of and all that now.
Now, we would like to I thought the one work which we have developed done at IIT
Kharagpur over a period of time we wanted to share with you which is an advanced
technology used for harvesting of cotton. Particularly you know about this crop you must
have heard that harvesting of cotton is a very difficult task and in this respect we wanted
to develop a technology which will be gradually reducing the tragedy of the people who
are involved in this.
So, let us discuss in detail about this particular approach of cotton harvesting though the
slides which I have brought for you.(Refer Slide Time: 01:41)
Well, why robot in cotton harvesting? This is a question which I have asked, but the
question is as I said we need to know about the details of how the present task is done.
You can see here the 4 figures I have given the photographs you can see here, in the
photographs which are given here and these some of the equipment.
Now, what we what is done in this? The problem in hand picking is first of all it is a
drudgery and is labour intensive is very high cost of labour is very high. You know that
because of the non availability scarcity of labour as such the cost as increased for every
crop for that matter and for every operation for that matter. So, and more so, particularly
because this is a drudgery proned crop where when the person goes lot of thorns etcetera
are there while it is picked and many a times they get hurt in their fingers and all that.
So, what are the problems related? I have just jotted down for your information is that
not  suitable  for  every  variety  at  all  at  once  process,  mechanical  cotton  stripping.
Sometimes, we can do that use a machine and that is strip of everything, but it is not
done because we required at different stages not at one time. One go harvesting the way
we do for other crops this is not done for this particular crop. Then capacity is less, some
of the machine, some of the attempts which people have made are less capacity and still
arduous and not very effective.
Now, advantages of robot harvesting, what then we thought that instead of human being
let there be a robot which is utilised. You may ask question us to why you are thinking ofrobot in this country, no. In fact, we have to think ahead because time will come when
there will be a lot of cotton grown and lot of yields to be harvested in time and you will
not have people for doing that. In fact, this is the problem now itself.
So, you can imagine what will happen and their therefore, there is such machines start
such is all it is already started in several locations we also wanted to do at IIT Kharagpur
and the work which we have done is going to be shared over here.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:13)
So, now basic harvesting cycle of a robotic arm; now actually what it is for example, if
you have to if the human being has to go in the harvesting in the crop what we will do?
We will identify the ball white ball of the cotton and try to pick it up and then store at
one location, this is what generally is done. So, your machine should also be doing this
particular thing because, when we will say robot is also a machine human machine you
can say.
So, now what are the aspects? The first point which has to be looked into all the for the
complete cycle and cycle time for this operation is the image processing time, that you
require you have to capture the images, identification of the cotton balls. You must first
identify where it is, whether the we are identifying the cotton balls or something else. So,
first we have to identify the cotton balls and for that we have to take the images. So, by
you have to take the images, process the image to identify the actual one.Then vision time; actually this vision times talks of the machine vision the procedure
here rectification of the images because when the images are taken what is the condition
of that, then this it will be distorted, it may be that the images not exactly of the crop, it is
of cotton or of not of cotton, but of something else. So, we need to actually identify
where they are and once we know that this is cotton identify that yes it is a positive
image which is cotton.
So, once we know the cotton then we need to know where it is, from which point
because human being can go to that place and do it, but the machine will not do it. So,
machine for the machine every coordinate has to be identified, every location in the X,
Y, Z plane has to be located and the movements it has to do to actually grip and then pull
it off.
So, this is the one which is done in this aspect then inverse kinematics. In fact, what we
do is when we try to find out the primary basic location which we call the forward
kinematics and when we want to know about the angles for example, X, Y, Z will talk of
this. Then the moment we talk of the angles required for corresponding X, Y, Z planes or
X, Y, Z axis. So, we employ inverse kinematics where we can get the orientation and
other angle details the limits etcetera.
Then the picking time, then once it is known we are in a position to find out the angle
etcetera then we will find out what is the amount of torque required for taking that the
ball and removing it from there. So, accordingly there has to be a equipment, there has to
be a system which will try to pull it and then pick the cotton from there.
So, the cycle starts from taking the image of the equipment 2, picking the actual cotton
ball into the field. This is the complete basic harvest cycle of the robotic arm. We call it
robotic arm as such because there will be around just like a human being it will just go
there pick up once it identifies and then take it. So, this is the complete cycle.(Refer Slide Time: 07:43)
Now, algorithm used for cotton recognition, now what is the algorithm? Well, it is very
big algorithm which has been used and in fact, is work of one of our research students.
So, we may not be in a position to tell you every details of that, but we nutshell we have
given you some of these aspects of this algorithm which the person has done it. So, we
can you can have a look at this actually.
So,  input  color  image  that  convert  this  image  into  double  then  the  split  3  color
components R, G, B, then pixel find out the pixels of that. Then you again divide into A
and B, where A is R equal to G is equal to B is equal to 1 and then R is equal to G is
equal to B is equal to 0, where you will call whether it is the actual image or not, then
open operation and small area removal and then final segmenting of the image. So, this
will talk of the image process.
Now, when we go to the other side color difference methods algorithm, color different
algorithm here, calculate B minus G for each pixel. Similarly, you will calculate  (B – G)
/(R-G)  for each pixel
Now, then the next one is see here a various color difference method algorithms have
been tried. Now, this is one this is one here, the other one is here calculate B by G for
each pixel here this is B minus G, this is B by G. Here calculate (B – G) / (R – G) this
given, then in this what we calculate is over here that is calculate CA CA = B – (R/3) – (G/3)
Now,  these  are  the  concepts  which  had  been  used  for  identification  and  the
differentiation recognition of that. Now, this is the detail of this until unless you have
idea about the particular image processing you may not be in a position to appreciate
this. But, then as an engineer you must know what is the technology which is being used
for robotics and application of robotics.
We may not be in a position to tell you every details of that because as such being an
agriculture engineer we are not equipped with the detailed knowledge of that. We have
only picked up the knowledge and try to explain and apply that into our application our
picking of that. So, that knowledge we have so, application part and if you want to go
into more details of that you should always go for the details in the relevant books and
you will find them.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:27)
Well,  for  how  you  would  segment  the  cotton,  segmentation  using  color  difference
method the methods which we I told we have given there. The methods or see A is
original image, B is after B - R segmentation, after R - B segmentation and the other is
after B - G segmentation. Now, why? Because until unless we actually identify the
correct image you will the job will not be done. So, this part segmentation is very
important.Now, segmentation using color difference method several color difference methods have
been employed as I said earlier and those have helped us in main identifying.
You can see here that in A, B, C, D how we are in a position to identify from the A, A is
the original image. So, from the original image to a image which is giving you here D
after B - G segmentation is gives you very clear information about what it is if you if you
compare A and B here. Then this is the information which we get from there. Now, this
is done by the by the computer and then it is done by the processing system.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:43)
The comparison between different methods during evening time, now you see this one
aspect which has to be looked into what time of the day the picking is taking taken place
and what will happen with the climate or morning evening or day time. So, during
evening time a comparison has been made between different methods. Now you can see
here the original image which was there A, then the chromatic aberration method B, then
the color difference ratio method C, the color difference method D and the band ratio
method E.
Now, you can very easily identify that A and E are very close to exactly what the
situation is or if you compare even A and B now out of this one has to choose it will
come out of experience and when you have large volume of data then only you can
compare that what is the exact matter and where is this actual balls which are there.(Refer Slide Time: 12:47)
 Well, the parameters used in performance evaluation of proposed algorithms. What are
the parameters used we taught? It is also to let you know about what they are? And how
they  are  done?  In  fact,  these  generally  until  unless  you  have  some  idea  about  the
algorithm you will not be able to follow it, but then as an information which you can if
you want you can go to the books and get more details. For example, I will tell you here
the hits rate that is correct ones 
Hits rates = [ TDC / (TDC + MC)]
Where TDC is true detection of the cotton and MC is missing cotton. So, hits rate is
dependent on this and a false positive is false detected, this false positive it may be
positive, but it is not detecting even one. Then false negative is MC here the missing
cotton, missing cotton divided by the total cotton which is true detection cotton plus
missing total.
So, you can say that this is the process, which have been algorithm to process each
image. This is these are the parameters which have been used to identify this which we
have discussed earlier.(Refer Slide Time: 14:03)
So, what is the what other parameters used in evaluation of proposed algorithm? Then
with respect to the number of pixels, we talked of the number of pixels, number of pixels
background.  Yes,  it  is  in  the  background  because  you  have  to  identify  from  this
background. That is many a times it is in the it is hidden in the background, the cottons
are hidden in the background sometimes. So, how will you take it up?
So, what we have is sensitivity then we have specificity and then accuracy. Now, these
are the parameters which have been used and how they are used? What are their values?
What they depend on? It is given here that number of pixels predicted as cotton when
these pixels are of cotton. Then TN talks number of pixels predicted as background when
these pixels are of background.
So, these are some of the important parameters which must be looked into when we are
thinking of evaluating the proposed algorithm, a whether the algorithm is in the right
direction  or  not,  whether  it  will  properly  identify  the  balls  are  not  this  is  what  is
important.
So, we have to have these parameters taken into consideration when you are evaluating
the accurate accuracy of where the where the balls are.(Refer Slide Time: 15:29)
The performance of cotton segmented algorithms, now, what is the performance? Well,
the values which we have got here as we discussed in the other ones is that see what are
the different methods? What are their hits and false positive, false negative? We have
seen earlier on what basis we got.
So, if we take these let us have a look at these values which are there and this will give
you some information how you are in a position or how the researcher has developed the
algorithm and correctly predicted the location of the of the balls the cotton balls. See, the
color difference method hits 93.3 percent the false method, false positive 21.33 and then
false negative is this. So, you can see that color difference method with any light noon
time which is about the 50 klx of the illumination level.
Now, evening time the illumination level is 2300 lx . So, depending upon this what is the
behaviour? What is the performance of this? You can see color difference hits are 88.62,
% then false are minimum false negatives are also less. Similarly, for band ratio we find
here that chromatic aberration is giving 94.3 % and these two are also very less. Now,
you can see this chromatic aberration in this case also is 96 and the false negatives are
less ok.
So, if you compare that in noon time and in evening time the cotton segmentation
algorithms we find that chromatic aberration gives a better performance as compared toothers. Now, it is a question of argument you can say that how do you say that these
values are really 94, 91 and then 2 and this is 8 and 5 how statistically different?
Well, here I would say that the argument is that you need to take large volume of data
then only you can question this. It is just an attempt made and it is giving us the results.
So, we will see that definitely this has given us the actual what we are comparing and
how we are in a position to identify the cotton balls.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:09)
Well, the same thing which we have done with respect to the other parameters which we
say the sensitivity, specificity and then accuracy level  of the color difference color
difference ratio, then band ratio and chromatic aberrations. Comparison of algorithms in
terms of these parameters, we talked of other parameters there, you talked of these
parameters here.
You see here that in each of the situations then chromatic aberration. Now, you see here
that this. In fact, we have this accuracy is also 99.52 % as compared to the accuracy in
the other ones. And then the other details which are all given it is very much in you can
say that very much in inclined towards chromatic aberration is the method which gives
us the better result.
Time taken, now let us see what is the in respect of time taken; that means, which
method is taking less time, more time or what is that. Because, we have to also comparedwhen we say that accuracy we have to also talk of what is the time taken for that method.
It you may have a accuracy very high, but the time taken is more then there will be a
problem. But, we can see in this aspect that for this particular method you can see the
time taken minimum time and the average time is this which is much more than the other
times which are taken by the other methods color difference method, color difference
ratio and even the band ratio.
So, with these we still feel that chromatic aberration method which has been adopted to
identify appears to be the one which will give us higher level of accuracy and lesser time
for a locating the cotton balls in the in that plant.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:05)
Coordinates of targeted objects well, this is. In fact, we have talked of this because when
we are talking of the target object. Our target object is the cotton balls and how do we
locate the target object? We need to know about it is X, Y, X and also we know about the
orientation of that. So, this, this talks of that where we have talked of the X, Y, Z values,
we need to know the X, Y, Z values when we are talking of the coordinates of the target.(Refer Slide Time: 20:41)
Well, algorithms for finding real world coordinates using scene construction method.
Now, there is one you need to construct the scene sometimes in the laboratory when we
want to identify a certain situation whether the cotton ball is exact located at that place or
not, whether my system or the algorithm which I have written or the instrument which I
have made will be in a position to identify properly or not.
So, 2nd methods have been employed here, first method is talking of the algorithm for
finding real world coordinates using scene reconstruction method. The second one is
algorithm for finding real world coordinates using triangular method.
Now, these 2nd flow charts are given here if you have some knowledge we will you will
appreciate otherwise you will say that we do not understand what is that it is, but then it
is starts from the images which we have already discussed that images taking, then
disparity, then construction of the scene, then the images on the left, then centroid cotton
balls, point cloud of the scene and then X, Y, Z values. How do you get to the X, Y, Z
values?
In fact, we get the positive images go to the negative images and then we try to locate
that and what should be the location of the arm all details are given and we have tried in
2 methods here. In both the methods there are some level of success which we got. So,
we thought of sharing that also with you although, it may not be essential for you tofollow both the methods, but then we find that if both are given to you, you will be able
to appreciate why one method is giving advantage over the other one.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:31)
Now, location result using scene construct method, now as you have seen that on the
right we have given a pattern and on the basis of the one which we have talked of actual
points and the output points if how do we how this particular algorithm is in a position to
reconstruct what we have. And you can see that the values which are here. The values
which are say for example, X millimetre here and the X millimetre here, you can see this
was minus and this is this output points.
Similarly, at say value of minus 280 here and in this slightly off ok. Similarly, say this is
this much and this value is this value is this here. So, you can see that the scene has been
reconstructed  in that method you were trying to only validate we are trying to see
whether the system is working or not.
This is all laboratory exercise which has been done to reconstruct and then understand
the system. Because, once the machine is designed and the whole robot arm is designed
it when it goes to the field how it will behave. So, that part is a separate thing which we
have not done, but what we have done is we have taken the real image of a crop where
the cotton balls are there. And then from there we have tried to understand the whole
design of it whole mechanics of this and whole system of this processing of the image
and identify the image.(Refer Slide Time: 24:15)
Well, matrix represent a position of rigid body. This is this talks of the basics of that I
need not go into that, but there will be the design of the end effector will come into play
over here. So, what is done is an object can be represented by a. Now, this is the basics I
will not like to give you the basics here, but then if you go into details you will definitely
find here. So, I will skip this, but I have given to you. So, that you can understand the
mechanics behind this, the theory behind the whole aspects of identifying an object.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:55)
Robot what is the kinematics of robot as such? Because, you know that this will find out
as I have already said that will find out the X, Y, Z because, we have to have an end
effector. And this end effector will tell what is the location and when it will be in a
position to find out the real location of the cotton ball. So, we have a forward kinematics
wherein we are in a position to find out the X, Y, Z location and then the inverse
kinematics, where we are in a position to find out the angles θ X, θy and θz Cartesian
space.
Now, this the details remaining this the kinematics has to be followed. Now, these are
the basics of the system before you enter into the details of designing. It is worth giving
as an information to you, but then until unless you have knowledge about the image
processing, you have some knowledge about what the robot kinematics is and what are
other details of the matrix etcetera you may not be in a position to follow.
But, what is to be understood and appreciated is the attempt, the approach which will
help you to see that there are possibilities of developing such a thing. If you want to
develop say another fruit harvesting or an fruit identification then definitely you will be
in a position to do that using the method.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:39)
Now, well, some of these details  are also further given about parameters  and then
mechanics of this, how to get the angles and then how to get the arm of the robot these
are some of the details with a different links and the axis which are to be followed. So,that you can see that these locate the exact. So, these are the some of the details which
we have been taken from literature for your knowledge which you can go into details and
try to follow them.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:01)
This is the different parameters of the robotic arm. What are the parameters of the
robotic arm? What are the angle? You can see that we what we have shown here is that
this is how what are the different details? How this will move? And what are the angles it
will move at? And what are the positions it will move? What distance is it will move
before it reaches the particular location the end effector which will reach the arm? So,
how the arm and you can see the details of the distances which have been made and what
are the connections which are required to move it in different angles etcetera in both the
situations we have indicated over here.(Refer Slide Time: 27:47)
Inverse  kinematics  as  I  said  that  we  I  need  not  explain  the  details  of this  inverse
kinematics. I have already talked of, but the flowchart is given here for you to follow and
you can always use this for understanding the system better and identifying the angles as
reverse  kinematics  talks  of  the  angles  to  be  identified  with  respect  to  X,  Y,  Z
coordinates.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:15)
Well, a GUI has to be retained this will help you to understand this is program which you
have to graphical user interface. Now, you have to use to design the manipulator.Now, here all the all details are shown to you on the diagram here I will just pick up and
tell you some of the things. For example, you see here this is the X, Y, Z situation here.
And if this is the item here, this is the your arm, now these are the arms which are
moving here and you will try to locate. So, you can see here 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.
Now, this 1, 2, 3,4 and 5 are here input positions X, Y, Z here and then highest, lowest,
leftmost, rightmost, this is how we try to, this is how we try to identify the location. If
particular location has to be identified in this X, Y, Z plane and this is the arm this is the
robotic arm which is going to identify.
So, at least it must get some locations of left the highest, lowest, sideways and then
location centre these positions, 5 positions and then the output the angular limits you can
say accordingly are given here, the lower limits and the upper limits of the angles with
respect to this. After you have found out this you must also require what will be the
amount of torque required for doing this task from here to there and to this what is the
torque required.
So, the maximum torque required is also given in this particular the joint torque. How
much will be at each joint these joints? What will be the torque required? And then what
are the values of this? So, accordingly the motor has to be selected, the motor has to be
designed. Generally, we do not design in the sense what I mean design by this here is
you select the particular type of motor which will give that that much of torque at least
that much of torque. So, depending upon the requirement you have to choose the torque
which is slightly higher in capacity and it will be able to do the task.
so, the motor switch will be required for each of these links here you can see 1, 2, 3 and
4. So, each motor with different torques which are given over here. in this if you say exit
this will the GUI it will exit out of GUI. So, this GUI which has been developed this is
for the design of the manipulator.
So, what the manipulator? And then what is the curvature? You really how the what will
be the works space of that robotic arm? You can see here we have shown here the work
space of the robotic arm which way it will move; you can see here the patterns which are
shown here. So, it is shown how it will move and the torque is given over here.So, this speaking arm design has to be picked up in such a way has to be designed in
such a way or the GUI has to tell us has to what is the torque required? What is the space
required? And what are the locations of the cotton ball which is available? And on that
basis, if you can design the end effector which will do the job.
(Refer Slide Time: 31:39)
Now, these talks of the torque requirement calculated in Mat Lab using RTB and the one
which is for each of the joints you can see this is what it is shown. So, for each of the
joints joint 1, 2, 3, 4, what are the torque joint torque required is given over here. This
has been done using GUI as I showed earlier graph.(Refer Slide Time: 32:07)
This is the flowchart to operate the complete robotic arm I will not go into details of this,
but I have talked of these slowly that you need to know the take the image as I if you go
back to the previous the first slide where I had shown you that what is the cycle? We
need to identify it, then we need to segment it, then we need to locate it is actually and
then find out it is X, Y, Z position, then we find out it is through reverse I mean inverse
kinematics. Find out the theta angle θ X, θy and θz these angles. So, that the end effector
can go to that location and pick up the balls.
So, the whole flowchart of rotation of the robotic arm is given in this. Here, you for you
to appreciate and understand if you can, but then what you know from this particular
lecture is that advance approach has been employed for doing this.(Refer Slide Time: 33:03)
 I will Arduino flowchart to run servo motors how the servo motors will run? So, this is a
flowchart for that. You can see the details on the right hand side which we have given
here for all the details of the electronic hardware which is employed in this.
(Refer Slide Time: 33:21)
The working robotic arm so, this is the one which is developed at IIT Kharagpur and I
will just show you the a small video of this particular thing. You can have a look at what
are the items or the components of this robotic arm. There is a manipulator, then we have
not kept the end effector in this now. The stereo vision we can see the location where thestereo vision is there then there is a power source which will be giving the power to the
whole system. Then Arduino mega control unit the control unit is over here. And there is
a  laptop  for  processing  the  information  and  interaction  between  the  person  or  the
engineer and the system.
So, you can see here I will just show you the working of this system. You can just have a
look at this.
(Refer Slide Time: 34:15)
How it moves? maybe that this is this spare this is location where you can have a look at
this that how it moves and what are the different ways that it has to reach to the actual
point, you know can just see that this happens yes. So, it is going in now with this you
can see that the it reaches the location, then to be in a position to pick up. So, this is as if
it has just picked up. So, this is one which we can show you that it has done the job and it
will come back to this position.
Now, the all these aspects will take place, this is the stage at which we have developed
and we are hoping that it will be the machine will be ready in some course of time you
can see the various aspects.
So, as such in this particular lecture we wanted to share with you the research work done
at IIT Kharagpur regarding the advanced technology used for cotton harvesting. You can
use this you can use the technology for many other things. And there is a need for use ofartificial intelligence sensors, embedded systems and various other aspects all related to
internet of things for designing the agricultural machines. And devices which will require
less power which will be able to do the task easily and which will also not get affected
by the various factors related to the crop or to the soil and things like that.
So, with this I think some approach has been given. I hope you will definitely have many
questions and we would like to answer this at some point of time when we encounter
those questions. And I hope that you will get benefited out of this and we will try to
answer questions at a later point of time.
Thank you very much.