Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 40
Performance Evaluation of Sprayer
Dear students welcome to your another lecture that I would I have presented to you in
the form of  Performance  Evaluation of a  Sprayer. Well, I discussed in my previous
lectures if you have gone through you will find that we have talked of the various types
of sprayers and what are the special features of those sprayers how they are designed.
And now the time has come we must know how to find out the their performance. I mean
what are the parameters which need to be evaluated with respect to a particular sprayer .
And we can say that ; yes this is a sprayer which is worth being used in a particular field
or in a particular situation of crop field either it is a cereal crop or it is a orchard crop or
plantation trees etcetera. So, with respect to this we will discuss in this particular section
the performance of a sprayer.
Now, let us go through the slides what I have brought to you one by one in which we
will see the parameters and what are their details required for those parameters.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:28)
See when we talk of a performance evaluation of a sprayer you know that the items
which are there in a sprayer or the pump which develops the pressure. And then after that
you will have the boom, after that you will have the lance and then the cut off device. I
mean start and stop device and then the nozzle. The nozzle gives you different types of
the pattern which you require as per the requirement of the crop or as per the requirement
of the infestation which has taken place in the field.
So, here we will talk of the different parameters. Now let us talk of the droplet size. Yes,
as I told you that droplet size droplets are important because those droplets if they are
bigger definitely they are going to not cover the whole area at the same time they amount
of spray required or the volume of solution required will be quite high.
So, we must talk about what is the droplet size. See, the droplet size is affected because
of the surface tension and viscosity. So, these are the fluid properties of surface tension
and viscosity, so the droplet size will be affected because of this. Now here when you
talk of the number of droplets we must know we have idea about the droplet size which
is the principle fluid properties or surface tension and viscosity.
Now when you talk of the number of droplets what sort of droplets are required, whether
large volume of droplets are required of a particular type or not. And what will be the
sizes of that depending upon the type of nozzle that you have used. So, you can see that;
here we can say the depending upon the pressure that you have the flow rate and the
spray angle.
We it has been found that the flooding nozzles which are simply throwing or spraying in
a jet form flooding nozzles are greater than the fan nozzles then greater there the hollow
cone nozzles. That means the droplets if you go through flooding nozzles the droplets are
higher than this and this is how it moves.
So, uniformity of deposition now how do you go about the uniformity of deposition
which is very important, whether the droplets are uniformly placed at the right location
or not, or they are concentrated one side more and the other side less and so on and so
forth this could be situation. So, the uniformity is very important as the size is important
and the properties of the liquid which are important the uniformity is another important
item which depends on the flow rate and the spray angle which has been take.In fact, these parameters are very much interrelated when you talk of the liquid you have
to talk of the surface tension, you have talk of the level of viscosity of that, you have talk
of the density of that you will have to talk of the orifice through which they are coming
out then you have talk of the flow rate what is the flow rate and then you talk what is the
spray angle.
So, if you go through this now I have presented one table here which will give you some
idea about how to think how to learn about the droplet size, the types of droplets and the
volume and what is their corresponding use. So, let us have a look at this see nozzle type.
If you have the rotary atomizers, fog nozzles, or aerosol generators; so were there the
droplet size which is represented in VMD volume in median diameter in microns is
given as  50. If you talk  of rotary atomizers  and gaseous energy nozzles  then it is
increasing 50 to 100 droplet the 100 microns 50 to 100 microns of VMD which will
have.
The same they are similarly when we talk of only rotary atomizers that it is 100 to 150
microns then hydraulic energy used once, then where you can have the solid cone where
you can have hollow cone you can had flattened fan nozzles. So, for them the droplet
size varying 200 to 400 micron and sometimes greater than 400 microns for some of
these.
So, depending upon the requirement of which one you have chosen it will vary from 200
to 400 even it can go beyond that. And the types of droplets what will be the types of
droplets if you have the corresponding ones the aerosol this is the mist type you can see
that these ones then fine spray you will get in these. Then medium spray because the size
has increased here and then coarse spray it has more than 400 micron.
Volume per liter particularly corresponding that you will have a volume per liter see
when you have aerosol it is 1 liter per hectare when you have mist type you can have 1 to
3 liters per hectare. And fan spray about 5 liters per hectare, then when you have see
sizes which are about 200 to 400 you can go about to 100 to 200 liter per hectare. Now
these will be required, because as per the crop you will have and depending upon the
infestation  which  is  already  there  in  the  crop  you  will  have  to  choose  this  and
accordingly then you will have the nozzles.So, these are given as a guideline which will help you when you are talking of and when
you are trying to design or select a particular nozzle. And if it is very coarse spray then
you can it can go more than 500 liters per hectare. The uses of course, they are given
when it is between 1 and 3 you can see the ultra low volumes applications even up to 5
liter per hectare is a ultra low volume. If you are sometimes people say about 9 liters or
so, but then quite often you will find that 5 to 7 we will say is within this.
Now, 100 200 and below and above 500 liters per hectare those will be going the aerial
application of field crops and herbicide liquid a fertilizers. Now these are some of the
things when you are talking of high volume then you need to have different the type of
equipment as well as the process by which these are to be given.
So, with this what I wanted to show you is what is the droplet size what are the different
what are their numbers and how do you get uniformity, how do achieve uniformity with
regard to the their application. When they are taking; when you have taken a particular
nozzle you have taken a particular equipment in which the nozzle is fitted. So this will
give you an idea about the nozzle type and nozzle details.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:27)
Droplet size now how do you I just said droplet size there, but now when you want to say
about this droplet size, how do we class classify these sizes, and what are the different
parameters which we talk of as I said about VMD we had given in the previous table.So now, you see what these are see here the spray droplets are classified by their
diameters it is in micron meter. Now a droplet size distribution can be represented by
plot of the number of particles  of a given diameter  and this kind of plot is called
histogram yes this is the one here. So, you can see the droplet size class on the basis of
this will number of droplet or the class of this on this side.
So, depending on this the droplet size is here and then the class is given on this side. So,
what we can show you that this talks, this particular way we represent the class and with
the droplet size. Now when we talk of the droplet size with respect to the; I mean
percentage of undersize I mean when you were trying to find out what is the particle size
distribution?
So, droplet size distribution is one where we can put this class and the droplet size. Now
when you are talking a particle size distribution could be a cumulative fraction of the
total number of smaller than a given size against that given size. And this type of plot is
called cumulative frequency plot this is important, because then you would like to know,
what is the exact name that we have given volume medium or mass median diameter and
all that.
So, here if you see this plot the second one here the droplet size is given on the abscissa
and  percent  undersize.  So,  depending  on the  percent  underside  is  presented  on the
ordinate and we see here that at somewhere around 50 or so if this is the value here you
call median diameter. So, the median diameter of that droplet is here it if you take this
value to be 50 then median diameter here is the median diameter. Now, whether it will
be volume or mass we will talk of this later.(Refer Slide Time: 10:55)
Well, droplet diameter we have talked of this droplet diameter could be expressed in
mean diameter and median diameter well, there are various ways which we can do. So,
this can be droplet diameter could be as mean diameter or median diameter well I have;
shown you as to where this median means what does it mean and all that.
So, mean droplet diameter is given by this particular expression this of course, this
expression we have taken, because these are the ones which have already been in the
literature. And it is worth telling you about what is already available in the literature and
you should make use of it when you are looking  of representing a particular droplet size.
So, if you talk of this particular see here p and q talk of 1, 2, 3, 4, or p greater than q.
Now this talks of the when we are talking of a particular when you have large number of
droplets and how do you represent a particular in the diameter of a section or a class of
droplets. So, Di talks of droplet of the ith size class so Di talks of droplet size class.
Similarly Ni talks of number of droplets in the ith size class this is what is explained here
then i is the number of size classes how many number.And is the total number of size classes if there N is total number and i talks of the
number of the size class. So, if you put this thing together what you get here is N. Where
N is the number of droplets here multiplied by the diameter which is the diameter droplet
of ith size. So, ith size class ith size class diameter and then it has to be taken i - 1 that 1 to
N a which is the class.
Similarly, these talks of i the number of size class here it is number of size class with
respect to q where q is more than p. Now these p and q talks of this talk of the well these
talk of the numbers I think, we have these talk of the various numbers when we take the
droplet size distribution ok. Now here, just have a look at this table the arithmetic mean
when you talk of arithmetic mean is represented by dot D 10 where p is 1 and q is 0 and
you were talking about metric mean p is 1 q is 0, Similarly surface mean diameter D 20
this is p is 2 and q is 0.
Now, how many talk of volume mean diameter D 30 then this is p is 3 and q is 0 when you
talk of Sauter mean diameter now this the Sauter mean diameter. So that means, Sauter
mean is D32, where 3 is the p and 2 is q here, because you can see that here we have
talked of Dpq. So, depending upon what whether we are talking about arithmetic mean
surface mean , the volume mean or Sauter mean this p this representation is indicated.
This is one way of how we talk about the droplet diameter or droplet size or droplet class
in which these fall.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:28)
Median diameter: now as I said earlier that in the table it was there a volume median
diameter. So, what is this some; these definitions I think you must have clear idea about
these definitions that is why I have given you here for your information and you must
take  cognizance  of  these,  while  you  are  talking  with  respect  to  the  various
representations in your experimentation and your reports when you write about are the
report of performance evaluation of a sprayer see.
The volume median diameter VMD what is this; it divide the droplet spectrum into two
portions. If you have the droplet deformations in two portion such that the total volume
of all the droplets smaller than VMD is equal to the total volume of all droplets larger
than VMD that value. So, if VMD has a certain value so if you divide into two parts so
the equal number will be on this side on smaller than and the equal number will be on the
larger side.
Similarly, mass mean when you talk of this the only difference is that you will be mass
of all droplets here it has the total volume of droplets here it is total mass of the droplets,
and  then  at  similar  definition  that  us  why  VMD  is  equal  to  MMD.  That  means:
numerically equal you would we can see that they are numerically equal VMD is not that
volume is equal to mass no not like that, but numerically VMD is equal to MMD. But
one will talk of the total mass value and below that of the smaller ones the number must
be equal to that beyond that value.
So, VMD and MMD are virtually numerically equal now numerical median diameter
NMD numerical median diameter what is this stocks of when if you divide the droplet
spectrum to into two portions. If you again, supposing you have got a large volume of
droplets of various classes or whatever when you have applied in the sprayer or the
droplets or a chemical onto a certain location or to a certain canopy.
Then, if you divide these droplets two portion such that the total number of all droplets
smaller than NMD smaller than NMD is equal to the total number of all droplets larger
than NMD. So, numerical median diameter this is what is the value of this where or if
you see the definitions all talk that put in two parts and of the value.
If in case of a volume it will talk the number will be equal on both sides. Similarly for
mass it will be equal on both sides where it talks of numerical median diameter also it
seems similarly. But then the VMD will be greater than NMD here it was VMD wasequal to MMD there, but VMD will be greater than NMD here when you consider the
numerical mean diameter when we are talking with respect to the classification of the
various sizes of the particles which are there.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:43)
Now, what relationship exists between all these factors? So, let us have a look at these
see the factors affecting droplet size of a particular liquid what are the factors affecting.
You can have type of the nozzle yes this will definitely talk of the droplet size it will
affect the droplet size, operating pressure what pressure has been maintained: yes it will,
if the pressure is low then there will be the droplet size will be something a value.
And then which pressure is very high lot of atomization will take place density of the
liquid surface tension of the liquid viscosity of the liquid and the spray angle: yes, when
from the nozzle what is the spray angle maintained. So, the droplet size will depend on
these factors which are very important factors whenever you want to design a nozzle,
when  you  want  to  design  a  spraying  system  you  would  have  to  consider  these
parameters.
And we have already discussed about what are the various ways by which we can talk
about the diameter of the particles, diameter of those droplets sizes. Now a relationship is
given here, which is worth knowing this the volume median diameter depends upon
operating pressure orifice diameter and surface tension of the liquid mark here, that this
orifice diameter pressure and the surface tension of the liquid these are very important.So, the volume median diameter this is given by this straightaway we are talking of value
medium volume median diameter-1 (VMD 1) by volume medium diameter-2 (VMD 2) if
you have two then the pressure is this is a rate. 
That means this VMD is proportional to p. And so if you are talking of two sets of this
value then VMD1 by VMD2 is nothing but this similarly, VMD 1 by VMD2 is this where
D1 and D2 you can are orifice diameters and the orifice diameters of this here we talked
of the pressure, here we talk of the orifice diameters.
Now, when we talk of the diameter you see here what is the change which has taken
place. It is the power which has change it was one third here now it is two third of that
with respect to when you are talking of the orifice size. When you are talking of the
surface tension of the chemical sigma 1 and sigma 2 and the surface tension surface
tension of the chemical this did not be there.
So, with this the VMD and is related like this under root of this you can say just half so
of the power is half. So, with these parameters when you are talking of volume median
diameter how this related with the pressure with everything nozzle orifice size and the
surface tension of the liquid which is being handled here this is the weight percent.
This will help you when you want to solve the problem when you want to understand
better the effect of these parameters surface tension. And the orifice size etcetera on the
total particle size and the total diameter of this. And the pressure etcetera when the when
you are encountering with a design of a particular sprayer.(Refer Slide Time: 21:07)
Methods to determine droplet size distribution there are various methods actually how do
you determine that we just talked of the droplets their sizes and their representation
etcetera. Now when we talk of the methods by which we find out this droplet size
distribution suppose spray has taken place on a canopy and how do you find out.
So, there are various  methods  I just listed those methods  you also you can see in
literature. And then maybe that some of the materials are very simple way. See if you
want to find out how many droplets have fallen on a particular location what you can do
is put a paper on that and if the liquid if it is colored you will get these spots and from
there you can get.
Now,  what  are  the  different  measuring well  glass  slides  coated  with  the  silicon
magnesium oxide the glossy paper such as this or this paper which is a glossy paper
actually. This is the glass slides which are coated with these materials on which are if
you put those locations and this free it takes place then you can take those values and you
can determine the droplet size.
Then  immersion  method  emerges  what  is  the;  a  immersion  method  that  is  utilize
electronic analyzer these another way of finding out droplet size. Actually by seeing as to
what are the different sizes and electronically you can find the value of the droplet size.
Various methods, various sophisticated equipment are available to find out this dropletsize this is one practical which you can put on the; as you can see that we have put here
you can see that the droplets are here.
All the droplets are seen here you can see this and these are at different locations have
been kept. In fact, a field demonstration in which we wanted to measure this. And that is
why we have shown you here for practical understanding of this aspect of droplet size
distribution.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:17)
Methods to determine uniformity of deposition this is important actually once you have
talked of all this must know what is the method by which we see that distribution is
uniform or not. The one which is very widely used is using a particular equipment which
is known as patternator.
So, this patternator we have made at IIT Kharagpur and I can show you what are details
of this is the one which is very widely used with other its other adding gadgets etcetera
which are kept on that and attached to this and you can very easily determined this
uniformity of deposition. For example here the drift there is a cover here, so there is no
drift which takes place we have the nozzles you can see there is one nozzle here another
nozzle here.
These are the nozzles and then that with pressure gauges where you can find out what is
the pressure. Then the spray lance four is the spray lance you can see here this is thespray lance this is the one which is connected. So, this is the one flow control valve fifth
is a flow control valve here this is the flow control valve you have to have flow control
valve patternator channels.
Now, these are the channels which would see these are the channels here where the when
the liquid falls this will come here. And then that liquid test tubes are you can see here
their several number of test tubes are put here, and then the on just at the base of the
channels. So, this will all get collected inside this, you can take it and then see whether
what is the level of uniformity when you are considering this total length of this is the
collection tray. So, you have this collection tray to full measure the total volume which
has come. So, we using this which is developed at IIT Kharagpur. In fact, this facility is
there with us and then we are in a position to use the sprayers you having other details of
how much we can give the power etcetera from the pump.
And then do this exercise under the laboratory conditions and we can measure you can
see here the specific dimensions of these are worth knowing, because suppose you want
to make a petternator at your location to do this a study to understand that. So, you we
have here length of the channel about 140 centimeters width of the channel, about 25
millimeter depth of the channel, 10 to 15 percent slope because the liquid has to fall here.
The liquid has to fall here then the number of channels what is the number of channel
that you have kept actually when you are talking of distribution you have to have a large
number of channels then only you can know what is the spread in which the whole
chemical is falling and how much you are getting. So, all this will fold flow down and
get  collected  into  the  tubes,  and  ultimately  it  will  fall  into  this  total  width  of  the
patternator maybe 165 centimeters. So, this is the total width this will talk of that what is
the swath that you will have if you have nozzles here.
Now, what are the changes material of construction where GI sheet has been this is one
material of construction which is given here. But this can be used for selection of a
suitable nozzle to facilitate uniform distribution of the spray liquid from the type you
want. See what are the things what changes you can make in this for example, if you
want that we would like to see how about the spray angle. So, when you change this you
can change this and say what is the spray angle when you want to see the spacing of the
nozzles.So, you can increase this spacing which is given over here you can increase the spacing
and see how much is the distribution you can that means, you can change the height you
can change the angle and you can change the spray angle, you can also change the types
of nozzles. Suppose you have different nozzles you can put those different nozzles and
then you can see the distribution and can compare the distribution.
So, you by this particular device you could be in a position to actually understand. What
will be the pattern, what will be the size of the droplets, what is the pressure which
should be there which type of nozzle is better what spacing I should maintain what the
spray angle I should maintain. And all details and how much will be the total swath if I
maintain this or what should the optimum value of number of nozzles in a particular
swath area when you are designing with this.
So, this particular patternator had been in use for long time and this is a very standard
and very easy tool to measure this is the uniformity of deposition what is the uniformity.
And we have all talked of the other parameters when we talked of the how to categorize
the diameter of the droplets what should be the pressure, how the various diameter
various diameters are related to the other parameters in which connection and all that we
have discussed.
So, that way I think we have discussed about the performance of a sprayer we have not
talked about the pump as such. Particularly I have particularly avoided that because if
you talk of the pump we have discussed much detail earlier. And that is why identify and
better just to talk with respect to pump when we are talking of the performance of a
sprayer.
When you talk of the sprayer does require a pump, but since we have product of the
details of the pump etcetera. So, I avoided that and the other thing is that the nozzles
which are the most important, the spacing of the nozzles, type of the nozzles, their
distribution pattern, their other diameters their distribution and all sorts of things which
are required you I have discussed in this.
And I think then I have conveyed what I wanted to say by performance evaluation of a
sprayer. Well, we will welcome your questions as in when they require. And, I think this
is we will try to close here.Thank you very much.