Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute f Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 46
Harvesting Equipment
Welcome students to my lecture number 46, which is on Harvesting Equipment. Well, so far
we have discussed about the crop all details right from tillage to planting of the crop, then
plant protection, weeding etcetera. And now, we have come to a situation, where the crop is
ready. And this crop needs to be harvested, and then transported to the yard for threshing and
then after that to bagging and then storage. 
Now, what is the equipment, which is used for this particular task, which is known as
harvesting. I have gathered here the basic principles which are involved in harvesting. In fact,
if you find that there are several machines now available from small to very big for this
particular task in agriculture. What is important as engineers point of view, what you should
be knowing is that what is the principle on which the different elements of the particular
harvesting equipment work, what are the different lacuna which they have, what are the
features important features, which they must have correct at the time of harvesting? Those are
the principles, which you must know. 
And what are the varieties of the harvesting equipment available, because crop could be a
cereal crop, crop could be a fruit crop, crop could be a root crop. So, depending upon the type
of the crop, then you have these harvesting equipment vary. So, we will discuss in the 1st
lecture, we will discuss about the basic principles and talk about what are the ones which are
available, and what are their basic principles? So, let us follow the slides, which are here with
here.(Refer Slide Time: 02:03)
Well, as I told you, what harvesting is? Well harvesting is the process of gathering ripe crop
from the fields, yes we would like to gather this crop, which is standing a crop, stand you
must have seen and that crop is stand has to be now cut, and then taken. When it is in the
right condition, whether it is as I said it could be a cereal, it could be a bulbs or the leaves,
stalk or whatever that has to be.
Then depending upon the position of useful grains in the plant, depending upon that the
harvesting is carried out. And what are the things which it involves, in fact it involves cutting,
the digging, in case of root crop, then picking, laying, gathering, curing and then stacking.
This these are the different various unit operations, which are involved in harvesting.(Refer Slide Time: 02:57)
Basic principles, actually, when you want to cut a particular plant or a particular you can say
tree, what do you do, you must have seen that you take a action and then start hitting on
through that, so that is not possible in case of a plant, which is very thin and which is very
soft. So, how do you do, and what are the various aspects, you must have seen that their
lawns are there, would like to maintain the lawns, wherein we would like to keep a cover of
grass, but then the bigger ones we would like to trim them off. So, there are various methods
we employee, depending upon where it is and what is the crop? 
So, you must have seen that people using devices, which are just they use and try to fit and
cut the plants. So, one is slicing with sharp smooth edge that if you have just like sword if
you have seen, the you can just use and try to cut it, it could be a smooth edge, it could be
very sharp edge. Now, depending upon the sharpness and depending upon the bluntness of
the edge, you will have to apply the force.
The tearing with rough serrated edge, you might have seen the scissors we use, you might
have  seen these sickles  which are  used  from ancient  time  by the people,  generally  for
harvesting or cutting. By that, we have serrated edges and those serrated edges are rubbedagainst or pulled against while holding the particular plant or a group of plants or group of
those leafs etcetera to get. 
A single element with high velocity with sharp or dull edges, now, these are the basic things
what we do in this, either you have cutting by a high impact or you have shear cutting, these
are the two basic things. Now, there could be variations in that which as I told you. So, with
these basic principles of harvesting, what are the equipment which are available and how do
we go about the basics of mechanics which is there in this?
(Refer Slide Time: 05:01)
Now, you see the harvesting equipment, I wanted that you should have a look at these
equipment as such for the purpose of information that which are the equipment, where they
are use and how. They are already available in the country and broad and very places for
different types of crops. Maybe we will show you the working of this at so later stage in this
particular lecture but then, I just wanted to show you, what are the crops which are available?
See combine harvester, this is one, this is the combine harvester. Here you would like that
when we say combine, actually generally when we are talking of harvesting, we are talking of
only cutting the crop, whether you whatever be the methodology for cutting, you require this.But, in case of combine, what we do is we would like to cut the crop, then we would like to
thresh the crop, then we would like to clean the crop and then we would like to bag the crop.
Several other several you can say the operations are done in this, and that is why this is
known as combine either you can say combined or some people say combine harvester as
such. 
Then the groundnut harvester, now, this is a groundnut, you have seen that this is groundnut
is inside the soil. So, what is done through this, there is a cutting blade here and that the
cutting blade, in fact will cut and then this groundnut bushes etcetera will be going through it
and then it will fall and, the soil will be removed. Similarly, the potato digger, I will show
you the operation of all these. Potato digger, potato is also a root crop so, it is there in the root
in the soil and that is to be dug, and then to be removed. 
Then you have one, which is very widely used in this country and even in all Asian countries.
And the one which is known as vertical conveyor reaper, which we call as VCR, you must
have heard and many of you might have seen their working etcetera, this is where smaller
unit, which is very handy only for cutting. But, what is done if you have seen the harvesting
by the manual method, you see the cut and then small bundles are made and they are put on
the sides, which is known as windrowing now, this job is not done by this. 
So, for cutting and weed drawing, we have another machine which is available, which is
known as reaper binder that means, it will reap, as well as it will create the bundles. When I
show you the operation of this, you will appreciated that time. Then some fruit harvesting,
see you must have seen that fruits are either on the smaller trees particularly for apples and all
that and some are on bigger trees like you should have say mangoes and other trees, which
are slightly tall. 
Now, if you harvest them, then what will happen is that once they fall on to the ground, they
will get hard. And then after sometime, they will get spoiled and hence, their self-life will be
deteriorating and it will be reduced a lot. So, the ultimately the farmer will not get enough
revenue, so we do not want that to happen. So, what they will do that small devices you cansee that these small devices are there which the person either he can start from the ground
itself and then click it up. 
And just taking these ones, or in these ones or maybe that he can go onto a platform that
platform is reached, you can have a hydraulic platform, tractor operated hydraulic platform,
which  platform  rises  and  then  you  can  have  this  unit  and we  can  pluck  the  mangoes.
Particularly for the mangoes, good quality mangoes that they will be available and this will
help you to get good quality and good price of that, so that is why so, I have shown you just
these harvesting equipment, which are available in the country for on cereals and then root
crops and then food crops etcetera so, just for information, this is worth knowing.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:11)
Now, mechanics, what is the mechanics of cutting and the plant structure? This is very
important. As an engineer’s point of view, you must know what is this mechanics, what does
it happen, where does it happen? You have the plant here, you would like that cutting should
take place properly. Now, it should cut in such a way, there should be enough strength for
cutting. If it is such that it simply bends, then it will not cut. So, you will have to have that the
when the plant is straight, there should be the cutting should take place and the proper
moisture content. See when you must harvest at a particular given moisture content of the crop. If the moisture
content is very high, then also there is a problem, because the moment you touch the plant
itself, it will simply start shedding and then lot of grains will fall. So, it is very important that
particular moisture content and that the agronomists have told us that what is the moisture
content for harvesting, wheat, paddy and things like that? 
So, accordingly we should be doing that, but what is the mechanics behind it? So, we want to
I have just jotted down some of the things, which you may also get in different books and
literature as well. Just jotted down for the purpose, so that you can understand particularly the
undergraduate students and postgraduate students and those in the industries, who are have
not undergone a course on agricultural engineering, and working for industry, developing
harvesters, developing other equipment and all that, this will this is worth knowing. 
So, what is important here is the plant material I will show you. The plant material sheared as
the sickle sections reaches and passes over the counter shear, the which is known as ledger
plate on the right. Now, at the instant figure with the figures, which we have shown you here
the left end of the stroke and moving toward the ledger plate. 
Now, you see here the if we what we are showing here, in the sections which are shown here.
So, this is a section, which is cut this section is shown over here ok. Similarly, this section is
shown over here and this is for the cutting edge or the we can say that the cutting section and
this is for the ledger plate. So, this so sickle section or ledger, these are all actually the
serrations are on to this here. 
So, this stocks of the ledger plate. So, what happens you have, you can see here that end of
see start from end this is the ledger plate is here and then the cutting blade starts like this and
then it will cut, and then it maintain a certain position. So, this is what the different angles,
which  are  shown  here.  Now,  what  are  these  angles,  have  a  look  at  this.  See  velocity
component of knife relative to the mower V km now, this is here. Similarly, the V f forward
velocity  of the mower, the forward velocity  of the mower here is yes, this  is here ok.Similarly, the oblique angle of ledger plate, the oblique angle of knife, all these angles are
given here. The rake angle Φ rk knife rake angle see this is the knife rake angle here. 
Similarity,  the knife clearance  angle,  in the  knife clearance  angle Φ ck, this  is the knife
clearance angle. Then knife bevel angle, this is knife bevel angle. Now, all these are very
important angles, so one must look into this. Then similarly, knife clearance angle here Φ rc.
So, this talks of the cutting mechanics that means, cutting geometry what happens, when the
cutting serrating blade comes to the ledger plate and cuts. And this is the forward motion
actually this is motion taking place in this direction so, let us go ahead and see what else is
there.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:19)
Well, sharpness and fineness of a knife, what are these important parameters actually, these
are very important parameters. The sharpness of the blade is important, how fine is that blade
sharpness. Now, here fineness is defined as the bevel angle so, this bevel angle Φ bk, this talks
of the fineness. A fine knife has a small bevel angle, while a blunt knife as a large bevel
angle. So, this is important to be noted that if you if the fine knife has a small bevel angle. When
this bevel angle is smaller, then the knife is fine. And the other is when the blunt knife, when
the knife is blunt that means, bevel angle is very high value. So, you must mark this points
and see the proper angles to be maintained, when the cutting blade is designed. 
Similarly, sharpness is defined as the radius of curvature is r ek. Now, this is where it is you
can see here, this is r ek, this is this portion is shown here. So, the sharp knife has a small
radius, while a dull knife has a large radius. Now, these are various important things, which I
am trying to tell you. In nutshell, we have put all these parameters, which are very important
to understand. 
So, we talk of the mechanics, we are talking of the angles, we are talking of the velocities,
and we are talking of the important behaviour of these very angles. So, when it is said that
whether the knife is a sharp knife or whether this knife is a blunt knife, so what are the
parameters, which differentiate them from their.
See initial penetration of the knife into the plant material is aided by the rake angle. Yes, this
is very important Φ rk so, this is the one. So, this important is that was initial penetration of the
knife to the plant material. So, this angle is very important for entering or cutting so, this you
check this angle. So, the values of all these angles of rake angle, sharpness angle, or the
radius, bevel angle etcetera, are very important and they must be maintained, when you are
designing. 
So, here as an engineer, you should be very careful about choosing these angles. Well, it is
not that you have to redesign the field as such, but these are very important, when you are
going to take up the blades, you must check whether the blades do have this important angles
as per the requirement or not. Otherwise, the working will not be that satisfactory and then
acceptable see the same figure we have put here, just to understand the other factors as well.(Refer Slide Time: 16:07)
Now, this what is the important of these? See very important in fact, you see here that the
relationship  which  is  been rake angle, bevel angle and clearance  angles, now these are
important angles. So, what is the relationship? 
Φrk + Φbk + Φck = 90°
The total of that must be equal to 90 degrees check this. So, you have to now decide how the
rake angles should be there, what should be the bevel angle, what should be angle clearance
angle? So, that it is not more than 90 degrees, it must be equal to 90 degrees. Accordingly,
you have to choose, depending upon the plant material, which is there, the thickness of the
plant material and the strength of the planet material etcetera.
Chip angle, now, this chip angle is the angle, which is about 
Φchk = Φbk + Φck
So, you can see here that Φ bk is this, and Φck is this that means, this angle, this angle is your
chip angle, this is important. Now, oblique angle of the knife ok, the, here this is Φ oc  this is
the angle. So, the angle between the y-axis and the cutting edge, a straight cut one you arehaving phi equal to 0. So, we will see here this is the angle, so this angle depending on the
angle that you have, the oblique angle knife a is very important. So, a straight cut is one in
which pi k is 0, when it is straight away ok. 
So, this is so these are the angles, which are important and how they are related is shown over
here. And it is worth understanding from your point of view, we have you have put the angles
together again here, the oblique angle of the knife, the oblique angle of ledger plate, then
bevel angle of the knife, similarly bevel angle of the ledger plate, clearance angle of the
knife, then rake angle of the knife. These are very important angles and how they are relate
worth understanding and then following it for your design.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:27)
Well, how the whole thing takes place, when the plant is cut. Now, you have a look at this
then so, the tilt angle is the angle between the stem and the z-axis is projected in to y-z plane
now. Here see this is y-z plane; this is z, this is y so, in the y-z plane, this is tilt angle here.
So, it is important about when this is the knife, which is cutting, and this is the stem, this is a
knife here and this is the stem, which is written here, you can have a look at it. Now, this slant angle Φ s, yes now this is slant angle. You can see here for this angle, which is
shown over here, this is in another plane; this is in x-z plane. So, you have to be careful about
this, Φs slant angle is in the x-z plane, whereas the tilt angle is in the y-z plane. Now, the
sliding is expected, if the oblique angle is greater than the following maximum angle. Now,
what it is oblique angle max should be equal to
Φok max = artan fek
 where what is this f ek? fek is the fiction coefficient of the knife edge. Similarly, friction
coefficient of the counter shear edge is f ec . 
Now, these are related, how they are related? When the plant comes in contact with the knife,
what happens, you see Φ cl maximum is given as
This is the imperial relationship, which have been developed by the researchers, who have
done work in this particular area and gone into details of how they are taking how do they are
cutting takes place. 
This work has been done at IIT, Kharagpur and we wanted to have a you to know that this is
the details of the mechanics, which is working on the plants, depending on whether it is a
hard one or a grass or a crop, whatever it is. So, these are the important angles now, the figure
shows here, the slant angle and the tilt angle, which as I explain to you here. So, the various
angles are now understood by now you see what happens next. (Refer Slide Time: 20:41)
Plant structure, now, what is the plant structure? You must have seen that every plant see this
is the plant here. Now, you can see if you take a cross section, if you take cross section of
this, so here you can see that this is a cross section here, before the plant is cut. Now, the
cutting process that causes mechanical failure of the plant stem now, this is the plant stem,
this is the cross section of the plant stem here and this is before and this is after, it has been
cut now, this will be the situation. 
Now, how this value takes place, when the blade acts. So, have a look at this, the cutting
process is the is a process that causes mechanical failure of the plant stem and or leaves and
thus structure and strength of plant materials are of interest, when we are talking with respect
to the plant structure. 
The mechanical properties of the plant material; what are the mechanical properties of the
plant material, which are also important to us. So, we need to know what is the ultimate load
or bending failure, we must know about this. We must know what is the deflection of the
steam, yes the stem will deflect depending upon where you have started cutting and how and
what is the strength of that and at what velocity the blade is coming this deflection of this
stem will take place. And we have to be careful that it takes it does not bend properly and the
simply goes over it, we have to be we have to design. Now, where these parameters are already indicated, here you can see that the ultimate load at
bending failure is represented by F bu, which is here.
Fbu = ( I × su ) / (C × L)
 I is the moment of inertia is given here, s u is the ultimate stress of the plant fibres, these are
available from the literature. Then c is talking of the radius for this neutral axis to the most
outer fibre ok, then L, this L is the distance from the concentrated load point to the support,
this is the eldest. 
So, using this and knowing the details of that similarly from deflection of this stem, we have
all these parameters which are indicated here, where E is the modulus of elasticity of the stem
fibre. So, these details are with us and the researcher knows about it. So, we can we can find
out for a hollow and thin walled sections, this with moment of inertia for a solid and circular
cross section, this will be the moment of say, where d is the diameter, t is the thickness here
of this and d is a diameter here. 
So, using what you are talking and what you are trying to cut, accordingly this I will be used.
So, this is about the plant structure, this will vary from plant to plant. If you have taken a tree,
you must have seen the cross section, what will be the if you are talking of other stems may
be that if you cut there, you will find something like this. So, you have to be careful and
understand what is the structure of the plant and how the blade should move on, what should
be the velocity etcetera?(Refer Slide Time: 24:07)
Well, when the this cutting takes place it is worth showing you here the so, the energy during
this process area under this, we will talk of the compression only that means, energy for
compressing that particular plant or collection of plants material, which are being cut. Then
compression and cutting, which is taking place the energy for compression taking place is
this direction this area. This is the area, which is talking of B. 
Then cutting only, only pure cutting will take place during this part of the energy so, this part
of the energy which is represented by C will be the complete cutting. This will talk of
compression, and then cutting starts, and this  is talking of compression only. Complete
compression and after that the compression and cutting starts and then there will be only
cutting. So, this is what happens, when the actual cutting of the plants take place as we have
said that in the ledger the selected knife and the ledger plate, when they come together this
exactly is happening. 
This is the energy, which is force and deflection curve for knife and counter shear. Counter
shear is that which we are calling as the ledger plate. This is the reference from where we
have seen, you can have a more detailed information if you want, you can check from here,
because, this is worth showing you. You will appreciate this part of it, because the mechanicsas an engineer, you must understand the mechanics of what is happening, while cutting is
taking place.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:47)
Well, what are the equipment for first equipment we are talking with respect to forage
harvesting, we just talked of the plants certain of forage, now forage. You have seen that this
forage is required for our animal. And it is very essential and it is grown separately, and then
their heights etcetera, the stem height stem height, as well as the stem thickness, all these
vary and of various types. Now, we would like sometimes grasses now, these grasses, which
are quite about 2 feet 3 feet grasses, they also need to be cut. So, these such equipment are
known as forage harvesters. 
Now, what is the basis of such cutting? You can see here that the cutting takes place through
the various types of mechanisms that we have, one is known as mower here. So, mainly
harvesting grasses and forage crops, which are there smaller then the it is some say for about
30 to 100 mille metre above the ground maybe about you can say 30 to 100 mm above the
ground very small distance above the ground it cuts, and maintenance also generally used for
lawns etcetera. Then sometimes when you have very big grass about 3 to 4 feet grasses, and then you want
these grasses to be completely cleaned and all that. You may not use a harvesting equipment
just like that we have, because those grasses you want also them to be cut and may be used
for say cover. So, moisture maintaining the moisture of that so, this is better.
Then you have a flail mower, now, you can see these are the flails. This is the shaft here and
on the shaft, these are flails, which are there. These are the flails you can see here, these are
the flails here. Now, this many a times, these flails could be chain, you must have seen a short
about 30 to 35 centimetre chain. So, these chains could be also there, where it rotates at about
high speed of 2000 to 300 rpm, then these will bit onto those and then like that they cut so,
accordingly this cutting takes place. 
Similarly, when and what does it do see after the cutting, you see the flail the blades are these
are the flail blades, which are shown, a rotor is shown over here. And after this cutting, then
they are thrown to the trailers, we can have a trailer behind it so, these some of the forage
harvesters  or  the  mowers  which  are  mainly  for  maintenance  of  the  lawns,  gardens,
playgrounds, etcetera. And flail mowers generally for say area which is very bushy area and
not attended for a long time. So, if you want to clear that, you can use the flail mowers.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:39)
Rotating disc type mowers, where these are also small rotating (Refer Time: 28:45) cylinder
type mowers, these are some of the smaller mowers, which are manually driven. You can say
if this is one, which is a manually driven, this is cylinder type how this the these are the
blades. So, when it goes on to that, in fact it will maintain a very smooth carpet sort of a
cleaning of the grasses and maintain a carpet of the grasses. Those are actually the helical
blades and you can see here that they can cover about 1.5 to 2 hectare per hour at a speed of 8
to 10 kilometre per hour in fact. Then you can have a small engine connected to it and then
you connect these two this, so that they can rotate. And then also these are operated manually
operated, as well as engine operated ones are also available. 
And some of the rotating disc type yes, there are various discs on which the blades are kept
and then free 2 swinging, you can having 2 to 3 free discs which are free to swing. And then
while the swinging, they just by their action of swinging in the cut and because of the speed
is very high. So, at high speed when they swing, they will cut the grasses etcetera so, these
are other types of mowers, which are used, which you might have seen also, but these are the
ones, which are available. And you must know these that they are available. And you should
not be I mean ignorant of this that no, you have not seen, at least you must know the actions
and the principles on which they work and where they are used.(Refer Slide Time: 30:25)
Well, we wanted to show you the some details of the mower. Here see this is the knife edge
section here and reciprocating type mowers. These are the ones, which are very large ones;
even you can have about 3 metres, 4 metres depending on the type of the tractor you have
connected too. These are and there is a pitman here, you can see this is the pitman, this is
called pitman here. And then cutting into the cutter bar, these are guards and then these are
the cutter  this is the complete cutter bar this is the complete cutter bar here and there
reciprocating type mowers, they reciprocate. There are certain things, which are important for
this, because on the other side, they are not supported. So, there has to be a proper balancing
of this and proper alignment of this, which are very important. 
And these are standard strokes are about 76.2 millimetre pitch uses in this mowers. And they
the power is see the power is given to this pitman and the what happens is the rotary power is
given here and the reciprocation takes place with this. So, it moves with the power from the
tractor and then by reciprocating action it cuts. Now, what are the other principles, which are
followed for a particular balancing of this and alignment, let us have a look at it. (Refer Slide Time: 31:45)
This is the cutter bar so, in the cutter bar, there is important things which are here in this
cutter bar, which has been shown here the in one of the sections of that from the side. And
what are the details of this, you can see the cutter bar assembly as the shoe the ledger plate,
which you have talked of. The wearing plates, which are there, hardened steel material, then
knife is there, and knife section will be there.
 Then knife head, of course these details are shown over here, then the pitman, which I was
showing you the pitman, then the connecting rod. Now, this connecting rod and there is a
pitman and crank wheel. So, depending upon the power is given to the crank wheel, so the
pitman is off set and that is why the rotatory rotary motion is converted into reciprocating
motion and then it cuts.(Refer Slide Time: 32:41)
Adjustments, what are the important adjustment? See adjustments are very important here;
otherwise it will not cut. And the two important ones are the registration and alignment,
which are known as. Now, here a knife is proper registered when the midpoint of the knife is
section is stops in the centre of the guard on end of the each stroke. This is exactly why a
good registration, you can see here that you can see the cutter as well as the ledger plates,
they are just that means, at the end of the cut, we will find that the center line of the ledger
plate and the cutter are in one line. Same way if it is not so, then this is wrong registration or
poor registration, which is shown over here. 
Then what happens is that when the this long one, so the outer end of the cutter bar is fitted
with the little head of the inner end so that the outer end may align with the inner end, when
the mower is pulled enough through the crops yes, this is very important. And what is that
head, how far is that head, actually it is put 2 centimetre per metre of the cutter bar length and
virtually it maintain certain angle. 
So,  this  is  important  to  maintain  this  alignment  is  important,  the  cutter  bar  should  be
maintained. If you do not maintain this, then the cutting will not take proper placing place,and then you will lose power unnecessary. So, this is very important that the registration and
alignment are maintained for these mowers which are there. 
So, as such in this, we have given you an overview about what are the harvesting equipment,
what are the root crop equipment and what are the knife edges and what are the details of
that, what mechanics happens and what are the structure be plant etcetera? So, we will follow
this into more details about this equipment in the later lecture. So, I think will close here.
Thank you very much.