Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 42
Problems Based on the Design and Selection of Spraying Equipment – I
Well students, in this session, I have brought certain Problems Based on Design and
Selection of Spraying Equipment. Well you if you have gone through my earlier lectures,
you  will  see  that  we  have  discussed  various  aspects  of  spraying  equipment,  and
parameters there are testing, evaluation etcetera. Now, I thought it what is discussing
certain numerical problems on that. And through that also you can clarify many doubts,
which you have in your mind.
And I have come up with about four problems here. And we will see what are the
requirements, how they have been answered. And later if you find that there is a problem
in that you can always approach, and we will try to give answer to that. So, let us go
through each of the problems, what is the stated, what is given, and what formulae we
have how to use these formulae and how to get the answers.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:35)
Problem number 1, see if this problem here, a field is sprayer having a horizontal boom
of 20 nozzles  are used at a spacing of 46 centimeter apart is to be designed for amaximum application rate for 750 liters per hectare at 520 kilopascals and 6.5 kilometers
per hour it is a good design problem.
 In fact, you need to design a sprayer, where there will be 20 nozzles at certain spacing.
And then this is the 750 liter per hectare we require. And this is the pressure at which,
and the speed at which it must work. So, determine the required so for this, what you will
require, what is to be done. Determine the required pump capacity in liters per minute,
then assuming 10 percent of the flow is bypassed under the above maximum conditions.
So, with the data, what you need to find out, determine the required pump capacity in
liters per minute. Then mechanical agitation, because this is will be a long one, and
agitation is required. So, you need to know what is the mechanical agitation requires 375
input Watt, and the pump efficiency is 50 percent. What would should be the engine
rating, if the engine is to be loaded, to not more than 80 percent of its rated power.
So, well, in this particular design problem these are details which are given. And you
need to use your knowledge what you have learned so far to find out how they behave or
how they actually perform. Then what discharge rate per nozzle, what is the discharge
rate per nozzle is required under the above conditions. See we have 20 nozzles at 46
centimeter apart; and with the given data how much will be the discharge per nozzle
discharge rate per nozzle.
If the nozzle have 70 degree spray angle, we have seen that spray angle, which we have
discussed. If the spray angle is 70 degree, and the pattern is such that 50 percent overlap
is needed for uniform coverage. As we have talked at distribution of uniform coverage is
very very important.
So, at what  height  above the top of the  plant  should  the  boom  be operated.  Very
excellent problem so far as understanding a design of a good sprayer. You have this
sprayer, you have the conditions you have given nozzles, you have been given spacing of
those nozzles, but certain aspects are given to see whether how do you check for the
performance of this.(Refer Slide Time: 04:05)
Let us see how do we approach the first is determine the required pump capacity. So,
what is given here in that see the nozzles as I said we have been given to you the nozzle
spacing is also given to you. Then maximum application rate is 750 liter per minute is
given here. Now, this you can, because you want to change it to hectare or per square
meter you want to check this you can see this. Then operating speed is 6.5 kilo meter per
hour. Operating pressure, which is also given 520 kilopascal.
Now, determine the required pump capacity in liters per minute. How will you get this,
assuming 10 percent of the flow is bypassed under the above maximum conditions 10
percent of the flow is bypassed. So, what will be the required pump capacity? Now, we
need  to  know;  what  is  the  pump  capacity  without  losses  straightaway  maximum
application rate into area covered will give you. So, you have the maximum application
rate ARmax and number of nozzles and number of spacing and speed. So, when you get
these things definitely number of nozzles the spacing and the speed will give you how
much you have got area covered.
So, area covered will give you from the number of nozzles the spacing and speed at
which  is  moving. So, area  covered per  unit time  you will get  from here.  And the
maximum application rate which is already given to you the maximum application rate
which is given to you. Then this information is multiplied by this which you get about 75liter per minute (Refer Time: 05:54). So, the pump capacity without losses is 75.75 liter
per minute.
Now, consider 10 percent loss by bypass that means this is bypassed. Then what will
happen, the pump must give more than this, because there will be a lose. So, just
increased by that much that means say 1.1 times that value so, this is the value which you
are going to get. So, you understand that given everything how do you approach two
aspects pump capacity is needed, so maximum application rate and the area covered.
When you want to find out the area covered you must know; what is the number of
nozzles, spacing of the nozzles and the speed at which there moving.
So, you will be able to know what is the area covered per unit time and the application
rate. So, then you will be able to know, how much is the requirement. When there is no
loss from the pump, from the pump which you required, but when it is said that 10
percent is getting bypassed well you have to increase that amount actually we get this.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:59)
Second aspect mechanical agitation requires 375 input Watts and the pump is 50 percent
pump efficiency is 50 percent. What should be the engine rating, if the engine is to be
loaded not more than 80 percent of its rated power. Very nicely avoided problems see
you are taking of the power BHP of that. Now, the pump capacity and the operating
pressure this gives of the power. So, the pump capacity is you have already found outfrom the other side, and then what is the operating pressure, which is mentioned 520
kilopascal already mentioned.
So, taking care of the units what you get is this kilowatt this is the power. Now, pump
efficiency  how  do you  say pump  efficiency  the  output  by  input  is  giving  you the
efficiency. So, the actual brake horse power is theoretical brake horse power by pump
efficiency, this is what you get, because what is given here is 50 percent is the pump
efficiency. So, with respect to that what do you get the actual brake horse power is this.
Then the net power including agitation, how much will be the net power including
agitation, because for agitation you are requiring certain amount of the power, which is
this input.
So, if you put this 375 watts, so 0.375 kilowatt. So, this kilowatt plus this that means the
two net power including agitation is 1.180. Now, brake horse power of the engine will
be, because this engine as such the engine rating, if the engine is loaded 80 percent of its
rated power, it is working at 80 percent of its rated power. So, this has to be so and
1.801divided by 0.8, so this is the power so that means, at this 2.25 kilowatt should be
the power. What should be the engine rating engine rating should be this, because it has
80 percent rated power is being used this is the value which comes. You only need to
understand the aspects, which are asked and then follow.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:19)
What discharge rate per nozzle? Well is required under the above condition. It is very
important what will be the discharge rate, discharge per nozzle, how do you get total
discharge by number of nozzles definitely, so this is what you have got discharge per
nozzle. Then if the nozzles have 70 percent spray angle, now the spray angle we just this
is called the spray angle. You can see this is the angle which is known as the spray angle
this spray angle is this spray angle this is what it is this is about 70 degrees this is spray
angle.
And the pattern is such that 50 percent overlap, so it says that 50 percent overlap is
needed for uniform coverage, what is this spray pattern 50 percent wider than the nozzle
spacing. This is the meaning of the overlap that we are talking with respect to this. So,
where you have this at what height above the top of the plant should the boom be
operated. Now, it is once this is known to you can see that. As if there are three nozzles,
one nozzle is here, the other nozzle is here, the other nozzle is here.
So, the spacing of this, now you can see that one nozzle has a coverage area like this
other has a coverage area from this to this. And now what how do we approach this you
see yes, if you drop this here, you get tan 35 degrees. So, with this, and if this is the D is
the total diameter or the width, which has been covered. So, D 2 will be up to this.
So, now we have said that the 50 percent wider than the nozzle spacing nozzle is spacing
is 46. So, what do you get here the coverage which is in the overlap comes this is equal
to this. Now, if you have this, so this and this can be found out. Now, if this is known
this D2 is known to you. So, tan 35 will be nothing but if you if you are talking with
respect to this, what do you get
tan 35 = (11.5/h)
, if this is the h, which we are talking with respect to this.
So, here 70 degrees, this is 35 degree. So, this is the one which we have talking is half of
this. Now, you get h this h as this. So, once you get this h, now you cover these ones,
because this is the h which is capital H here. So, this if you talking of this triangle here,
and this triangle, which you are talking with respect to this triangle this one here.So, what do you get is H/h. Now, this is this the height h this by this if you are talking of
this that means what you get is 23 plus 11.5 here in this case this will be here. And then h
this is H here corresponding to this h you will correspond to this is 11.5.
So, the H value you can get, because is small h you have got from here. So, bigger H you
will get from here. So, that means the height should be 49.27 centimeters above the
boom should be operated, so this is how we get. Now, this these I have explained these if
you have further questions, you can always ask us and we like to clarify, but this is worth
understanding how to design a new system.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:09) 
So, the results I have already said these the results if you put them together at one
location, the required pump capacity is 82.225 liter per minute, engine rating or the brake
horse power should be about to 2.225 kilowatt then the discharge rate per nozzle is 3.75
milliliter per minute and that the height at which 49.275 centimeters. This is the result
which we got from the previous one previous. It was a good design problem. Let us see
another problem considering some other aspects of the design.(Refer Slide Time: 13:47)
An airblast well we have talked of sprayers, and where no pressure and here carrier it
sprayers where airblast is there, and I which we are optimizing particles. So, it is good
that a problem like this has been taken. And I am sure you are aware of this particular
device, which we had seen shown you earlier. This equipment has been shown to you
earlier the lectures, if you have seen those lectures.
So,  and  airblast  sprayer  is  to  be  operated  4  kilometer  per  hour,  and  the  desired
application rate is 19 liter per tree. So, the tree spacing is 9 × 9 meter that means these
spacing on this way I mean when you talking of this, so maybe one is here, the other is
here. This is what I talks of this and each nozzle delivers 4 liter per minute. And the
operating pressure is 415 kilo Pascals.
So, if what is asked. If one half row is spread from each side of the machine, how many
nozzles will be needed. Now, you can see here that. In fact, this is exactly done here.
You can see that there is no plants here, but this is on plants are only on this side. So, if
only this side is to be spread, so how many nozzles should be required. And definitely
when it goes into an orchard, then on both sides there will be the canopy. So, it will have
to have a spray on both sides, and hence once you know on one side, you can just double
for the other side.
So, how many hectares can be covered if there is a 2 meter cube tank full of a spray. This
is another aspect which is asked. Now, let us say how will you approved, what is givento us the spacing that means distance between one tree and another tree is given. So,
operating is what is given here already 4 kilometer per hour speed is given, which is
which can be changed to 1.11 meter per second. Application rate is 19 liter per tree so
much of you have to apply. So, you must know how much time the nozzle must be
spread so that you get that much. Then the tree spacing as I showed here. Then the
discharge per nozzle is given here, the operating pressure is here.
So, once you have this details you use this given details into the problems that you know,
in the formulae that you know, the expressions you that we know for finding out the
details  of  finding  out  the  total  number  of  nozzles  or  the  nozzles  required  the
specifications spacing of nozzles, and pressure etcetera.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:45)
So if one row is spread from each side of the machine, how many nozzles should be
required? Let us say that only N is the number of nozzle on one side that is say. So, if net
discharge on one side will be because 4 is coming out from one nozzle, so N into 4 will
give you total this much. Now, if t is a time for application to each tree, you know that
19 liter is required. So, 
T = 4× N×t
This is the amount which is per tree, and you know that this is equal to the time of
application is given.So, then t is the time of application to each tree. Then what do you get 4 × N, which is
the net discharge, and N this much time. What will, so much liter per tree is the one
which you get. Since t is also equal to equal time to move 9 meter sure. So, in this time it
has moved from one to another one that it. So, during this period see what how much
time it has taken see 
S = v×t and t = (S/v)
So, what do you get here the 19 liter is equal to this. Therefore, N is equal to 35.18 is
very simple.Now, it says that about 35.18 nozzles will be required. Now, you should not
take less than 35. So, definitely 35 cannot be size at 36, but then you will have to go for
36, because the minimum is this, so you will have to go. And therefore the answer is that
one side at least 36 should be there. And then when you talk of the other side, so the
system will have, therefore on both sides it we will not like to have only nozzles on one
side, you will like to have nozzles on the other side as well.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:55)
So, 72, so this what is the answer for that. How many hectares can be very simple, if you
know that 2 meter cube tank is full of spray, the total discharge how may you get
discharge one nozzle total number of nozzles are known to you. So, 72 nozzles and this
is the discharge of total this is the value. Now, time required for this now, chemical to be
utilizes 64, because you know that how much is the discharge what you require, and howmuch is already in the tank. So, on that basis you required that is to take about 6.94
minutes just by ratio will give you.
So, the total area covered during this period, what is the area covered, because you know
the speed at which it moves. So, you should be in a position to find out, because this is
one and this is what you get the distance covered, and this is the rate at which it is
moving. So, you can get this and hence this much area. So, the answer is 72 nozzles and
this much hectare. So, if you have 2 meter tank full of spray here, it will cover about 0.42
hectares this is what it says.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:07)
Another problem a very simple problem, but then it requires you be to remember some
of  these  formulae  which  we  had  talked  of  particularly  with  respect  to  mechanical
agitation. So, this talks of mechanical agitation a round-bottom sprayer. Well this you
need to take this to be a round-bottom 1.5 meter long and has a depth of 0.9 meter. So,
mechanical  agitation  is to be provided with 4 paddles, yes 1, 2, 3, 4 paddles, 280
millimeter long, and 200 millimeter wide mounted on a shaft 150 millimeter above the
bottom of the tank.
So, this distance is known from here to get is this distance is known to you, then
calculate the minimum revolution per minute for agitating a mixture of 10 percent oil
and  90  percent  water.  And  mechanical  efficiency  of  the  power  transmission  is  90
percent, what input power would be needed for this particular agitation?Well these are already given to you. So, let us see you how do you proceed. In fact, here
hardly anything is required what you what is required, you need to remember those
empirical equation, which the researchers have found out regarding the details of the
paddles, the spacing location of the paddles, and the width etcetera. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:43)
See, so the minimum revolution per minute for agitating a mixture of 10 percent oil, 90
percent water. This is given to you already this formula is given to you. 
Sm = 5.39 ×A0.422 ×R-0.531 × fe0.293
Where: A is the depth of the tank minus location of shaft above the bottom of the tank.
So, what you get is 0.9 minus 0.15 your location of the shaft above the bottom was given
already. Then A is actually 0.75 meter.
This A is here, A is raised to 0.422 this will need to remember. R here, this R is the total
combine width of all paddle by length of the tank very important, this is raise to minus
0.531 this you need to remember. This is what you need to remember, because these are
empirical equations and they have been found out with large experimentation. So, you
need to understand this and have may be you need to remember that length of the tank.
So, this is R, which you get. So, you got R, you got A now, F e you need to get Fe, where
it is this is a value which will be available.(Refer Slide Time: 23:00)
Now, now Fe agitation factor. So, the agitation factor here F e agitation factor is taken
from the table is 0.89. If it is not given in the formula or in the problem, you need to take
from the table here. And these are maybe we had given you earlier, what is the emulsions
are there, so this had been given. So, from there you need to take them.
And put these values as you can you got for A or F e and using this, then you get S m is so
much meter per second. So, the volume of the tank V.
V = (3.14×d2/4) × L
 So, this is known to you, you can get what will be the diameter of the tank this is the
diameter of the tank. 
Sm = 3.14 × D× N
 so you know the pi, D, n, S m is already given to you here.
So,  you  should  be  in  a position  to know  how  much  the  rpm,  what  should be  the
revolution per minute. So, simple you get this revolution per minute here. So, by this you
are you can you see, this is also you can we want to clarify better with what you have we
have thought you or shared the knowledge particular with respect to sprayers and dusters
and they are details.So, with this numerical problems we are trying to clarify more details. If you have
further information, which you need to know, you will be happy to answer those at some
point of time, when it is required. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:53)
If the mechanical efficiency of the power transmission 90 percent, what input power?
Well for input power of an agitator, this also is given to you. So, you can use that R, S m,
and L. Sm is you have and you have got it already, R you have got already, and the L is
given to you.
So, using this is the one which you get from here, but mechanical efficiency is only 90
percent. So, this has to be enhanced to 90 percent. So, it comes to about 45 kW. So, the
ultimately these are the things, which we are asked of you and you have to using these
you are in a position to find out the details of the problem, which was presented to you. (Refer Slide Time: 25:45)
Let us check another problem. Well it is worth showing you this, because this is a
problem which has been talked of with respect to one aspect of the volume median
diameter. And it is very straight forward problem. Although to you once you see once
you have not seen the solution to you it will appear that, it is very difficult.
What is asked here is a manufacturer of pressure nozzles is specified that a volume
median diameter is 135 millimeter is obtained at 345 kilopascal using water. The same
nozzle  is  to  be  used  for  a  chemical  whose  surface  tension  is  a  certain  value.  So,
determine the volume median diameter droplet size, if the nozzle is to be operated at this.
Now, tension remaining same here what do you get, volume median diameter is this
which is given. Pressure of nozzle using water is given here, and surface tension is given
here, and pressure nozzle using chemical is also given here.
So, the relationship which is known to us, you should go for the relationship. If you gone
through the details of this sessions which I had earlier, then you will be able to get this.
See here how it is connected, the surface tension of the chemical is given here.
DVMchemical/DVMwater = (σchemical/73)1/2
So, they are in this relations are nothing but this with respect to these here. Now, this in
fact this is wrong this should be 1/2 here so, the value is 0.83. So, you get the valuedetermine the volume median diameter 0.83. So, let us see what else; how do you get the
details. 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:47)
So, we had got this volume median diameter VMD 1 by VMD2 this was given to you, you
might have checked. This is this is of whole actually one-three here. So, so this is what
you get, So, VMD 1 by VMD2. So, VMD1 was given to you, so VMD2 is just this is the
value.  So VMDchemical is  this  time  of VMD water. So, the volume  median  diameter  of
chemical droplet is 97.83 millimeter. This is how very simple only thing you must have
your concepts clear so far as the volume median diameters are concerned.
And I think through these four problems, what we have discussed is, we have enhanced
your knowledge related to this sprayers and the details of sprayers, what is the pressure
maintained, what is the overlap, what is the nozzles spacing, how do you test them, and
how do you find out the different parameters. You need to of course as we seen one of
the problems, you need to remember some of these empirical equations, which have been
developed by the researchers. 
So, with these four problems, we have tried to enhance your knowledge related to this.
May be you will pay of few more problems in this regard, and see that you are a very
well equipped with the knowledge rate to the spraying equipment and application part of
it. And if you have any questions, we will definitely like to answer them as and when
they come. And we close this at this point of time. Thank you very much.