Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 48
Combine Harvester
Welcome students to my lecture number 48 on Combine Harvester. In fact, if you a
undergone my earlier lecture you might have seen that have talked of the harvesting
equipment  various  types  of harvesting  equipment  for serials  root crops, fruit  crops,
vegetables, etcetera. And then I said at one point of time that combine harvester combine
means that you have various operations way for cutting then threshing and then cleaning
and then bagging. So, all these are operations which are taking together and that is why
we call this machine has combine or also known as combine harvester.
So, we would talk about this particular combine harvester. You would also talked about
suppose you have to test this such a combine, then what is the procedure you should
follow, what are the parameters that you should measure and how you should certified?
Because these machines are also available in the market and the consumer would like to
take a product which is acceptable to the farmer and which does not give a lot of losses
because the losses are one of the important parameters of this particular machines. If the
losses are very high, they will not be accepted by the consumer or the farmer here in
question.
 (Refer Slide Time: 01:41).
So, let us have a look at this combine what are its details. Well here, I would show I will
let you know that the various functions of the combine cutting, picking, windrowing, and
convey threshing, separating the seeds chaff from the straw, cleaning the the debris,
chaff and other things from the actual grains. Now process or diagram of the combine
harvester here what is the procedure? In fact, if you see that there is a reel and this reel is
the job of this reel is to bring the crop closer and then the cutter bar is there, this cutter
crops are brought together and they have the small you can see the rods and those rods
move and they try to bring the crop closer and the cutter bar is there below which will
cut and then they are convey it. 
You can see here that they conveying is actually this will go on to the threshing drum
and on dumb. Once they are threshed and let us go through the deals of the combine
harvester,  what  are  the  various  functions  of  combine?.  It includes  cutting,  picking,
windrowing conveying and then threshing separating the seeds and chaff from the straw,
cleaning  the chaff and other debris from the seed and bagging. Now  these are the
different operations which are there in this. Now we will like to have some details of this
and where they are done? In fact, this is a process diagram which is given gathering
initial gathering when the reel is there in front the reel gathers the plants and then the
cutter bar is there. So, this is the reel here then this is here the auger and there is a cutter
bar is over here then this these one for conveying, this is one for threshing. This is the
location where this is which is known as straw walker and then after this the there is a
blower here, there is a fan which will try to after harvesting and the straw will go awayfrom here and the threshed grain will fall into this and then this will be in fact that taken
and put to bag.
So, this is this is the process there more details are all given in this particular diagram.
Once you go through this diagram you will be in a position to understand each and every
aspect, but these are the details of a particular combine. So, as such as I told earlier
combine harvester is that combining several operations and functions. Now let us see
more details of this particular device and the equipment. Unit operations and relevant
losses in the combine, yes it is very important to know the whether this cutting and
gathering.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:31)
.
See  when  the  machine  is  working  in  the  field  there  are  various  losses.  Now  you
remember as I told you in the beginning that the crop must be harvested at a certain
moisture content. If the moisture content is very low; that means, the crop is very dry.
So, if there will be a losses because the moment machine touches the plant, so there will
be sheltering losses, they will just shelter.
Then their losses which will so cutting and gathering. So, during cutting and getting
there will be loss is taking place. We can check in here cutting and gathering cutting and
gathering conveying assembly known as header includes reel and cutter bar yes this is
there then headed should be adjustable to obtain height of cut very important. If the
height of cut is very much high then you need to cut this again. So, this is important Ineed  where  is  from  this  to  about  the  ranging  from  5  centimeter  to  at  least  100
centimeters. I think this is too much 100 centimeters about 1 meter or so.
But this is where is the higher side. Generally we would not like to go over 3 to 4 inches
also and it has been seen that in working condition about 15 to 20 centimeters or so.
Now, this is the reel which is there and this reel has a small if you can see this that this
reel has small bars and these bars collect the material and the cutter bar is below here,
which will cut. Now these are the other portions of the machine which we are discussed.
Let us see what are the relevant losses the losses are important at each and every aspect
let us say when a cutting takes place as I said if the cutting is not proper a moisture
content then the loss we will start just while taking a touching itself then when it is being
conveyed there will be a loss when it is and being threshed there will be losses then there
will be losses when the blower is there with the some of the good grains will go away
some of the good grains will also be on the straw walker and the straw is going along
with that if proper threshing is not done then there will be losses on that. So, these are the
losses which are relevant to the various unit operations which happened in combine.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:57).
Proper operation of the reel yes if the proper operation, if the reel will not take place as I
said then sheltering losses will take we call them shelter losses then cutter bar losses if
the cutter bar see the pots etcetera may fall on that itself. So, they will remain because
though they those could not be picked up because the crop has been cut and it has beenconveyed for thresh, but those pots and some of the grains which will be there will be
cutter bar they will be left there and maybe sometimes left in the field itself. So, there is
another loss.
 Factors affecting header loss now what are the factors have a have affecting header loss
cutting height yes at what height you are cutting this is there will be a loss which is
taking place reel position with respect to the cutter bar what is the position of the reel
many a times if the reel is not properly aligned with respect to the cutter bar then also
there will also losses taking place because when you come across the a plants there will
be deflected differently as compared to what is required. Then reel speed with respect to
the forward speed yes this is very important. In fact, we will also show you through a
problem that what is the importance of reel speed with respect to the forward speed of
travel the if they are yet not unison then you will find that the proper action is not taking
place and losses will be increasing.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:19).
So, position of the reel where is the position of the reel? In fact, as i said the position of
the reel should be at the in the front of this. Now what is important here is see optimum
reel position is determined by the crop height, this is very important what is the height of
the crop because they depending upon the variety of the crop that has been taken the
height will also very short duration varieties short height of varieties in heightening
varieties depending on the height. So, you have to be careful and amount of the straw cutand the condition of the straw. So, on the basis of this you have to position the reel with
respect to the cutter bar.
The normally the reel should be set to the to show that when in the lowest position it will
strike at least 15 to 20 centimeter above and slightly ahead of the cutter bar. This is very
important you see that normally this is what we require and why because we want that
the crop height has been taken care of the lodged crops, yes this is one of the big
problems should be set farther back. In fact, this is one of the biggest problems of the
combines or for any harvesting equipment harvesting machine.
 Because many a times just to at the time of harvesting will find that there will be a
storms sort of thing and then whole crop is completely lost and completely flat position
the field and it is very difficult. So, god forgive this situation should not come, but then
they do come sometimes and we lose lot of crops. So, for that in fact, there are specific
arrangements have to be made. In fact, some of the arrangements in the machines are
made and then their cut in such a way that we would recover most of the crop.
Now, what I was talking with respect to the reel here? I said that there has to be proper a
speed of the reel and the forward speed of the machine. Now this reel index is very
important that is why a reel index have been given here. 
Reel Index = (vr / vc)
Now this needs to be maintained. So, this value of this it is recommended that the
peripheral speed of the reel should be about 25 to 50 percent faster than the forward
speed of the machine or in other words what we say that reel index should be 1.25 to 1.5
this is what it is. So, it is very important because remember that if the reel is not there
you are simply not cutting the crop in the proper position and there are lot of losses will
take place. It is not gathering in front of the cutter bar. So, these are very important to
learn what is reel index and what should be the value maintain.(Refer Slide Time: 11:10).
Well we have it since it is a component, although we are we will be teaching threshing
separately in the second lecture lectures of today’s, but then since it forms the part of
combine. So, I have shown you here I am would like to briefly talk about this maybe
details of the design etcetera will take up later in a later session of the classes, but here
we will briefly tell you what are these are and what are the various types which are used.
See the types generally used in the combines a rasp bar cylinder type axial flow, cross
flow, and spike tooth cylinder. Now you could see that these are spike tooth cylinder
once this is given here, rasp bar type this is one which is rasp bar type and the spike
tooth. In fact, some of the you can see that the spikes which are there a rotary cutters
have. Now separation what do we how do we separate all this thing? Straw walker action
in a conventional width. What is the action of the straw walker? In fact, you can see here
that after the thresher now what is this going on here you can see these details.
. So, the separation is grain separation in combine refers to these separation of the grains
from the straw after threshing this is what is exactly is being shown here. So, when a
large percentage 72 to 90 percent of the grains are separated during threshing process
itself here itself because they were separated from the straw, but then they this process
when it is go in the straw walker that is why it is known as straw walker. In fact, there
are it is purposely made. So, that whatever is left will be separated farther types of grains
the separators are commonly used in the combines two types of grains only conventionalcombines use straw walkers and rotary combines used rotary separators. Now these will
help farther removing not much, but then we do some of the crop grains here also.
So, these are some of the other aspects of the combine which we have. We have talked of
the cutting we have talked of the reel if we have talked of the relationship between the
rotation of the reel and the forward speed of the machine then we have talked of the
threshing, then we have talked of the separation, let us see what else are the parts and
how do we understand that.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:43).
Cleaning very important, because you have got the job done, but then cleaning is very
important  because  otherwise  you  will  need  people  to  clean  that  generally  what  is
manually how people clean is once the grains are threshed. They will have blowers made
and then the whole the chaff and the grains are clean. In the machine we would like to do
this. So, how these are done? See the, this particular diagram which we have picked up
from the literature and the reference is given here. You will see that how we are trying to
create and clean it.
Cleaning refers to the final separation of the grain from the crop material, mainly chaff
and broken straw pieces are there with this. Cleaning shoe consists of two or three
oscillating  adjustable  opening  sieves  pedal  type  fan  and  blower  through  the  sieve
opening. So, that you can see here these are the this is the grain pan here, these are thefingers here, now this is the cleaner clean seed auger here then this is the trail trailing
auger and these are the adjustable flats you know here is the one which will blow.
. So, the chaff gets blown off air and the grains falls through the openings. Now this will
fall through the openings of these and those will be the other portion other portion will
be move to the outside the chaff etcetera. So, the separation occurs due to difference in
the terminal velocities of the grain and chaff material. The chaff is lighter one and this is
this. So, when the speed the blower is blowing air. So, depending upon the density or the
velocity of the grain these will fall because the grain is heavier than the chaff. So, the
chaff will be thrown off and the grain will be inside lift it and then brought to the
bagging side. So, this is the operation which takes place. A schematic diagram is shown
in  cleaning  shoe showing  and auger  bed  for  feeding  the  grain  chaff  mixture.  This
happens in the cleaning process of the combine.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:10).
Now, these are the various types of combines, it is I think worth going about this and
having a look at it. In fact, there is a question mark which you might have you would like
to ask me that why this big machines in the country like ours where 60 percent of the
people are having smaller fields less than one hectare or so. So all small fields only 10
percent of the parts are very big, but here now the economics engineering works into
play.So, you have to think of this part because then if you do not consider this economics you
will have to have a small farm farmer having a small form he will have to have 5 6
machines, see for example, he will have to have machine I might have also give a
reference of the same thing in my first lecture or so that you will have to have machines
for each and every operation, see the first operation in the preparation of the land and
second operation will be the seeding, third operation will be weeding, fourth operation
plant  protection  and  then  harvesting  threshing  and  then  bagging  etcetera  and  then
transport.
So, for each and everything he has to look for small machines and then that way you will
find that he has to have power source and even many a times these small machines will
not be that much effective even the person who would like to do it faster than that. So,
we have to be very careful about this because if he has to purchase so many machines
and to maintain them, there will be problem. Now in order that he does not have to
maintain this, but if he can rent it, he can hire these machines and get the thing done. In
fact, we will show you some of these machines, which are being operated all over the
country. In fact, from the northern belt from Ludhiana and other north of India they come
to be various parts of the country in eastern parts in West Bengal and I will show you
some of these videos which have been operated here and being operated and above 20 to
30 percent of this machines are very much popular in this area.
And so custom hiring or the concept of self help groups or you can create a group a
engineers  can come together and I have groups or maintain a setup machines  such
machines which will give you either a combine or a combine harvester or you can think
of two three machines together for a crops setting or for a crop rotation and once those
machines are there with you it is possible that you can rent and it will be easier for the
farmer, he will get without having an botheration about the about the owning of the
machine the maintenance of the machine and its shelter and then paying the insurance
and things like that he will have to just pay per unit of time and get the work done and
have their machine in have do not have the machine and have the crop bag in his
farmyard.
So, for that the various machines are available. Now I will show you what are these self
propelled multi crop combine harvester one which is available, mini combine harvester.
This is a small machines which are also available then wheel type and track type. In fact,sometimes, what happens even in West Bengal. Here we have seen that water logging is
there and the crop is ready to be harvested. So, at that time this these wheel machines
wheel type ones are very difficult to be operated.
Tractor  mounted  multicrop  combine  harvester,  now  there  are  machines  which  are
available and some of the manufacturers in Ludhiana and other parts in Northern belt
there are there and they have the combines which are tractor mounted they are mounted
on to the tractor and taking power from there for the operation of the whole system.
Then track type combines yes as I said the track type combines if are very popular now a
days because of the slashing conditions of the field and as I said in particularly in West
Bengal we have seen that because at the time when the crop is ready for harvesting you
will find that the whole field is filled. So, this is not possible. So, these machines have
worked very well and in fact, as I said earlier they are very much being taken on custom
hiring basis.
 (Refer Slide Time: 20:56)
.
Now, let us have a look at the operation of these machines. Now you see this machine
this is being operated in one of the farmers in West Midnapore,  West Bengal near to IIT
Kharagpur and we have taken this video from a to let you know that this is being
operated in our country and people are using it and then custom hiring basis. These
machines have been brought from you from Ludhiana and there being operated in thefield and it is cheaper for them. In fact, on a minute basis because as I said the machine
the area is very small; so, on a minute basis they pay.
So, if he this job is done in 20 minutes you will pay for 20 minutes accordingly. So, by
minute is the cost that they charge for working these such machines and its worth having
look at the operation of such machines you can see this how they are being operated and
there is absolutely no problem the farmer faces. So, you can see the front side wheel and
see at the back and then the details of falling at this details of this whole machine, you
can see all the operations being taken place.
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:56)
.
 Let us have operation of this wheel type mini combine. So, wheel type mini combine
you see the operation here, this is a small machine and its operation is well except will,
because he is less farmer who can afford he will be invocation to get this, but this is a
wheel type. So, if the condition is better in this there is no problem here, but if the field is
slushy and even some ponding of water is there then you will require different type of
machine and I will show you and we would have track type such machines are also there.
So, this sieve it is being operated very near to IIT Kharagpur and that is why I have this
videos here for your, I mean visual appreciation that look this machines are available.
So, those who are not agriculture engineers if they will look at this they will know that
these machines are available and those who are there agricultural engineers they will try
to appreciate the principles behind which they are there and what is the economics ofworking with these machines. You can see that all the bagging are details are there you
can have a look at this , all the operations are being done you can see the hips being
created and kept in the field.
 (Refer Slide Time: 24:30)
.
Now, let us see the track type one. Operation of the track type one, you can see the big
tracks are there have a look at these tracks; you can see the tracks and see you can see the
whole area. In fact, you can see at various locations this is the case of West Bengal
where people see that mechanization is not reached the mechanization about I can say
that about 20 to 25 percent of the farmers are using these machines and maybe many
have purchase, many have using it, these are custom hiring basis, many are using the
ones which has come from other locations in the country.(Refer Slide Time: 25:15).
The performance of the combine harvester now, as I told that you should be also in a
position to understand that what are these machines and how they can be they tested? So,
what are the details of this if you are asked to test the details of these machines when you
will have to go about this information’s in the combine capacity, what is the capacity of
the combine. You must measure the capacity of the combine find out what is the feed
rate  etcetera  and  at  what  are  the  different  types  of  losses,  what  are  the  various
efficiencies like cleaning efficiency how clean the task is what is the field efficiency,
how much hectare per hour it is doing and then what is the threshing efficiency, etcetera,
what are thresh grains? So, these are the some of the important information’s which are
essential.(Refer Slide Time: 26:11).
Feed rates, what are the different feed rates you must know? Grain feed rate the material
other than grain feed rate what is that feed rate if is a very I mean these details you will
have to measure you will have to record and then put it to the person who has given this
for testing. Total feed rate you will have to see what is the total feed rate some of the
grain feed rate and the materials other than grain feed rate. So, total feed rate also will be
essential and you should be in a position to inform the person who has given you.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:47).
Then losses is a very important. In fact, the machines are rejected and accepted on the
basis of the losses. So, the Bureau of Indian standards have put a check on this that
maximum combine losses should not be more than 2.5 percent for rice, wheat, and gram
and 4 percent for soybean. Now this is the limiting value the maximum value of losses
which you taken. So, that is why the manufacturer have to get it tested and see that their
losses total losses are maintaining or being complied with the with these values these
data.  The  collectable  losses  what  are  the  losses  happening  which  could  have  been
collected for example, the header grain loss the from the thresher unthreshed damaged
grains etcetera then from the cleaning unit, grading unit then the some of the header loss,
shoe rack loss, secondary blower losses yeah. These are the locations where the losses to
take place.
So, if the manufacturer has to take care of all the details and see that we do not lose the
crop then the processing losses it will be loss of grain terms in terms of the damage
which are there unthreshed threshed obtained after completion of the threshing and all
that. So, these are the different types of losses which was one must keep in mind and
keep a record of this if he has to certify a particular device.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:16).
Ah the header loss very important, cylinder lost what are the losses which on the thresh a
cylinder losses take place, the rack losses and the shoe losses. Now these are the losses
which whom the manufacturers when they give and the engineer you would be interestedto measure this record this and then put in a tabular form and then you give your
signature that this is the machine on which this is the parameter on which this machine is
acceptable not acceptable and things like that.
So, I can say that in this lecture we have just talked about the basics of a combine
harvester. What are the various unit operations which happen in a combined harvester?
What are the importance of each and every operation and the and the component which
is there, what sort of losses do take place and where one as an engineer should be careful
about that, what are the values which you should maintain while increasing or decreasing
the forward is field of the machine because you have to maintain a reel index and things
like that. So, I think we have taken care of the harvesting with respect to the combine
harvesters and the smaller harvesters for cereal the root crops, fruit crops, etcetera and
well you might have several questions in your mind which we can always answer as and
when required and look forward to your other queries.
Thank you very much.