Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 45
Advanced Level Spraying Equipment: Drone Assisted Variable Rate Chemical 
Application System and Electrostatic Sprayer
Well students, welcome to the lecture number 45 wherein we want to tell you about
another  Advanced  Level  Spraying  Equipment  which  we  have  developed  at  IIT,
Kharagpur and which has lot of application now and being talked of in several aspects of
its application which is Drone Assisted Variable Rate Chemical Application System. At
the same time we have also talked of electrostatic sprayer because when we are talking
of the deposition efficiency on that then there is a question mark of the sprayers many a
times  because  of  the  wind  etcetera.  So,  in  order  to  see  that  the  deposition  of  the
chemicals at the right target is enough and good quality then only the effectiveness of the
chemical spray will take place. So, we will discuss in this particular session drone
assisted technology as well as electrostatic sprayer.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:09)
.
Now, what is drone? Of course, you know that this is also a robot. What are the details of
that? You can see that this is one which I have shown you here and this is the drone here.
Now, what where are they applications and where it is? See it is used for crop yield. So,you can used for crop yield monitoring, you can find out for spreading, if you want to
spread certain items you can just carry that and spread wherever you want. You want to
map certain things then you can take a photograph of that and you can map the whole
information then crop monitoring you can monitor the crops details of growth etcetera
then the animal monitoring if you have animals etcetera at one location you want to
check whether they are. So, you can get that. 
Variable rate fertilizers what is the level of fertility of that if you want to measure and if
you want to see in this possible to do. Then diagnosis of diseases well, diagnosis of
diseases are also through this is possible and then water stress if there is water stress at
some location it is possible to use this drone application and then find out. So, as such it
has various application, let us have a look at more benefits of this
(Refer Slide Time: 02:35)
Drone assisted a variable rate chemical application. Well, so we saw what we can do
here? So, the chemical frequently needed to kill insects and growth in agriculture, we
know these things, we have discussed all this that to there would there is a requirement
of the chemicals at some places, when we want this.
So, what are the essentials of that when you have a look at the essentials, which are
indicated in this diagram here. See it could be mobile app information that we want to
give and this is the spraying drone which is over here and the health monitoring which is
possible and then the image processing. So, you should have a camera, which will do theimages and that those can be processed at the location. And the position control, what is
the position of this.
So, with these details of the systems which can be put together for the drone, it will it
will give us or it will help us in locating a place, then getting certain information, getting
back to us that information can be processed. And then after processing, it necessary
requirement or necessary job, necessary task can be carried out with the help of the same
vehicle.
Now, this UAV which we which we call as Unmanned Aerial Vehicle also, this is
operated by manual flight plans and the sprayer is manual triggered by RF controlled
Nozzles. Now, this is one way that means, you can control from a distance. Now, it is
possible that you have different sizes of this, which we call as payloads.
So, varying sizes of payloads of this could be designed and all that. But then, it will be
better, if you design as per the requirement and the in a country like ours, where 60
percent of the area is about and less than 1 hectares. So, one has to think of small such
devices which can do the job at in short distances, at the same time in arduous places
also a hill regions where people cannot reach. So, such devices may help us a lot.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:05)
The various benefits of this aerial spray; what are the various benefits? See we have just
dotted down here. You can see that it can treat crops faster than ground machines, yes.Then quick and timely application, it is possible. No yield loss due to wheel tracks, if
they if it is there.
Then no direct contact prevents spreading of the disease, because these are all aerial, we
said aerial spraying, when we are doing from the top that these are not in contact. No soil
compaction, you are not if you have a vehicle, which is going in between, then it will
compact the soil, which is not happening. Applications are not limited by wet soil. So, if
the soil is wet or if flooding has taken place and you want to do some spraying, it is
possible, you can use this device and do it.
So, these are benefits of this aerial spraying and that way this particular device has been
used in large applications in even in defense and in the markets in other requirements,
policy and all this various application. So, we want to take this technology and to use it
in agriculture for our spraying or for a identification of the disease and take care of the
health of the crop, which we have put. So, this is an attempt, which has been made in this
direction.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:31)
Methodology  of  aerial;  what  is  the  methodology  followed  in  this  case?  See  image
acquisition and pre-processing. You need to first you have to take the image of what you
want to do or what is the basic thing, the image has to be taken. Supposing we are at one
corner of a field and then you want to know what is the infestation level or what is the
disease which has happened and at what locations. So, accordingly you need to get theimages, maybe it is difficult to reach at those locations. So, you will have this drone will
then go at that location through the GPS, we should be able to locate there and then it
will take the images.
And then pre-processing, it will do some pre-processing. Take multi-spectral images,
capture data and filter them by processing. So, what it can do? See airborne camera can
take multiple multi-spectral images; it can take multi-spectral images, capturing the data
and then filtering them by processing. So, these job which it can do initially. So, we take
the image and pre-processing, it can do at that location.
Then  it  needs  to  image  segmentation.  This  image  needs  to  segmented  for  our
requirement that is see partitioning of a digital image into multiple segments and then
assigning a level to every pixel. Because, then we should be able to understand what is
the level of pixel of that, what type of image it is and how we can process this image for
our information and assess the level of infestation or whatever that has happened to it.
Then feature extraction, what are the features. Then extracting the features such as the
shape, the contours, the colors the textures, the intensity, the homogeneity, the corners all
details. These are very important. Features extraction, how will you extract that means,
you need to process information in such a way that you are in a position to identify once
the images are in front of you as a designer as an engineer.
So, what is the shape of that, what is the contour, what is the color and what are the
texture of that, what is the intensity of that, which has happened maybe if infected, how
much  is  there,  whether  it  is  homogeneous  or  not,  whether  it  is  erratic  or  only  at
impatches all these details, you can get. You can identify the corners, where the corners
are, then classification all or recognition of this that may refining the features using
genetic  algorithm  or  optimization  algorithms.  Now,  you  will  write  to  refine  this
information that you have got. And then decision making; guiding the sensor and the
vehicle to spray or monitor accordingly.
So, this is the process methodology which is for aerial spraying. You see the image has
to be taken, it has to be pre-process. Then segmentation of image has to be done for
understanding. Then features have to be extracted that means, we have to understand
what is fought by which features we understand that this point is a corner of feet or it is ashape of that or the talks of the color and things like that and then classification and
recognition of this.
And once you have done this, then you will take a decision, has to what is to be done,
whether  chemical  has  to  be  sprayed  at  what  quantity  and  at  what  rate  and  what
frequency. Now, those decisions you will make.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:09)
Identification  of infested zone in a crop field; now, how will you do this, see this
particular concept is given here to understand. You have the drone here, you have the
drone here. Now, the NIR camera is here, storage of images along with position, now
you need to store the images. The processing of the images have to be done.
And then the GPS receiver there, this is through you can say that drone and GPS receiver
are in unison. And then the information which has from the camera it is getting and the
location it is identifying that these two information comes to and then images are along
with the position, there is stored. And after is storing, the images are process, as we have
seen what are the different steps which are done. So, this is process.
And once this process we find out a certain parameter is certain index by which we
should be able to categories what is the intensity level, what of the infestation which has
taken or what we want to identify. If you want to identify that there are weeds or if we
want to find out that there non-weeds or whatever that we are interested in, so in thatcase, this NDVI index, one index we have been normalized difference vegetation index.
This  has  been  this  field  mapping  based  on  this  has  to  be  done.  Now,  this  is  the
identification of the infested crop in the field crop. This is the process, which we need to
follow.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:53)
Chemical sprayer block diagram. Now, what is the; this is also shown to you that what is
the block diagram of this system, which is taking place here. See the controller is there,
which will have the information with regard to GPS, the stability of the controller, then
altitude and then motor speed control. These are important, which will be the controller
side and then the spray side. Then what is it, the after the controller has taken care of all
the details of the location of that, then the features have been extracted and distance have
been taken the accordingly, then spray mechanism has to be directed. So, we have the
tank status; what is the tank, what is the speed control of the spraying then what is the
pump location, whether it is on or off? Now, this part is done. So, two aspects, one is the
controller part of is, second part is the spraying part of it.
So, this chemicals sprayer block diagram has been various it has been shown to you to
capture in your mind that what are the things, which take place. You have the controller
and you have this. Now, you before that you know that way in know with the location, so
for that GPS, you have to have the image for that camera is required, pre-processing of
image with respect to the position. And then accordingly, you will take a decision withregard to what it is, what is the intensity etcetera. And then this spray mechanism to do
the needful and it will do it. So, this talked of the chemical sprayer block diagram. A
simple way which is explained, which you can follow.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:37)
Aerial spraying mechanism; what is this aerial spraying mechanism? Well, if the same
thing has been put it slightly in another way, the see the micro controller see the signals
from  the  receiver,  see  microcontroller,  then  the  tank  of  the  status  monitoring
microcontroller.
Then there will be a buzzer depending upon what is the what you want to identify
through this buzzer, whether you want to say that the chemical is not there, or you want
to give some instruction or whatever through this. Then the motor driver, the motor will
be given, motor driver will try to drive the pump, because then this will this is the in fact,
keep the power to the water pump to operate.
And then the splitter that means, it will talk of this will split into the nozzle and the other
nozzle on two sides. Because, we have the pump here on splitter here, definitely we will
talk of the solenoid valves etcetera, which will in fact, talk of which side the chemical
will go and all that nozzles. So, this is the aerial spray mechanism which is there in
nutshell. As we have discussed about the chemical spring there and the aerial spray
mechanism as such which takes place.(Refer Slide Time: 15:03)
The variable rate chemical application system for drone assisted sprayer. Now, the whole
thing has been put here again, now you just see how these some more details are there.
You can see here the GPS, fine; you have the microcontroller, yes; and the variable rate
controller, it will like to control this.
Now, what do you need here, what is our requirement, our requirement is this NDVI,
because we would like to maintain a certain NDVI with respect to our task, so that NDVI
index  receiver  is  here.  So,  this  needs  to  be  decoded  and  then  it  will  go  to  is
microcontroller, which will again inform or try to say that there is should be a variation
in the rate of the controller. Then it will go to the actuator and then ultimately the it will
go to spray nozzle.
Now, of course the transmitter, which will talk of the ground station and then image
processing etcetera, has to be done. So, as you have seen that the rate the variable
chemical application is taking with respect to the NDVI. If you find that the NDVI is up
to mark or not accordingly, then you need to change this variable rate through the
instruction of the microcontroller and then the spray nozzle will as soon give you the
amount.
Therefore, this quantification of vegetation by measuring the difference between the
near-infrared and the red light this thing details that means,NDVI = (NIR-RED) / (NIR+RED)
This difference upon NIR + red this is this is the way we defined that means, this NDVI,
in fact always will vary between minus 1 to plus 1. So, these values are known.
Now, this values once they are known actually, then you are in a position to code or
decode with respect through the microcontroller and talk to the spray nozzle as to what is
to be done, how much is to be given. Accordingly, you can maintain the variable rate or
you can decide the rate change etcetera.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:23)
Initial prototype development as so, we developed at IIT Kharagpur, we developed a
small prototype about 500 gram payloader and so on. And we would like to show you
this the working of this here, the details are you can have the details here in the system.
The flight controller is over there, then there is a air pump, then there is a carbon fiber,
then the air frame, then the spraying nozzles, which is which is given here, then the
pesticide tank which is connected and the brushless motor or CF propeller. So, these are
the propellers or the three propellers. And all details are shown you over here. Now, let
us have a look at how it works.(Refer Slide Time: 18:17)
Now you can see that this is very small one about 500 grams payload capacity, we will
just tested, because the aim is to make a small is possible, which will be in a position for
the farmers small, who can use this. Here is spraying and showing you whether there is
spray can which is coming out of this, this is being controlled. And the distance you can
vary above the ground as well as the in the horizontal direction.
You can see very small system, which is working. And we are working on more details
of this and we want that such small systems can be prepared for small plots maybe in a
radius about 50 meters and you can see how cheap such units can be fabricated, which
can be used by the farmers. This further work is going on this.(Refer Slide Time: 19:41)
Now, the another aspect which we wanted to discuss here is the electrostatic sprayer. In
fact, long back people had tried above electrostatic sprayer, but those times in fact,
because of the difficulties of the wires and then electricity availability and the safety
aspects because of all those things, it was simply difficult for the people to continue with
the electrostatic sprayers.
But now, because of the modern technology coming to play and availability of the a
wireless items available, this has become very easy and we are in a position to use this.
And some of the even manufacturers  have come out with some of the electrostatic
sprayers. Now these as we can know that these sprayers may be manual carried spraying
equipment  is  there but then you have to have some sort of safety, which must be
provided to the operator.
Now, it works on the very simple aspects of Coulomb’s law electrostatics sprayer. Here
we have nothing but the force of the charge q experiences  such as this. So, is the
electrical field here. So, the q is positive, force in the same direction as the field; if q is
negative, the force in the above direction.
Now, on this basis itself, you are in a position to create the electric field, what we want is
charge these particles, these spray particles, which are there, if they are charge. Now,
why they were so much in fact tried earlier and why there was demand for such an things
earlier and because of the difficulties we have we did not continue on these.The beauty is that when the particles are charge is greater deposition efficiency very high
deposition efficiency of 90 to 98 percent you get for the particles on the target, which is
not possible in the earlier case or which is slightly lesser than that. So, in order to
increase deposition efficiency what will happen is that you are chemical will be less, at
the  same  time  the  effectiveness  of  the  chemical  will  be  very  much.  So,  such  as
electrostatic sprayers are beneficial from that count and efforts are in various direction in
order to do this and they come out with efficient and good units, which can be used.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:29)
Working of electrostatic sprayers; how do the work, actually we need to look into this
here. See atomized droplets pass an electro electrode inside the nozzle. So, negatively
charged electrons are attached to the droplets, this is what. See while we discuss in fact,
you we have given you here this right up, so that it will help you in understanding the
details of that when you go through the video. Maybe while we are talking, you may
forget and that is why we have given you some right of here, which is what I have told.
So, the electrostatic charge, though safe, pulls the spray towards the plant 75 times
greater than the force of gravity. So, this is the beauty of that. So, if this particles will fall
on the ground, but then with this electrostatic charging, they will fall on to the targets
and the deposition will be better.
The droplets will reverse direction and move against gravity to coat and even hidden
surfaces; this is which is important. What happens is many a times in this canopy,sometimes we will find that the sets or press or there underneath the chemical sorry
underneath the plants and the chemical does not go up to that many a times,, but this
technology  helps  us  in right deposition at that  location.  So, the negatively  charged
droplets are carried in an stream towards the surface. Since, the surface has a natural
positive charge, the droplets are magnetically charged to the surface attached. So, they
get attracted and then this. So, this is the beauty of this system.
Well what was of the problem earlier, in fact it was because of the voltage and because
of the electric wire etcetera being carried and the electricity availability in the field and
all that because of which of these did not take off earlier. But now, they have come back
and because of many wireless systems available these are being taken as I told earlier.
Now, charging of spray. What do we do here then there are three ways to charge the
liquid to reduce the drift, yes, it must be told. So, here the aim is that you are not
allowing the chemical particles or dismiss to get a drifted away. And the that way even if
there is a wind slight wind, it will not affect this to that extent. Well if you if you say that
this will not affect it all means is slightly wrong, but then to some extent. But otherwise,
if there is high wind, all these things will not work. But, then we can say that this
charging helps in deposition grater deposition.
So, the three one is that 5 to 20 kilovolt induction charging of conductive liquids; then
ionized  charging  of conductive  or non conductive  liquids,  which  requires  30 to 70
kilovolt; and then direct charging of semi conductive liquids about 40 to 50 kilo volts.
So, these are the three ways to charge the liquid to reduce the drift. So, this is a way one
can do.
So, what we are seeing here is that electrostatic sprayer is a prospect we which can be
taken up and small units can be fabricated and made for a small farmers which you
which will be within their which this is one aspect, which can be looked into. And
manufacturers have come out with some of the units are still long way to go.(Refer Slide Time: 26:27)
Knapsack electrostatic spinning spraying disc now. Advantages we see here, we wanted
to  explain  to  you  the  knapsack  electrostatic  spinning  disc  and  the  advantage  of
electrostatic  spraying.  Now,  this  is  worth  showing  you  here  because  then  you  will
understand what are the advantages, which we get through a particular unit and what we
do not get.
See knapsack electrostatic spinning disc is what you get the electrode potential is 1.2
kilovolt, the spinning disc revolution is this much about 2000 to 3000 rpm and spray
charge is so much micro coulomb. The and then flow rate is 50 milliliter per minute,
mean droplet size 160 micrometer and the actual capacity is something of this capacity
of this spray takes place.
Now, advantage of electrostatic spraying. What are the advantage; in fact, I said that
there are several advantage of such things, it will definitely increase the deposition
efficiency. So, reduction in drift, yes no doubt about it, increasing the penetration into
the canopy. Yes, this is what where is the biggest advantage, where you get, because it
can go and catch the insects, which are under the leaf.
In fact, I might have told you earlier that generally spraying is done in the early hours,
morning hours and then afternoon, later afternoon, so that the insects are come onto the
upper surface of the leaf. Otherwise, if you put in daytime and when the temperature isvery high that they will be underneath and then you can spray, but still it will not be
effective, they will not be killed.
Reduce the amount of required pesticides by 30 percent. Yes, this is another thing. When
the efficiency is higher, when deposition efficiency is higher, then definitely you will
require less amount. The deposition of liquid is enhanced by 2 to 3 fold, the deposition,
yes  I  was  talking  of  this  deposition  only  by  this  message  using  under  the  same
conditions, yes we under the same condition.
Now, electrostatic sprayer saves the overdose as well as chemical consumption and thus
preventing from the environmental pollution, good yes. So, we can say that by this
methodology,  we  are  in  a  position  to  exactly  cover  all  the  targets  and  then  you
economize  on  the  chemical  and  also  the  it  will  not  fall  into  the  soil  and  hence
environmental pollution can be also taken care of.
So, by these two technology which I discussed, one is about drone, the other is about this
electrostatic sprayer. I think these you as the student; you would like to venture more
into these and try to use your knowledge to design such equipment and small equipment
as much as possible. And you can think of having indigenous designs for such things and
I think this will help you in helping the industry and also helping the country.
Well I think I have tried to explain to you all facets of electrostatic spraying, other
spraying, the drone spraying, we have talked of the different sizes of the sprayers and all
that. And we have covered everything. Even then, I am sure you might have questions at
various stages, which we would like to answer as and when they come. So, for the time
being, we will we would like to close this.
Thank you very much.