Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 56
Machinery for Land Drainage, Land Reclamation and Estate Maintenance Part-II
Welcome students for my lecture number 56. You might have heard my earlier lecture in
which  I  talked  of  the  Machines  for  Land  Drainage,  Land  Reclamation  and  Estate
Maintenance Machines. Now I discuss that there are we have kept these in different parts
and the second part which I will be dealing now. Well here we would like to see some of
the specific machines which have been used for some specific requirements.
It is essential for you to know that these many a times we talk of what exactly is this land
drainage and then land reclamation as I said and estate maintenance. Land drainage is
one which is very important when you are talking of irrigation equipment and you are
doing irrigation sometimes so, much of water comes that you would like to drain that
water otherwise the crop will simply get inundated the field and then even the crop
which is there either it is a bush crop or it is a cash crop or whatever.
So, in order that we should have machines which will drainage or which will remove the
water as  and when required. So, for that we have machines  which called  drainage
machines, sometimes  we would like machines  that they should make holes because
sometimes we are talking of orchard plantations, at that time we would like that number
of holes will be created of a certain size. So, we would have certain machines for that.
Now with these background I think let me go through the lecture which I have prepared
for you and we will have more discussion as and when we come to that.(Refer Slide Time: 01:55)
Well what is estate maintenance this is one subject which you as an agriculture engineer
may be you would say that where is the relevance of that, but I think it has a great
relevance here. Because we are a process of preserving and extensive area of land this is
what the estate maintenance.
The requirement of estate maintenance machinery what are the requirements. See we
have observed down I think it is worth going through it for time being so, that at least
you understand what exactly we mean by these see the heavy pulls. Supposing, you are
trying to use this then for a stone clearance lot of stones are there you would like to clear
those things, for cutting and scrubbing or clearing of the materials for you would like
that something has to be done for this.
Then  flail  hedge  and  verge  trimming  you  might  it  will  required  sometimes  maybe
trimming of the trees, some of them trimming of short bushes maybe some of hedges
which are where you would like to clean them for that you would require. As I told you
earlier hole digging maybe you will require holes for plantations.
So, level of plantation you would require at different sizes and all so you drag that
machines  for that fencing yes fencing post many a times  we require fencing posts.
Because when we have to do fencing of that, there also you require heavier posts and
those holes need to be made. Now it is once we are talking of mechanization we have tohave machines which will do these operations very fast and that is why it is essential that
we must use these machines instead of going for manual.
And as such there is no point talking of manual as such because the people are not
available and digging a hole even if for two feet or three feet hole it will require a lot of
time of a human being and the equipment sometimes some of the equipment which it is
not possible.
That is why we need to get the right kind of machines and with right kind of power
source for clearing and doing the job at the fastest time that we can do. Road sweeping
and slurry clearance sometimes it is also possible that sometimes slurry of the refuse of
power plants or some other things when you require and need to do.
And sweeping of the roads may be sometimes lot of say because of the storm etcetera
when the bushes or when the trees fall into that, maybe you will require machine for
clearing that. So, you can talk of road sweeping when it virtually cleaning of that so
these are the requirements of estate maintenance machinery; what are the types which are
available.
Well we will show you what are these, but then have a list of these. For example, the
tractor winches which are required sometimes when you want to pull the bigger logs of
food and all that and you will require these winches which are connected one location
and then there pulled by the heavy power machinery.
I will show you the tractor operatory stone pickers some of these stones which are there
we need to pick the bigger ones could be there and we need to clean and we will need to
pick up that. Rotary slashers; see sometimes on the air a tract or the maybe that lawns or
gardens, we would like to maintain a certain coverage of growth of grass not that very
high. So, for that we have machines which are known as a rotary slashers.
Then the rotary cutters maybe they are the these could be called cutters as well when
there is slightly higher this thing, then post hole digger as I said that for digging the holes
you there known as post hole digger tractor mounted towing trolley.
Sometimes you would like to carry maybe about 150-200 kg of material. And in short
duration of time in less location and less place then such trolleys are also useful to us wehave these machines and we would like to have a look that you should appreciate where
there used and how they are used.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:27)
See the tractor winches as I told you that these machines are very much essential for
example, you see here that these are the wood logs which are there.
Now, they are connected in fact, through this rope arrangement through this they are to
the power source they are very much connected you can see here that they are connected
they connected here. And these are the places where they have been tied down because
this is otherwise it is not possible to carry these.
So, these are used for very heavy pull you are trying to pull this heavy size of logs or to
certain extent or to some location or you would like to pull them and then later on they
can be lifted on the some of the towards and can be lifted to another location or put into
trucks for transportation etcetera it is possible. Then winch what are the components of
this? See the winch drum this is these winch drum which is here which has been shown
here.
Then the wire ropes as I showed told you that these are the wire ropes which are there
these locations because these are very strong. And mind you that these ropes are proper
designed ropes these ropes are just not any rope which can be used, because on the basis
of the strength of this itself is the load which you have here you will be pulled.Otherwise even if we per the tractor is of a high horsepower and you do not have these
ropes which are strong enough they will not be able to pull this. So, we have the winch
drum on both the locations here and the other details. So, this is one equipment which is
used for clearing the ground. Now, in the series of this we are telling you what are the
things which are used and let us see what are other things which have been used.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:25)
Tractor operated stone picker well you could see here that the stones were there and now
you these need to be picked up because it is essential that it is not possible to broom
them off and all that and many a locations these stones need to be removed for clearing
the ground or for making the hole location acceptable and to the requirement of the job,
which is planned for the future. So, this is used for a stone picking yes and definitely as
the name suggests then what are it is components the various components of this well it
is connected you can see that these connected due to the tractor over here and it is simply
pulled here.
Hydraulic system yes it has to be hydraulic system power or hydraulic power which has
to be used as I told you earlier. And it was very nice that we introduced you the hydraulic
circuit which has which was told you earlier.
Because this is the one which will be required quite often in all these a heavy machinery
wherever is chase whether you are talking of lifting cranes bigger cranes which are lifted.
Which are lifting some of the you can see there some of the used material sometimeswhen there is accidents you might find bigger cranes which are used, sometimes cranes
are used for lifting people to locations and remove them from some of the problems
which has take place particularly if someone say the fire has taken place and there you
would like to remove people.
So, some of these things which will be required so rotary picking and then collecting unit
this is a rotary unit which picks and then collect collection and these corrections will be
put at one location and then later on you can be these can be pulled and discharged at one
location. The various specifications of the one which as shown over here are the width is
about 150 centimeters 1.5 meter.
The speed at which these are to be taken well this is 10 to be speed which is given from 3
to 6 because many a times when the when it is very heavy there you will require that
lower a speed, but that it has to be pulled and then if these stones are stronger smaller.
Then maybe up to 6 kilometer 7 kilometers can be used minimum rock diameter 5
centimeter well this has hardly any meaning although out of literature if you find such
things are there. But then this does not have any meaning as such what exactly is
required is we need to remove those boulders or a small stones which are there mean
they need to be picked up and then they need to be removed.
So, as such definitely we will talk of a size it is not that we are talking of very big ones,
but if you can look at these you will find that yes this is required for such work. And
hence a minimum and maximum situation is given for such machine. If the is a very big
boulder maybe it will be of the size of this then definitely we are not talking of lifting or
picking such a thing. So, there is a relevance of giving this minimum and maximum size
of the rock or the stones which are to be picked.(Refer Slide Time: 11:55)
Well rotary slasher actually as I said for grass and weed cutting many a times as such
when we call of weeds particularly more relevance in a crop field. But then when you are
talking of grasses you see when we are talking of grasses we are talking of maintenance
of lawn maintenance of an aircraft landing say place etcetera. Or any orchard which is
there and where lot of grasses are there in between the in a plants or the bushes we would
like to clean.
Now, what are the different components of this well the components are simple. In fact,
this is a tractor drawn unit and it has this particular unit where we have beneath this we
have the rotary blades which are there. So, as connected via you can see here that the
PTO and the, from this is a Cardan shaft which is used and on both sides through this
PTO is a hooks joint.
So, this joints are connected and then it comes to this gearbox be here. So, a certain
speed we are getting from the PTO and that speed is you can say manipulated to get the
right kind of a speed which is required for this particular RPM of this. So, we are getting
about 540 RPM or depending upon what we have for the tractor which is there. So, about
and there are two blades in this maybe we will show you the operation of this now and
you will be a then you can appreciate what it is.
There is a guard here yes this is important so that sometimes when this cutting maybe
that the stones etcetera which are there may fly off and it may hit the people or thepersons if somebody’s around. So, that is why there is a proper guard is there and also
for whatever cut material is there will cut material will not be thrown off into the air, but
it will because these are meant for actually you can say carpet like maintenance.
For the grass which is there these are not meant for very heavy tall grasses maybe 3-4
feet or so. For them in fact we use the flame watts which are having actually about one
and one and half feet chains and those chains are useful for cutting of the those taller
ones, but these are meant for a carpet sort of a operation and carpeting of the grasses. So,
these are you can say the finer ones and more sophisticated and sort of used for such
equipment we may like to give you a operation of this.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:55)
So, you can have you can see that this you see here that Cardan shaft is rotating taking
power from the PTO there and this is the  whole slasher, here below this we have the
blades which are there two blades are there in this. And the rotary blades which are there
and at the end the blades are connected we will see the operation of this when it will
starts moving yes it is started moving.
Now, you can see that the carpet virtually you can see here that what is the type of grass
which has been created. Now you do not know even where is the grass which goes
maybe once these are removed you will find that proper lines are there on the two sides
here. There are lines which can be easily corrected because it is simply topping off youare simply topping off the grass which is there you can see the condition which has been
met.
And well the grass is near the blades need to be taken care of properly sharpening of the
blades is important. And you can see that where are those locations where the whole
thing is in operation now; well this is what a rotary slasher is and it is meant for certain
specific purposes such for operation it takes power from the PTO of the tractor. We
know the PTO of power is about 540 RPM and in fact, you know that the maximum
power we get from the PTO. So, better utilization of the power of the tractor is done
through such machines if they are utilized for a longer duration of time. So, better
matching could be this equipment which are used.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:49)
The  rotary  cutters  or  boom  mowers  sometimes  we  would  like  that  the  whole  tree
sometimes streaming of the trees are required. And maybe it is not possible that people
can go on top of this and then trim it, but then these machines are available and these
machines can do the job of trimming.
Well here these are as such it is written here you can have a look at this is used for
overgrown and neglected hedges to reduce them to the reasonable proportion. Well either
to maintain the beauty of that area or to see that they do not fall into the electrical lines
and all that which may come into picture. And that is why you can see here that they are
meant for cutting and trimming of the plants bigger plants.The component  regardless of what you have the hydraulic machinery  the hydraulic
system is definitely one of these and you should know. So, I would like to tell you here
that hydraulic system you must be very clear and good knowledge about the hydraulic
system, when you are talking of or you are thinking of even changing or design or
designing a new type of equipment for any earthmoving machinery or for such tasks like
trimming of the trees or even for harvesting of some of the fruits.
We are talked in one of the lectures about harvesting of fruits if you want that may be
that the hydraulic system will be used and the person can go closer and then harvest
those fruits. So, that they don’t fall and if they fall the quality will be deteriorated.
So, even for that you would definitely require the hydraulic system here and which takes
power from the tractor itself. Now the maximum reach horizontal you is 5.5 meter and
maximum reach vertical 4.8. Now these are some of the important things which are to be
taken into consideration depending upon the size of the tractor that you have size by
mean the power of the tractor.
And then also the CG of this tractor see depending upon the CG of this which is very
important. So, you cannot go as high as possible see that is why there is a cap on the
vertical and the horizontal distances, otherwise there is every chance that this particular
machinery will topple the CG will change because they are narrow track machines.
And therefore it is very essential to maintain this maximum reaches in the horizontal and
vertical  direction  very,  very  important.  Well  other  guards  are  definitely  important
because until unless you have the guards maybe that whatever is being cut will be thrown
and then it will thrown on to maybe the chips could come onto the person itself who is
involved in the system or sideways or it may be thrown off onto the atmosphere or to
other locations and scattered everywhere. So, we would like that this sort of things must
be taken care of carefully and understood before they are being used for your purpose.(Refer Slide Time: 20:15)
Well another thing which I said earlier is the post hole digger this is one equipment
which  is  very  extensively  used  in  most  of  the  operations  particularly  for  orchards
development and different types of plantations which we want to have.
Because as I said making a hole of about 4 inches 5 inches diameter or 6 inch in diameter
and about 50 centimeter, 60 centimeter depth is not easy. You require some of the
equipment which manually it is very, very tough and that is why these equipment which
is known a post hole digger is one which is very commonly used.
Now, it takes power you can see here that it takes power from the PTO of the tractor see
here this is from PTO of the tractor it is taking the power under connected to the 3 point
linkage here. And a see this is power here and this is a particular blade you can say that
which will have certain diameter because in this is, in the form of a auger you must have
seen augers.
So, they keep on moving and this will once I show the operation  of this you will
appreciate that yes the these augers actually churn out the material as they go down while
giving a certain force of this and take the material and then ultimately this comes out.
So, the this specifications of this so the telescopic shaft definitely we have a telescoping
shaft as I told you here and both sides just like the earlier one. Since we are taking power
from the tractor PTO this is the only method you have to have a Cardan shaft or atelescopic shaft which can be extended now telescopic shafts particularly. So, they can
be extended depending upon the length that is why it is telescopic here it can you can see
here that you can increase the length. And the connection here to here is through the
universal hooks joint which is employed and this is the digger the digging blade which is
there.
The auger length is varying length, but generally you will find these about 76 centimeter
or so. The auger type is a screw type auger as if this screw moves inside and then you get
the various thickness of the auger sheet is generally 3 to 4 millimeter that means, this is
the auger which is there and the thickness of the blade which is there has about 3 to 4
millimeter is the thickness of that.
It is important because these are made of special material. In fact, I have planned another
lecture which I will be telling you at the end of this course about the material what are
the materials which are required for which part of the, or which component of particular
equipment.
So, these materials of this auger is very important because it has to sustain cut the soil
and then get inside and remove the soil. So, lot of scouring of the these blades takes
place while they are going to different types of soils sometimes they will go into sandy
soils sometimes they will go into hard soil sometimes they will go into stony soils and
things like that. So, we need to look into this and we need to see that they remain strong
enough and that is why the material of construction of this is a special material which is
used to, may be that we will like to show you the working of this particular equipment.(Refer Slide Time: 24:11)
See let us see yeah you can have a look at this how it is connected you can see that this
connected to this side from here and then this is the auger. Now, we will see how this
operates the power will come to the PTO through this Cardan shaft and then from here to
this box here. And then it will come to this yes you see the operation here you can use it
anywhere you want.
Of course, we are not talking of completely stony land, but then definitely we are talking
of the places where such swire is there. this is softer swire it appears. And that is why it
is easier to make this particular hole easy maybe the capacity their capacity depends on
several holes of certain size per hour. So, they are known as per there capacity and as per
the size of these plates which are important this is the equipment which will help you in
making it as early as possible.
So, you can have a look at this the speed at which you want to remove the material you
can see the material has been totally removed then it is cleaned and later on you can go
to another hole and so on, complete well so this is about the post hole digger.(Refer Slide Time: 25:53)
Now, another tractor mounted towing trolley this is we have developed at IIT Kharagpur
in fact, it is not a big job done. But then this is the one which we are using it and for you
can see that in a small area in a small locations if you want to have you can use this
thing.
The length is about 1.5 meter width is 1.5 meter and loading capacity goes up to 250 k g
or so. And this is very handy it is connected to the 3.0 linkage of the tractor and transfer
transport materials you can be the fertilizer seeds oil drums several things, we may have
a look at the working of such equipment here very handy equipment.
So,  and  well  although  these  equipment  are  available  the  knowledge  of  agriculture
engineer or the ingenuity of the agriculture will be on the use of them. What is required
at what time when will particular item will be used? Not necessary that if you have the
bulldozer or if you have the dozers you can use it at each and every time because they
have  the  power and all that,  but  sometimes  for short duration  depending  upon the
requirement you can keep on changing this let us have a look at this video.(Refer Slide Time: 27:25)
If you have I think some material is based transporter you can never look at this some
material is being transported here and it is easy we can maintain a certain angle to this so
that it will not fall. And it does not require so much of a space about 1.5 meter width
only the, of this particular item the video gives you a lot of information if depending
upon what you want to do.
So, in this well you can use for any other requirement if you have. So, I can tell you that
in this specific equipment that we have talked so far. It is very essential that we keep
these into our knowledge and try to see what machinery is required how cost effective a
particular machinery will be for the job that is there.
Whether you want to create a park whether you want to create orchards or what is the
time apart and exposure of material and bulldozing of materials or you can say plain land
etcetera. So, this is all depends on what you have the information is fed to you and now it
is on you to look into these and try to use. I hope you will have several questions many a
times because as an engineer we are not going into the more details of the mechanics of
the system the system have been told to you.
Now, what is the type of job it can do and what are it is important components where
they can fail you must have an idea about this you must know what are the critical
components which should be kept in inventory. So, that if it is required it can be replaced
immediately and the system will work so these are very important things which you musthave I am sure that you will like to have questions which we cannot know handle at any
time that is required and I think we will close here and.
Thank you very much.