Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 53
Conservation Agriculture
Welcome students to my lecture number 53, in fact after discussing with you about the
implements at various aspects of testing etcetera. I have come for what to give you some
idea  about  Conservation  Agriculture.  Now,  this  conservation  agriculture  is  very
important so far as machines are concerned, because what we are interested in we would
like that the, with minimum cost we should be in a position to produce maximum that is
the  aim.  So, in  this  conservation  agriculture,  what  do  you mean  what  we  want  to
conserve this is what is important. So, let us go through the few slides which I have got
for  you  and  the  considerations  which  we  do  when  we  are  talking  of  conservation
agriculture.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:01)
So,  agriculture  production  and  sustainability  concerns,  what  are  the  agricultural
production and sustainability concerns, this is very important. We would like to maintain
the soil health, because if the soil health is not good definitely nothing will come out of
that. What are the water resources that we have we must conserve our water resources,
we must see that the water resources are full with water when we require. Then agroclimatic environment, what is the environment at some point or the time the environment
has an effect. And today with all sorts of global warming and lot of noxious gases being
produced, because of the vehicles etcetera, the whole environment is very much affected.
So, this also affects our agro production and the farm size.
Now, I have put farm size particularly here with respect to agriculture production and
sustainability concerns. Well, farm size does not come so much but I have particular
reported here, because this also plays a role. If you have a small farm, then what sort of
considerations  you  would  need.  And  if  you  have  a  large  farm,  then  what  are  the
considerations you need and that is why I felt relevant that this must also be put in the
sustainability concerns.
What are the threat to the natural resources, what may happen, see land degradation has
taken place over the period of time. We I need not elaborate much, but I can just show
you that see 5 billion tonnes of soil and 6 million tonnes of nutrient loss is reported every
year. Now, see what happens, because of the various  degradation  methods, various
methods which people are using for various aspects of infrastructure creation or for roads
various kinds various things has happened. We would like to get this soil move from one
location to another location. And maybe application of the chemicals over the period, so
much of the several billion tonnes and of material has been spoilt.
Protection of the crop top soil especially in rain fed area is most crucial yes. We want to
protect, because the crop is going to grow within the top soil. And we must see that that
crop that the top portions, top soil is congenial for growth which is important. So, this
while we consider the land gradation degradation what is our concern with respect to the
soil health is the top soil, especially in rain fed areas, where when there is rain there is
water if there is no rain, there is no water. So, though there where there is no source of
irrigation, and we have to be careful about this.(Refer Slide Time: 03:47)
Conventional practices what we are doing as I said we are degrading the land, what we
are doing excessive soil tillage we have been doing so far we have been doing excessive
soil tillage. And this is what is shown here that the tillage is excessive so far we have
been doing. And then runoff with these runoff losses soil, erosion and nutrient leaching
this is going to happen.
Then  straw  burning  this  is  a  big  concern  in  our  country  here,  where  loss  of
microorganisms the environment is totally polluted. And this is very very big concern in
our  country,  you  might  have  read  in  papers  and  then  several  aspects.  The  whole
government machinery is behind this in the particularly in the Delhi and NCR and
Haryana and all the areas lot of this is going on. Not only that area, but that is very high
in those areas, because of which the whole environment is getting affected, and lot of
people are getting affected. So, the adverse consequences of on farm burying of this crop
are in fact, here emission of methane, carbon monoxide, nitrous oxide oxides of nitrogen
and sulphur.
Now, these are all there and these are very harmful to human being, human beings and
all sorts of living creature. So, it is very important that we need to have a check on this
land degradation, which we are doing over the period for our different activities, what
have we have done. So, what exactly we mean by conservation agriculture I have given a
small  definition  of this  over  here.  I would  like  to  just  read  for you.  Conservationagriculture is a system of integrated management of what the soil water and biological
resources combined with external inputs with a view to conserve natural resources.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:29)
So,  what  exactly  we  are  doing  the  soil  water  and  biological  resources  need  to  be
maintained. And then only you are talking of the conservation agriculture. Whatever you
are doing you must produce at the same time maintain these in good health so that you
have sustainability of production over a period of time that is the main concern. It is
satured be is crop production that is strives to achieve acceptable profits together with
high and sustained production that is the important part as I said, yes this is what we
want that while we take care of these.
If you take care of these parameters, the soil water and biological resources, if we take
care of them properly, and then do cultivation and minimise inputs and maximize target
maximum production. So, that the sustainability of the produce out of that land remains
over a long period of time as far as possible that is the main aim and that is what is
known as conservation agriculture. So, if we put this in this particular farm that we have
put here conservation agriculture of the centre means the continuous cover residues or
cover of the crop, then plant diversity or crop rotation we need to look into this the
minimum soil disturbance. 
So, you do take care the soil health over here. It take the plant diversity, so that the crop,
but use the proper crop rotation, then cut the residues crop residue is what you haveshould be properly taken care of so that they conserve the moisture. So, you reduce on
the water requirement. And then use the moisture which is available after the one of the
crops is harvested.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:45)
Benefits of conservation agriculture, where as I said in fact, if you add all these are all
benefits, if you are going to talk about the soil, if you are going to talk about the crop
rotation that you should take, and the moisture which you want to conserve through the
crop residue which you have got; all these are going to give you benefits in terms of
erosion of the soil erosion will be controlled.
Then weeds will be minimum, then the moisture will be remain for a longer period of
time, then crop we will definitely increase we find that about 46 percent crop increases.
Environment as such the total environment, where along with the crop you are also going
to stay we are all going to stay in the environment so that environment is also protected.
And crop diversity opportunities we should think of crop diversification opportunities,
where we should think of multi cropping we should think of different crop rotations, we
should think of inter cropping and in such a way that the soil health is maintained. 
For example, if you take leguminous crop, then nitrogen fixation takes place and that is
very essential for the next crop, if you take, so you can save form the nitrogen when you
apply next time  so that  is  very important.  Therefore,  these are extreme  benefits  ofconservation agriculture if you talk of the maintaining of, the all these parameters over a
period of time.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:15)
Conservation tillage well I told earlier that we are doing lot of tillage. So, conservation
tillage is important that means I would say that you should do minimum tillage you
should do no tillage. In fact, you should try to see the amount of tillage which is just
required for that. So, these the concept which says when to that the 30 percent soil cover
by residue planting, now we need to know that how much is the actual amount required
for the tillage and that should be done. If you if you just go on tilling the land just like
that each time, then you are increasing your tillage energy at the same time you are also
damaging the soil.
So, the important thing is ploughing and soil turnover from conventional tillage are
major concern for CO2 emissions, now is very important. Soil turnover and conventional
tillage are major reasons for CO2 emissions. Now, we have to check on these aspects.
Conservation can be achieved by then what we do, how do we achieve soil conservation
or the conservation agriculture what exactly means is soil conservation till no more than
necessary as I said. Till the only when soil moisture is in a favourable limit, and then
vary  the  depth  of  tillage  to  overcome  compaction.  So,  it  should  not  very  highly
compacted (Refer Time: 10:43) how create problem for germination of the crop. So, thisis very important, when you are talking of conservation agriculture the conservation
tillage first aspect.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:57)
Mechanization strategy in conservation agriculture; well here I just like to tell you that I
have  been  biased  towards  mechanization  as  such,  because  when  we  are  talking  of
maintaining of the soil health, and also talking of not disturbing the environment. We
what is that which is disturbing the environment what is that which is disturbing the soil
health. It is the equipment which will it is the operations which we do.
Once the crop has come we are going to weed the crop and then harvest the crop and
(Refer Time: 11:34) crop and keep it here, but what is that which happens before that it
is the tilling of the land, what sort of tilling you should do, what sort of equipment is
reduced, what should be the design of that equipment so that is why it is becomes very
imperative that mechanization strategy must be very clear and concrete in conservation
agriculture. We must have an idea about which machine to use and when. So, this is what
is given as I said that we would like to say paddy is harvested.
Then immediately after that there is proper enough moisture in the soil and at that time if
you simply open a slit and put the seeds of wheat, it will simply grow so that is what is
say that we should have a machine. Now, here is a machine which does this job zero seed
comfort it has a drill here. It is the one which is very effective and very widely used.Similarly, another equipment of similar type which is there which cuts, the any cuts the
front certain portion of the small stubbles which are there.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:57)
And then seeds, so these are some of the very popular equipment, which are used for
conservation agriculture. Minimum tillage this is what I think we have been talking of
this time and again, because minimum tillage tilling of the soil and seeding planting a
performance single operation, when we are talking of minimum tillage, we are talking of
no tillage, when we are talking of zero tillage, where we are talking of roto till drill,
when we talking of slit till drill, now these are all the equipment which are helping us in
doing what zero tillage virtually so that the tilling of soil and seeding planting and
perform in the single operation in minimum tillage.
The minimum tillage practices may progress from reducing the number of tillage passes
to stop tillage virtually. So, have minimum process as I said that you have to so the other
equipment which are available you can say roto till drill, if the say rotovator here in the
front which will cut the stubbles which are there. And then the for a openers are there
through which you can sow the seed or fertilizer both. 
Similarly here you can see that this slit is there by slit is created by these, and this one
will try to smother the small stubbles which are there, and then you can sow the seed
through seed and fertilizer. Hopper is here and you have the same seed fertilizer system
which you can see separately. So, these are the some of the equipment which are used forminimum  tillage  these  are  all  towards  minimum  disturbance  to  the  soil  and  no
degradation of the soil, but maintain the health of the soil that is important.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:39)
Mulch tillage well as I told you that you would like to do some sort of mulching
sometimes when a stable mulch sometimes with the stubbles which are cut there we
would like to keep them for some time and conserve the moisture, so that is what it is
written here. So, mulch tillage is nothing which stubble mulch tillage involves cutting the
roots of the weeds and other plants and leaving the crop the crop residue on the surface
and mixed into crop top few centimetres of the soil. This is the portion which is then you
can say that you can mulching mulch tillage if you maintain there.
Chief objective of mulching tillage are to reduce wind and water erosion very important
this to conserve water reducing runoff. So, this will help the mulch tillage will help you
to conserve on the erosion of the soil because of the wind or because of the water
etcetera. And this practice is widely accepted in the great plains and arid and semi arid
regions this mulch tillage in where particular in dry areas, areas, dry regions where they
are only dependent on the only dependent on the aspect of rainwater. So, these are
important. You can see one photograph which is given over here it talks of the mulching
which is given in this particular crop and you can see this once where the mulching is
maintained. So, mulch tillage is also a practice which is important for conservation
agriculture.(Refer Slide Time: 16:25)
Furrow irrigated raised bed farming system, yes, this is another thing because furrow
irrigation is done and raised bed farming system when we do this we have the equipment
here and through this equipment in fact, we are in a position to do.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:39)
Now, some the other equipment for residue management, now this is another equipment
for residue management. So, a stubble shaver you can you can have a look at this. You
can see that this is going to maintain stubble here. Similarly, this another equipment
which is for rotary slasher. Now, these stubble shavers, rotary slasher, these are going toactually  for  residue  management  what  reason  do  are  have  left.  They  will  say  for
example, if you operate this will cut they into a very carpet sort of thing and very small
size reduction of the grasses or weeds which will be there. And they will be left over
there, so that we also you can say conserve the moisture of the soil which is there. So,
this equipment are also used and known as residue management equipment which are
there.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:35)
Carbon sequestration, now what exactly we mean by this. Actually well we are talking of
these sink of carbon from the atmosphere to either plants or into the soil this is what we
are trying to do. The sink of carbon from the atmosphere we want to take and to mix with
either plants or into the soil of from atmosphere to the soil is called carbon sequestration.
Now, this is what we are looking trying to do. Now, what we do by this the largest
contribution  to  mitigate  climate  change  with  the  conservation  agriculture  could  be
obtained from carbon sequestration and storage of atmospheric carbon in the soil.
Yes, how do we do that? So, this is an aspect which is very important and we must try to
do this on an average 0.1 to 0.5 tons per hectare per year of organic carbon can be
captured  under  humid  temperature  conditions  from  the  atmosphere.  So,  this  is  one
important  thing  which  must  be  looked  into  when  you  are  talking  of  conservation
agriculture. So, you must employ the methods and mechanisms by which you should bein a position to conserve the carbon or get the carbon of the atmosphere and get into your
soil. This is very important.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:57)
What are the benefits of this in fact, what are the benefits of this carbon sequestration.
Now, the benefits could be maximum because, what we want is you are interested in
having the details the carbon more and more inside the soil. So, agricultural carbon
sequestration  maybe  one  of  the  most  cost  effective  way  to  slow  process  of  global
warming, very important. Global warming increasing of soil carbon storage can increase
in filtration rate fertility and nutrients of the soil. Yes, we will be able to increase the
nutrition quality of the soil then decrease wind and water erosion this is what we want to.
Minimise the compaction of the soil yes we would like to minimise the compaction
because harder and harder the soil becomes it will be difficult to sow the seeds and we
will have to do the tillage. So, the compaction level must be the extent that we can
control this then decrease the well. The minimise compaction enhance water quality, we
should try to see that the quality of water which is being used is a good quality water.
Decrease the carbon emissions which are there as much as possible we should be trying
do this then impede pesticide movement and enhance environmental quality.
Now, these are the things which we need to do or we do it for the benefits of carbon for
you can see that conservation agriculture. So, as such if we look into what conservation
agriculture  is  we  can  see  that  we  want  that  maximum  moisture  of  the  soil  mustmaintained. We must maintain the soil health, we must maintain the nutrients which are
there in the soil. These are important because until less you maintain this properly, you
are not going to get a good crop and for that what should you do. So, you should in fact
as we have seen that we are going to disturb the soil. The degradation of soil has taken
place a lot and this degradation must be care must be looked into must be taken care of.
And for that what are the equipment so we have talked of the various equipment that
they are there, and what are the designs and types which are there, what sort of benefits
they give, and how they should be used. And, what is mulch mulching because mulching
is another aspect of tillage mulch tillage which tries to maintain the moisture. Some areas
where irrigation is not possible the areas which are totally dependent on rain rainwater
there you have to have.
So, dry land agriculture which we call of dry land agriculture what is the dry land
agriculture we are trying to conserve these. So, if we will like to have mulching, we will
like to trap the carbon of the atmosphere into our soil, and see that we are in a position to
do a good quality conservation agriculture and have these things in common. Now, I
think this way we have tried to give you some idea about carbon I mean conservation
agriculture as such.
This you may not find in many books this portion, but then what I can say that it I found
it very essential and an essential input as well as very just for give you some idea about
conservation  agriculture  you  might  say  that  this  is  not  coming  into  which  farm
machinery. In fact I would say it does come into formation because we have talked of the
mechanization  with  respect  to  not  degradation  of  the  soil.  So,  what  sort  of  tillage
machines we should use, what sort of machines we should use for maintain this condition
of the soil and other aspects the way we have discussed about reclamation of the land.
When we discussed about reclamation of land, when we are reclamating land for our
crop,  what  we  should  maintain,  where  our  water  resources  should  be  properly
maintained, what are the other biological resources which should be maintained. So, all
these aspects have to be taken into consideration that then that is why I wanted that we
must have some lecture on conservation agriculture as an agriculture engineer, you must
have idea about this. If you go into various types in various countries you will find
different types of different equipment depending on the size of the farm. See, we havenot talk of the size of the farm here, but size of the farm is very important, because when
you talk of the tillage machines which are to be taken the size of the farm is important.
In countries where it is very difficult to have bigger machines or the farmers who have
very very less amount of area or farm size, they would like to get small machines. And,
in fact in this area the small equipment and devices are used for total cultivation of the
crop whether you talk of a cereal crop or you talking of a vegetable crop or you talking
of a fruit crop and so on and so forth. 
So, the farm size is another important aspect which must be considered in conservation
agriculture that is what I have thought of. And, that is why this lecture I wanted to share
with you my knowledge with respect to conservation agriculture. I am sure that at least
some idea you have got you might have certain questions we would like to consider as
and when they come up. But, then I think we will try to stop here and we will look
forward for your questions. 
Thank you.