Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 52
Performance Evaluation and Testing of Thresher
Welcome  students  to  my lecture  number  52, which  is  Performance  Evaluation  and
Testing of Thresher. Well, it is very important that every machine must be evaluated and
tested. And there are standard codes through which we should be testing all the machines
for certification, and so that they can be sold in the market. And it will be better from its
performance as well as the components, which are used in the machine.
Now, we will like to see; what are the parameters, which affect the performance of the
thresher, and what sort of test we perform on them, and how do we report, what are the
different ways by which we can report, and how we can certify a particular thresher. This
is what we are going to discuss with this particular lecture.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:09)
The various parameters affective performance of thresher: well, definitely you know that
the crop parameters are we have crop parameters, then we will have machine parameters,
and  the  interaction  between  these  two.  So,  when  you  talk  of  the  crop  parameters,
definitely moisture content of the soil as moisture content of the crop which is importantat what moisture the crop has been harvested, because depending on that moisture only
the threshing will efficiency and threshers performance will depend.
Addition of green matter how much of green matter is added in the harvesting, when it
has done. And what is the straw to grain ratio. Well, we have a small graph here, which
indicates what happens to the losses cylinder loss, what happens to the grain damage,
and what happens to the percent of grain separated. Now, you can see in this particular
graph that the as the moisture content of the crop increases, there is increase in the grain
cylinder loss, and it is quite obvious.
Similarly, if the moisture content increases, what happens, the grain damage also been
increases. Now, this is something which needs to be looked into at properly, because you
see that the variation here is that initially it decreases, and then at some point, then it
starts increasing here. That means, the losses we restart decreasing, but then they will
start  increasing  at  this  point.  Similarly,  the  percent  of  grain  separated  through  the
concave. This is another important thing depending on the moisture content of the crop,
which has taken. So, this is if the moisture content decreases, you will find that sorry
increases; then the cylinder percent grain separated through the concave also decrease.
Now, these are some of the important things as related to the moisture content. Similarly,
addition of green matter, if the green matter is there, you will find that green matter
increase, the threshing efficiency is decreased definitely, because threshing efficiency
will decrease more of green matter is there. So, the cylinder losses are naturally going to
be increased.
The straw grain ratio: now, with the increased of the straw grain ratio, the threshing
efficiency also is affected. Sure, it will get affected, because straw grain ration if it is
very high straw to grain ratio that means, straw is more and grain ratio, then also you will
find that the cylinder losses are taking place, and they are increased. So, as such when
you talk of the crop parameters, which are affecting the performance of a thresher, the
moisture content, then the green matter which is there, and straw to grain ratio of that.
These play an important role, so far as the crop parameters are affected or considered.(Refer Slide Time: 04:31)
Machine parameters right: once you have the crop, what are the machine parameters,
well we know that the machine consist of a drum, then consist of a concave. And there is
there are certain the dimensions of this, certain speed at which the drum operates. So, we
have to consider all these parameters with respect to the machine. For example, when we
are talking of when we are talking of the drum, the type of the drum. Now, here the type
of drum has a some sort of a effect on the depending upon if it is circular, if it is
polygonal type. Then what will happen is the number of beating switch will be there,
while the material is passing through this through the concave will be higher.
Now, peripheral speed; what happens to the peripheral speed, now let us have a look at
all these parameters of the D, L and S, which we have seen the cylinder loss, the grain
damage, and the percent of grain, which is separated, and the cylinder diameter. As the
cylinder diameter increases, generally there is no difference in the D and S that is talking
of the grain damage, and this percent grain which is there. But, the losses if the cylinder
diameter increases, the losses are on the higher side as it is shown in this particular drop.
Similarly, when you talk of cylinder speed, what happened to the cylinder speed? Now,
you see if cylinder speed increases, then the losses are going to decrease, well the
cylinder loss as it is shown here. Similarly, if cylinder speed increases, then the damage
grain damage is going to increase now. You see what happens, because then if there is
likelihood of damage of these. Similarly, the S that is the separation, which is takingplace the separation of the grain from the straw, which is there within the concave and
the cylinder; they are in this particular fashion, so they are going to virtually increase.
Now, depending upon the number of rasp bars and their shape, angle of wrap of the
concave, length of concave;  now, various aspects  have considered, for example  the
concave length. Now, the length of the concave generally we keep as same as the length
of the drum. So, the length of concave has also an effect on the performance of the
cylinder loss, the grain damage, as well as percent of this as it is shown in this graph.
Similarly, cylinder concave clearance, this is very important. With the clearance, you can
see that has the clearance increases, you will find that the losses are going to be higher,
because then the actual threshing may not take place properly. And accordingly, the
others will also get D and S will also get affected.
So, when we talk of the crop, it is moisture content, the straw grain ration, and the green
matter. I mean talk of machine; it will talk of the cylinder, the diameter of cylinder, the
design of the cylinder, the peripheral speed of the cylinder, and then the concave. What
is the size of the concave, how much is the width of the concave, it will also depend on
how much is the input. In fact, the input you can see that the where we are inputting the
material, what is the diameter, or what is the spacing there, or what is the size of the
input and size of the exit. So, on these basis also, there will be effect of the on the basis
of on D, L or S.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:11)
Operating  parameters:  well,  feed  rate  that  is  what  I  was  trying  to  tell  feed  rate,
positioning of the delivered stalk and with respect to the drum (Refer Time: 08:18) and
point  of  contact.  Now,  these  are  also  going  to  affect  definitely,  because  operating
parameters talking, when we are going to feed, how it is coming out as I said, it will have
an effect on both these all the three, in fact the cylinder loss the D and S grain damage
etcetera. So, it has been seen that for all these there has to be a engineers point of view,
and a trade off between all these values, and the dimensions which we choose, while we
are talking of the evaluating the performance of the thresher.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:01)
Well, selection and specification well testing of power thresher. Now, when we are
talking of thresh, we have talked of the parameters. Now, when we talk of testing,
because we need to certify that as an engineer, you will be require to do this. And BIS
has put standards, which must be followed. We have just taken those standards over here,
and  put  it  slightly  in a  different  fashion,  everything  remaining  same,  we  have  not
anything modified anywhere about the parameters, and the procedures, and the data to be
collected and to be reported; we are not done anything on that we have just reported that.
But, since it is very essential as an engineer agricultural engineering, you would be
required to test these and then certify. So, you must know the procedure behind doing.
So, first of all you must select, how do you get suppose a manufacturer comes to you and
say that I have designed a thresher, please test and certify whether this is worth marketmarketing or not. He may also get he may also apply for some sort of subsidy, which the
government gives a particularly as concerned in case of this country India. So, he would
like to do this. So, how do you select. In fact, he would like to give you one machine, but
then that is not the procedure. What the procedure is that you should go, and see the lot
of all his threshes, which he have made, which he has made. And then out of that you
should just randomly pick up one. And then mark all these, things keep all the details,
maybe that you can put some stamp etcetera, and then take those things along with some
literature etcetera, and come back.
And that machine only he should be in a position to he should be in a position to send to
you for testing that has a particular idea behind that, because it may happen that the one,
which he is bringing may have the right kind of material, right kind of dimensions and
everything that he has taken care of. But, in the subsequent or other models, he may not
do, in fact that he may do later also. But, then when you have randomly picked up, at
least this certificate will early for a period of time about 3 years or so. Now I think it has
been increased to 5 years recently. So, up to 5 years this is so, but there should be a
check on his material of construction of the various components, which he is blowing.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:47)
Now what are the things that we should report, when we are trying to test and give a
report what do we do. See the general specifications, for example it is given here. What
general specification, general specifications are there, that what is the type of thresher,name of thresher, make of the thresher, size etcetera.  Then visual observations  and
provision for adjustment, safety provisions, we need to look into that. Then test at no
load.
Well it is essential, when we are not threshing something at that time we may like to test
this. So, what all that power consumption, how much is the power consumption of that
particular  thresher,  we  have  talked  of  the  procedure  for  determination  power
consumption  in  our  previous  lectures.  So,  you  need  to  find  out  what  is  power
consumption of this, may be that this is ok, but it consumes lot of power. So, you have to
find a check over there that is why test at no load is essential.
Then visual observations: visual observations are very important, because then they give
you a look, they and some idea about the quality of the material made or quality of the
whole product itself, which is very important. Because, if you were aware that it has a
appeal, then only it will go to the market that is number 1, because ergonomics is one,
which also talks of the requirement and liking of the people, while it is giving a good
quality work done. It must have some appeal to the consumer, who is coming to buy.
Therefore,  as  a  designer,  you  should  insist  on  him  that  you  should  have  a  proper
colouring etcetera and proper marking, so that it will appeal to the person, as well as it
will have sufficient safety observations and safety aspects, which are written or clearly
defined over there on to the machine. So, these are the things, which we require.
Then test at load. When you want to give a load, what sort of test you should give. Now,
there are as such if you a recall, we had discussed about testing of other equipment as
well. There also we have talked of short run test and long run test, because short run test
also give you some idea, but that cannot become a reporting matter, and we need not go
for  large,  because  it  may  happen  that  in  short  run  test,  where  few  hours  testing
everything may appear fine. But, once it is subject to a long run, then the problem comes,
and that is why it has been said that.
The testing must be on the load, it must be for a short run, and then must be for a long
run. And their specifications  or details  a specifications  are given. Say for example,
losses; see efficiency. Now, quality of work, we need to in a short run, we need to find
out this part, where losses and efficiency could be found out, what is the efficiency of
threshing, what is the efficiency of cleaning. Similarity, what are the different losses atthat time. You can see that all these four losses; we must see what are the value for this.
Then the power consumption, what is the power consumption.
Then the capacity of this: rated input capacity, output capacity, and corrected output
capacity and other visual observations. If you have tested for 3 4 hours maybe, and then
you find what sort of things are happening in that you will if you are alert, you should be
able to see everything in the how the movement of the grain is coming, and how to this
straw is moving, or how the material, when it is fed, how smoothly it goes and all that.
These are some of the things, which you like and the safety thing safety aspects, which
are given in the design are they effective or not. Some observations visual observations
are important, which we do in short run, and have some idea about the whole machine.
After that, then we should go for rigorous test, what we call long run test, so that is very
important.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:31)
Well, performance parameters. Then definitely we are talking of see what we do, once
we have the grain or once we have the crop, we would like to get the maximum grain out
of the straw at the whole crop. And the straw must be cleaned at the same time grain
must  be  also  cleaned,  so  that  is  the  aim.  Now,  so when we  want  to find  out  the
performance parameter, we will definitely look for the total grain input per unit time.
What is the total grain input per unit time, now we see here that A the total grain input
per unit time is what is available between B plus C and D. See quantity of threshed cleangrain;  then  the  quantity  of  broken  grain  from  all  outlets  and  then  the  quantity  of
unthreshed grain from all outlets. So, if you put them together, this is what you get the
total grain input.
Now, percentage of broken grains; so if you want to check what is the percentage of
broken grain, so if you know the quantity of broken grains from all the outlets. Then that
by the total A is going to give you the percentage of broken grain, where C is the
quantity of broken grain from all outlet. This is in fact, region here and total grain input
per unit time.
Now, the data sheet how this information has to be put in data sheet for efficiencies,
power requirement and capacities. Now, this is the data sheet, which is given over here.
Now, as an engineer, you are supposed to do this, and then put them properly. Now, you
see the test number are given here, how many such tests you are going to conduct. It
virtually talks of the replications of this, because then you must carry over a period of
time, you just cannot do for some time, and then say that these are the values, you have
to carry.
Let us (Refer Time: 17:31) it for example, it is threshing unit speed say maybe 1, 2, 3, 4,
5 several speeds you have to take, those speeds will talk of. Then the feed rate, then
power  required  the  total  grain  mixture  received  at  main  grain  outlet  percentage  of
unthresher grain, percentage of broken grain. All these parameters then you have to
while doing this test, you will have to measure, and you will have to record them over
here,  and  with  your  taking  a  signature  at  this  point.  So, this  is  the  data  sheet  for
efficiency  power  requirement  and  the  capacities  different  capacities.  So  far  as  the
reporting is concerned.
So,  you  must  look  into  these  parameters,  and  report  them  properly,  judiciously,
meticulously, so that when the it will goes to any authority, he will be able to appreciate
your sincerity of purpose so far as testing is concerned.(Refer Slide Time: 18:31)
Percentage of blown grain: definitely, once you know the amount of grain, which is
outlet gone clean grain obtained at outlet by this, so you can get the total. Similarly, for
unthreshed grain, if you know the unthreshed grain per unit of the total grain, which have
will give you the percentage of unthreshed grain. Now, this has to be put again in the
similar fashion, you have to report. As we have reported in the earlier case, you have to
report here also.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:05)
Percentage of the spilled grain: quantity of clean grain obtained at sieve overflow and
underflow per unit time. As if you know the total grain input and how much is this
spilled grain you were talking of that means, how much is the clean grain obtained, so
the ratio of that will give you percentage of spilled grain. Similarly now, when we talk of
threshing efficiency, now threshing efficiency here 100 minus percent of unthreshed
grain.
So, this is what is going to see. We would like that 100 percent threshing must take
place, but percentage of unthreshed grain we know, because there will be such thing
happening. This has many aspects and as we consider those it is not possible to have 100
percent threshing. And therefore, there will be some unthreshed grains and hence if you
subtract that from 100 you get the threshing efficiency of the thresher.
Similarly, the cleaning efficiency, see we would like that it should be clean as clean as
possible. So, the total quantity of sample taken at main grain outlet and the quantity of
clean grain obtained from the sample taken from this. So, it will give you few samples
you need to take several samples in order to see that you get a correct idea about the
cleaning efficiency of this. So, when you take samples and get this M by F you should be
in a position to find out the cleaning efficiency of this. And then, accordingly report on
this particular data sheet which is provided by the BIS organization.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:43)
Determination of corrected output capacity: well this is another important parameter
which must be done. This correction particularly with respect to the moisture content,
and the grain crop ratio; this is particularly with respect to that you can see here that m 1,
m 2 talks talk of the moisture content of grain at observed grain crop ratio, moisture
content of the straw at observed grain crop ration of grain and straw
So, similarly we need to know about the standard moisture content of the grain, and the
standard moisture content of the straw. So, this particular empirical equation has been
found  out;  has  been  used  actually  for  finding  out  the  determined  corrected  output
capacity when we want to correct tell about the thresher. So, for some of the crops, we
have given you here which you can always have a look at particularly with respect to m
1, m 2 r, and where m 1 is the standard moisture content of grain, m 2 is standard
moisture content of the straw, and r is the standard grain crop ratio in percent. So, these
for some of the crops are given for information and it will help you in using it over here,
so that you can get the corrected output capacity of wheat, paddy, bengal gram, sorghum
or soybean.
So, these crops you can get.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:17)
 Determination of the power consumption: well, it is very important we had if you recall
we had given you how to calculate the power consumption of a thresher. We had talked
of the (Refer Time: 22:28) theory. Now, but generally how we do particularly when wewould talk of what is the what is the torque at the excel of the thresher which is in fact
rotary and then find out the speed and that is how we get.
But then if you going to all details of the drum which has a air velocity wrapping, the
wraping this drum while it rotates. So that way we had considered every aspect of the air
and the material which was there and that way we had got some value. Now, here at the;
what BIS wants you is that you should be in a position to find out the find out the torque,
and the speed. Just we find out the toque which is in fact the torque of the thresher and
the speed at which it is moving revolutions per minute. So, this being the because of the
it is because of the units that you get this and into 100 will give you percent so kilowatt
in fact into 100 know, this will in fact talk to you about the total power in kilowatt it will
talk to you in kilowatt.
A long run test now long run test when we are doing see, operate the operation the
operation of thresher must be at least 20 hours at load for each recommended crop which
should be covered by continuous run of at least 5 hours. Now, you this is very important
when we are talking of long run test. See, long run test are essential and have to be done
anyway, but then it is important that at for continuous run of at least 5 hours which
should be at continuous run of 5 hours, it is not that total time we have taken 1 hour, 1
hour and then say 20 hours, no continuous run of at least 5 hours is very important as it is
said
And then recording of the major breakdowns, the defects developed repairs and repairs
and average grain output after the test and data sheet. So, the data the here is your test
data sheet. Now, these are the details  of that where you get everything  about total
quantity of the crop fed, then power consumption, then torque, then power consumption
in the test, then fuel consumption etcetera every detail. All these things are given number
of samples and quantity of main grain outlet, sieve over flow, straw outlet, total quantity
of grain mixture, the total quantity of grain mixture at sieve under flow kg. Now, these
are the 20 items from 1 to 20; these are the 20 items which are there. So, these items
must be looked into while reporting the values.(Refer Slide Time: 25:35)
Similarly, for the specification sheet: yes, it is important to talk about this here this is the
BIS  standard  which  we  follow.  And  the  specification  sheet  to  be  filled  by  the
manufacturer and testing station. Now, here all the details must be filled by the testing
station and the manufacturer will give it here. So, there will be a comparison between
this what whether whatever he has written, and when we see with the observations
whether they match or not this is very important to recommend. Similarly, crop threshed
the main crop, the other crops, main drive what is that directly coupled, what is the type
of power requirement, how it is connected, all these details are to be provided in the
specification sheet which is given by BIS which you have to follow.(Refer Slide Time: 26:31)
This is the in fact a long list for that matter I must have a look at this say for a threshing
unit. So, the details  of the  threshing unit type construction  features  diameter  width
similarly the concave the type diameter or width. Similarly the sieve what is the sieve
which is used, because then materials are sieved out then you have the chaff cutting
mechanism  cutting  mechanism  which  is  there;  the  shaker  which  is  there,  which  is
cleaning, and separating the chaff from the grain. Then the blower which is blowing out
and giving the brown sow on one side and the green saw on the other side. The elevator,
elevator after it is threshed it, and it is cleaned it has to go to the elevator for bagging
etcetera. So, these are important.
Then crop feeding, what is the method of feeding, what is the height and location
etcetera. When the person is feeding, you might have seen in this that a platform is there
these people get up and then try to put the material. So, we need to look into that because
there is aspect of safety consider, so that is why we have to have an clear observation
while the testing is going on. Similarly, transport, how you what are the transport wheels
whether the wheels are can be stalled at one place or not can be we can make it stand at
one place when threshing is going on, what sort of provision given all details and overall
dimensions flywheel details everything has to be looked into and provided in the sheet
which is given here.(Refer Slide Time: 28:11)
Further  information  about  the  date  of  test  material  of  construction:  yes  it  is  very
important. We also discussed you with you in one of my classes that what should be the
material of construction of a particular component of a particular equipment. And this is
very important over here that what the material the person has used, the manufacturer has
used here what materials he has used. And what is the size of that. So, for each and every
item over here material of construction what he has given and maybe that we would like
to also test maybe random or even we should test each material after the use and before
they used to check, how is the longevity of the material whether he is using a right kind
of material or not.
Otherwise, the breakdown will be more and then it would be a loss to the farmer who has
taken  this.  Similarly,  data  should  have  visual  observation  very  important  visual
observations and provisions for adjustments many a times. Say adequate marking and
inlet and outlet you just see, these are important. Similarly, we provisions for lubricating
moving parts there should be provisions for moving parts or not. Similarly, I am just
picking up some of these parameters and in that go through that you will if you go
through the details you will definitely have a look.
But then, I am just going through this (Refer Time: 29:33) tightness of belts and nuts and
other fasteners, how tight they are and all that is it loose and all that. So, you have to
look at these parameters when you are having a observation, visual observation of thesethe thresher before you testify that. So, adjustments what sort of adjustments for the feed
rate for the concave clearance and other details are given sieve clearance etcetera, you
must watch for that, and then the test engineer signature over here. So, these are the
important things which we need to look into.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:11)
Data sheet, for the data sheet for test in safety provisions definitely we must have safety,
because  maximum  of  the  accident  which  have  taken  place  in  this.  So,  the  safety
provisions must be looked into a how the feeding is taking place. So, it is very important,
and this clause must be taken care of the test engineer must get satisfied, and then only
give a signature of this over here.(Refer Slide Time: 30:31)
So, data sheet for test at no load and then data sheet for test at load. Now, the concise
with respect to power consumption, observations, sources other details, which are given.
These are the concise information which are wanted.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:47)
With same thing which has now given over here test data, which we had already shown
to you earlier; and the other observations which are given over here.(Refer Slide Time: 30:59)
Well, I think with this we would like to conclude testing, because all details of testing the
crop parameter, machine parameters, safety aspects everything must be considered; and
you should be very careful while you are going through all the details where you are
sampling you are you are giving a short run a long run test. And then all procedures
proper recording must be done with all truthfulness, then only you can be said to be a
good tester and certification certifying agency.
And, I hope we have tried to give you this information. If you have any further questions
we would like to answer you as and when you required this. And we closed here. 
Thank you.