Farm Machinery
Prof. V.K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 59
Machinery Selection and Management Part – II
Welcome students to my lecture number 59 which is in fact, the second part of the
Machinery Selection and Management of farm machines. Well, in the first part we have
talked of how we should have for a 20 hectare farm and if you are thinking of a certain
set  of machines,  what  should be  the  concept  behind?  How  the  machine  should be
selected from available machines? and depending upon their capacity and depending
upon, what cropping crop rotation I take and cropping intensity, we are intending to
have. 
As I said that some of the equipment, which we did not include there could for irrigation,
you can have equipment for transportation, you can have equipment, but then when we
are talking of managing base and we are talking of the cost.
Now, I have taken here in a problem through, which we will just calculate the different
costs  of the  machine,  taking  into  consideration  various  aspects  of  the  machine  the
ownership cost and then the timeliness cost and the total cost, variable cost, etcetera. And
then how do we find out what should be the actual cost of owing particular machine
irrespective of which machine is we have not taken the cost of each machine, which we
took in the earlier part, but here we will take 1 particular type of machine and then where
we will go into details of this calculations. So, let us go by the slide which I have. (Refer Slide Time: 01:46)
Now depreciation method, suddenly I have put a depreciation method why? Because
when you have the equipment one important things, that should be kept in mind is that
the depreciation of the equipment starts from the day 1.
So after, you have purchased and you have started using it then, it will start depreciate,
now it does not get depreciated in 1 day as such as I say, but definitely you can say the
depreciation start from the next day. So, after 1 year what will be the cost of this? After 2
years what will be the cost of this? After three years what should be the cost and its
condition etcetera, because then everything has to be looked into. 
Now, various methods are there how do you find these cost? So, some of the methods,
which are used very you could say available literature and the people use depending
upon their suitability as and when required, we have just listed those methods say here,
straight line method gives constant amount each year. Now this is one method, which is
very widely used and on a thumb rule basis, one can use it and find out, but then see the
declining balance method gives depreciation as constant percent of the remaining value
at the beginning of the year. 
This  is  another  way  of  looking  at  it,  sum  of  years  digits  method  charge  higher
depreciation in early years of the useful life. Yes you can think of because, early years
definitely higher depreciation as it goes the definitely it will lesser and lesser sinkingfund method has based on compound interest and then advantageous for use with a
planned replacement internal policy depending upon what you think. 
So, these are the 4 methods, which are generally found out for the because, calculating
the depreciation of the equipment that you have thought of and in the when we are
actually talking of the, see the remaining book value of the machine at the end of a given
here. Then the initial cost minus the total depreciation amount till that year is the book
value.
So, if we plot here, now here in this particular diagram, what I have shown is a machine
book value. Here add the number of years on this side here. So, we find million rupees
here, just for the international audience, we have to convert 1 rupees so, much dollar as
on 23rd of July 2018. 
Now, this is just an idea for the larger audience of outside, those who understand rupees
fine, but those who do not understand for that we have put in million rupees here and the
behavior of all these methods are given here to understand. It is not I did not go into
details of the discussion of how it happens in all it is very simple to understand.
If you follow any one of the modern methods, you can calculate what exactly is and then
plot over the period from 0 to 10 years depending upon what is the equipment. We do
not find that any equipment last more than 10 years well you may say that there are
equipment, which are some of the equipment, which can be used for 15 years to 20 years,
but then depending upon their condition and the repair maintenance and then other parts
to replacement of the parts etcetera. 
You can use a machine that we do not talk of that because, if you go into that sort of a
carcass,  I  tell  you  that  you  will  definitely  fall  into  problem  because,  repair  and
maintenance will keep on adding up here and there and it will create a very neck pain
and so far as the success of the system is concerned. And that is why, we would consider
the relevant and the most effective use period of the equipment and that is why, a 10 year
period with the number of hours of each one of them are given in the standard books
particularly the AC standards ACB, now what we call and from there we are used for our
cost calculations etcetera, while selection of machines. (Refer Slide Time: 06:11)
Now, let us see I have a put as a problem, but then we will get into the get in the details
of this later. A farmer is using 2.5 meter header or on combine to harvest wheat at a
speed of 2.5 kilometer per hour. The wheat is yielding 3.2 mega gram per hectare losses
proportional to area total 2 32 minutes per hectare are primarily due to the unloading
grain from the combine, neglecting any other losses.
Now, we need to calculate say for example, the field efficiency and the field capacity on
area basis and on material basis total material, which is produced then rotary power, how
much is the rotary power required? Then the specific annual ownership cost and the total
annual ownership cost of the machine, which you have total operating cost per hectare
excluding terminus of cost. Now you remember this, assume the all the other necessary
data well we need to understand, what necessary data we need to take from the table
etcetera.
So, that is why, this has been treated. Now as I said, we are talking of a combine. So, this
is the combined, which has been given here and using this, how do you proceed, what are
the methods that we adopt and how do you adopt them? (Refer Slide Time: 07:43)
First determine the field efficiency and field capacity on area and material basis, this is
first thing.
How do you what formulae we already know for this, well we are talking of the field
capacity on area basis of this is known to you already from previous knowledge, which
we have discussed. We are talking of the width of the machine then, we are talking of the
speed of the machine here and this constant will give you, how much is the hectare per
hour? This is given hectare per hour from the data, which has been given. 
Now field efficiency, we know that field efficiency will have different components, it
will think of what is the actual work done at that theoretical work done then, the losses
which  have  taken  place  of  various  kinds  of  those  for  example,  we  are  talking  of
fractional implement with actually used, then the time loss is that a proportional to the
area. The time loss is a proportional not proportional to the area, there could be time
losses, which are may be header loss and things like that. 
So, here, if you talk of these you find something like this; that means, T t tau t here is
talking of the total and t q, K w is talking of the fraction of the implement width actually
used. So, with field  efficiency  given  by this  expression here,  the  total  time  or the
theoretical time you can think of. So, these are the times actually, now we have to think whether, how best we can estimate
this parts that is essential. Now you see here that we have talked of 0.625 hectare per
hour is the capacity theoretical capacity of this, which is FC T which we are calling now
then with use of this what we get T e or T t here, which is the effective operating time
effective operating time comes to this 1.6 hours it is just.
If you would take inverse of this you would get this vary and then the efficiency here we
are talking of the time loss that are not proportional to area as equal to 0. So, we with
these then we are getting that efficiency is about 0.75; that means, efficiency is above 75
percent q field capacity on the area basis that, you have got already actual capacity here,
you got about 0.7 with this field efficiency, you get this value. 
So, the field capacity on material basis is it crop yield has to be multiplied with this. So,
we know that this is the hectare and this is the mega gram per hectare per hectare. So, on
a field capacity on a material basis comes out to be the. So, much of mega gram per
hectare per hour and the this is good point 0.625 hectare, which is come to about 0.47
hectare per hour.
So, this is the way we try to understand, now you need to look into these expressions,
while  considering  the  machine  the  various  aspects,  which  we  have  given  in  this
particular problem need to be very carefully understood and then the formulae to be used
and answers to be produced out of that.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:14)
Now  let  us  come  to  the  determination  of  rotary  power  requirement  and  power
requirement for the engine, yes it is very essential to know how much of rotary power
will be required and what should be the requirement of the engines power? Actually total
power of the engine which will be the main power and which will deliver to other units
of the combine which is under consideration. 
So there, here we find that the P rotary is given as a plus b w plus c FC m t where P
rotary is kilowatt the header, w is the our header width then FC is theoretical field
capacity and material basis and a, b, c are the specific constant, which we have got from
the ASAE D 497 data this thing. 
Now, hence a is 20 kilowatt, b is 0 kilowatt per meter and c is this for combine of for a
small grains. Now this is the data which we have taken from this here and it is worth
mentioning here, when we are trying to find out the total rotary power. Now using this
formula here, we know that C m t is given as this into this, which comes out about 2
mega gram per hour. Now then the rotary power using this, equation can be simply found
out to be the a p rot the a P rotary is about 27.2 kilowatt. 
Now, there are certain considerations here, now this is the power required for the rotary
portion only, but then you need to look into what should be the power, total part to be
taken and the power of the engine here, this is the one which is required now once, you
go for they this now there is something a note given, which is essential. And designers
must look into it estimate is for average condition, this is for an average condition.
But then, actual power requirement could be 50 percent higher or lower as given in this.
Now there is a data, we will also you there is data where in we have the various aspects,
which are given and the designer can choose from there. So, this actual power could be
50 percent higher than this and it is always better to have a higher power because, you do
not know, how much will be the requirement and what sort of eventualities which will
come in the when the machine is under operation. 
So, therefore, we can simply double this and you think of about 55 horsepower or of the
engine could be taken now, another power requirement is grain bin unloading. Now for
unloading, you will find you will show in the table there that for unloading also you
required certain power. So, considering the rotary power and the in other exigencies
including the power for unloading of the grain bin then, you will required another 30percent of that. So, virtually you require a power, which can be as high as about 70
kilowatt, this is what we have worked out on the basis of this. 
So, roughly we can think that about 70 kilowatt of engine on the combine is required for
getting the rotary power and all sorts of power that will be required, we can say that if
you do not have a 70 kilowatt engine may be about 80 and 90 kilowatt combine is
available, you will have to choose, if it is a 60 kilowatt combine then this will not serve
the purpose.
If it is a 80 kilowatt or 100 kilowatt combined then, you will have to take that because,
this is the requirement basis, you cannot if you think that is about 70 kilowatt and we can
do with only 65 kilowatt. Then I think that we will be in trouble at some point or the
other and therefore, if the requirement is just for the engine and it is available about 80
kilowatt fine I think we should take to be with certain factor of safety. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:10)
Now, determination total operating cost per hectare excluding terminus cost. So now, we
if you exclude the terminus cost here, they determines total operating cost total operating
cost per hectare works out to be. Now certain assumptions, when we want to do this, we
have to have certain assumption, what are those assumptions? Well these assumptions
could be working hours of the combined, well you see that these machines in fact, if you
see in reality although we have taken about 8 hour per day. But in reality, this machines is start from early morning and till late evening and about
14, 15, 16 hours we have seen to be used even the nights, they use lights and then the use
this  machines,  but  then  for  the  calculations  and  for  a  general  assessment  and
understanding of this problem, I think if you take 8 hour per day and 200 hours per year
for the use of this machine.
In fact, although these are the standard values which we say that they are used much
more than that, but then for this particular problem, we will limit to the values which are
standard and which have taken we will not go for the reality. Reality could be about 300
hours or 275 hours or so. 
But then, using this if you take the current value of the fuel cost, which we have given on
the basis of the current value say at July 2018, in Indian conditions, the labour cost and
the oil cost and fuel cost, if you had together then the these values are there. Now we
need to take these values. So, using this value the field capacity of the machine is yeah
here it is already given to us per hectare labour cost works out to be then rupees 93 per
hectare ok.
Next the per hectare fuel and oil cost will be calculated, how do you calculate that? In
fact, for that also the ASAE has given already a equation and why we follow this?
Because these are the standard equations, which are being all over standards and which
are being used all over by the scientists and engineers for finding out the specific fuel
consumption and this is the expression, which is given here. Now where the ratio to
actual ratio of actual to maximum power is given by X here in this rest L c is the
equation.
So, this value as we have taken found to be 0.39. Now using this value 0.39 then what
we get here is something of the order of this 0.582 liter per kilowatt hour. Now the
hourly consumption is then given as 15.83 liter per hour.
Now, depending upon what is the type of the machine, what is the total horsepower of
that this  value be changed or this  is a calculation which is on the basis of certain
assumptions of the cost and the existing cost etcetera and the calculations which are say
ratio of actual and maximum power, which we have taken as 70 and this the actual which
is to be used include. So, using this value which comes to about 16 liter per hour, now this value may change,
this value will change depending upon the conditions, what you have depending about
type of the machine, which you have taken this is actual. But then actual machine could
be about more than 75 horsepower then in that case, these values will change, but it gives
only an idea that how much hourly fuel consumption will take place? In fact, the oil
consumption also will be there accordingly. 
So, we need to calculate that as well, how much of oil will be required this talks of only
the fuel consumption. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:54)
So, per hectare fuel cost that way then comes out to be about 2696 per hectare and the
estimated oil consumption rate as I said that we need to also know about this, because the
machine will required this oil, when it is being used for long duration of time, there will
be requirement of this oil for lubrication and other aspects which are there in the machine
at 3 different locations. 
So, we it works out to be; it works out to be here, we are talking of so much the per
hectare fuel cost, which comes out to be 2696 per hectare. My duties values, which are
given a representative value, we have picked up and want to show you these are not the
value, which will remains constant always.But then what you have to understand is that these values or uncertain assumptions. So,
as an engineer when you are going for it, you will have to consider, the data given, the
conditions of the machine, availability of the machine and your own condition of the cost
and the shelter or whatever that you have at your disposals. So, you have to consider all
these things then only, you can come to the per hectare cost of the machine. 
Now, per hectare cost of oil of course, as I said per hectare is something of this amount.
So, we have taken rated power to be 70 kilowatt that as I said earlier. Now we using this,
we are getting fuel cost as well as oil cost. So now, let us see what else is required
because we are looking for the total cost, ownership cost of this particular equipment. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:38)
The purchase price is corrected for 3 percent inflation rate that is the adjusted price well,
when you are talking of the interest rate, when you are talking of the machine when what
you have purchased and then you are talking of correction inflation rates. So, changes
inflation rate depending upon what is the, which year you are talking of and all that. 
So, a very big figure comes at this point of time, which you may check if there is any
mistake anywhere, well we are all with of all humble this thing we will accept that, but
we hope that we have in a position to be a correct value that was given over here. 
But then all apologies for any mistakes in these calculations although, we hope there
would not be, but then if there are any we are ready to accept that and will be correct if atall. Now accumulated repair and maintenance cost for the 10 years use of the machine at
only 200 hours per year, which I said that could be vary, it could be varying a lot. And
you for that you can use the same our data of ASAE and this is given a C r m by P u, you
know what C r m is the accumulated repair and maintenance cost and P u is known to us
already, earlier then RF1 and RF2 equal talks of the repair factors from ASAE data.
So, repair factors are F1 and F2, now to these values can be taken to be this from this
data. So, assuming this the C r m or the accumulated repair maintenance cost works out
for this machine works out to be about this much value. So again, you can see that the
calculations you may check. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:25)
Well harvesting at rate of actual field capacity, now we have talked of say total in the life
of that machine comes to be about 2000 hours, the combine harvests was 940 hectare
well could be about 1000 hectare also during it is economic life time, yes it could be
because as I said we are not talking only 200 hours.
It could be slightly more than that. So, if we safely even if you take 1000. So, you will
get a very decent value of the total rupees per hectare, which comes to be for repair and
maintenance cost. So, total per hectare operating cost excluding the timeliness penalty
cost, if wheat combine is given as this much here. Now, this is a cost which has been a consideration, which has considered with excluding
the timeliness cost. Now remember that when we considered this we do not exclude this,
but when we are excluding this is what it is. So, as an engineer you must be careful about
all the parameters that I have talked of from right from the beginning to this point as to
what are the parameters to be considered, what values to be taken which size of the
machine to be taken for a particular operation etcetera. So, you need to look into this. 
Now, with these 2 lectures of part 1 and part 2, what we have tried to explain to you is,
how  do  you  select  machines?  As  I  told  in  the  previous  one,  that  selection  and
management these are 2 important parameters, when we are talking of selection we are
talking of what concepts to be followed in selection and then management. 
You can think of if you go for simply calculations on a basis of the capacity of a
machine, then you may find that about 3 4 units of tractor, 3 4 units of transplanter and
certain machines and the cost of that will be quiet high and in fact, that is not the way of
the way an engineer look into. Engineer must look into the economics of the whole
management, what selection we should take so that it is manageable and it is worth
having those system, because we are trying to talk about a particular model. If somebody
has 20 hectare land and he is thinking of a crop rotation of paddy, wheat and green grain
gram then, what should be the machines? And in the second part, we have try to look
into what are the different cost which come.
So, accordingly you have to work out the cost of those machines also which you have
taken for your analysis, because the movement you have a 20 hectare land and if you
think of a high ton capacity of production. You will have larger and larger amount of
production and say income will increase and then you would like to roll back the money
back into this and have increase in area. 
At once, you have from 20 hectare to about 100 hectare and beyond then all that then,
you will have to think of increasing the machines, you may have you think of even
storing of the grains etcetera and then maybe processing of the. So, you can think of a
total aggresses to model where, we can consider about the equipment to be required
management of the equipment then produce and then storing of the produce. 
Then  processing  of  the  produce,  then  marketing  of  the  produce,  every  gamut  of
information that has to be looked into has to be considered, when we are thinking ofselection and management of machines. Well, I think this way I tried to give a sort of
overview of how should you select a machine or a group of machines or a certain given
hectare area and what management practices you should consider. 
Well this will help you in solving some of the problems and I know that there could be
some relations, some situations, where you may not be in a position to come to a
conclusion. But then I hope that you will be able to follow this and if you have any
questions, which we can always answer at some point of time, during the your process of
understanding this we will be ready to help you out and I think, I would like to close this
here.
Thank you very much.