Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 07
Tractor implement hitching system
Well, dear students, you have seen the various aspects of implements being connected to
Tractor and how they operate in the field. And, what are the different design factors,
which are considered if you want to have a certain matching implement to a power
source.
The last lecture we had talked about the PTO Driven Tractor Rotavator. And, we had
considered all the factors and we saw how they an efficient design of a rotavator can be
performed. Now, in this series of lecture my 7th lecture here talks of tractor implement
hitching systems, well you might have seen how to hitch an implement in the field,
which was described earlier.
Now, we will talk of certain other aspects, which are very important from academic point
of view and from the point of view of the researchers and the designer’s right let us go to
the slides.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:18)
Now, in this slide I have shown the different hitching points, well you may remember
that we have already discussed in my previous lectures, that the 3 locations where the
drawbar is connected with of the tractor single point, two point and three point.
Well we had discussed earlier that two point hitches are generally for larger equipment
and they are not involved in the Indian conditions, we do have the single point and the
three point. So, we will discuss about the single point and three point in later course of
the slides here, but let us look at some of the important features of the tractor implement
combination.
For example, have a look at this. Here, this is the top view of the tractor here. In this
case, we can very easily see what the details are. I have already explained these details in
previous course, but it is very imperative to have a look at those parameters again, for
better understanding and have a correlation between what has happened earlier and what
is now? So, you can see that the wheelbase, wheelbase is the centre line between distance
between the center line of the front and the rear this is the field base here.
Similarly, the wheal tread I discussed that wheal tread is a stronger bearing on the rotor
row spacing, which when we want to change. Although, this is provided in by the tractor
manufacturers,  but farmers  because of various reasons, particularly  the difficulty  in
changing this they do not change that and use. This is the distance between the center
line of the rear wheels here and maybe same case in case of the front as well.
See if you see the side view of this. How the hitches are kept? Now, in this side view of
this you can see that this is the front axle, this is the rear axle, then the lower links, you
can see that these are the lower links, these hitch point, this is called the hitch point, this
is the lower link hitch whose hitch point is this, then this is the lower link point again of
the other (Refer Time: 03:53) point, then 5th this is the upper hitch point, this is the upper
hitch point where and upper link is this.
So, upper link is this here I linked at this position and this is the hitch point, this is the
linked at this position this is the hitch point, upon the there are 2 lower links here. The
distance 6 is the vertical convergence distance. Now, this vertical convergence distance
is between the CPV virtual hitch point and the horizontal virtual hitch point now here.The virtual hitch point if you recall I had discussed earlier, that you will get a virtual
hitch point, when you extend the top link backward and the lower link backward, you
will get a virtual hitch point. Of course, when I can implement is connected to this, then
this will keep on changing the location of this will keep on changing , but then to
understand this is the point, where which is the virtual hitch point, when you extend the
the top link and the lower links here.
The horizontal hitch point of course, if CP H is the Horizontal hitch point which is shown
in this diagram here. These horizontal hitch point at this position, because when you see
in the top view this is the location which will be seen here. So, we will talk of the single
point  hitch,  now  what  is  single  point  hitch  and,  how  the  different  implements  are
connected to this. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:31)
Let us have a look at it. Vertical Hitching System in fact, the implement having hinged
pull members and support fields or runners. There are 2 conditions, which we encounter.
Actually, when larger implements or hitched to the single edge point. We will talk of the
trailer at some other point of time in our course of these lectures, but we will just talk of
the implements particularly the moldboard ploughs.
We have a look at the moldboard plough have a look at this figure one here, well have a
look at figure one figure one here. Here, there is a runner we can see that there is a
runner here and these are the ploughs and this is the location where, we this particularimplement is hitched you can see that there are 1-2-3-4 these are the positions where, this
implement can be connected.
Now, when this is connected to the hitch point of the tractor, you can have a look at this
that the hitch point of the tractor drawbar is somewhere here. Which is in fact, when we
are talking of the line of pull, we are talking of the line of pull which is in fact, a line
which has already been explained to you, that it is a line which is joining the center of
resistance which is at point G over here and the hitch point. So, this is the line which is
the central of line of pull from the center of resistance to this.
Now, what important point is to be noted here is the hitch point is too low, when we are
attaching  to this  point the  lowest one, the  hitch  point  becomes  very  low, but then
advantage here is that then this runner is in a position to take the load. And, then
maintain a position of depth of the operator with respect depth of the implement with
respect to the tractors operation. And therefore, we call this to be a stable condition here
of  the  system  of  operation,  when  the  field  is  being  ploughed  with  this  particular
implement.
But, then if you see the second figure 2 here. The runner is still there, but what has
happened is now instead of the lowest one, it has been fixed to the a higher position here.
So, the moment you put to a higher position, what happens? That, the position of this G
the center of resistant here is shifted forward at this location here, this location here and;
that means, that once this location is the implements get lifted. And, when the implement
gets lifted? Then, this particular [hill/wheel] is this runner wheel is also lifted. And, then
it is not in a position to operate or maintain the depth of operation. And, that is why this
condition we call a unstable condition.
The rear of plough will be very unstable, when momentarily variations in the direction
and magnitude of R v are considered, because this is the R v force this is the force R v here.
And, these force over here. In case of you see the condition of this, now we get this
particular parallelogram here. And, in this case we are getting a situation which is like
this here, but ultimately since it has been shifted we are getting a situation like this here.
Where Pv is the resultant where shifted here. Also, it passes through the point F here, but
then it is not a stable condition, and it will also not maintain the depth of operation. As,
in case of the stable one a uniform depth will not be maintained there will be a depthdefinitely in this, but uniform depth will not be maintained although both are hitched
implements.
So, it is important to understand that if the hitching of these implements are done at
proper  location  on  the  drawbar  with  these  points  here,  then  you  will  get  a  stable
condition and an unstable condition. Stable condition will help you to maintain uniform
depth of operation and unstable condition will not allow even the runner to maintain a
certain depth operation, as the as well as the G will also get shifted here.
And, there will be unnecessary load on to this and we will not be in a position to utilize
the whole capacity of this particular equipment this is important.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:30)
Now, well now we will go to another case where, again we are attaching the implement
to  a  single  point  where,  we have  the  hitch  system  possible  hitch  system  could  be
obtained  by changing  the height of the drawbar well.  We know  that the when the
drawbar is here, if we want to change the position of the hitch, we can shift the location
of the drawbar by changing the position of the lower links.
So, when we change the position of the lower links, we can do this part height of the
drawbar can be change, adjusting the position of the lower links at F this position. So,
that we we can do this part of it now, this type of full type of implement you can have a
look at this, the line of pull is through G and vertical hitch point F is at a tractor drawbar.So, this is the location where, but the point of hitch is here and G is at this position. Now,
there appears to a slightly better condition of operation in this case as compared with
previous implements, but this is a rigid pull type of member. Earlier once we had a wheel
there and there was no rigidity with respect to the manufacturing of this or with the
frame of this as compared to the previous ones.
So, here we find that the hitching of this rigid pull member or the implement is at a
elevated position or a position where we want to have, wherever we want to have we can
use this and the center of resistance is at point G here, and the force is the way we had
talked of the Rv, and Pf are connected which pass through the center line and which pass
through the hitch point as well as center of resistance.
G the point G is fixed by intersection of AB and Q v this is quite natural because the
locations where the forces are acting of the weight of the implement, as well as the soil
forces. So, this position remains same here, but then the whole mechanics will change,
but it, but it has a case particularly when it is rigid pull member.
Now, in this case what is so, important is the Q v passes slightly behind the axle center
line to supply torque which overcomes the wheel bearing friction and causes the rotation
of the fields this is important. See Q v, this Qv force is this is the Q v force here. Qv passes
slightly behind the excess center line of the pull. So, slightly behind the axle center line
of pull to supply a torque, now this torque will help us in overcoming. These curves will
help us in overcoming the friction bearing. Now this is the one which will help us in
overcoming the varying friction and then causes the rotation of the wheels. So, the wheel
will rotate and the implement phase will be in a position to move.
Now, this is the tractor rear wheel this is the tractor rear wheel. So, what has happen is
this G has come inside the tractor wheel. This is as compared to the other ones this G has
come inside this and it will help us in hitching taking the implement forward by creating
this torque, which will overcome the varying friction and then move away move the
tractor I mean help this in moving the tractor forward ok.
Let us go to the other side when we have discussed about the single. So, I just wanted to
show you that if we compare the conditions here of the pull type implements being
hitched. So, the conditions are here you can see that the wheel, where is the location of
the wheel here? And, what is the location of the wheel in the other cases? In the stablecondition you can see, where is the G here? It is away from behind the wheels, where it
comes inside in case of unstable condition, which is not acceptable and then when we go
to this condition it is falling in between this.
So, these are the 3 different conditions under which the implements are test. Now, it is
when it depends on what type of implement you want to use and what is the condition in
which, it has to be of the soil as well as the total output capacity of the implement and so
on and so forth.
But, then one must look into that these single point hitch implements or very large
implements  and  they  are  used  with  very  high  horsepower  tractors,  which  in  these
conditions are not very much in use, but what are important is the single point, which
mostly used once or the trailers or the for the haulage operations we will discuss that
slightly later.
Then, now we will talk of another aspect of this condition.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:51).
See horizontal hitching of pull type implements. Now, those we had seen the vertical
hitching where, the hitching was in a vertical plane. Now, when we talk of this pull
implements being connected in the horizontal plane, we can see that this is the drawbar
here and this is the hitch point at this location.(Refer Slide Time: 16:12)
Yes, well we can see that this is the plough, this is the top view of the plough, we find
that the center of resistance is the at this location. And, this is connected to the hitch
point now you can see the hitch point is over here. So, it is following the center position
here.
So, the line of pull is if you see this is the line of pull in this condition. Now, moldboard
plough will operate satisfactorily even when the line of pull is at considerable angle from
the line of travel. This is the important part when we talk of horizontal hitching of this.
Horizontal hitching of the pull type of implements will have this advantage, that even if
there is certain inclination or even slightly more inclination even then, the operation will
be satisfactory.
For hitching it is location can be concede can be assumed to be one-fourth of the width
of cut over the landslide and little behind the rear edge of the share. Now, we has talking
of these position; that means, the hitch for hitching it is location can be assumed to be
one-fourth of the width of the cut, over the land side and little behind the rear edge of
this is point which needs to be looked into location of H, this location of H varies
depending upon the soil condition, this H here, this is the position here. Now, this will
definitely vary with this soil condition, the length of the land side and amount of side
force taken by the rear furrow wheels.So, the important positions are important aspects to be looked into are the line of pull and
the hitch point and the center of resistance here, which will have a variation on the type
of the soil, and the amount of the total length of these land side, because the that length
the land side takes certain amount of force side thrust and maintains a clear furrow. So, it
will also have that. So, depending upon that force which the landside takes the location
of H will have a bearing on that.
So, and the importance  which I told earlier is that here, it will have a satisfactory
operation even if the line of pull is at considerable angle from the line of travel yes this is
possible the because, the line of travel if the if this is the here and it is slightly away then
also, it will have a satisfactory operation, because the hitching is in the horizontal plane
this is the importance of this.
Well, now in it is a separate thing whether we will be in a position to use this under what
conditions this separate discussion altogether. At this point of time we limit up to this as
to what is the horizontal hitching of pull type of implements? What is vertical hitching of
pull type of implements? What are the locations? How they are stable? How they are
unstable? And, what happens to the point of hitch as the central position, where does it
go and which way it helps in the total operation of the implement with the tractor. So,
this is what we discussed in these slides. Let us go forward and have look at some other
aspects of the C.G.
Well three point hitch. We, would like to have a three point hitch, which is the drawbar,
which is most used and in fact, supposed to be the least effective. So, far as the power is
concerned and the amount of power that we get from the tractor and you will find that in
most of your problems and the designing you will be always talking of three point hitch.
Well, when we want to know this three point hitching, we must know about what are
these details of these components of such a H point or hitch system or a hitching system. 
Well, look at this figure here three point hitch categories are given here, but look at these
here we have given all details of the components. For example, the upper link 1 is upper
link here, this is the upper link here 1, 2 is the lower link, 2 is lower link. Now these this
is 1 lower link, this is another lower link. This is 2 3 upper hitch point now this is the
upper link and this is the hitch point of the upper link 3.4 lower hitch point now lower hitch point there are 2 lower hitchpoint, because there are
2 lower links. So, this and these are the 2 lower hitch points upper link point fifth is
upper link point at what position this upper link is connected in the tractor body. So, this
is the position 5.
Lower  link point  now  where  the lower  links  are connected  this  6. Now, these  are
connected well this is not shown here, but they are connected at this position, yes it is
shown here. This is position at which it is connected and this one is connected on the
other side of it just opposite. Then, upper hitch attachment upper hitch attachment 7 is
upper hitch attachment. Now, this is upper hitch attachment over here a lower hitch
attachment.
Now, at 8 now this is the location where lower hitch attachment, then 9 upper link
attachment  here  upper  link  attachment  in  this  so,  this  position  is  the  upper  link
attachment.  Then  10th  is  Linch  pin  well,  this  linch  pin  is  important  when  we  are
attaching the implement to this.
Then, Lift rods well, the lift rods are there this is lift rod here this is lift rod here, because
they help us in adjusting the position of the links they help us in adjusting position of the
links. 12th is Mast now this is these the mast here, which is of course, cannot be
appreciated with this small diagram, but that once you have a look and you might have
seen in the field I explained that this is the mast here. The mast height mast height is this,
that position of this with respect to this. So, this is the mast height this distance is the
mast height.
So, it is important to understand what are these where they are connected, the lower
points the H the upper point, what are the connect their connections in the body, because
then it when it they bigger implement is connected, whether it is a mounted type or a tilt
type, you will find that the if there is a failure or if there is lot of load on to the
implement, the failure takes place at these locations in the body of the tractor, we have
seen in some of the experiments at one of the companies that the failure took place from
this location of the body of the tractor where the lower link was were connected. So, we
had to look into the material of construction at that location.
So, it is very important to let you know as to what are these and how they are framed?
How they are connected to the tractor? How they are connect? They are in a position tobe connected with implement? And what are the other details this has been explained
over here? 
Now, since these are being universally used there has been a standard. And, that standard
is ASAE standard S217.10 which I have written here over here there are categories. So,
category I belongs to 15 to 35 kilowatt about 20 to 45 watts per tractor, category II 30 to
75, category III and category III N both well depends on the locations in some of the
other European countries and all that 60 to 668 kilowatt horsepower and fourth and fifth
is hundred 35 to 300 horsepower these are the categories, but we will find that in our
Indian conditions most of this we will be talking of category 2. Category I is where we
have been using the implements earlier smaller implements, but because of the more and
more use of larger equipment for more and more coverage area and saving in time. Then,
now we are shifting to 50 horsepower tractor 55 horsepower tractor and then that falls in
category II.
So, this will be the important category for us it is important to know that these are the
category exist, because these are being used all over the world. The standards for 3 point
hitch  specify  all  dimensions  including  minimum  lift,  limit  of  lifting  height,  lateral
levelling adjustments and side sway. And, minimum lifting force to be available at the
hitch point, this is important to know what does this category mean? And, what are the
important things, which have been universally used or being universally used by all of
these people.
There, but there is a limitation of this particular H point, what is the limitation? The link
lengths and the amount of horizontal and vertical convergence are not specified. So, one
must know that, while these are very universally used and there are certain limitations or
the values have been already fixed being to be used worldwide, we find that the link
lengths and the horizontal and horizontal and vertical convergence are not specified, this
you can be taken as the limitation of.(Refer Slide Time: 26:59).
 
Another  thing  which  worth  mentioning  here,  you  might  have  seen  the  hitching  of
implement the in the field, we had shown you. But there are very important devices or
couplers which at which we call quick attaching coupler for 3 point hitch.
Now, the beauty here is that when this coupler is connected to the implement it will be
easier for the tractor operator to just bring the tractor near and get it attached without
leaving his tractor C; that means, you have might have seen that when it was attached in
the field earlier case. People were trying to bring the tractor the (Refer Time: 27:52)
were bringing the tractor near. And the other pay persons were there to put the hitch
locations, and then this was being done and it took about 2-3 minutes of time.
But in this case it is that is why it is known as quick attaching coupler and it is very
simple in construction many a places where you it is used saves time. Of course, there is
a cost involved in that, but then does not matter one who wants to save time? And, who
does not have people to help him in hitching he can definitely use this.(Refer Slide Time: 28:26)
Free link of 3 point H system, we must have some information about this free link
vertical forces analysis of free link operation. See location we it is very simple that as we
discussed earlier that there will be gage wheel, then there is the center of resistance
center of resistance here, where the forces of the implementer are here, there are the
vertical  force of the implement,  then the soil forces and the forces in between  the
implement and the tractor while the tractor is being put.
So, the gage supports the gage wheels, supporting surfaces of the implement free link
operation  gives  more  uniform  depth  operation.  Here,  it  gives  more  uniform  depth
operation, because it is field and this gage will it in facts gages the operation here this.
So, it helps in this condition of operation and we have hardly any problem with regard to
the  maintenance  of  the  depth  operation.  Because  then  depth  operation  if  there  is
changing then maybe in the irrigation etcetera more amount of water will be at some
location or the other. So, it is very important that we should have a free link operation
where, we can get a uniform depth operation.
A location of F, shifts automatically as the implement is raised or lowered. Yes. Here
this particular position of F, which is again in case of the 3 point linkage we know that
this is the virtual hitch point. So, virtual hitch point this will definitely have a change in
position as the implement is lifted or lower in course of it is operation in the field. And,this shift promotes rapid entry of the tools appreciable bottom surface such as moldboard
plough.
Well operate this operation is easier from this point of view that rapid entry of the tool
takes place in this case.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:44)
Restraint link, in restraint link operation this provides greater tractability of the depth
fluctuations caused by ground surface irregularities are greater in this restraint link over
here,  but  then  it  we  are  controlling  by  the  hydraulic  lever.  So,  the  importance  of
restrained link here, you can have a look at this  that the line of pull is shifted as
compared to the other case. And, the restraint link operation the effect of the implement
upon the tractor, when the implement is at it is operating left is the independent of the
hitch linkage arrangement. This is the important things with respect to a restrained link
here.
And, it provides greater tractability attractive ability depth fluctuations, which are caused
by ground surface irregularities are greater in the restrained link yes, but then they are
taken care of by the hydraulic system of the tractor.
The in restrained link the implement gets all or most of the vertical support from the
tractor. Yes. This is the important part with respect to when we cover the free link
operation there here, whole weight of the tractor, whole weight of the implement easesonto the tractor, and hence it helps in the pulling ability of the tractor as compared to the
free link operation.
This is the well I think then in this course of my lecture what I have tried to explain to
you is how the hitching is done with respect to single edge and three point edges. And
what are the different types of forces which are acting into it, what is a three point
linkage  and  what  are  it  is  specifications  world  over,  what  it  is  capacity,  what  is
limitations etcetera. I think then we look into the other aspects of this system in my later
course.
Thank you.