Farm Machinery
Prof. V. K. Tewari
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 08
Mechanics of tractor implement hitch system and traction prediction models
 
Well, in my previous lecture we discussed about the hitching of the implements of
different kinds, the pull type implements in the vertical and horizontal hitching as well as
3-point linkage hitching. Now when we have this hitching with the tractor, what is the
mechanics behind the implement and tractor combination?
And what are the different prediction models which people have developed over the
years,  researchers  have  done  over  the  years  in  order  to  find  out  the  total  draft
requirement?  And  hence  the  total  power  requirement,  because  this  will  help  us  in
designing a particular equipment for matching to the power source.
Let us have a look at the different slides through these slides we will go through. And I
have named this lecture as mechanics of tractor implement hitch system and traction
prediction models.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:17)
Yes, mechanics have tried to implement combination under static condition; where you
must have seen that when the tractor is simply standing condition, and when the P is 0the very simple. What I have done through the slide difference slide you will find, that I
have made things very simple and not complicated by keeping all the forces acting in on
the soil, and the wheel at one point of time. So, that you can understand step by step how
are these things happening.
So, in the in this one we have given a very simple diagram, which will talk of the front
reaction this is the rear reaction, and there is a P load P here, which I have assumed to be
0. Then in this condition only the center of gravity of the tractor is over here, and this
total weight is Wt. So, if you take forces in the vertical direction, we get this only. And if
you take moment here that you get R f is equal to this, and R r is equal to this.
Now, move the moment there is a force on to this. There will be change in these reaction
forces. So, those think we call as weight transfer, that the moment there is a value of P,
when P is positive not 0 more than that, then there will be a weight transfer taking place
between these and to these and these size. We will talk of this slightly later.
Now, let us go to the next slide.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:12)
Here well, but before I go to actual so, you then differences, I have tried to make you
understand how that aspect of the same here, now, yes. So, now you can see that these
are the forces the R r and Rf here. So, if you consider this with respect to this particularfigure  particular  problem,  we find  that  in very easily  we can  find out what  is  the
horizontal distance from rear axle centre line to the centre gravity of the tractor.
The center of gravity is if it is here, we are interested to know what this distance is. This
is wheelbase, we know this is wheelbase ah. It has been already said earlier. So, taking a
simple moment as we described earlier, you can find out what is the value of L 1 here.
And once you know the value of L 1, there is another aspect which is asked identify if the
tractor is 2-wheel drive or 4-wheel drive the total weight is given over here.
So, it is such that the moment we know that on a 2-wheel drive tractor, the weight
distribution is slightly different. About 60 to 65 percent I have said earlier also and the
rest weight on the rear wheels. But when the weight is approximately 50 percent on both
sides, then we call that tractor to be 4-wheel drive tractor.
So, that is the hint I have given here. That when it a 2-wheel drives tractor weight
distribution front and rear axle approximately 35 and 65 and for a 4 wheel drive it is 50
percent. And on that basis you can answer this question here. Because, the R r which is 70
kilo Newton and this value the front axle is 72 kilo Newton, which is already given to
you.
So, from here you can know that R r is this and Rf is 72 kilo Newton; that means, this
tractor is a 4-wheel drive tractor. And hence the answer is there is a 4-wheel drive
tractor.(Refer Slide Time: 06:05)
Well we go to a working condition. Now the moment we go to a working condition you
please consider the previous figure and this figure here. There we had not talked of the
force and we have said that P is equal to 0.
Now, here we have put an implement.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:24)
So, here we have said that there is a force here. And this will have 2 components very
simple as you have seen earlier that when there will be a line of pull, through the line of
pull there will be a pull force acting. So, the horizontal component will be the pull, andthis Py will be acting downwards. Now this is the location where it acts where the weight
of the implement is also acting at this particular point 
The location of this particular point is about distance Y 1 which is Y1, vertical distance of
center of resistance from the ground wheel this. Here the moment the tractor is in soil
you will find that the contact point is not exactly under the center line as we had seen in
the earlier case
Ah In the earlier case, it is slightly at a distance e f, in case of the ef and in case of the
front wheels and e r in case of the rear wheels. And therefore, you will find that this
distance er and ef have been very clearly indicated when the same when the implement is
in the working condition, and the implement is working condition in the soil. And the
other related forces will be RR r rolling resistance in the front; similarly, RR r rolling
resistance at the rear and h this is the cross tractive force.
So now from the static condition of simple in the tractor, you have come to a condition
where this combination is working in the field this will have. So, if we take the vertical
this is ∑v = 0, and then the forces if we take the summation of the forces this is what we
get here. Then taking moment about C, this is the point C here. So, if we take moment
about the point C here, we get the equation with respect to this here, where W m, Py, PX
are indicated here.
Then the in a forward the front wheel dynamic reaction is given by this here. Now taking
moment about point D, when you take moment about point D over here, we get the rear
wheel dynamic reaction by this. And X 1 total distance which comprises X m; that means,
distance from the center line of the wheel to the center of the resistance. And the
wheelbase plus ef, because this will talk if you are taking moment about D then X 1 is
given by this where X 1 has been used, in the equation wherever X 1 has been used in
equation this is the value which happens.
So, if you take the moment, then from the previous one now here condition different.
Now we will see another condition in which when it is at certain angle, yes. So, these
this you can see that same combination, but now it is a certain angle slow. It is on a slope
here.(Refer Slide Time: 10:07)
So, the moment it is on a slope beta comes into play here. And then we have the forces
which we discussed earlier the CG will act here, and these components the because beta
(β) will be in this direction, sinβ will be acting in this direction here, and then this is the
force F which acts the line pull. Then it will it will have a component Fcosα by here, then
a component which is Fsinα here.
And this is the Rf over here, this is the point of resistance this portion in the rolling
resistance. In fact, this should be rolling resistance here R rf of front field and this R rr here
rolling resistance in this. All the forces which we have shown there are same here.
Except that the nomenclature certain distance is say x p is the distance from this centre of
this point hitch, ok. And y p is from this location here.
So, y p and x p has been explained to you as what is their position with respect to this
line? This is the line which is drawn which is at an angle of beta from the horizontal line.
So, considering similar aspects of mechanics here we find if the pull F is equal to F s and
is given by this here.
And at Rf is equal to 0 now, this is a condition which needs to be considered, what will
happen is the moment I have said earlier. The moment there is a pull onto the tractor, the
there will be change in the reaction. And hence there will be may not be a physical, but
there will be a weight transfer taking place this weight transfer. And that means, thisvalue of Rf the reaction force on the front wheel it is start decreasing. It will start
decreasing.
So, a point a limiting point where we can say that the maximum pull force that we can
get Fs the maximum pull force which will be equal to F s when Rf is equal to 0. So, R f is
equal to 0 this is the value. We know the angle alpha (α), we know angle beta (β), we
know Mt, we know yc, we know yp all this X1 and X2 all the details are there. Then we
will be in a position to find out this F s.
Now, look at the traction. How do we get actually the pulling ability of the tractor wheel
of the implement? How what do we get from there? See, here we have given the certain
tractor wheel here. And it is imprint it is footprint is shown over here. And you can see
that this is virtually an elliptical in shape here it is virtually elliptical in shape with the
length here and breadth here.
Now, what happens? Whenever we have supposing that these grips these grips, when
here soil is fixed now where the moment it goes into the soil, soil will come inside. This
it is just like as if we have some sort of a here, and there will be soil into this.
Now, if there is a load on this here, say in certain load W, then the force required to put
here and F. So, when we are trying to push this what will happen is this will have a
resistance being offered? Now that resistance will be offered on the basis of what is the
area. And what is the cohesion force you can say cohesion between the particles here?
Now, this same thing has been very nicely said by coulombs equation which is given as
over here. F = AC + W tanϕ. So, the force this force is the force which is the shear force.
This shear force is given as W is the normal weight coming on to this. And A is is the
area on which it is acting area of the footprint. So, we get that F is equal to AC into this.
Where phi (ϕ) is the angle of an internal friction which has been explained over here.
Now, this is very important so far as the capability of the tractors lug is there. Because
when this lug is the there is the change in the design of the lug will have a greater
bearing on the pulling ability of the tractor. And higher tractors have higher sizes of the
tractor fields you might have seen that we are starting from 12.4 into 28 to 13.6 and
maybe even higher than that. So, those values will have a greater bearing; so, the largertractors  have  larger  fields  and  because  they  can  pull  these  the  implement  larger
implements.
Of course the torque is on to the tractor axle here, and we know that when the torque is
acting at this position here, at this location is the pull here. So, we have to have a this is
the one which we are talking of the torque here, now this torque and this center distance
we will make up the total torque the force here, and this order will make the torque.
Now, while we are getting the torque out of this, the important parameter is the lugs
which are here. So, these lugs if these lugs are not properly designed or these are worn
out, then the pulling ability will decrease of this. So, it is important to understand that the
lugs of the tractor are important, and if the lugs are not there then this the pulling ability
will be simply virtually 0 and is given by the famous equation this. This footprint is not
necessarily a rectangular one. This footprint is in fact, a we find that this is generally an
elliptical in shape. This is elliptical in shape, you can say that this is elliptical in shape
here with l and b.
And therefore, as it is said here therefore, the pressure which we get on to these P =
W/(0.78 bl) this has been worked out. That the value is 0.78 times not bl, which is for a
rectangular case. For a track of course, this is W/bl. And the value of this angle of
internal friction varies from 25 to 45 depending on the soil structure yes. And C is the
cohesion force, and cohesion force for a pure sand C is equal to 0.
So, when we talk of the traction which is nothing but the driving force developed by a
wheel track or other traction device. This is traction. It is important to understand that
without the proper tractive traction field, you cannot get enough traction or enough
pulling ability of the tractor or from the power of the tractor.
So, a traction is the driving force developed by the wheel or a track or any other device
which we get, and it is bearing is on the lugs which are there which has a gripping
capability onto the soil, when they grip the soil and is being pulled depending upon the
type of the soil, the C and phi (ϕ) values the C and phi (ϕ) values the amount of force,
this force shear force will depend. And we will be in a position with what is the total
pulling ability of the tractor.Now, if you see the same thing here it is very nicely you may told about this particular
driving wheel. That D is the pull here, and W t is weight coming onto this. And the force
is here this is soil force over here rolling resistance over here, and this is the vertical
force of the soil reaction. And G.T. as gross tractive force over here, and tau (τ) is the
torque. So, this is the mechanics or the one or the point of consideration for you when
you want to design a particular implement or try to find out the total power for a
particular implement width of an implement while connected to a soil.
So, it is very important to understand this aspect of traction. And when we are talking of
attaching of the implements, we are simply talking how to attach. Once it attached, we
must see what are the forces which are acting there. And once the forces are coming, we
should see what is the traction device which is developing this particular amount of
traction; which will actually help us in getting the design of the implement which we
want.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:01)
Well I talked of the tires it is also very important to know what are these tires. And how
these tires are employed, and what is their design, under what conditions which type of
tires are used, why certain type of tires are used under field conditions, why different
types of tires are used under road conditions. We see that most of the tires which we
have are the bias ply tires which are used like this here.Now, this is the rim diameter say 12 ply rating, 13.6 if this is the designation of this
particular tire. Then we know it has also been told to you earlier even in the field
condition I told; that what is the meaning of these which is written on the tire itself. You
can see the crossing bias ply these plies these fibers and these fibers are making an angle
of 45 degrees.
In case of this is not a situation they are parallel here virtually and the condition under
which these radial tires. In fact, these radial tires rolling higher rolling resistance, but
improved coefficient of traction is obtained in case of radial tires. And these radial tires
you must have seen that mostly these are our passenger vehicles which are mostly going
onto the roads and high speed vehicles. They have their own advantages, but when we
talk of the tracking ability or the pulling ability there is not so much in these as compared
to the bias ply ratings or bias ply type of tires.
So, it is important to understand why this type of tires are used mostly in tractors, and not
this type; although, in European condition these are also used because most of the time
those are being used on road conditions and for haulage operations are other earthmoving
operations. So, those are being used, but these are the ones which are used under Indian
conditions or not European non-European conditions.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:41)
Terms related to traction models. Now, we talked I had said that we will we also talking
of some of the prediction models.Now, I have been telling in the beginning itself that the moment there will be the forces
are there on the wheels. And the moment there is a pull behind the tractor because of the
implement  there  will be change in these reactions. And when there  is  a change in
reactions there will be weight transfer taking place which is physically we do not see, but
yes there is a change. Because as we discussed earlier, that the moment R f comes to 0
virtually the implement will get lifted. And that is why at a limiting value of R f, we find
what the maximum pull that we can get is. And once we must limit the maximum pull
within pull within that value.
Now, the moment we have a wheel, we have a wheel, and if this wheel is rolled let us
say that for one rotation. So, this distance if this is the diameter of the wheel is D, this D
here; this will be πD for one revolution. Now on a condition, if you see that this is on a
road on a road or level road, where there is no load on the wheel.
So, when there is no load on the wheel, we will call this the radius of the wheel, this
diameter D is equal to 2r. So, this radius is then known as rolling radius. So, this r is
known as rolling radius. So, the rolling radius is the radius obtained when under 0
conditions, that is under 0 conditions. So, if we want to define this, what is rolling radius
is the radius obtained by rotation of the wheel under a 0 load condition and divided by
2π.
So, these distances suppose this is the distance S. So, S/2π will be r here. This is what the
rolling radius which we design here is. Now since there is there will be a change in the
reaction these reactions, and if this distance is changed because of some load. Now this
was the condition when there was no load. When there is a load now, supposing there is
a load on the wheel. So, there will be load on the wheel.
The moment there is a load on the wheel what will happen? The earlier distance OD will
not remain OD. Now it will become now OD 1 where, where the D 1 will be less than D
where this D1 will be less than D. Now since D 1 is less than D we will say that there is a
reduction in the distance travelled. Because this πD will become now πD 1 and πD1. So,
the distance πD is greater than πD 1.
Now, that means, there is a reduction. So, this reduction is known as travel reduction.
And now this travel reduction happens because of the load behind the wheel because of
which there is a slippage of the wheel which occurs. So, sometimes interchangeably thistravel reduction is also known as wheel slip then I which has to happen, ideally it should
be 0. Ideally what we want is D 1 should be equal to D only, but it does not happen. There
because the definitely when the load is required there will be some resistance required
for overcoming that. And that is why we will have a wheel slippage. So, we talk of that
as wheel slippage it could be wheel slip or it could be called travel reduction or travel
reduction ratio.
Now, this table direction ratio is now given as (1 – v a/vt) where actual velocity theoretical
velocity here. Then other aspects of the attractive model is talk of drawbar power. Now
we know the drawbar power, we have if we know the drawbar force. We can multiply by
the velocity we can get the drawbar power. And the axle power the axle power is the
power which we are getting at the axle of the tractor. Which is in fact, not possible to
find out, there are other ways by which we can find out, but yes there is it that power
which is coming at the axle. And from here we go through the wheels now.
Net traction; so, why we call net traction here? Because the pull which we have got
earlier and the rolling resistance which you have got there will be difference in this and
then the dynamic rear. So, the net traction coefficient is given through this equation. And
coefficient of rolling resistance is rolling resistance by dynamic load onto the wheel. So,
it is it is easier to understand once you know about what a rolling radius is and what the
travel reductions are.
What slippage takes place, what slippage happens in the wheel, because of which there
will be a traction which will be a gross traction, and then there will be a traction which is
net traction, because the growth traction will take care of everything and the moment we
talk of net traction we have to I mean subtract the rolling resistance. And then we will be
in a position to get.
Now, if we talk of coefficients, we have to talk with respect to the total dynamic load
which is coming out to the wheel. And that is why we are talking of coefficient here.
Otherwise this is what is the net load which is net traction which we are getting. And the
moment we divide by this we are talking of the net coefficient.
Similarly, rolling resistance we get here. This is the value, but the moment we talk of
with  respect  to  the  dynamic  load  which  is  coming  on  to  the  wheel  it  becomes  a
coefficient.(Refer Slide Time: 29:53)
There are certain other aspects which need to be explained about the wheels. See wheel a
simple wheel which has only to be pulled here, we call this wheel where there is no no
torque this torque is not there. So, this is towed wheel.
This is we call as towed wheel. The famous example is the front wheel of the tire tractor.
Driving wheel, now the moment  we have a torque coming  onto this wheel weight
remaining same, and the horizontal this pull is there h pull is over here. So, when the
driving pull h is 0 greater than 0 we have and this is the reaction here, we call this as a
driving wheel.
The moment we have everything that is the weight coming here the reaction of the soil,
but there is no pull here, when the pull is not there, h is the pull. So, when the pull is 0
we call this as a self-propelled. And the example of this is the transport wheel of the
power tiller. So, rear wheel will drive is the driving wheel. And towed wheel is the front
wheel, and a self-propelled wheel is the wheel example is a power tiller.
And braked wheel is where we are calling where braked wheel where this torque is there,
and there is a soil reaction here. And the pull is also over here, we call this to be a braked
wheel.(Refer Slide Time: 31:46)
Traction models where there are the several scientists have done several studies. And
they have found out on the different types of models.
Particularly in order to find out what are the different coefficients of rolling resistance
gross traction, and the net traction I have talked of gross traction net traction. But the
equations which have been given are just have a look at this that this is the equation
which is given by Wismer and Luth in 1973 for the rolling resistance for gross traction.
This is the equation, here he has talked of the wheel slip in this case and Cn a wheel
numeric which talks of (CI bd/W) where CI is the cone index. We will talk of cone index
slightly later; it is talk of the strength of the soil.
And the tractive force here; the moment we talked net tractive force it has to be gross
tractive force minus the rolling resistance. So, you can just see that the net tractive force
comes like this. And these are the details are explained over here. So, this is the traction
model given by Wismer and Luth.(Refer Slide Time: 32:58)
Now, another scientist  in 1987 Brixius  model.  What  the Wismer and Luth did not
consider was this aspect of the δ/h. Delta by h which delta (δ) caused the deflection of
the tire and h is the sectional height. We know that when the tire is over here and then
because of this there will be a deflection coming up because of the soil pressure there
will be deflections.
Now, this deflection we generally take this deflection is the ratio of del (δ) by point 20
percent of this, on a normal pressure that we maintain in these wires ah, in this tires. So,
he has considered this aspect and accordingly then he got a number instead of the wheel
numeric which was there in case of this. Here you got a mobility number between given
with this. And he has also found out the rolling resistance as well gross traction. And so,
if you want to get the net traction definitely there is a difference of these 2.
So, these 2 models have been used all over the world being used all over the world,
depending on the soil, depending on the condition which the person wants to study, and
they have been very popularly used, and lot of research is going on. People at other
locations also have done some work.(Refer Slide Time: 34:29)
Ah Say at IIT Kharagpur also we have done similar work and found out for reactions,
particularly with respect to the soils which are in sandy lateritic sandy clay loam soils
which are there in Indian conditions.
So, well these are the different traction models, as I said from Brixius and Wismer and
Luth and the conditions in under in Indian conditions we have developed these models.
We will like in our next class, I would also like to show you how we take we test these,
and what is a soil strength, how do you maintain soil strength, how do you measure soil
strength, how do you measure the traction into the lab conditions. We will show you
these in the next course of classes.
Thank you.