Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 18 
Evaporation and Concentration (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to NPTEL  online certificati on course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering . In the last class , we were  discussing about the different types 
of evaporators . So, today we will continue the discussion on Evaporation and 
Concentration . 
So, we have discussed  in the last class about  the multiple effect evaporators . Multiple 
effect evaporator  is one way by that we can improve the  efficiency of an evaporation 
system . And if we talk about improving the  efficiency ; so, generally efficiency we define 
by the output effect that we  are getti ng divided by the input energy that we are  giving to 
the system . 
So, using  multiple effect evaporator  we can increase the  vapour  that is being evaporat ed 
from the system , where as we can utilize the same amount of steam that we can use in a 
single effec t evaporator . So, that is one way to increase the steam economy that is steam 
needed to  evaporate the  amount of  vapour from the liquid that we are concentrating 
using the evaporation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:46)  
 So, today we will discuss  the same  thing that is the multiple effect evaporator  and other  
mechanisms by which we can increase the efficiency . So, in the multiple effect 
evaporator  if we just recapitulate that . 
So, in multi ple effect evaporator what we did is suppose  this is the first effec t and in 
series there is other  2 effect that is the second one  and this is the third one right . So, 
steam enters into the first effect ; let us say TS temperature  and this steam is  utilizing  here 
to ev aporate  the liquid from the feed  F that is entering at  TF. And the temperature here in 
the first effect is  T1 in the second effect it is  T2 and third effect is  T3. 
And the corresponding pressure prevai ling in all these chambers are  P1, P2 and P3. Now 
the vapour produced from the first effect is going to  enter into the second one  and 
similarly the vapour produced from the second effect is going to introduc e in the third 
one. 
So, this vapour will be condensed here in the  second  effect and give the latent heat of 
condensation that is being utilize d by the f eed; that we use here which is the  concentrated 
feed that is coming out from the first effect . And then similarly from the second effect 
the concentrate which will come  will be utilize d as the feed in the third effect  right . 
And finally, the vapour which i s coming out  from the third  effect at the temperature of  T3 
will be going to the conde nser right . So, what will happen that  if our first effect operates 
at atmospheric pressure ; so, this vapour  that is coming out at that atmospheric pressure 
and temperatu re will be again conde nsing here in the second effect . 
So, temperature  T1 must be greater than  T2 right or pressure  P1 must be greater than  the 
pressure  P2 in the second effect . Similarly  the vapour which is coming out from the 
second  effect will going  to condense in the third one ; so, T2 >T3 and the pressure  P2 >P3. 
So, definitely the vapour  that is coming out from the last effect will be  coming at vacuum  
because  P1 >P 2, P 3. 
So, except the first one the other  2 effect must be operate under vacuum . Therefore , we 
can say that the vapour from the last effe ct are usually leaving under vacuum  and these 
vapours must be condensed  and discharge as  a liquid at the atmospheric pressure . (Refer Slide Time: 06:31)  
 
This c ondensation can be done by using the cooling water ; now the type of condenser if 
we look into  there is one surface condenser ; that means,  there is a heat exchange surface 
is pro vided ok ; one side of which there is a  steam and the other side the re is a  liquid . So, 
the vapour to be condensed  and the cooling liquid are separated by a metal  wall. The 
other method is direct contact condenser that is where the vapour and the cooling li quid 
are mixed directly . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:22)  
 Coming  to first the surface condense rs, here no mixing of the condensate  with condenser 
cooling water is done because there is a heat exchange surface  across which the  heat is 
being transferred . So, no mixing of the condensate with the condenser cooling water is 
done here . 
Shell and tube condenser s with the vapour on the shell side an d the cooling water in  
multipass f low on the tube  side so, that is one case we will  discuss  in detail the heat 
exchangers  or in the  other chapter s. With  the vapour ; there are some non condensable 
gases usually present . So, this can be air or carbon dioxide , nitrogen or an y other gas 
which may have entered as  dissolved gases in the liquid feed or occur  because  of the 
decomposition in the solution . So, these has to be removed from that  vapour . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:40)  
 
So, these n on condensable gases may  be vented  from any well cool ed point in the 
condenser . And if the vapour being condensed is below atmospheri c pressure as the case 
may be when the last effect is operated un der vacuum , the condensed  liquid leaving the 
surface condenser can be  removed by pumping and the non  condensable gases by a 
vacuum pump . 
So, because from the low pressure to the  high pressure we need to  take them out the 
condensed  liquid  that’s why we need to pump them . Then surface condensers are much 
more  expensive and  use more cooling water . So, they are usually not used in cases where 
a direct  contact condenser is  suitable . That means, since we are using a  proper define geometry that is the  tubes inside the 
shells , where the st eam is in  and we need to define all those geometry  length of tube , the 
thickness  everything and designing of this and fabrication is a cost involving affair . So,  
where the direct contact condenses  can be use ther e we avoid any kind of surface 
condensers . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:26 ) 
 
So, direct  contact condenser s; now we will look into direct contact condenser one 
example is countercurrent barom etric condenser . So, what happened here , the vapour  
which is  coming from the  evaporator  first effect  is coming into the condenser  the 
barometric condenser . 
And then that is being  condense by the water  which is falling on or  getting d irectly 
mixed with the  vapour . So, this kind of condenser generally  the condenser is kept over a  
long distance from the discharge and because to accommodate the water column that is 
establish ed in the pipe for differences in pressure between the low absolu te pressure in 
the condenser and the atmosphere . 
So, because of atmospheric pressure it  try to maintain  a liquid column inside the  direct 
barometric condenser . So,  that is why we need to  keep the condenser at  specific height 
above the discharge level  and these are very inexpensive and economical in terms of 
water consumption . So, here maintain  a high vacuum corresponding to a  saturated v apour temperature within 
about  2.8 K of water temperature leaving the condenser . 
(Refe r Slide Time: 12:27)  
 
So, now water consumption in the direct contact condenser s; so, how we can calculate 
the total water consumption in case of a direct barometric condenser ? So, the vapour 
flow to the condenser if we  assume that  V kg/h at this rate the vapour flow  is coming to 
the condenser at a  temperature  of TS. 
And the water f low is  W kg/h at an entering temperature of  T1 and this  water leaves at a 
temperature of  T2. So, then what will happen that the  heat which will be  given by the  V 
kg/h will be taken by  W kg/h and the temperatu re of this will increase from  T1 to T2. So, 
making a heat balance  we can write  
V×HS + W×Cp(T1- 273.2) = (V+W) Cp(T2- 273.2) 
So, W/V i.e. kg of wat er/kg of vapour = (HS - Cp(T2- 273.2))/Cp(T2-T1).  
Where,  HS is the enthalpy vapour at  TS, W is the mass flow rate  of liquid water . So, from 
above equation  we can  calculate the w ater consumption per kg of vapour needed in the 
direct barometric condenser . (Refer Slide Time: 15:08)  
 
Now the vacuum pump that is used can be mechanical pump or steam jet ejector . In the 
ejector high pres sure steam enters a n ozzle at high speed and entrains the non  
condensable gases from the space under vacuum ; jet barometric condenser that is another 
type of  condenser that is bei ng used , where high velocity jets of water at both as vapour 
condenser  and as an entrainer  of the non  condensable gases  out of the tail pipe . 
So, jet condensers usually require mo re water than more common barome tric condensers 
and are more difficult to thr ottle at low vapour rates . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:12)  
 So, another  way of improving the evaporator efficiency is the vapor recompression . So; 
that means, we are somehow increasing the pressure of the vapour that is coming out of 
the effects of the evaporat or. Compression  of the vapour generated by evaporation 
increases its saturation temperature , so the vapour that is  if we want to draw this . 
If we take a single effec t evaporator , well this is ste am entering at  TS temperature an d 
this is feed at TF and here it is  T1 temperature , P1 pressure and  the vapour  V which is 
coming out at T1. Now if the vapour is  being compress ed that means, we are increasing 
the pressure from  P1 to P2. This is kind of a  reversible adiabatic co mpression .  There  is 
no chan ge in the e ntropy. So isentropic compression is assume d and the compressed 
vapour is introduced to the steam side of the same evaporator . 
(Refer Slide  Time: 17:59)  
 
So here we  are not going to increase the  in different effect , but within a same  effect , we 
just recompress the vapour  that is coming out of  the effect and then we are re using it in 
the steam side section of the evaporator . (Refer Slid e Time: 18:26)  
 
So, the vapour recompression can be of  two types one is the mechanical vapour 
recompression , another is the thermal vapour recompression . if we  look into mechanical 
vapour recompression  diagram . So, this is a single effect evap orator  where steam is 
entering from this section  and that is  condensing condensed liquid is coming out  from 
this side. 
The feed  which is  entering  the evaporated from this bottom and then it is evaporate d 
here. All the vapour  that is being separated is going to this mechanical vapour 
recompression device  and then  it is compressing the  steam increasing its pressure . Then  
adding  some makeup stea m to it and  is again  being utilized  for the evaporation process . 
So, here we are getting a  higher efficiency with single effect only , but by the  application 
of vapor recompression . So, the enthalpy of the vapor is increased to that of the original 
steam . In this process the steam economy is increased ; that means, using 1 kg of steam , 
we can increase  higher amount of  water evaporation that we can get ; so, that is how that 
is how steam economy is increased . Make up steam will be required  and this requi res a 
large compressor generally positive displacement compressors are used . (Refer Slide Time: 20:54)  
 
So, another method is the thermal recompression  here by injecting high pressure steam 
via a nozzle or steam jet ejector  we increase the  press ure. It has the ability to handle very 
large volume of vapo ur and can operate at lower pressure . So, there are no moving parts  
present . So no power requirement is needed . The major disadvantage is that optimum 
operation of this device occurs at a specific pressure and temperature . 
That means, if there is any kind of variation in the condition that is the steam the amount 
of steam that is being generated or any variation in the pressure and temperature of that i f 
happens , then it cannot perform . So, variation of condition in the evaporator  may well 
lead to reduction in the economy . (Refer Slide Time: 22:14)  
 
Now, next we will see the effects of processing variables on  evaporator operation ; first is 
the effect of feed temperature . Now how the feed temperature  is going to effect because 
we generally  try to increase the efficiency of an evaporator . 
So, feed temperature if  well below the  operating temperature of the evapor ator then we 
need to heat the feed to the  boiling temperature . So, we need more heat and more  you 
know heat transfer  area is required . So, to minimize the extra  heat needed to increase the  
sensible heat of the f eed. We can preheat the feed and then we try to enter it  near the 
temperature that is prevailing inside the  effect of the evaporator  so, that can be done . 
So, one point is preheating the feed that can reduce the heat transfer area and size of the  
evaporator . Next is  effect of pressure ; so this is also very clear by now that  
corresponding to the  pressure the saturation temperature  we can  see from the steam table 
that is the temperature that  is being present or  that is the boiling temperature of the liquid 
in the evaporator . 
Now by any means if the pressure  is change d the saturation  temperature or boiling 
temperature will also change . So, reducing the operat ing pressure increases the  ΔT that 
means, if the pressure is reduced or the vacuum is being generated inside  ΔT will 
increase and results in decrease in  area because a overall heat transfer , q = UA ΔT.  So, if 
some how this ΔT is increasing  that means, A will decrease to get the same heat transfer effect . So, therefore  reducing the operating pressure  increases the  ΔT and results in 
decrease of the heat transfer area. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:10)  
 
Then effect of steam pressure ; so using higher pressure saturated steam increases the ΔT 
which decrease s the size and cost of the evaporator . Definitely , if ΔT increases again by 
increasing the  pressure of the saturated steam then we are getting a higher  heat transfer 
by having a lower surface area . So, thereby we can design  smaller size of evaporator for 
the same  heat transfer rate and the cost will be reduced . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:52)  
 The next thing  we will going to cover is boiling point elevation . So, this is an important 
phenomen a because there are a difference  in the boiling point of a solution 
corresponding to the pure water . The difference between the temperature of  boiling 
solution and the boiling of the pure water at the same pressure is known as the boiling 
point rise or sometime boiling point elevation . 
So, as evaporation proceeds the liquid sample  that we have  taken for evaporation 
becoming concentrated more and more  and this will cause rise in the boiling point . So, in 
multiple effect evaporator wh ere effects are fed in series  the boiling point will rise from 
one effect to the next as  the concentration rises . So as the concentration increases , 
boiling point elevation will also increase . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:15)  
 
Now, there is a chart which is called Duhring’s plot w hich can give us an  idea that how 
the boiling point of pure water and boiling point of solution  varies  and we have seen that  
they have a linear relation . So, if we see the Duhring’s plot , there is l inear relationship 
with boiling point of water  either in degree Fahrenhei t or °C and boiling point of sodium 
hydroxide solution  in degree Fahrenhei t or °C. 
So, we have pure water i.e  bottom curve and then  10% NaOH, 20%, 30% then 40, 50; up 
to 60%. From  this we can get an idea that the boiling point elevation because of the 
dissolve d NaOH into the liquid water varies from the boiling point of pure water linearly 
and we can calculate them from this chart . For examp le, let us say the boiling point of pure water at certain condition is 75 °C. Now if we want to calculate the boiling point of  
40% NaOH in the similar condition . So, this curve is which is corr esponding the  40% 
NaOH and the boiling point of water which is showing 75 °C. So, we will look for the 
intersection of that and then we will find the point which is the boiling point of the  40% 
NaOH solution . And the  difference between this point and these point s is 1.1 and 0.2. So, 
boiling point between these  2 will give us the boiling point ri se or boiling point 
elevation . 
So, at a particular temperature  and pressure the relationship between the  pure water  and 
dissolved  material in that will generally follow the linear relation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:12)  
 
So Durhing line is for  NaOH solution and for other we can also  calculate it . (Refer Slide Time: 30:21 ) 
 
So, here will solve one  example the pressure in an evaporator  is given as 25.6 kPa (3.72 
psi) and a solution of 30% NaOH is being boiled. Determine the boiling temperature of 
the NaOH solution and the boiling -point rise BPR of the solution over that of water at 
the same pressure.   
The pressure in the evaporator  is given . So, what we can do is first corresponding to  25.6 
kPa what will be the  saturation pressure of pure water ; satura tion temperature of pure 
water that we can find and later on we can read from the Durhing plot that for  30% 
NaOH and the boiling point of pure water corresponding to this much pressure what is 
the boiling point of the solution  ok?. 
So, we have seen that from the steam table 65.6 °C is the saturation  temperature or 
boiling point of pure water at this pressure . From the Durhing chart  at 65.6 °C and 30% 
NaOH , boiling point of the  NaOH solution is coming  around 79.5 °C. Now, those who 
are not familiar with  steam table ; here I want to show you . (Refer Slide Time: 32:28)  
 
So, this is the properties of saturated steam and water that is called steam table . This is in 
SI unit, you can get in othe r unit as well . So,  this is available in most of the unit 
operation or food engineering book  appendix  section . So, here we need to find the 
vapo ur pressure that is been given something between these  two. 
(Refer Slide Time: 33:12)  
 
Here, saturation temperat ure corresponding  to 25.03 kPa is 65 °C and corresponding  to 
31.19  kPa is 70 °C. So, in between these  two we need to  interpolate for  25.6 kPa and that 
is coming around  the temperature that we have measure d i.e. 65.6 °C. From  the Durhing chart  we have read 79.5 °C for the solution of  30% NaOH . So, 79.5 °C -65.6 °C will b e 
the boiling poin t elevation . So, we will stop here and we will conti nue in the next class . 
Thank you . 