Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 16 
Evaporation and Concentration  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to NPTEL online certification course  on Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering . Today we will start a new chapter on Evaporation and 
Concentration . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:34)  
 
So, evaporation  it is very important unit operation and we perform this for many food 
processing application , wher e we want to concentrate the product  from very dilute 
solution and also crystallization . And there are many other applications where some 
processing part of  some processing can be done utilizing the evaporation phenomena . So, 
we will  see first  what is evap oration ? So, in evaporation vapors from boiling liquid 
solution is removed and more concentrated solution remains ; that means,  if we compare 
it with the drying where we also perform  moisture  removal . 
So, the difference is basically in the final product dev elopment , evaporation give us final 
concentrated liquid where as drying give us the dehydrated product , which is basically a 
solid product having certain amount of moisture content which is definitely lower than 
the evaporated  liquid that we are getting finally  And if, we compare it with distillation evaporation normally produces a single vapor fraction where  distillation produces 
several  vapor fraction . The evaporation can be done for con centration of fruit juice , sugar 
solution , sodium hydroxide solution , sodium chloride and for milk .  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:20)  
 
Now, first we will see that the evaporation phenomena . Evaporation as we are  talking 
about that  it is a boiling we perform the boiling of the dilute solution and we make it 
concentrated by evapora tion of the liquid . 
So, that is why I feel it will be very beneficial to  express few things about boiling and 
also of the condensation phenomena , because these  two are very important in terms  
understanding the evaporation . So what is boiling ? As a liquid i s heated ok , so its vapor  
pressure increases , until the vapor  pressure equals the pressure of the gas above it ok. 
And then bubbles of vaporized liquid that is the gas form  within the  bulk liquid as we 
can see in this figure rise to the surface were they b urst to the atmosphere and release ok . 
So this is the phenomena of boiling that happen while we heat  dilute  liquid .  (Refer Slide Time: 03:48)  
 
And also  if we perform boiling at  different  temperature , we can observe that the external 
pressure also increas es; that means, if we want to  perform the boiling of pure water at 
100 °C the external pressure will be maintained at  one atmospheric pressure . 
However , if you want to  increase the  temperature of boiling , we need  to definitely 
increase the pres sure as well ok . So, at the boiling temperature the  vapor inside the  
bubble has enough pressure to keep the bubble from co llapsing . In order to form  vapor 
the molecules of the liquid must overcome the forces of attraction between them  ok. So 
when they get enough heat  so they get that force to overcome the attraction  force 
between them from the vapor and try to come up through  the liquid . The temperature of a 
boiling liquid , remain constant throughout the process , even when  more heat is added t o 
it.  (Refer Slide Time: 05:18)  
 
Now, if we  try to understand the p henomena of boiling , what happen  the boiling is 
happen across a  heat exchange surface or if  we want to  immerse  any tube or any vertical  
surface through which the stea m is being  given to the dilute  liquid and the liquid is being 
heated for boiling . So, the heat tr ansfer  across the surface of that  tube of the vertical  
surface or any surface through which we are providing the  heat that can be represented as 
the rate  of heat transfer per unit area  i.e. W/m2. 
if we want to plot W/m2 against the ΔT of the surface and the  boiling liquid . Then we can 
get a curve of this kind which is called the boiling curve . So, this is a typical  boiling 
curve whe re this ΔT excess that  signify the Ts that i s the surface temperature across 
which we are provi ding the heat to the  boiling liquid . And Ts is the temperature of the 
boiling liquid that is  in equ ilibrium  with the pressure prevailing in the chamber . So 
initially when  there is a little difference between the  hot surface and the boiling liquid . 
So, as a ΔT starts building the liquid  in the in the liquid, if we look into this zone  from 
the starting point of the plot to point A so in this zone we observe the natural convection 
in the liquid level . 
So, there is a temperature difference ve ry less we can see here around  5 to 3 °C different 
tempe rature is there , it is being shown here by this plot where surface is at 103 °C and 
the liquid is at 100 °C. So, here we are  providing heating and  natural convection taking 
place , so the heat transfer coefficient will start increasing  followed by the  natural circulation  of the liquid inside the medium right . So, heat transfer als o try to increase and  
rate of hea t transfer (q) also increases ok . However, there is  not any kind of bubble 
formation or very less amount of bubble formation may come up here. Now, if we 
consider the next section that is from A to B, so here again the ΔT starts in creasing  and 
the bubble form inside the liquid wi ll start collapsing in the liquid and with the bubble 
the liquid will also try to move at a faster rate in the  in the liquid material . 
So, the rate of heat transfer is further  increased and when the bubbles rise to the free 
surface that is th e condition B to C. when  bubbles rise to the free surface . So, it further  
enhances  the movement of the liquid  and there is a  high velocity mixture that will initiate  
in the liquid and that cause the heat transfer increase . So, therefore, here we ar e getting a 
higher  curve , the curve  is increasing constantly up to a certain poi nt where the critical 
point can be observed , that is the maximum heat flux . Now, here what happened  that the 
temperature  in th is zone  that is A to C the su rface temperature was around 110 °C and 
the liquid since the boiling has to be there at a constant temperature under  atmospheric 
pressure , so it is 100 °C. 
Now, beyond  that what happened that the vapors  start de positing on the ir surface and 
acting as an insulating layer ok. On the surface of the  heat exchange  surface  so that the 
temperature difference between the  heating surface  and the liquid the boiling liquid will 
eventually increase to a very  high va lue ok. So delta  T increases high value  because of 
this insulating layer the heat flux does  not increase rather it drops  drastically ok. So this 
condition  is called the transition boiling , first we have observed from  0 to A section  1 to 
A section . Here we have observed the natural convection boiling because the convection 
happened because of the natural convection movement of the water . 
Then we have seen the nucleate boiling where  because of the bubble formation the  
movement of the liquid was very fast and the heat transfer increase d. In the third zone  
that is trans ition boiling heat flux reduced  to point D which is the Leidenfrost , that is  the 
lower heat transfer rate we can observe here . And after that what happened that the 
difference in  ΔT is being  so high a round  the surface temperature has reached to 400 °C, 
where the liquid temperature is 100 °C still. So the difference of ΔT is so high that the 
radiation  phenomena start s developing here and radiation heat is  going t o generated from 
the heating surface to the liquid media and that the heat transfer will drastic ally increase 
again ok . So this condition is called the film boiling , so because of this i nsulated air film the gas bubbles film that that is being co ntinuously cover the surface the radiation heat 
transfer predominant  and increasing the heat transfer to the boiling liquid . 
So, in general case  we may offer this is the typical curve , but in certain cases practically 
we may move on  to C to continuously t o the increase section that is the film boiling 
section . So in the heat transfer  you may get more detail understanding of  various kind of  
this heat transfer phenomenon . But I feel that it will be helpful for you to understand the 
boiling pheno mena here , so that you can analyze or understand  the performance and 
mechanism of evaporator better .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:45)  
 
So, empirical equations are  there to estimate the boiling heat transfer coefficient for 
water boiling to the  water boi ling on the outside of submerged  surfa ces at  1 atmospheric 
absolute pressure . Because most of the cases  when we deal w ith evaporators the 
submerged phases  either  tubes or surfaces are there in the  liquid material  that we want to 
evaporate or  the water . So for that purpose we w ill see a few equations  that have  been 
developed .  
First is for horizontal surface :                 h (w/m2K) = 1043× (ΔT)1/3  
Where , ΔT is again the difference between  the heat transfer surfaces  to the boiling liquid . 
And this equation is  valid where your rate of heat transfer  across the unit area (q/ A) 
<16kW/m2. If the rates of heat transfer  across unit area is between 16 to 240 kW/m2 then 
the heat transfer coefficient will be :        h (w/m2K) = 1043× (ΔT)3 So if you want to see the previous plot once again this has been device  based on  this 
section from new natural  convention to then nucleate boiling natural  convection . Since, 
the h is very low h  generally varies with respect to ΔT 0.25.  In the nucleate boiling 
section generally h  varies wit h respect to ΔT 2 or 3. So most of the cases we are 
considering  about the nucleate boiling and film boiling because that is most  predominant  
in the cases whe re the  surface is submerged  in a boiling liquid .  
For a ver tical surface ,  
When  q /A < 3 kW/m2,                          h (w/m2K) = 537× (ΔT)1/3    
When  q /A = 3 to 63 kW/m2 then          h (w/m2K) = 7.95 × (ΔT)1/3  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:22)  
 
So, next is  condensation , so why condensation is impor tant in the context of 
evaporation ? Because we evaporate the  liquid and make it  concentrated liquid  by 
evaporating the water from it  and the heat that we needed for this purpose is taken from 
the steam . 
So, we generally take a saturated steam and  we condense  the stream  outside  the surface  
of if it is a steam jacketed  type evaporator , then it is inside the jack et or if it is a  
horizontal tube  kind of thing . So, inside the tube we send this steam we will discuss in 
detail the  configuration of different evaporator s. So, there the condensation occurs  right  
and condensation is needed , so condensation occurs when a saturated vapors  such as steam comes in contact with a solid whose surface temperature is below the saturation 
temperature to form a liquid such as wate r.  
So steam condense  to water when it  touches the lower temperature surf ace. So, most 
common  is two kind of condensation that is  one film type of condensation another is the 
drop wise condensation . In film  type condensation  vapor condenses on a surface as  for 
example  vertical or horizont al tube  or other surfaces of film of con densate  is formed on 
the surface and flows over the surface by the action of gravity . 
So this film of liquid between the  surface and the  vapor forms the main  resistance to heat 
transfer , so this film type condensation is most co mmon . Another is that the drop wise 
condensation occurs and when the more and more drops will condense then the drops 
will collapse  with each other and then gradually because of gravity they fall down . So, in 
that case the whole surface is in cover ed by the drops  in at a processing t ime, so film 
type condensation is the most common method the we often observe in case of the heat 
exchanger  that we  often use in the evaporation process .  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:04)  
 
So, for condensation again we will see  one equation as we have seen certa in empirical 
equation for the boiling . So, heat transfer coefficient in case of film type condensation on 
a vertical wall  or tube can be expressed assuming laminar flow that we are assuming that 
the film which is falling down  on the surface of the heat exchange  surface that is  in 
laminar flow . So, heat transfer coeffici ent ‘h’ will be   h=0.943 ρl ρl−ρv ghfgkl3
μl Tsat−Tw  1
4
 Here  ρl and ρv is the density of the liquid and the vapor in kg/ m3 respectively , g is 
acceleration due to gravity .i.e. 9.8 m/s2, L is the vertical height of the  surface or tube that 
is being submerged or on which the film condensation is taking place , μ1 is the viscosity 
of the liquid in P.s. kl is the liquid thermal conductivity in  W/m .K. ΔT is the  Tsaturation  - T 
wall that is in Kelvi n and h fg which is the latent he at of cond ensation in J /kg at Tf that is 
the film temperature  which is  taken as  (Tsaturation  + Tw)/2. 
In fact, all the physical properties  of the liquid exce pt that h fg because hfg is the  latent 
heat of con densation that has to be fixed at the  temperature at w hich the condensation 
occurs . So at saturation temperature , but all other  properties like the viscosit y of the 
liquid and you know the k l all this we need to calculate  at film temperature that is  
(Tsaturation  + Tw)/2.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:43)  
 
So, coming to objective of  evaporation  first is mass and volume reduction results  
reduced cost of package and  transportation . So some time  we need to  do such processing 
using evaporation , so that the bulk volume and the mass can be reduced and the  
transportation will be  benefited . Then another thing is  preservation  because by lowering the water activity by evaporation 
we are lowering the water activity  we are evaporating the  water . So, free wat er avail able 
to you know  the activity of the  microbes are for enzymes enzymatic  activity that is being 
reduced , so this helps in the preservation of food material . Then prep aration to 
subsequent treatment  such as crystallization , because if we make an  concentrated 
solution by evaporation that will help in  crystallization and less energy will be involved 
in the crystallization step . So for sugar crystallization evaporation is used then 
precipitation like pectin and other gums , coagulation like chees e, yogurt  and forming like 
candy , then dehydration like milk  whey , coffee soluble  etc. 
So, for example, milk if we want to dehydrate  normally  spray drying is the mechanism 
by which normally we perform the drying  of milk , to maintain the qual ity in an efficient 
way. Now, before sending it to the  spray dryer the milk is being concentrated in 
evaporator and generally around 50 percent of  this concentration  is being done and 
thereby we can reduce the energy requirement in the spray dryer  as well . So, building a 
desired consisten cy is also a parameter sometime when we want to prepare jams and 
jellies , tomato concentrates , ketchup etcetera . So, all such are the  primary objective with 
that we will  move on  to different evaporation processes .  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:12)  
 
Now, we must have to see the different factors that can affect the evaporation process , 
first one is the concentration of liquid . So, we know that we use the dilute solution and to evaporate them to ma ke it concentrated solutio n. So as we  concentrated or  as the 
evaporation process moves on the liquid will become viscous and the heat transfer across 
them is very difficult , because the  concentration is increased . So that causing the heat 
transfer coefficient to drop and to overcome this we may provide some kind of agitated  
or some kind of motion into it  so that heat transfer rate can enhance . 
Now solubility is another factor , maximum concentration of solution obtained by 
evaporation depends on solubility  of the soluti on and the solubility again  has some  
interdependency  with temperature because some t ime with increasing the temperature we 
can increase the solubility . Temperature has also e ffect with the sensitivity of a material , 
some food material degrade at h igher temperature or  prolonged heating , foaming or 
frothing  that is very interesting phenomena that some solution produce  foam or froth 
during boiling, this foam accompanies the vapor coming out of the evaporator  and also  
certain liquid  and that causes the  entrainment losses. To overcome this several baffles are 
attached at the  in the evaporator at the  exit section of the vapor.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:33)  
 
So, that the entrainment  loss can be minimized  pressure and temperature as  I have 
already mentioned th at if you want to increase the temperature of the boiling we want to 
increase the pressure that prevail s above  the liquid level as well . Boiling point of solution 
is dependent on operating pressure of the system . Scale deposition and  material construction , scale deposition as it is very common in case of  any kind of heat exchange  
surface whe re we provide the  heat exchange  by an exchange surface . 
So, it may happen that the impurities in the  water may deposit on the  on one side or the  
inner side of t he tube . And it may also  happen  that the scale deposition may happen  in 
the liquid side that we wan t to concentrate because  sometime some  composition of the 
food material may be sticking  to the wall of the surface and t hat may d egrade  the heat 
transfer coefficient  because that deposited scale will offer  resistance to heat transfer . So, 
the overall heat transfer coefficient will drop .  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:30)  
 
Finally the construction and working , so simply this is the constitu te of heat exchanger 
the evaporating section  and the separator . Heat exchanger plus steam chest that is 
together can be termed as calendria . There is also baffles  at the  exit to check the liquid or 
droplets that may cause entrainment losses . In this  figure  we can see that the feed  which 
is raw juice that is entering from the bottom side and that is  entering in the shell  where as 
the steam which is entering in this  short particle tubes . And this steam while coming 
through  these tubes  is getting condensed and the latent heat of condensation that it leaves 
that is being taken by the  raw juice  and it be coming concentrated . And it leads to  this 
section where  this is called the stream chest where vapors  is separated from the liquid 
and the concentrate d juice is coming from the bottom while  vapors  are leaving from the 
top.  So, the steam when it comes to the surface which is having the lower temperature it gets 
condensed . So, we have  seen that it is  start moving and then  vapor development  takes  
place along with the liquid  so vapor will separated here and the liquid will come and 
concentrated juice will come out and some part maybe re-circulated  with the raw juice . 
So, the product inside the evaporator chamber may  kept under  vacuum  for heat sensi tive 
material , because in that case we want to cause  the evaporation at lower temperature and 
as we know the temperature and pressure has a direct relationship in case of the  
evaporation process . So, if we want to lower  the temperature we have t o lower the 
vacuum level inside the chamber as well .  
So, we will stop he re we will continue in the next class . 
Thank you . 