Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 10 
Rheological Properties of Viscoelastic Food (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the  NPTEL  online certification course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process E ngineering , we will continue with the viscoelastic properties of food 
today . So Rheological  Properties of Viscoelastic  Food that we have started in the last 
class , we will continue in that . 
(Refe r Slide Time: 00:41)  
 
Kelvin -Voigt models :  
This is the spring and dashpot attached in parallel network just the opposite case of 
Maxwell, where it is connected in series. So, this is showing the simple creep behaviour.  
Simple Creep behaviour is exhibited  by the strain beginning to increase rapidly but the 
rate of increase diminishes over time in the form of an exponential decay.  
 Spring and a dashpot connected in parallel  
So, it can be observed that  since  any applied force will be there , immediately the vi scous 
material will respond and try to flow . Now since the  strain  or the flow will be observe d, it will have similar effect in the spring as well ; so, both will try to expand or strain in 
similar fashion.  
Now because of this  linear relation of this spring , it has a linear relation with stress and 
strain , so, it will try to take away some amount of force t hrough it. As a result , this 
dashpot will show the  diminishing rate of the  increase in the flow behaviour . So, 
eventually the exponential decay will be see n. 
 All strains are equal to each other  
 So, γ = γ spring = γdashpot  
 Total shear stress caused by the deformation is sum of the individual stresses  
 τ = τ spring + τdashpot  
 τ = Gγ + μ γ˙ 
 (Refer Slide Time: 04:05)  
 
So, another advancement over the K elvin model we will see here , what happened that the 
phenomena of creep  has been explained by  the Kelvin Voigt model , but sometime it has 
been seen that the proper behaviour may not be fully express ed by the K elvin model 
therefore,  Burger model is introduced where som e advancement  over the earlier model is 
been  done in this form . Burger model  
Here  a spring  and a dashpot are in series  which  has been combined with spring and 
dashpot in parallel . So, it will show sudden initial elastic behaviour , when applied to a  
constan t stress σ. Then it will show exponential retarding that will increase because of 
this parallel effect of spring and dashpot , and then a perpetual linear increase in the flow 
will be observed . So, here Kelvin model sandwiched between an external spring and  an 
external dashpot . 
So, E 0 and E R is the spring constant of the initial and  here in this combine d model , η0 is 
the coefficient of viscosity of the external dashpot . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:24)  
 
So, in the  Burger model ,  
 External spring allows the initia l elastic deformation to occur in response to the 
applied stress, while the external dashpot allows for the perpetual linear increase 
in strain over time so long as the applied stress remains.  
Burger model used to predict strain as a function of time by  
 So, this str ain is because of the first elastic component that is the spring , the exponential 
decay part is because of this combined model of spring and dashpot , and the last part is 
because of this dashpot . Modulus of elasticity is stress versus strain ; if we try to have the 
reverse  function that is strain versus stress that is called the compliance . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:25)  
 
So, here J is been used to measure the creep compliance , that is the strain versus stress 
for the creep test that we are getting . So, here J 0 that is the initial  elastic compliance that 
we are getting  J 1 which is increasing exponentially  that is 1/μ0; and then after time t  1 it 
is decreasing initially becau se of the elastic component  J0 and then exponentially because 
of J 1.  
So, some part is instance recovery because of the elastic nature and because of the  
Kelvin model , after the elastic nature we  are getting some  exponential  decay in the 
recovery  and some part which is because of the dashpot , is lost completely . So, this will 
be the compliance overtime behaviour . 
Here also if we plot 
  that is shear rate over time . So, t = 0 path one w hich is showing 
the elastic deformation , and then path 2 or curve 2 is showing the creep flow  which  
means,  the flow is increasing continuously , then recovery of initial elastic deformation 
that is  3 and 4 shows the permanent deformation . (Refer Slide Time:  11:04)  
 
Dynamic Test (Oscillatory Test)   
In rotational viscosity measurement device we have seen where a constant angular speed 
or constant angular motion is provided. But w ith an oscillating mode, both viscous and 
elastic properties of a material can be  measured simultaneously.  
 Rate controlled -stress is measured at a constant strain  or  
 Stress controlled -deformation is measured at a constant stress amplitude  
 Usually, a sinusoidal strain is applied to the sample, causing some level of stress 
to be trans mitted through the material. Then, the transmitted shear stress in the 
sample is measured   (Refer Slide Time: 13:20)  
 
We provide  a sinusoidal oscillation  
  
So, we will plot it  γ0  is the  magnitude the maximum  point and with respect to the 
different ω it is being changed from  following the  Sinusoidal pattern . 
So, this is the  shear strain that we applied and then what is the stress will be to maintain  
that strain that  will be analysed . So, cosine function for the resulting sh ear rate will  be  
 
 
That means we can observe a  90 ° shift in the shear rate .  
 shear rate function follows the deformation function with a phase shift of 90◦.  
 elastic material will show a shear stress which is proportional to the shear 
deformation (strain),and  
 a viscous material will show a shear stress which is proportional to the  shear rate.  
  (Refer Slide Time: 16:52)  
 
Ideal elastic , viscoelastic and ideal viscous  
 So, this 3 kind of material when exposed to oscillatory test what will be th eir shear 
stress and deformation behaviour . So, shear stress is showing in this plot , for the ideal 
elastic materials since  stress will be proportional to strain  so, it will follow by similar 
kind of plot  so, δ = 0 so, δ signifies the phase shift that is equal to  0.  
Now for the viscoelastic , there will be a phase shift  so, that δ can be observe d; however, 
for the ideal viscous nature the δ will be  90 °. So, 90 °phase shift will be observed in case 
of ideal vis cous material whereas, ideal elastic will show δ equal to 0 and in between 
them any value can be  observed in case of the viscoelastic material . So, the material will 
have a phase shift between  0 and 90° for  the biological material or real material . (Refer Slide Time: 18:36)  
 
 complex shear modulus : characterize both the viscous and the elastic properties 
of a material by measuring the phase shift δ only.  
 In case of viscoelastic material , it does not have a fix  modulus like modulus of 
elasticity , so followi ng has been introduced, Complex shear modulus is  
 
  
G’ for the elastic component, and  G’’ for the viscous component   
As we have seen that the deformation which is curve 1 and the shear stress observed that 
is curve 2 has a phase shift of δ.  
 The phase sh ift then simply is  
 
So, in any oscillatory test if we can have the  value of tan δ, we can find out what will be 
the component of  G’ and G” in that . So, if G”  is that is for the viscous component  so, 
that is  0. So; that means, tan δ = 0. So, δ is 0 so; that means, it is pure elastic material . So, phase shift does  not observe d there and if we are getting  the higher value  so, that 
shows that G”  has a significant effect.  So, the viscous component will be there .  
And in the similar fashion we can calculate als o the  complex viscosity , where the re will 
be kind of a real viscosity and imaginary viscosity ; real viscosity for the viscous 
component and imaginary viscosity for the elastic component . So, instead of  G we can 
also express  in terms of the complex viscosit y. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:08)  
 
Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) :  
It is done  in various food material or two or different polymer material, to understand the 
the textural behaviour of that. So, what we do here is that, instead of the rotational 
movement that we have replaced by the oscillatory mechanism, here the uniaxial force is 
being done in the method of oscillation . 
 Instruments which perform oscillation in an uniaxial or linear direction.  
 closely related to texture testers.  
 assumption that temperatur e was always maintained constant and known.  
 Certain types of experiments have been devised specifically for the purpose 
studying the effect increasing temperature on rheological behaviour of materials.   
(Refer Slide Time: 24:11)  
 
We can think of a problem  here the problem has been ta ken from  taken from S haheen 
book  ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:32)  
 
Problem  
The creep analysis results were obtained for wheat flour dough by applying a constant 
stress of 50 Pa for 60 s on the sample. The data are given in Table  E.2.9.1. Using creep compliance data, determine the viscoelastic parameters, G 0, G 1, μ1, and μ 0 of a Burger 
model.  
Burger Model is  
 
The Burger model in terms of creep compliance is:  
 
Solution:  
In Burger model , there is a spring to which  force is  applie d, that is constant stress σ = 50 
Pascal .  
In the  data table , deformation of whea t flour dough with time up to  60 s is given.   
So, in Burger model  γ= τ0 / G0 is because  of the initial spring stress . 
Then because of the combined parallel system of the  Kelvin model, the exponential 
decay term will be there (τ0/G1) × (1- exp (-t/ λret), where  the creep  will be retarding .  
In terms of creep compliance  we can write this equation as  J (t), just we have taken the 
inverse  that is the  strain versus stress . So, divid ed by τ0 are getting this  
 
  (Refer Slide Time: 29:20)  
 
First the creep complian ce with respect to time  will be plotted , and we  can get that 
initially there is a curvature  or exponential increas e and then a little bit of straight  
section . So, from the straight  section data if we plot that by subtracting the initial stress 
that is J  0, then we will get this equation by linear regression . 
 
And from this data J - J 0 with respect to time , we can get the intercept and slope value . 
So, we can get the values of J 1 and μ 0. Again which is the  non-linear  part or that is the 
gradual increase that section , we will plot with respect to time  so that the  part of the 
Kelvin model  (the parallel  arrangement of the spring and the  dashpot ) that section can be  
can be  calculated  from  this cha rt. 
 
 λ ret will be given by  
 μ 1 is the  viscosity coefficient of the dashpot  1 and this is the  spring constant of the 
spring 2 that is attach in parallel dashpot.  
So, we are getting the retardation  time as 5.21 second .  
So, will just put all th e values that we  are get ting from the equations and also from the  
straight and curved  section  in 1st graph , that is from the curve  section with respect to 
time. So, we will get finally,   
 
So, from  this creep behaviour that we are getting  J 0 from  this plot, then once we get this 
value . So, J 1 will be  calculated from 
 plot. 
 
λret  is calculated from the equation.  μ 0 which is coming from the  inverse of that  slope  
that we are getting . 
So, using  that, we can find the equation of the  creep compliance of the d ough sample . 
Thank you  all. 