Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 17 
Evaporation and Concentration ( Contd. ) 
 
Hello everyone , welcome once again to the online NPTEL certification course on 
Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering . We will continue today with the topic 
Evaporation and Concentration . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:32)  
 
So, first we will discuss today types of evaporators . So, evaporators as we know that i t is 
a one kind of unit operation by which we remove water from the boiling liquid and 
thereby  the dilute feed will become concentrated product . So, first we will see the batch 
type pan evaporator . 
So, this is how it looks like  there is a pan which is  put on a jacketed pan , where steam is 
entered steam and there is a valve which controls the  flow of steam into the jacket . And 
here it is being condensed and the dilute liquid that is kept here and it is being  heated and 
evaporated . The vapor  goes out of this section t o the condenser  and the concentrated 
product is discharge d from the bottom . So it may also be some kind of mechanism where 
instead of this jacket  certain coils are immersed . It may b e the  design ed such that the coils are immersed in this  where  coils are  carrying the steam which is  causing the heat 
transfer  across the surface .  
So, heat is  supplied by steam in a jacket or coils that is immersed in a liquid , this batch 
type pan evaporators are operated at atmosp heric pressure or under vacuum for heat 
sensitive material . And paddle  or agitator  is used for agitation , because as evaporation 
continues the liquid will become more thick and viscous . So, heat transfer across the 
surface will be  lowered , so to increase t he heat transfer agita tion is being provided . This 
is an inexpensive and simple method  to operate and heat economy is very poor , because 
a steam  that we are using  here is condensed . And this vapor  that is lea ving it is it is going 
out and normally  in this kind of a system we cannot reutilize  that steam , so the heat 
economy is poor here .  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:10)  
 
Next we will discuss the horizontal tube evaporator . So, in case of horizontal tube 
evaporator , see these are the horizon tal tubes  through which  the steam is coming into the 
evaporation  chamber  and it is being  condensed by coming in contact with the  lower 
temperature surface and the condensate moves out from the other side . The product is in 
into the evaporating  chamber and this is be ing splash over this t ube or maybe these tubes 
are submerged  into the product and  by that this  bundle of tub es are  providing the heat 
transfer . And the vapor  will leaves out from this section concentrated product will be collected at 
the bottom . So liquid product covers  all the tubes and vapor  leaves through de -
entrainment devices . So, sometime here certain kind of de-entra inment devices are  
placed to reduce the entrainment losses and often consisting of a series of b affles . These 
systems  are suitable  for low viscosity product . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:47)  
 
Now, then we wi ll discuss the short tube vertical evaporator s. In case of short tube 
vertical evaporator s the steam is again coming into the tube s, but  here these  tubes are 
vertical bundles  and in between there is a place  in which the feed is  entering from  one 
side and falling in between the gap of those tube s through which the st eam is passing . 
And then again by natural  circulation this is being  heated a nd circulation is continue 
continuously  happening unless the concentrate  is taken out from the bottom and the 
vapo r is taken out from the top , steam which is condensed and collected from the other 
side.  
So, because of boiling and decrease in density liqui d rises in the bubbles naturally . 
Concentrated liquid s fall down  through  the central an nual space , where as  the vapors  
moves from  the top . So concentrated liquid which will  eventually become concentrated 
because of evaporation that will fall do wn and will be collected from the bottom 
opening .  (Refer Slide Time: 06:15)  
 
Next is vertical long tube evaporator . So format ion of vapo r bubble  inside the tube 
causes  pumping action giving quite high liquid velocity . So, feed here enters from top  
through this vertical tube s to all the feed is coming down.  
Now, formation of the vapor  bubble  inside the tube causes a pumping action giving quite 
high liquid velocity . So all the bubbles at wil l form here in the liquid because  the gas will 
try to  escape out , so that will cause the increase in the velocity . And eventually that is 
goes to the vapor  separator , where vapor  come out from the top and the concentrated 
product will com e out from the bottom . Steam is entered  circulating the tubes and 
condensed and taken out from the bottom . 
In falling film evaporator where  liquid is allowed to flow  down through the inner wall of 
the tubes as a film . Vapor and liquid are usually separa ted at the bottom of the tubes as 
we have seen in this diagram . (Refer Slide Time: 07:42)  
 
So, another  kind of evaporator that is called rising film evaporator , in that what ha ppened 
that the liquid starts boiling at the lower part of the tube  and the liq uid and vapo r flow 
upward through the tube . Feed which is entering from the bottom and  the liquid boiling 
at the lower part of the tube an d the liquid and vapo r flow upwards through the tube . So, 
this feed which is enters here and st eam which enters from  top section and then it is 
coming down it is being condensing and this feed  is heated up  gradually and starts 
boiling and that boiling liquid will moves up and going to the sepa rator .  
In the separator the vapo rs are being separated from the top and the pr oduct is being 
collected , where a s the condensate of the steam is getting collected from the  side section 
of the lower part of evaporator . Concurrent  upward  movement against gravity has the 
advantage s effect of cre ating a high  degree  of turbulence ok. Because we need to do it to 
overcome the  gravitational effec ts and  that is why the heat transfer increases . (Refer Slide Time: 09:21)  
 
Next is the forced circulation evaporator . Natural  circulation evaporators are not suitable 
for highly viscous material or for the heat sensitive material . Because in h eat sensitive 
material sometime it may happen that  we are using  higher temperature for the dilute 
sample . But, lower temperature for the  concentrated sample and that time we need  to 
throw the material against pressure . That means, from th e lower to higher pressure  so all 
such cases the force circulation is needed .  
Here there is a circulation pump giving high liquid  velocity  over the heating surface , this 
is a cala ndria and here steam  in and here the condensate is moving and this is the 
separator where vapor  outlet and concentrated liquor outlet is  shown . Now, the problem 
of high viscous solution and for heat sensitive material can be efficiently handle d by 
when the liquid is circulated at high velocity , evaporator that use pump to ensure  high 
circulation velocity that comes under the force circulation evaporator .  (Refer Slide Time: 10:49)  
 
Another is the agitated thin film evaporator . So feed is spr ead as thin film on the inside 
of the  cylindrical heating surface by  wiper blades . And due to high  agitation 
considerably higher rate of heat transfer are obtained here , so here is the feed inlet  and 
the concen trate is taken from the bottom . Now as the feed is coming with a thin film and 
there agita tion is provided . there is a vent these are the agitators .  
These are the agitators , there is a vapo r separator is there which cause the you know  
differentiation between the vapo r and concentrated liquid and then  move them into  two 
different direction . And there  is some moto r there is a steam jacket also to cause the 
better heat transfer , this kind of system  where agi tated thin film evaporator used for very 
high viscous fluid food .  (Refer Slide Time: 12:12)  
 
Now , methods of improving evaporator efficiency , so evaporator efficiency  
improv ement if you want to think of we  the first thing is how much  the utilization  of 
steam can be enhanced  or for the same material of the steam how much higher amount of 
the moisture or water can be evapora ted right. So, multiple effect evaporation is a 
solution to that problem . In case of single effect evaporator the vapors  produced are 
discarded without further utilization of their inherent heat .  
So in multiple effect evaporator the latent heat of vapor , because whatever steam  we are 
using  to concentrate the liquid and  so the steam is being  condensed and the l iquid is 
evaporated . So the vapor  is again generated in each  single effect , so if that vapor  can be 
used so an efficient system can be generated . 
So, keeping that in mind in multiple effect evaporator , latent heat of vapor  coming out of 
the first effect is reused for heating of the fee d in the next effect  right . Steam economy  is 
greater than that for  single effect evaporator , steam economy is actually kg of vapor  
produced per kg of steam used . So, for the single effect evaporator this  steam economy is 
low where this is significantly high for  the multiple effect  evaporator .  (Refer Slide Time: 14:02)  
 
So, the first  one we will discuss is the forwar d feed  evaporator , what happens in this case  
of forward feed ? See feed  is first enters into the first effect th is is a triple effect 
evaporator . So, feed is entering into the first effect at temperature  Tf and in side the 
evaporator where the feed is entering the temperature , the saturation temperature  of 
boiling water is  T1 and the corresponding pressure  let us say P1 is maintained inside the 
first effect or first evaporator chamber . Steam is coming at  Ts temperature that is 
saturation  temperature of steam and it is being condens ed via this heat exchange  surface .  
So we are getting condensate from here , now in case of  forward fee d the concentrate that 
we are getting from the first effect is going to the second ef fect where the temperature is  
T2 and corresponding pressure le t us say P2 is mentioned  maintained . So the fee d is 
moving forward and then again it is being concentrated i n the second effect by the vapo r 
that is being gener ated i n the first effect . So, this vapo r that is generated at  T1 
temperature is se nt to the second effect as the steam or the heating media or evapo rating 
media .  
Now, the temperat ure of the boiling liqu id does  not change we know , so at P1 pressure  T1 
temperature the vapo r will move out at T1 temperature  and at T1 temperature only it 
enters into the second effect . However , in the second e ffect the temperature will be a bit 
low corresponding  to the  pressure P2 and the vapo r that leaves the effect  T2. And this 
vapo r whic h is coming out coming out at  T2 temperature will again enter into the third effect  here we have design ed 3, we can design for m ore as well based on the  cost of 
development and the economy  that we are getting . 
So, it is again entered into the third effect , it gets condensed and finally, we are getting 
the condensate here . So, for the same steam  let us say  1 kg steam that we have us ed here 
that is used to evaporate water from this affect this is going as a vapo r and this again 
utilized  for evaporation in the next eff ect. Again some amount of vapo r and this is 
finally, used for the third . So, for the same  1 kg steam that we are getting the fee d, 
concentrated product . So, the product is  coming out from the second effect after  
concentrating to some extent and again enter int o the third effect ; And the vapo r which is 
coming out of the third effect  goes to the vacuum condenser to separate the vapo r from 
any other  you know material that has  been taken away with the vapo r, such as any 
volatile or any  liquid droplets if it at  all going to with the  vapo r. 
So, in a nutshell we can say that both f eed and steam are introduced  in the first effect and 
the feed passed from effect to effect parallel to the vapo r from the earlier effect . And this 
is used when the feed is hot or when final concentration of the product may be  
degenerated if it is exposed to high temperature , because eventually we are  having a low 
temperature . Because the temperature at which it is developing the vapo r it has to come 
into contact with a lower temperature to condensed and the lower temperature will be 
maintained eventua lly by lowering the press ure. So, pressure also is reduced from the 
first effect to the last effect and  so is the temperature . (Refer Slide Time: 18:59)  
 
Next is the  backward feed , so what is th e me chanism of the backward feed he re though 
steam is entering from the first effect a nd the steam is condensing the vapo r which has to 
be generated if it  causes vaporization of this material . So, that vapo r will again goes to  
the second effect and the vapo r coming out from the second effect  goes to the third  one. 
Whereas , feed is entered from the last effect at low er temperature and pressure  it is being 
concentrated  to some extent and then this concentrated feed is  you know  coming out of 
the bottom has to move to the next effect . Now, the next effect is maintaine d at higher 
temperature and pressure and this is continuously  so for the first effect as well . 
Now, in the forward feed  case we did not utilize the  pump because the concentrated feed 
has to go from the higher pressure to the lower pressure . So, automatical ly it can go 
there , but  since here we wa nt to move the concentrated feed  from the lower pressure 
section to a higher pressure section  so, we need to have a pump  a positive displaceme nt 
pump that is taking this feed  to the next effect . So, the feed is  enter ing from the last to 
the second to  the first like that and as per requirement we can change the number of 
effect that we have added in series .  
However the steam which is being  used in the first and utilizing  the concentrated feed of 
the second effect and producing the vapo r that vapo r goes to the second  effect and vapo r 
also produced from the second effect which is goes to the last  one. So the high heat is 
available to the final product that is being concentrated and that needs higher he at transfer and if it is not such a product that can you know  damage in  exposing to high heat 
treatment , so in that case  we can use this  one.  
So, feed here enters at the last effect or  the coldest effect and pumped through the 
successive effects . This is used when co ld feed entering  needs to be heated to a lowe r 
temperature .  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:46)  
 
There is also a mixed feed system where feed is getting introduced in an intermediate 
effect. From this  intermediate  effect  partial  evaporation  happens corresponding to the 
pressure and temper ature inside this  then that concentrated feed goes to the last effect . 
And from the last effect it is eventually  going to the second  one, that is placed befo re the 
effect where the feed  has entered . And this is b eing done by the pump because again  
from the lower to higher pressure , we are sending the feed  and again from the 
concentrated feed of second to the first  it is going by pump .  
So, to pump  we have utilized instead of  three  pump that needs to be use  there  if we have 
gone to fully the  backward or  backward method of multiple effect evaporator . So by 
utilizing  this kind of mix ed feed we can eliminate the requirement of th e pumps , where 
as steam is  normally utilize d normally used in the first ef fect first . And then it moves 
onto the  second  one then evaporation evaporated vapo r from the second is moving to the 
third  one and so on finally, from the last effect vapo rs are coll ected and sent to  the 
condenser for separation . (Refer Slide Time: 23:19)  
 
Now, multiple effect evaporator . So, another is called the parallel feed  so what we have 
seen that  so far that once we are entering feed  whether it is forward or backward and 
once we are entering steam the rest of the thing is happening continuously . The 
evaporation of the first effect  causing the vapor  and that moves to the second  one and 
eventually goes to the next  one. Similarly, the con centrated feed of  one effect either  
forw ard direction or backward direction goes to the  successive  effects . 
But in parallel feed what we do that feed  is individually entered into all the effects  and 
the concentrated product is coming out from all the effects . Only steam is utilized  from  
you know  every effects , steam fro m the first effect causing vapor  and that  vapor  is 
utilized in the next e ffect. The vapor  of the next effect is  utilize d in the third  one and so 
on. 
So, the fre sh feed is introduced in each e ffect and in this configurati on the product is 
withdrawn from th e same effect in parallel feed operation . So, this is the most common  
in crystallizing  the evaporator s. So, when we want to crystallize we want to evaporate 
the water and  finally , we are getting the crystallize d material .  
So, we will stop here ; in the next class we see the , we will see the design of evaporators . 