Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 12 
Thermal Processing an d Kinetics of Microbial Death ( Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone . We will contin ue the last class  where we have  left. We will continue 
from there . So, today ’s topic will be  Thermal Processing and Kinetics of Microbial 
Death.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:41)  
 
So, we have stopped in the  last class , in the calculation of the unsteady  state conduction 
equatio n which is the one dimensional F ourier 's law of heat conduction . So, the solution 
was this and using the boundary condition , we have found that  
 
So, let us see the term s her e. We have seen that only first term of this equation  can be 
taken  for calcul ation of  the temperature w here parameter Y=(T-T1)/( T0-T1 and “α” is the 
thermal diffusivity of a material , “L” is the char acteristic length of the body or  the food 
that we are considering and “x” is the  dimension which is related to the  distance fr om the 
centre to the surface . 
Y= 4
(2n+1)πn=∞
n=0exp − 2n+1
L 2
π2αt sin 2n+1
Lπx  So, we will see  that this analytical sol ution that we have  solved now has certain problem 
for using i n actual case because  this analytical solution  will depends on  the different 
geometry and of ten this is very  tedious  to solve ok . And also  sometime it happens that  
we co nsider  the parameter the a lpha thermal diffusivity as a constant parameter . So, also 
the thermal pro perties like α depends on k , ρ, & cp. These  also varies  because of the  
composition of the material . 
So, there are different  cases ok , different conditions for this . The lump  parameter 
approach that we have taken earlier  has been changed to this  but again the difficulty  of 
solving F ourier ’s law of heat co nduction for the actual cases and  actual geometries , we 
will further move on  to a graphical solution .  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:37)  
 
So, how we can solve in this  graphical  method is that  graphical solution has been  
develop ed based on  certain dimensionless parameter . So, first Gurney and L urie 
develop ed this kind of a chart ; so, based on the dimens ionless temperature parameter Y 
against the  Fourier number (F0) as a function of  two other variabl es that is m and n . 
So, what is  m and n? m is the reciprocal of the B iot number  i.e. 1/Bi . So, for a cylinder or  
sphere , the characteristic length will be the radius . And n is a  dimensionless m easure of 
the position with the within the object defined by n=x/ L. So, we have seen that x is  the 
distance from the centre . So, that distance divided by L which is the  thickness or 
characteristic dimension of the body . So, x/L signify the value of n ; that means, if we say  n=0; that means, it is at the cent re 
that we want to measure and n=1 means x is L. So, L/L is 1; that means, at the surface 
we want to  measure the  temperature  ok. So, graphical so lution if we see the Gurney 
Lurie Chart .  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:36)  
 
So, this chart is  represented here . This is  basically for the infinite slab . So, as we have 
seen that for different geometry , the characteristic dimension or characteristic length 
changes because of the volume  & surface area . So, this is  characteristic  dimension is the  
volume by surface area . So, therefore, it is changing for different g eometry . So, this chart 
is specifically for the infinite slab  ok. So, in the x direction  the here, x is represented by 
the F ourier ’s number i.e.  α×t/L2 ok, y that is in the ordinate . So, this is the dimensionless 
parameter relat ing the temperature  and this  m is nothing  but inverse of B iot number and  
so m is varying  here fro m 0, 0.5, 1, 2 and up to  infinity . 
So, here, so, m is 0, then m is 0.5, then m is 1, 2, 6 and varies  to infinity ; however, the 
parameter in this is varying  from  0. We have seen  that n is equal to x/ L. So, x is the 
distance from the centre . So, n equal to  0 means , this is at from the centre . Then 
gradually it coming  to the surface ; so, 0.2, 0.4 and 0.6 and 8 and n equal to 1, where m 
equal to  0; that is signified by this line , the ordinate . So, this is happening for all the 
different  ratio of the 1/Bi.  So, from this cha rt we can take the value of  the parameter;  while let us  say if we want to  
analyze  that when a particular block  having a kn own geometry or  ok. So, this the 
temperature of this block , initial temperature T0 is kn own to us and then we are dipping  it 
into a temperature T1 and then we are calculating this Y value which is  (T-T1)/(T0-T1). 
So, let us say we want to achieve a final temperature of T΄. So, when we reach the T΄ our 
process will be stop ped. So, we put here T΄, calculate the parameter of th is i.e. the value 
of this y and we also check the  value of B iot number , so, m=1/Bi.  
And also the  distance from the centre , where we want  to measure th e temperature ; so, let 
us take if you wa nt to measure at the centre . So, n will be  0 and based on this B iot 
number block  because  this m is set of lines  here, the whole l ine representing a particular  
m i.e. 1/Bi . So, with value required we will see n=0 and y value . So, let us say , we are 
concerned for m=0.5. So, this is the  0 value and here is the y value . So, will connect 
them and then see what is the x value is coming  ok. 
So, x=α×t/Lc2, the characteristic dimension . So, α=k/(ρcp). So, K is the thermal 
conductivity . If the  material is known to us the thermal conductivity , we can measure 
density and specific heat is also known to us . So, then putting these  value and 
characteristic dimension , we can measure the time required , so that the centre of this 
food wil l attend the temperature T΄ which is required  for the proces s. So, this is how we 
use the Gurney L urie Chart for getting the  temperature profile at different  time and 
different  position . So, let us just  once again  think about the process we have considering 
now; for the un steady state process and that will be eventually helpful in analyzing  the 
heat treated preservation techniques ok . 
So, first we have seen the lumped parameter method . So, lumped parameter method we 
consider where the  system geometry  follows  the restriction  of the  Biot number  that is 
Bi<0.1 and also  it signifies that the internal cond uctive resistance is very low , 
conductivity  is very high . Also in this case , we assume that  alpha is constant  where in 
actual case , alpha varies  and also  the measurement of the thermal property will also vary 
and this use of lump  parameter can give us the temperature distribution with respect to 
time but not with respect to posit ion. So, then we have come to the  analysis  using the  
unsteady state one dimensional heat conduction equa tion that is from the F ourier ’s law 
and then we have  derived the final form of the equation  where the dimen sionless 
parameter Y can be related with the  dista nce x from the centre .  So, in this pattern , we can relate the temperature variation inside the foo d with respect to 
position and  time right . So, then from the same analysis , we can , we can perform by 
using this chart  as well just  to simplify the  tedious  process of the analytical method . So, 
from this , we can  again move on to the next chart which is the , which is the chart for 
infinite cylinder.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:02)  
 
So, this is the chart for infinite cylinder in the similar way as we have analyzed  for the 
infinite  plate . So, here is  the value of x which is F ourier ’s number and here  the Y value , 
here the m value which is 1/Bi and m value and n value which is x/ L. So, the x is 
signifying the radial  distance of the cylinder .  (Refer Slide Time: 13:35)  
 
Also for this sphere , we can  see this chart . So, this is for a sphere and x i s again 
represented towards x axis , in the y axis we are representing y which is dimensionless 
temperature parameter ; m and n are as representing the  1/Bi and characteristic  or the 
reference position of the temperature measure ment as it was for the earlier two cases . 
Now, the difference of this chart  from the earlier two chart is that here we are  measuring  
or a getting data for a finite  dimension for a sphere ; however, in the previ ous two cases 
for infinite slab or infinite cylinder , we are  getting  one di mension is in  finite  
measurement , the others are infinite long .  
So, there is a problem for using this chart  for actual calculation because what happened 
that in  actual food process , most of the cases , the dimensions are finite and if we use this 
chart , so, some error we may get . Because if we are taking an  cylinder , if we can take a 
cylinder , so, what happened that, we need to calculate the parameters  in between the 
infinite cylinde r and infinite slab . So, in that case , the Y that is the parameter  we actually 
need to take , we actually need to consider will come  as Y plate into Y cylinder and then 
we relate this with  other  Fourier ’s number and the dimensions m and n. So, there is a 
problem and most of the cases in the food sample when we go for  preservation using the 
sterilization . 
So, we need to have the  centre point temperature  because that is very important because  
the assurance that no  contamination  will be there or  no microbial gr owth will be there , is very important fo r preservation of food and to as certain that , we need to maintain  the 
centre temperature at a set  level or we can we can  perform the process in such a manner , 
so that the centre temperature should attend the steriliz ing temperature . So, for that the 
centre temper ature is very important . So, that is  why further  you know advancement i n 
the chart has been done by  Heisler . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:47)  
 
And , w e will see now , the other chart which  is called the Heisler  chart  where again the  
Fourier ’s numb er is represented here in the x axis i.e. αt/Lc2. Where, L c is your 
charact eristic dimension . And in the y axis , we are having dimensionless parameter Y  or 
θ i.e. (T 0-T∞)/(T i-T∞). 
So, initial temperature is of the body is noted by  Ti here, T∞ is the temperature of the 
surrounding  and T0 is the  temperatu re attain ed at any  time. And what is b eing done here 
is, the value of 1/Bi that is very important . So, that has been varied from  0 to 100. So, 
this number has been varied  from  0 to 100 because here we are considering  the cases 
where the conductive  resistance is very high . And also , all these  lines has been drawn 
considering n=0. That means, x=0 because n=x/ L. So, this is the centre temperature .  (Refer Slide Time: 18:34)  
 
So, we can also get  from  this chart, if we plot inverse of B iot number in the x  direction  
i.e. on x axis and θ/θ0 in the  y direction and r/r0 will be represented by this . So, we can 
calculate based on this , what will be the temperature distribution inside the  food. 
So, change in thermal  energy storage can also be seen from this d ata where the  again  
Biot number is plotted and q/ q0 that is the  heat content , change in the heat content over 
the initial heat content q 0 i.e. Bi×Fo2 ok. So, from this chart we can get the  thermal 
energy storage , the idea of  the thermal energy storage .  
(Refer  Slide Time: 19:47)  
 Now, this as I said that , this kind of  analysis will be varied for both  if we consider the 
sterilization or else if we  consider the freezing ; So, one problem of the  similar kind has 
been taken here  where apple of whose the diameter is  120 mm, ρ=990kg/m3, 
c=4170J/kgoc, k=0.58 w/moc with temperature of 25 oC is placed in a ref rigerator where 
temperature is 6 
oC. Average  convective heat transfer coefficient over the apple  is 12.8 
w/m2 oC. Determine the temperature at the centre of the app le after a period  of 2 hours .  
So, let us see the solution .  
Lc for sphere = R/3 = 0.02m  
Bi= hL c/k = 0.44  (>0.1)  Here Bi >0.1 means lumped parameter analysis can’t be used. 
So, use heissler charts to solve given problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:46)  
 
                             1/B i=2.267  
                            F0=ατ/Lc2=0.281  
Temperature at centre, x/L or r/R=0  
From Heissler chart we will calculate the parameter    (Refer Slide Time: 22:21)  
 
From Heissler chart we will calculate the parameter  Y. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:02)  
  (Refer Slide Time: 23:25)  
 
So, using tha t, here we are getting the  temperature dimensionless  temperature paramet er 
as 0.75 ok. So, putting all the value , we can find the T0. 
𝐓−𝐓𝟏
𝐓𝟎−𝐓𝟏=𝟎.𝟕𝟓 
𝐓−𝟔
𝟐𝟓−𝟔=𝟎.𝟕𝟓 
                                                                  To= 20.25oC 
So, in given problem we got  Fo = 0.281 and 1/Bi =  2.267. Somewhere  here this line for 
all n=0 this is and w e have taken the F ourier ’s number data here and find the point where 
these two intersects and calculate the  Y value which is the dimensionless parameter . So, 
this is how we can use the Heisler chart for calculation of  temperature with respect to 
different  centre points for different time in case of the unsteady state  ok. (Refer Slide Time: 25:04)  
 
So, now another problem based on the Gurney L urie chart . Meat slices  of 10 mm th ick 
initially at  a temperature of 80 oCis to be cool ed by blowing cold s air at 2 oC. Estimate 
the time  for the centre of a slice to reach 20 oC. The properties of the material  is given 
here k= 0.375Wm−1 K−1, ρ =1250 kg m−3, c=2130 J kg−1 K−1 & 150 W m−2 K−1.  
Let’s see the  solution , again will find the characteristic length a nd the B iot number of 
this. So, m=1/Bi i.e. 0.5 here. Then  α=k/ρc will calculate. the dimen sionless parameter  
(Y) we will calcula te because we know here the  final temperature and the initial 
temperature .  
Lc=0.01/2 =0.005m,    Bi= hL c/k =2  (>0.1)   
m=1/B i = 0.5  
α=k/ ρc = 1.41×10-7m2s-1 
Y= (20 -2)/(80 -2)=0.231  
 (Refer Slide Time: 26:36)  
 
And after getting this , F0 is obtained from t his chart . So, this is for an infinite slab . So, 
here putting the values of Y at 0.231 and at the centre  where n= 0 and further  we can  find 
the F ourier number  ok. 
Read the value of x axis for (m = 0.5, Y=0.231, n=0)     
X or F o=1.4  
From here we can ca lculate the ti me  
F0=ατ/Lc2=1.4   
So, τ=248s  
This is how using the H eissler chart and  Gurney L urie char t, we can calculate the  
temperature profile in case of different food material when these foods  are you know 
exposed to the higher or lo wer temperature surroundings . So, the principal , we have 
discussed today , we will be using this one for the thermal preservation techniques that 
we will follow in our next class ; so till then . 
Thank you . 