Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 01 
Importance of Rheology in Food  
 
Hello everyone  welcome to the first lecture of  the course Fundamental of Food Process 
Engineering. I  am Jayeeta M itra assistant  professor , Agricultural and  Food Engineering 
department IIT K haragpur . My two research scholars Soumen Ghosh and A maresh will 
be associated with me  for dev elopment of this course through out. Today I  will start the 
first chapter which is  importance of rheology in the food . So, let us first discuss why 
rheology is  so important in the context of food . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:09)  
 
Food having a diverse nature  we know that various kind of  a solid , semi so lid liquid 
products are available , purely solid we not get that much in case of food only for very 
very low amount of strain this kind of behaviour elastic beh aviour is visible , but mostly  
fluid and  semi solid nature is widely available . So, let u s first see that  what are the 
various kind of food , we see normally around us and what is the nature o f those food , 
right . So, first let  us see , this is a picture of a glass of water  ok, water  we all know that a 
it is a fluid and it is considered as  you mi ght have heard that N ewtonian  fluid ok . So, water  is having a linear relation among the stress and shear rate  ok. So, if we try to plot 
the behaviour let us do that . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:31)  
 
Let us plo t the shear stress and shear rate behaviour for pure  water . So, we will get a 
straight line  and the slope of this line is an important parameter that de fine the 
rheological property of water ok . 
So, so this water is a fluid , that is a N ewtonian fluid and it has a linear relation between 
shear stress and she ar rate . Now, if we see the clarified juice ok , clarified in the sense 
there is n o suspended particle in the juice . So, a fully clarified juice showing the similar 
behaviour that is it also  show a linear relation between the shear stress and shear rate . 
Pure honey , so pure honey it  is a viscous material , pure honey also follow the similar 
trend that is a constant slope we are getting if we apply a changing shear rate and plot it 
with the corresponding share stress .  
Finally, edible oil we all are  very much  aware of all kind of edible oil whether it is from 
ground nut source , whether it is from mustard seed . So, this edible oil also follow the 
similar nature . So, one thing in common in all such food material is that there is only one 
property , one rheological  property that can express the nature of all such material and 
that i s called viscosity right . Now, it is not  so simple in many other kind of food ok , in 
them if we see the  shear stress and shear rate beh aviour . So, we may not get a stra ight 
line nature , so let us see  those food . (Refer Slide Time: 05:03)  
 
So, now coming to the next slide we see that there is tomato ketchup , tomato soup there 
is mustard sauce and mayonnaise , all four food are very common to all of us we 
normally have this in my , in our hou se we eat day to day basis . So, see what i t what the 
title says it shear thinning behaviour with yield stress right . So, all such food having a 
shear thinning behaviour , now what is that actually ?  
If we go back to  this diagram , so shear thinning; that mea ns, in ‘x’ axis where  our shear  
rate is increasing and corresponding  shear stress we are measuring in ‘y’ axis. So, it will 
give us a plot of  this kind ; that means, with increasing shear rate it is having a decr easing 
slope  ok. So, viscosit y is decreasing at e ach instant , if we measure the slope here , here, 
here and then here . So, we are getting that constantly lowering in the viscosity we may  
see for those kind of material ok . So, it is see how much varied nature in different food 
sample we are getting , so coming back to the slide . 
So, these are  the fluid food showing the viscous property  and we als o say that plastic 
behaviour . So, plastic behaviour ; that means, it is it is somewhat  related with the this 
phrase that is yield stress . Now, again we will move on t o its sh ear thinning  behaviour 
which was visible by this , now when yield stress is added to tha t, so let us say this is σ0 
and fro m here this kind of a plot we are getting . So, it shear thinning behaviour with 
yield stress right . So, that means, a initial threshold is required to cause the deformation or flow of such material right . So, again very special kind of  category we can observe 
here. 
So, from this  we can see that different kind of food which is having shear thinning 
behaviour with y ield stress . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:15)  
 
Now, we will see the next category , here we are getting food having shear thickening 
behaviour , so just the r everse  of the earlier case that  we are getting . So, these are what 
sample this is partially gelatinised starch f irst one, then we  are getting a cream , this is 
also cream used as a toping of shake  kind of material . So, again this kind of product is 
showing a different nature . So, if just we look into the structure of this material we can 
say the  structure is somewhat more  rigid. So, they have a properly frame d structure an d 
to break that structure ; that means, to cause the flo w its needs a  higher amount of  stress  
or higher shear rate is required . 
So, this phenomena we can again observe here . So, this is called the shear th ickening 
behaviour . So, in the stress  strain or shear rate  diagram we can get this kind of a plot  
right . So, one first which w as showing the linear relation then  we have got which is 
showing non-linear  relation  shear  thinning behaviour then we have seen that the shear 
thinning  with yield  stress and finally, we are getting a behaviour which is shear 
thickening behaviour . That means, as shear rate is increasing in x direction we are getting a  higher slope at each and every point ok , so that means, viscosity is c ontinuously 
increasing right ok . 
So, why this happen ed because , when we are putting a  shear rate and we are in creasing a 
shear rate , so there are certain product which may form their structure  and the structure 
modifi cation is such that to break o r to cause the flow from them it needs a higher 
amount of stress .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:58)  
 
Now, next w e are having  food having time dependent shear thinning behaviour ok , now 
the new thing came that is time dependent . So, till now w e were discussing about the 
foods which is behaving  differently with changing shear rate ok . Now, we are getting 
certain kind of food material like salad d ressing , then soft cheese , whipped cream .  
For them what we are  observing is th at, that if we  apply a constant sh ear rate , but for a 
prolong time  so shear thinning behaviour ; that means, the lowering of viscosity we can 
observe ok . So, here the time is important that  for how long we are giving that shear rate. 
So, all such different  kind of nature is available  in the diverse food system .  (Refer Slide Time: 12:13)  
 
So, next is food having visco elastic  behaviour that is semi solid food . Now, this is again 
how different from the earlier discussion is that  by now we were discussi ng about the 
fluid food , the food which  is having  the nature  is viscous  right . Now, here we are getting 
a visco elastic food so ; that means, it has the property of viscous material and is also 
having the property of elastic material .  
So, very interesting  feature we can observe in this kind of mat erial, mostly different kind 
of dough  sample  comes under  this. So, this one is chapat ti dough  normally we prepare  in 
household  cooking every day,  then there is ice cream mix , there is chocolate brownie 
batter . So, all such material will have  nature that  they will , if they are  being applied 
certain  force . 
So, we can observe the nature that some amount of deformation  will be the re that cannot 
be recovered . However, certain amount of deformation can be reco vered  so; that means, 
they show both the elastic property  which says that upon withdrawal of force the product 
will come to its initial shape , at the same time  some deformation  we can observe  here. 
So, that is why these are called the visco elastic food and  mostly this  is widely visible in 
the different kind of food sample , the semi solid pattern .  
So, we can see that a vary diverse nature of the food availabl e and for that s ometime  it is 
better to be explain  by this diagram that sometime on e rheological property is enough 
that is this  slope to express the food  characteristic s or nature . Sometime we need to have differ ent slope  at different  location ; that means,  we need to cover a range of shear  rate. 
So, that what is the behaviour of the material of the food within that  strain rate  that is of 
important  issue . 
So, in that case may be more than one parameter we require  to characterize p roperly the 
food in terms of rheological behaviour . And this is important because  we may  not need 
to give the  shear rate or the range of shear  rate that is applicable for processing of all 
kinds of food , this rate depends on what kind of processing do yo u want for your 
product . So, that is why for rheological prop erties are very important for  processing point 
of view . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:00)  
 
So, we will  see now or try to just think over that , where  the rheological properties will 
help and why it is important ? So, we have taken a case of  tomato ketchup processing unit 
and we can see that  what are the  various steps maybe , first the proper good quality of  
tomato , possibly of similar variety a good colour ed, a shape and freshness  those  are 
received . Then they will be grading of  the material after that the re will be  pulping of the 
juice and we need then  deseeding mechanism then sometime we mix  a certai n ingredient 
to it, certain spices  and certain  preservative . 
So, all such thing we add ok, then what we do ? We do certain processing like we do  
pasteurization  or then after pro cessing we do f illing or canning . So, the properties of this 
pulp with seed , without seed and its rheological behaviour all this we need to  understand to design the system in a better way . So, design in terms of the consi stency of this pulp 
from  the making the pulp to final product is very important  while we are  designing the 
proce ssing line  the pipe or the pumping requirement . 
So, all things depends on the  rheological beha viour of this product , let us say  if you are 
heating this and then  the visco sity is changing or if the shear  rate is increasing , so how 
the viscosity is behaving . So, all such thing is very you know  is of interest and 
preliminary understanding before designing such kind of a system . So,  one case  I can 
just discuss is that . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:41)  
 
Let us s ay this is the pipe flow and  we consider a full y developed flow in laminar region , 
so we may get this kind of a velocity  profile  ok. 
So, one cross section  we have taken and we are get ting this kind of velocity profile . So, 
this is the centre ‘r’ and here it is ‘r0’ the radius at the  outside of the wall . So, so this is 
‘r0’ at the  wall and ‘r’ is at the centre and we also know that if we try to draw the stress , 
so this stress will  be minimum at the centre and it will be higher at the wall.  
So, this i s the stress at the wall i.e. τw and this is let us say ‘z’ direction velocity ‘vz’ ok. 
So, velocity will be maximum at th is centre and it will be zero at the wall  because , it is 
fixed  and there will be no flow at the w all. So, if we want to  know the velocity profile  
then we can velocity at any radial distance write as:  vz= dvz
drdrr0
r Stress  at any distance ‘r’ is given as:  
τrz=τwr
r0 
Also if we know the nature of the  fluid that is the rheological behaviour of the fluid is 
known to us . so any point of time we can  measure  stress .  
σ=η dvz
dr n
 
 (dvz/dr)n will come to detail of all the nature of the  different fluid . However, just to 
express th is particular case  we will take tha t n=1. So, this will  be a case of N ewtonian 
fluid  so the above equation becomes:  
σ=ηdvz
dr 
So, now if we want to know the velocity profile of  this fluid which we are handling in  
the in a processing line that t hat we are intended to , let us say in this case  the tomato 
processing  line we  want to  develop  or design . So, velocity profile analysis will be easy if 
we know the nature of the rheological behaviour . That means, the velocity is can be 
calculated by this equation where we need to know the dvz/dr this is nothing , but shear  
rate. So, this behaviour if we know then we can  calculate the ‘vz’ from  this or else if we 
know the  velocity , we can calculate what will be the shear stress at different section and 
the wall and based on that we can design the  whole processing line ok . 
So, so simi larly very much interesting  features can be  identified or the nature of different 
food ca n be  analyse , different  inference of the nature of the food can be drawn by 
analy sing the rheological property ok . (Refer Slide Time: 24:24)  
 
So, we have understood t hat food is a complex material  and the complexity depends on 
the composition and nature of the food . So, mostly this foo ds contain high molecular 
weight polymers like protein , pectin and other material and often they contribute 
significantly to the structure formation and viscosity of the food . 
So, when studying the rheological behaviour of a food a knowledge of the composition 
of the food  specially the important structuring  component , that is  the dissolved polymer 
or suspended s olids  this should known to us and structure of the food itself . That means, 
it is a homogeneous or a  heterogeneous composition or  the, what is the phase of that  
emulsion or what kind of materials . So, the structure should be known to us and 
processing and  storage condition because some time with changing temperature or with 
the sh ear rate with prolong time . So, all this change the rheological nature of the food . 
So, this is very important to know . (Refer Slide Time: 25:48)  
 
Now, structure of the food partic le if we consider we will take one example like 
dispersion . So, dispersion  we call if large molecules of or fine  molecules , fine sub divided  
bulk matter they  are considered to be  colloidal matter , if the particles are in the range of 
10-9 to 10-6 m in dimension . So, these kind of  colloidal matter which are dispersion , so 
they are exist like  milk or cloudy fruit juice and egg white ok , then there are may be 
phase transition . So, phase transition we  know that this is a  change of one  phase to the 
other that is  liquid to solid liquid and  gas this interchange is called the phase transition . 
So, most of the cases and in case of food we are getting liquid to solid ified state or vice 
versa . pH and presence of t he divalent i on as well as enzymatic action and  these are 
helpful in conversion of liquid to solid ok . For example, gels can be created from casein , 
either  by enzymatic action followed by precipitation with calcium i on or by acid 
coagulation . So, by that t he liquid to solid conversion can happen . (Refer Slide Time: 27:51)  
 
There is another thing which is gel . So, by definit ion gel can be defined as a two 
component  system that is the gelling polymer and the solvent , formed by a solid fin ely 
disperse d or dissolved  in a liquid phase , exhibiting solid like behaviour under 
deformation . So, both components that is the gelling polymer and the solvent the y exten d 
continuously throughout the ent ire system and each phase  being interconnected . 
So, what will be the structure  of thi s? So, at the molecular level , gelation  is the formation 
of a continuous network of polymer molecules , in which the stress resisting bulk  
properties which is the solid like behaviour these are impa rted by a fr amework of a 
polymer chains  that extend throughout the gel phase . So, when we call gel setting , that 
signify the  formation of cross link , while softening or  liquefaction o f the gel ; that means, 
melting or the destruction of the structure . (Refer Slide Time: 29:19)  
 
So, to sum up  I can say that  in the food industry rheology has a significant role , process 
engineering calculation involves a wide range of equipment such as pipeline , pump , 
extruder , mixer , coater , heat exchanger , homogen izers  and online viscometer .  
So, all this need a proper rhe ological understanding t hat what is the effect of she aring or 
increasing shear  or increasing time on it , similarly  final product quality control is  very 
easy if we know before  the rheological nature of the material . Then evaluating the food 
texture by cor relating the sensory data because  sensory perception is very important for 
any food material  based on with which we design a food because consumer acceptance is 
very important .  
So, to mimic properly the sensory data  texture analysis is being done which is  you know  
getting an  important insi ght of the rheological nature of the food and analysing 
rheological equation of state or constitutive equation which give n understanding of the  
flow phenomena o r the behaviour . So, this is very important . 