Fundamentals of Food Pr ocess Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 13 
Thermal Pr ocessing and Kinetics of Microbial  Death (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone . Welcome to NPT EL online certification course on Fundamentals of 
Food Pr ocess Engineering . Today , we will discuss the  Thermal Pr ocessing and Kinetics 
of Microbial Death . In the previous class , we have discussed  that how the pr ocessing and 
the heat transfer can be done , when we use thermal  processing t reatment for food 
preservation . And we have seen that how unsteady state  kinetics can be used to 
determine the ti me which is required for heating  the food materials during thermal 
processing . So, today , we will see what are the  various thermal pr ocessing’s available . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:16)  
 
So, in the thermal pr ocessing , because we know that all the thermal treatment that we 
will going to  learn  in this chapter will be used for preservation purpose . So, it includes 
blanching , pasteurization and sterilization and canning . After that , we will disc uss the 
kinetics of microbial death . In that , what is the thermal rate constant and how the change 
of microbial count varies with time during thermal treatment that will be  discuss in 
detail . We will also discuss the D value  i.e. decimal reduction time , F value  i.e. total 
process time , Z value  i.e. temperature  dependence o f microbial destruction rate , Q10 value and also the  L value  i.e. lethality . Finally , we will do the pr ocess calculation  by 
different  method  and also will solve  certain  numerical problems . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:40)  
 
So, the first thermal pr ocessing , we will discuss is blanc hing. Then, we will move on to 
pasteurization  and then sterilization . But before going to the detail discussion  of all such 
method s first  we will see the importance  of these thermal treatments  in the preservation 
of food . So, the purpose of this thermal pr ocessing is , first to reduce or destroy microbial  
activity . So, that is the prime importance of thermal pr ocessing given to food for 
preservation . Next is , to reduce or destroy enzyme activity .  
Apart from this , we may also give thermal pr ocessing sometime to produce physical or 
chemical change s to make the food me et a certain quality standard ; for example, 
gelatinization  of starch  and denatura tion of protein to produce edible food . Gelatinization 
of starch , this happen during the hydro thermal  treatment that we gives to paddy  that is 
calling parboiling  and it also change the appearance of  the rice kernel  and it is a desirable 
change . Similarly , denaturation of protein is also a desirable change that is being done by 
thermal pr ocessing .  (Refer Slide Time: 04:27)  
 
So, first thermal treatment that wil l discuss is blanching . Blanching is a unit o peration 
carried out at up to 100 °C using hot water or steam at or near atmospheric pressure . So, 
normally , we perform  it at atmospheric pressure and blan ching is a very common 
phenomena that we  normally  do in house  hold practice  for reducing the  surface microbial 
contamination from the product and also mainly to reduce the enzyme activity .  
But, blanching alone cannot be treated as a  thermal pr ocessing that can prevent the food 
from  long term microbial  contamination . It mostly used as a pre treatment prior to 
freezing canning and drying . The primary purpose of blanching is to destroy the enzyme 
activity in fruit s and vegetable because this enzyme cause certain undesirable changes 
durin g storage or  during exposure to  temperature sometime and this cause browning and 
off flavour  development to the fruits and vegetable . So, therefore, this enzyme such as 
polyphenol oxidase  etc should be inactivated prior to storing or freezing , canning , 
drying , etc.  (Refer Slide Time: 06:15)  
 
So, apart from the main purpose that is destruction of enzyme activity , there are ot her 
functions  of blanching . These are reducing the surface microbial contamination . It also  
preserves  the colour , flavour and nutritional value . And it imparts  of softening of 
vegetable tissue and that facilitate the filling into container beca use most of the time , 
after this  thermal pre -treatment that is blanching , we use this vegetable for  storing in a 
container for drying or f or freezing . So, softening of the tissue  helps in filling those 
containers . Removing air from intercellular space prior  to canning is another important 
aspect of blanching . 
Because this is very  important aspects ; we need to remove the air from the intercel lular 
space s otherwise  during canning . Because of the excess pressure generation , the can s 
may be  damage  ok. So, that is  why these are the important function of blanching .  (Refer Slide Time: 07:38)  
 
Now, there are many methods  by which we can do the blanc hing treatment . One such 
method is hot water blanching which is  very common . In this , the food enters a slowly 
rotating drum which is partially submerged in the hot water . The temperature of which is 
maintained  at 70 to 100 °C.  
Water blanching  requires  longer pr ocessing time and also  the adverse effect of it is  
results in increase leaching  of minerals because  vitamins and minerals which are water 
soluble , that may drain out  or leach out  with the  water during the hot water blanching . 
We can s ee here the system which is use d for continuous kind of hot water blanching . 
There is a conveyor belt is there on which the raw vegetables are put  ok. So, raw 
vegetables are coming over this conveyor belt and water will be sprayed from the top and 
is being  heated to desired  temperature that is 70 to 100 °C by steam . 
At the end of the blan ching treatment , it is being taken out and all the nutrition al losses 
that may happen because of this will because of the leaching of water soluble nutrient 
during this treatment . If you want to measure the  requirement of the  steam for this 
processing , so, there is a relation that is the  total heat required for this pr ocessing  
QH= Mp(CpΔT)+Q L 
ΔT is the tem perature that we need to increase from the inlet water  temperature , QL= loss 
of heat . If the loss of heat is  0, QL=0. So, the whole  heat requirement that is will be QH and then , we can calculate the mass of steam MS. i.e. QH/λ. λ is the latent heat of 
vaporization  of steam . 
So, steam requirement would be 134 kg/ton of vegetable s for hot water blanching if we 
consider QL=0 i.e. heat loss= 0. We have considered here λ as 2330 kJ/kg and Cp i.e. 
specific heat of water  is 4.18kJ/kgK . So, by this, we can calculate the amount of heat 
energy needed a nd thereby amount of steam needed for this  processing  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:07)  
 
Then, will move on to steam blanching . So, in steam blanc hing, product c arried on a 
mesh belt or rotating cylinder through a steam atmosphere . Residence time is controlled  
by speed of the conveyor or speed of rotation  if we  use the  rotating cylinder or drum . 
And it is an energy efficient pr ocess because  less water requirement is there . 
Since  it is a steam , so, leach out effect of the nutrients will be reduced to a maximum 
possible extent . And here , a system is there in which we keep the product on a perforated 
tray and then we  send the saturated steam  to do the blanching treatment . And after the 
certain time , after the required  time of exposure to steam we take out the material from 
the discharg e chute . After the treatment , we need to cool  the vegetables by spraying cool 
water and the water flushing is also done in certain cases . (Refer Slide Time: 12:33)  
 
The next method for blanching is indiv idual quick blanching that is IQB. I n that , what 
we do a single layer  of product  is conveyed through the steam chamber and each 
individual p iece of the product immediately enters in contact with the steam . So, here, all 
the material that we enter , so, they will individually com e in contact with the steam . So, 
better heat transfer and faster heat transfer will be there and also the  effect of  the 
leaching  is minimal here . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:15)  
 So, the next method that we will discuss is M icrowave  blanching . This is comparatively 
newer technology  as compared to the hot water blanching and steam blanching ; however, 
this is becoming very effec tive. So, this is alone used or in combination with the water 
blanching used in  household application and industrial application . And it further 
reduces  the heating time . So, both batch and continuous systems are available for 
microwave blanching .  
We know the principle of microwave heating and  it is very rapid volumetric heating 
because the electromagnetic radiation is absorb ed by the moisture in the fruits and 
vegetable . And these are high moisture product . So, very easily , they will  absorb  those 
radiations  and because of the dipole  rotation , the frictional  heat is generated which is 
causing the volumetric  heating  and the quick pr ocessing is being done in the microwave 
blanching . It improves  the product quality and minimise the waste water production  that 
may happen in case of the hot water blanching .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:38)  
 
Moving on  to the next thermal preservation technique , that is P asteurization . 
Pasteurization is the relatively mild heat treatment in which food is heated to less than  
100 °C.  
So, since we are h eating it  to less than 100 °C, we can perform this pasteurization 
operation at ambient temperature o r atmospheric  pressure . Pasteurization is normally 
used for the destruction of all disease causing organism that is  being used like pasteurization of the milk or the destruction or reduction in the number of spo ilage 
organism in certain food as for example, vinegar . Pasteurization does not  kill the spore 
formers . So, it is only  effective for disease causing or pathogenic microorganism . And 
we can also mention that pasteurization  since  it is a mile he at treatment , it can store the 
product for  lesser time after pr ocessing . 
So, after pr ocessing within few days , we need to consume the pasteurize d product 
otherwise the contaminat ion will be there and  pasteurization is better use with 
combination of several huddle technologies . For example, after pasteurization , it can be  
immediately refrigerated or the condition  may be lowered  like pH maybe lowered . So, 
this kind of processing  in combination of with the pasteurization is effective for storing 
of the  food material . Pasteurization is also effective , when we want to remove  in the 
surface steriliza tion if you want to do for the beer or wine . So, those cases pasteurization 
is effective . 
The two group of microorganism that survive the pasteurization  temperature used in milk 
are thermoduric  and thermophilic . So, in milk , we basically  do pasteurization to kill the 
mycobacterium  tuberculosis , listeria  monocytogenes and salmonella . We also perform 
pasteurization  in case of  liquid ache to remove the salmonella and  these microo rganisms  
that is thermoduric  and thermophilic  are as the name suggests that thermoduric means , 
they can  withstand high temperature that is given to the food mat erial during 
pasteurization . However , thermoduric organisms cannot grow at hig h temperature  but 
they can live at high temperature . They can withstand that where a s the thermophilic 
micro organism can grow and sustain at higher temperature . (Refer Slide Time : 18:05)  
 
So, Pasteurization , there is a typical time  temperature treatment is required because we 
know that as we increase the temperature , the effect on the micro  organism will be  
higher . So, that is  why we can maintain a combination ; that means,  at different 
temperature , different durat ion of time will be there i.e. exposure time in the 
pasteurization temperature .  
We can see that there is a  chart for different food material  that milk if you want to 
pasteurize  it at 72 °C, the time requirement will be 15 second . For the ice cream milk , 
pasteurization  ice-cream mix that temperature and time combination is 80 °C and 20 
second . For tomato juice , temperature will be 118 °C, time is 60 second . For honey , it is 
71 °C, 300 second ; fruit juice it is 88 °C and 15 second , soft drink 95 °C, 10 second . 
So, this is the time temperature combination that we need to maintain for pasteurization 
of these food products . And we can fix the  durati on for any particular product based on  it 
is composition and the index microorganism that we want to kill in a particular pr ocess 
because  every microorganism may have  different resistances  to temperature .  (Refer Slide Time: 19:49)  
 
Coming to Pasteurizat ion methods , in bottle pasteurization where tightly sealed  bottles 
filled with raw milk are held at 63 to 66 °C for 30 minutes . Then, bottles are passing  
through the water spray s of low temperature to cool the product in the bottle  because  as 
we mention that after pasteurization , we need to cool it to the refrigerator  temperature for 
better storage stability . In batch pasteurization , milk is heated in water jacketed vat at 63 
°C as we have mentioned here and held at that temperature for 30 minutes.  
So, this is a  setup , this is a set up where this is a steam jacketed vat where we have 
provide an agitator  to have better heat transfer  coefficient and  there is a  inside the jacket 
there is a steam that is  giving the  required heat treatment for paste urization of the milk . 
There is a  inlet line through which milk is coming into the container  and there is a air 
space heater . There is a  recording thermometer to measure the temperature of  the milk 
sample . There is indicating thermometer and air space ther mometer . So, here, we first  
heat this unless it achieves  the desired  temperature of pasteurization that is 63 to 66 °C. 
Then we hold it there for the duration of 30 minutes . And then gradually , we heat this 
where gradually we cool the temperature to the refrig eration temperature .  (Refer Slide Time: 21:58)  
 
So, after batch pasteurization , we will see now the Continuous  pasteurization . So, in 
continuous pasteurization , in high temperature short time method milk is heated to 72 °C 
for 15 second and c ooled to 5 °C or below . This is the continuous pasteurization system . 
First, we will  look int o this tank that is the balance tank  where all the milk collected in a 
processing section is stored first that is called the balance tank . And from he re, milk is 
going to the first regenerator that is called regenerator and here the temperature of the 
inlet milk is increased to some extent and then  it is going to the heater . 
So, in the heater , it is being heated to the desired  pasteurization  temperatu re that is  72 °C 
ok. And from heater , it is going to the holding tube . The design of holding tube that is the  
dimension of holding  tube and the flow vel ocity is being selected in such a way , so that 
by the t ime it reaches from the outlet point of the heater to the controller sensor , it is 
being expose d to the desired time period  at this  temperature that is 72 °C. So, it will take 
15 second from  this point to this point . To reach from t his point i.e.  exit of the heater to 
this controller , it will complete the requirement of time, exposure  time. 
So, after that  there is a controller senso r that will sense  or measure the temperature of the 
milk and if it has attained the desired temperature of pasteurization  then, it is being sent  
to the  pasteurized re generator . And from there , it is sending to the cooler . If it does not  
achieve the required tempe rature , this flow diversion valve  will redirect this inlet milk to 
the balance tank. Now, in the raw regenerator section , since it is regenerator ; that means, this inlet milk is being heated by the exit , exit milk , that is already being pasteuriz ed. So, 
the heat transfer between two fluids  happens . In the heater , steam or hot water is used to 
heat the milk and again in the p asteurized regenerator , this heated milk is being cool ed 
by the exit cool milk that is already ch illed by the chill water in the cooler . And finally, 
in the cooler  it is chill ed by the chill water . So, this is the whole pr ocess that we perform 
in HTST  pasteurizer .  
So, we have discuss the component that is the regenerator , heating and for cooling  and 
these are the actually plate heat exchanger . We will discuss in detail about all this  heat 
exchanger . In the  next chapter and flow diversion valve that we have  discuss that  it is 
function is to control the direction of the flow of milk , that is whether it is going to pass 
from the holding tube to the regenerator or it will b e directed back to the balance tank for 
reprocessing .  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:26)  
 
Next treatment is the S terilization . So, the purpose of sterilization is to cause des truction 
of all micro organism including spore formers . So, the product is heated above 100 °C, 
usually 110 to 121 °C and kept for a defined period . But the question must come that 
how we can heat it beyond 100 °C; so, obviously, we need to  increase the pressure . At 
atmospheric pressure  the, maximum temperature of the water that we can enhance is 100 
°C. Now, in this case we heat this or we  perform the sterilization by saturated steam . First, 
we use the saturated steam and then we can increase the temperature , we can use the 
superheated steam and the condition we normally maintain at 121 °C is 15 PSI pressure , 
i.e. poun d per square inch for 30 minute duration  ok. So, this is how we perform the 
sterilization . Now, what is C ommercial sterility ?  
So, commercial sterility implies less than absolute destruction of  all microorganism and 
spore , but any remaining would be incapa ble of growth in  the food  under existing 
condition ; that means, we cannot fully nullify the  number of the microorganism . But 
certainly we need to lower the probability  than 1, so  that that cannot  contaminate the 
sterile lot of the food products ok. The nex t higher treatment that we can give is ultra 
high temperature ste rilization where we maintain 135 to 150 °C for only few second . 
Now, as I told tha t the micro organism has a  definite sensitivity  to temperature . If we 
increase the tempera ture, so, the destruction of the microorganism generally may  
enhance . 
So, they have a temperature sensitivity that is defined by the z value . We will discuss the 
z value in detail in our next class . But to understand the effect of this heat treatment on 
the product quality , we want to  inform here is that  the z value that is the temperature 
dependence of microbes is much slower  than the  temperature dependence of enzymatic 
destruction or nutritional degradation . Therefore, if we enhance the temperature t o 
certain degree , the microbes can be destroyed  but not the nutrients or enz ymes will be  
destroyed at that  higher extend . Therefore,  this design has been done that if we increase 
the temperature and reduce the time combination for sterilization , so, defini tely the 
nutritional effect will be reduced . 
So, that is  why from the sterilization to  ultra high sterilization , this has been  performed . 
So, this will cau se lower damage of nutrition tha n this may cause by the  method of 
higher temp erature lower temperatur e and higher duration  ok. Also direct method that is 
in contact with the food  is higher and has higher efficiency compared to the indirect 
processing .  (Refer Slide Time: 30:44)  
 
The most  common sterilizing equipment  is Autoclaves or retorts . It is steril ization can be 
done in batch or continuous operation , high temperature is  generated either by direct 
steam injection as  we mention ed or by the heating water  up to a temperature over 100 °C 
by combine steam  and water heating . . 
Normally , what we do in retort processing  we first , put the material  inside , close the lid, 
and then , we open the vent port from which the air will be taken out and the mo ist steam , 
mixture of liquid water and  gas that is a steam that is w ater vapour is mixed here . And it 
is fill in the  chamber later  on we provide m ore heat to make it from the mois t heat to the 
dry heat . We increase  the temperature of that heat and  we make it in the super  heated 
condition and maintain the pressure  for certain  duration .  
After that , when we want to break the pressure and try to  take the product out after 
processing , that time we  first enter the liquid water into the chamber and also we  a vent , 
we start venting the air  through the port and gradually , we coo l down the sterile product 
by water spray or water circulation , flushing of the water  and in this with  the whole 
operation is being done . So, there are continuous rotary sterilizers , hydrostatic sterilizer 
available . (Refer Slide Time: 32:39)  
 
So, Steriliz ed product may be in package  sterilized  product like canning , retort pouches , 
sealed bottle etcetera . Aseptically , process products are there like tetrapack or 
combibl oc, fruit juices and soups  etc. So, in that what we do ? The ra w product which  is 
commercially sterilized and cooled  by the continuous thermal pr ocessing is being sent to 
the packaging section and the incoming packaging m aterial that is pre sterilized 
containers with hermetically sealing .  
So, they also  after sterilization , sent to the p ackaging section and package fi lling and 
hermetic sealing is done . So, filled  and released in an atmosphere , free of contamination , 
that is the whole pr ocess is being done aseptically . And therefore, it becomes  the shelf  
stable com mercially sterile product an d for those products  no refrigeration requirement  is 
needed .  (Refer Slide Time: 33:55)  
 
The other method  is Canning . This is  almost similar to the sterilization  method . Pressure 
canning and water bath canning is done . water bath canning is done for the acidic food. 
And here we do the hot pack method where we heat food in syrup , juice or  water befo re 
filling into the jars  ok. 
Another is the raw pack where we first fill the jars with raw food , cover t he lids with the 
boiling hot syrup , juice or water  ok. So, these are the system where we do the c anning . 
There is a jar rack where we keep the close container  and there is a safety valves and 
there is a counterweight  provided on that there is dial gauge wh ich measure the  pressure 
and by that we can able to measure that how long we want to keep that . There is a 
venting port also , there is a safety fuse . So, all such arrangement is being done during the  
pressure canning  process. 
Thank you we will continue in the next class . 