Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 23 
Heat Exchangers (  Contd.  ) 
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the NPTEL  online certification co urse on Fundamentals of 
Food Process E ngineering . We were discussing about Heat E xchanger and in our last 
class we have covered a few topic from this chapter . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:34)  
.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:33)  
. 
Heat transfer coefficient  
The heat trans fer coefficient or film coefficient, or film effectiveness, in thermodynamics 
is the proportionality constant between the heat flux and the thermodynamic driving 
force for the flow of heat (i.e., the temperature difference, Δ Tm). 
q = heat transfer rate, W= J/s, 
A = heat transfer surface area, m2 
U = overall heat transfer coefficient, W/  (m2°C)  
 (Refer Slide Time: 02:55)  
. q = U A ΔTm   Different types of basic  heat transfer equation  
Basically 2 very common modes are conduction and convection heat transfer . So, 
convectio n happens when  one fluid and one surface is involved and  conduction is when 
only heat is transferred through a solid surface  or solid wall  
For conductive heat transfer, the equation is follows:  
 
Let’s consider a  solid wall having  dx thickness and the heat  is flowing from the higher  
side to the lower side where , T1 greater than T2. Since heat is flowing down from the 
higher to lower side in the direction of positive x that  is why we are putting a minus here . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 04:22)  
. 
For convective heat  transfer, the equation is follows  
 
Suppose we have a wall , where this conduction is happening and this is a temperature  T1, 
this is T2. However, there is a n air layer or for that matter any fluid which is flowing  
through  the surface . So, here we can get a temperature  gradient ; here it is Ti and this is To 
if it happens . So, the heat transfer happen in this zone is because of convection . So, heat 
flow from the fluid to the wall . So, this is called the convective heat transfer coefficient , we can have this convective 
heat transfer coefficient in both the side , in and out  we can term it as h i in the inlet side 
and h o in the exit side . So, this is convective heat transfer coefficient h . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:44)  
 
In a practical case for example, in a heat exc hanger , 2 fluids are separated by a wall  
surface so ; that means,  the fluid has the convective heat transfer coefficient in both the 
side of the wall , and heat has to flow through  the wall of the heat exchange su rface. So, 
here we need both conduction and c onvection together and combine them to find out the 
overall heat transfer coefficient .  
So, overall heat transfer coefficient . 
 
So, conductive heat transfer coefficient k  = W/m.K  
Unit of convective heat transfer coefficient h = W/m2.K  
overall heat transf er coefficient  (U) = W/m2.K   (Refer Slide Time: 07:18)  
 
In a plane wall type configuration considering Δx A as the thickness and the fluid in one 
side there is a hot fluid and the other side there is a cold fluid  and T1 is the temperature 
in the hot fluid  T2 is the temperature at the surface of the  wall outer surface of the wall , 
T3 is the temperature of the inner surface of the wall and  T4 is the temperature in the 
cold fluid section . 
So, overall heat transfer coefficient we can  express as  
 
So, 1 / hi is actually the resistance in hot fluid side , then Δ xA/ kA = the resistance in the 
solid wall or the surface . And 1/ ho this is the resistance in the cold fluid side , ho is 
conve ctive heat transfer coefficient.  
For cylindrical wall  
If the high temperature fluid is outside let us say  T1 is the temperature . So, T1 to T2 that 
is the outside surface of the tube , then it is conducting through  the wall and  T3 is the 
inner surface of the tube and  T4 is the fluid which is in the  central tube, then the overall 
heat transfer coefficient    
So, when A can be equal , if this thickness  of the tube is very small , in that case  we can 
consider that inside area that is  Ai will be very much equal to Ao and that is equal to A. 
So, in that case we can omit this , which will become,  
 
Now if it is not equal if you know  Ai is not  equal to  Ao that is there is a significan t 
thickness of the  heat exchange surface is there , that time we can either define the overall 
heat transfer coefficient based on inside surface area or we can express them based on 
the outside surface area . 
So, if we want to express them based on the inside surface in that case we will multiply  
Ai in both the side . So, we will get  
 
Alm = log mean surface area =(A 2-A1)/ln(A 2/ A1) 
Now  based on the  outside surface area  
 
  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:29)  . 
Then if L= length  of the tube, we can write  
 
So, the length will be L right . So, this is how we can calculate  the overall heat transfer 
coefficient and also you can think of that  it depends on what is the convective  heat 
transfer coefficient value , based on that  your over all heat transfer coefficient can be 
defined . For example, if you have in the hot fluid side let us see for this case in the hot 
fluid side you have  h i. (Refer Slide Time: 16:21)  
. 
So, h i let us say  1000  W/m2K and in the cold fluid side h  o have a small  value that is  4.5 
W/m2K and if we consider for example, the Δ x is very small . So, Δ x/k that is the 
resistance offered by  this section will be negligible . Similarly if it happens for the tube 
also the  middle term will be negligible . 
So, in that case , U=1/ {(1/1000) + (1/4.5)} . So, 1/1000  can be neglect ed this as well . So, 
answer will be  4.5 so that means, overall heat transfer coefficient is mostly close to your  
lower convective heat transfer coefficient value . 
So, where  thickness is very less you can alm ost neglect that one , and higher side heat 
transfer coefficient and  in the in the other fluid where the heat transfer coefficient is very 
low, your overall heat transfer coefficient will al ways be close to the lower side.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:31)  
. 
Fouling factor ;  
In a heat exchanger, during operation, ash, soot, dusts are got deposited on the surface. 
This phenomenon is known as scaling or fouling. Due to this deposition thermal 
resistance increases and the heat exchanger lowers down. The effect of scal e on heat 
transfer is specified by internal ( hsi) and external ( hso) scale heat transfer coefficients.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 20:13)  
. 
 Analysis of heat exchanger  
Thermal resistances on scale formation on inside is given by:  
Rsi = 
  
h si was the  heat transfer coefficient in the scale side inside of this scale deposition   
Thermal resistances on scale formation on outside is given by:  
Rso = 
  
 The reciprocal of scale heat transfer coefficient is known as fouling factor (R f). It is 
defin ed as:  
 
The unit of fouling factor is given by m2.˚C/W.  
So obviously, U clean will be higher than U dirty. So, we are getting a positive value that is 
the value of the fouling factor . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:27)  
. 
So, the overall heat transfer coefficient considering the thermal resistance is given by    
 Total  temperature difference  that is the total gradient  = t i - to  
1 / hi = the fluid side external  resistance .  
1/h S = resistance because of scale deposition  
So, driving force by resistance  this will be the overall heat transfer .  
(Refer Slide Time: 24 :17) 
 
And the overall heat transfer coefficient based on the inner and outer surface  
 
So, when resistance due to thickness and scaling is neglected , the overall heat transfer 
coefficient is given by this value .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 26:24)  
. 
So, foulin g factor of some fluids  this you may get in many textbook and you can observe 
that, what are the range of this  fouling factor  Rf that is in m2°C /W. Like in for the 
distilled water this is 0.0001,  for the treated boiler feed water that is ranging from 0.0001 
to 0.0002 , fuel oil and crude oil this is 0.0009 , industrial liquid 0.0002 , etcetera . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:02)  
. Correction factor for multi pass heat exchanger  
For multi -pass heat exchangers the heat flow can be given as by considering correction 
factor.  
 
Correction factor can be calculated from chart. It is a function of temperature ratio (P) 
and capacity ratio (R).  
Temperature ratio (P):  
It is defined as the  ratio of rise in temperature of the cold fluid to the difference in inlet 
temperatures of the two fluids.  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 28:28)  
 
Capacity ratio (R):  
The ratio of products of mass flow rate times the specific heat is known as capacity ratio.  
 
   
                                          = [
  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 29:47)  
 
So, first case ; correction factor plot of heat exchanger with 1 shell . So, here we are 
getting  1 shell pass  2 tube pass . So, t c 1 is entering  and t c 2 is coming out a nd t h 1, it is 
entering  in a cross -flow situation t h 2 is coming out . So, p value can be  calculated as 
difference in the cold fluid temperature divided by inlet of hot and cold that we have 
calculated.  
So, from these  2 data we can calculate the correctio n factor . So, let us say  for p is 0.4 and 
1.5 will be the capacity ratio . So, this point  when it heat , so, corresponding to that value . 
So, something 0.86 or so will be the value of correction factor . 
 Similarly , correction factor for a plot of heat exchan ger with multiple shell . So, this is  2 
shell pass 4 tube pass  the charts are available . So, in similar  way we can calculate the P 
value and R value and from the chart we can find what will be the correction factor . So, this correction factor will include  in our equation that is  U A ΔTm and then we can 
calculate the ex act amount of heat transfer .  
Thank you . 