 
 Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 25 
Heat Exchangers (  Contd.  ) 
 
Hello everyone , welcome to NPTEL  online certification cou rse on  Fundamentals  of 
Food Process E ngineering . So, today  we will continue with the topic of Heat Exchanger . 
This is the last class on heat exchanger , where we will  see the remaining things we have 
discussed most of the  parts of the heat exchanger the important  aspects of the design . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:52)  
 
Effectiveness when R = 0.  
In certain cases temperature does not  change where the phase change is involved e.g  the 
condenser and the evaporator . So,  in case of condenser , hot fluid temperature does not  
change . In the temperature profile  along the length or  along the surface area , we will find 
that t h will be constant and t c will be varying . Now,  we are getting R  as the cap acity ratio 
this is C min /C max.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 02:47 ) 
 
1. When R = 0 (Condenser and boiler)  
So, then what will happen that when your  when your temperature of the hot fluid 
does not  change , so the maximum possible  transfer will be (t h1 - th2 )/(th1 - tc1). So, t h1 
- th2 becomes 0,  because they do not  change . Similar thing happen in cas e of the  
evaporator , the temperature of the col d fluid will be constant tc1 - tc2 = 0. A nd the hot 
fluid will eventually decrease t h1 to t h2.  
For both parallel flow and counter flow we got:  
 
2. When R = 0 (Condenser and boiler)  
For parallel flow:  
 
 
For cou nter flow:  
 
  
 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 04:48 ) 
 
Application of  heat exchanger   
Oil industry ,  
 for heating or cooling , for refining  
 edible oil cooler , and heater ,  
 esterification of biodiesel all other application .  
Dairy products - pasteurization  and steriliz ation  this happens .  
Egg products  heating and cooling of egg   
Fruits and jam processing - heating in order to lower the product ’s viscosity or heating 
and cooling mechanism .  
Viscous liquid always  put in the inner tube , for easy  cleaning and sanitation as these are  
important part s in the food industry . So, after every processing , it is to clean the 
equipments properly  and do the CI P process . Different stage s of cleaning takes place  to 
avoid  dirt or  deposition in the  inner tube or outer tube .  
 And if it is the re from microorganism , it may grow  and spoil or contaminat e the food . 
So, sanitation is very important and keeping that in mind the design of the heat  
exchanger will be such that it can be cleaned. B ecause , these  material has many 
dissolved particles or  materials into the liquid  for that the viscosity is also very high . So, 
it is to be  pump ed.  
 Then in the S auce industry , heating in order to lower  the products viscosity ; 
sterilization for the seafood cooling.  
 Sterilization  for meat -based product and prepare d dishes heating , and cooling  we 
need to perform , then recovery of fat , protein etcetera . This is also being done  
using the heat exchanger . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:56 ) 
 
Tubular heat exchanger  - two concentric  tube is there.  
From the inner tube generally th e liquid which is to be processed that is entered . And in 
the other the annular spaces the processing  is being done using  the hot  fluid or the cold 
fluid as the requirement may be .  
Shell and tube heat exchanger - There may be sometime bundle of tube  insid e or in the 
inside one single tube kind of configuration is also available . Shell and tube heat 
exchanger this is also very commonly  used particularly , in case of condenser and  
 evaporator . We use shell and tube heat exchanger , because they can withstand th e large 
variation  of pressure as well .  
And there also may be single  shell pass , single tube pass or  different configuration , like 
one shell pass , two tube pass or two shell pass , four tube pass like different  
configurations are there , the baffles are ther e.  
Plate heat exchanger is very common in the regeneration section of the milk pasteurizer  
this has very  flexibility in terms of increasing or decreasing  the capacity of the plant . So, 
you just need to  add more number of  plate s, which we cannot do, in cas e of area that 
geometry like shell and tube or double tube like that . So, there is flexibility . 
Scrapped surface heat exchanger - Suitable for  very sticky material e.g  fruit pulp 
concentration . It consists of  a central shaft and a scrapper  with scrapping su rface of the 
heat exchanger . It avoids the  deposition and  thereby the heat transfer coefficient  can be 
maintained . Because if deposition happens , so heat transfer will be lowered , that will 
offer a  scale deposition and re giste r resistance to heat flow . And that material which is 
stick to the wall will be  burnt eventually . So, that is why scrapped surface heat exchanger 
is used in those cases .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:55 ) 
 
Conclusion:  
1. Heat exchangers find a variety of applications in various bioprocess indust ries.  
 2. In Food industry, for production of juices, hazel nut pastes, yoghurts and other 
products, ethanol production and beverage Industry for production of wines, beer, 
ethanol, vinegar. Cryogenic processes, sterilization techniques and 
pharmaceutical Indu stries also employ heat exchangers to a large extent.  
3. The limitations in each industry are different and according to each modification 
are made in the design of the exchanger.  
So, what we can do ? One thing if  the phase changes  involve , we can design  multiple pass 
shell and tube heat exchanger to increase the surface area ; or else we can design the 
compact heat exchanger  as with the fin. S o depend ing on the requirement , design can be 
done.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:18 ) 
  
 In a certain double pipe heat exchanger  hot water flows at a rate of 5 0000 kg/h and gets 
cooled from 95℃ to 65℃. At the same time 50000 kg/h of cooling water at 30℃ centers 
the heat exchanger. The flow conditions are such that overall heat transfer coefficient 
remains constant at 2270 W/m2 K. D etermine the heat transfer area required and the 
effectiveness, assuming two streams are in parallel flow. Assume for the both streams cp 
= 4.2 kJ/kg. K  
 (Refer Slide Time: 15:33 ) 
 
In the configuration , both stream s are parallel . So, we have drawn the  temperature profile 
along the length  or along the  surface area . So, temperature of the hot fluid inlet was  95 
when  it is reducing to t h2 that is 65 and inlet temperature of the cold one is 30 °and tc2 is 
to be calculated .  
  
  (Refer Slide Time: 16:52 ) 
 
Now, if we want to calculate the area , we need the  temperature drop between the two 
fluids and for that  log mean temperature difference between these two fluid s is  
 
 
  
  (Refer Slide Time: 18:18 ) 
 
 
 
 
So, it was given that it is a double  pipe heat exchanger . So, it will look  like this with the 
surface area of heat transfer that we are getting. So, this is actually  2 π r l = 32.95  m2. 
 
Thank you . 