Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 22 
Heat Exchangers (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to NPTEL  online certification course on  Fundamentals of 
Food Process E ngineering . We will continue with the topic of Heat Exchanger today . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:31)  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 01:17)  
 Analysis of heat exchanger  
Following parameters are important to design the performance of an heat ex changer :  
 Overall heat transfer coefficient (U)  
 Surface area.  
 Inlet and outlet temperature (t 1 & t 2) 
We need to increase the temperature from t c1 to t c2 and for that what is the amount of  hot 
water or any hot fluid is needed , what will be the temperature  then the surface a rea 
available for heat transfer is very important . Because if surface area changes  then 
obviously, the rate of heat transfer changes . Because no rmally the rate of heat transfer is  
expressed as q=UA ΔT. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:14)  
  (Refer Slide Time: 03:34)  
 
So, now considering the figure that we have seen just now , that the hot fluid is entering 
and the cold fluid is also  entering and those  2 have a similar direction . So, they are in the 
parallel fl ow direction . (Assuming no heat loss)  
Now,  
Heat given up by hot fluid,                                                    Q = m h cph (th1-th2) 
Heat picked up by cold fluid,                                                Q = m c cpc (tc2-tc1) 
Total heat tran sfer rate in heat exchanger,                             Q = UA
      
Where,         
   = log mean temperature difference.  
                     
  = mass flow rate.  
        Cp = specific heat of a fluid.  
        
= temperature rise or drop across the heat exchanger.  
.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:01)  
. 
LMTD (log mean temperature difference):  
It is defined as that temperature difference which, if constant, would give the same rate 
of heat transfer actually occurs unde r variable condition of heat transfer.  
Assumptions:  
 Steady flow  
 Specific heat, mass flow and U is constant  
 Heat exchanger is perfectly insulated - no heat loss to the ambience.  
 No phase change of fluid during heat transfer  
 Heat conduction is axial direction  is negligible  
 No changes in potential and kinetic energy   (Refer Slide Time: 10:12)  
 
Logarithmic temperature difference for parallel flow:  
In parallel flow, the hot fluid and the cold fluid are moving in a similar direction and in 
temp erature profile acr oss the area the difference between these  2 fluids are  
θ1= th1 – tc1 and θ 2= th2 – tc2 . 
We consider an elementary area dA in heat exchanger. The rate of flow through this 
given by,  
dQ = U  dA (t h-tc) = U  dA 
   
The hot fluid is cooled by d th (-ve), whereas cold fluid is heated up by d tc (+ve). Ove rall 
energy balance is given by,  
d
  
Here, Δ t is the temperature gradient between hot and cold stream .  
The lowering of the temperature is happen . So, we are considering this as negative 
whereas, dtc if you consider that is the change , the differe ntial change in the cold stream 
in the temperature that is positive .  (Refer Slide Time: 12:27)  
. 
 
               
 
  
 = heat capacity or water equivalent of hot fluid.  
 = heat capacity or water equivalen t of cold fluid.  
 
 and 
  are mass flow rate of hot and cold fluid  
Subtracting above two equations we get,  
 
 
 
  (Refer Slide Time: 13:40)  
 
 
 
  
Q = C h (th1-th2) = C c (tC2-tC1) 
Or, 
  
  (Refer Slide Time : 16:55)  
. 
Substituting,  
  
 
 
 
Here,  
 
 
 = log mean temperature (LMTD).   (Refer Slide Time: 18:49)  
. 
Logarithmic temperature difference for counter flow  
In the counter flow, the 2 fluid streams are moving in opposite directio n and the hot fluid 
and the cold fluid temperature distribution across the area  will be  
θ1= th1 – tc2 and θ 2= th2 – tc1  
Difference  between  θ2 and θ1 are almost constant or there is not much variation between 
them . So, hot fluid is reducing temperature . So, d th is again  negative and dA  while  across 
the area if we go here also it is negative b ecause the flow direction is now reverse . 
For counter flow heat exchanger energy balance equation is given as follows:  
d
   (Refer Slide Time: 20:47)  
 
   
 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
 Q = -Ch (th1-th2) = Cc (tC1-tC2)  (Refer Slide Time: 24:29)  
. 
Special case, when  (θ1 = θ2 = θ ) for counter flow:   
The equation becomes, Q = U A 
  
LMTD for a counter flow heat exchanger is always greater than parallel flow heat 
exchanger. But when, the temperature difference between 
  and 
  is small, in that case 
arithmetic mean temperature (AMTD) is used.  
 
So, generally  LMTD  for counter flow heat exchanger is greater ; that means, if log mean 
temperature difference,  we are getting higher . So, area can be reduced right . So, 
therefore, for the counter f low we can  require less area compare to the parallel flow  for 
the same temperature  distribution if we have .  
Thank you . 