Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 26 
Drying Technology  
 
Hello everyone . Welcome  to the NPTEL  online certification course on Fund amentals of 
Food Process E ngineering . Today , we will start the topic of drying , drying we know that  
it is very important unit operation and most commonly practiced  unit operation in food 
processing section . Since a long time we are practicing dry ing on man y varieties of the 
product mostly the grains , fruits and vegetables , and some time for preparation of the 
baby food ok , then different kind of fruit pulp powders and all we are using different 
kind of drying  technique s. So, drying  is basically removal of moisture by evaporation  
from solid or liquid material to a very low moisture level , ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:05 ) 
 
So, there are many dried products available in the market and drying is the  mostly 
practiced  method for food processing . So, why we do this bulk removal of the moisture  
from the  product ? And, we have all also we have learned  evaporation there also we do 
the removal of the moisture , but the difference is the end product in the evaporation is 
mostly a concentrated liquid , but the end pr oduct in the drying  is a solid . ok, or mostly a solid or very  low moisture content porous structure if we deal  with the  fruits and 
vegetable ok. 
So, in this case the objective of the drying  is first is to preserve the content ; to preserve 
the food for a lo nger duration of time . Now, what are the main reasons that can spoil the 
food. Firstly, if you think about the microbial contamination  so, we have read the  
microbial  kinetics in this particular course . So, for the activity of the microbes they need 
to they need a certain moisture  level ok . High moisture level is required  for activity of 
the microorganism . Beyond  a certain amount of  moisture content  for let us say water 
activity  0.8 or above that  chances of  the contamination of microbe is  higher , but if you 
reduce the moisture content of the product to a safe  moisture  level . So, the microbial 
contamination will be reduced ok . 
So, the first function  of drying is to reduce the moisture content  or thereby reducing the 
water activity . So, that it can be preserved  for a longer duration of time ok . Now, 
lowering of water activity not only reduce the chances of microbial contamination , but 
also reduces the chances of enzymatic activity , because enzymes also need a certain  
moisture  content for their  activity right . So, the first thing is preservation  as, a result of 
depression of water activity . So, lowering of water activity is a very importan t 
phenomenon  in terms of storage point of view for  any food material right . 
 And, mostly if you see the fruits and vegetable they having very high moisture content 
around 80 percent  or 90 percent  wet basis  moisture content they are having . So, 
reduction of water activity is the first and important step of drying  method . Second is 
what happens  that since most of the food products are  having very high moisture content . 
And, we are evaporating  that moisture so ; obviously, the volume  is reduced  weight  also 
is reduced . Now, because of that what will happen the  handling will become very easy . 
So, transformation of a food  to a form is m ore convenient to store it pack i t and transport 
for different use that become easier if you perform the drying  ok. And, convenient for 
form in the sense like we have converted the bulk milk to the milk powder  so, how much 
the volume reduction may happen  you can think about ok . So, this is very effective 
meth od for storing as well then imparting to a  food product a particular desirable feature . 
What happen  that because of drying  some flavour development and the colour desired 
colour  is also , you know  it also  comes on the product , but we need to look carefully that  there is a thin line between the between the of falvour  development or there is a colour 
development . So, we need to keep the  eye open  so, that whenever we perform this drying  
we should be we should  optimize  those  process based on the requirement of the product . 
Optimize  in the sense that the factors , we need to control during the drying  operation . 
For example,  we will come to that eventually then how we perform different drying 
method . So, the main thing is the temperature we need to control . Then, the safe moisture 
level to which we need to store it that we need to optimize  ok. So, that all the required 
quality changes can be done , but no undesirable  changes or contamination can c ome to 
the product surface . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:10 ) 
 
Now, the most important aspects of  drying  mechanism is t o know the  kinetics of drying . 
This is very important , because there are many factors that can  cause changes in the 
kinetics of drying . So, whether it follows a constant  a pattern or it will deviate . In what 
rate drying  has happened and that  you know that has  effect t o the product in the long run . 
Because , by drying not only the moisture removal is our aim, but we also want to keep 
the product quality intact . And, mostly these product food products are very high heat 
sensitive  and they contain many  thermo labile  nutrients  vitamins , antioxidants . So, those 
may get damage if the y exposed to  very high temperature also . 
That is why ; sometime it may happen that some product in the initial stag e when 
moisture is high requires  a different temperature zone or temperature level . And, when the moisture has been reduced , then a different temperature or even altogether a different 
mechanism you may use . For example, in a high moisture product if  initially you can go 
for the  convective drying  method or solar drying method , and in the later stage when  the 
moisture is very less and that that also you know in the  pore space of the  inner layer of 
the food material . Then, you can try vacuum drying those kind of method where the 
drying  rate will also be faster and the product quality will be intact . 
Right so, quality is important kinetics  is important and the third  thing and the very 
importa nt thing is energy requirement , because huge or intensive energy  requirement  is 
needed in d rying process right . Because , for example, the very basic drying  method , if 
you think about that is a hot a ir drying  or convective air drying . There the drying  bulk air 
is coming that need to be heated and not all the heat that we have putting into the  air for 
increasing  is utilized . Always  there will be  losses . Because , of that s ometime we try  to 
recirculate the exit air so, that the some  efficiency of that can be utilized . So, there  is a 
waste full  of energy . So, it is it cannot be stated as very h igh efficient method unless we 
do some modification in the basic drying  mechanism or add some modification  to it ok . 
So, these are the main things . So, whenever we perform any drying  method we need to 
follow we need to see what are the kinetics of drying ? How it is proceeding ? What is the 
quality aspect of drying ? How we can control  or maintain the quality and also we ne ed to 
see the energy requirement . That means, to dry  unit mass of a product what is the energy 
we are putting into the system ? (Refer Slide Time: 09:36 ) 
 
Coming to the mechanism of drying  so, there are many mechanism prevails because not 
all the products that we are dealing  that we are taking for the drying  even  in the food 
product we are not of same  texture or structure . If, we deal with the solid or paste kind of 
material in that  the drying  phenomena happens because of the liquid diffusion . So, in tha t 
case if the wet solid or the slurry or paste is at a temperature below the boiling point of 
the liquid . So, in that case the liquid diffusion takes place and by that  liquid diffusion the  
slurry material will be  dried . 
Now, vapor  diffusion if the liquid v aporizes  within the material ; that means, the 
temperature is  such that the  temperature and the pressure level is such that that the liquid 
vaporizes  within the material , then the vapor  diffusion can takes place  inside the product 
as well  and it eventually comes to the surface and then  it is mix to the ambient . Knudsen  
diffusion , if drying  takes place at very low temperature and pressure for example, freeze -
drying . 
So, in freeze drying  what happen  that, first we freeze the moisture  i.e. all the moisture 
has be en converted to ice first and then at very low pressure and temperature that is 
directly sublime d. So, in that case  if we dry the  material . The diffusion is neither can be 
vapor  diffusion or liquid diffusion . So, that diffusi on is the Knudsen  diffusion . Another 
is the hydrostatic pressure difference , when internal vaporization  rates exceed  the rate of 
vapor  transport through the solid  to the surrounding . So, internal vaporization rate ; that means, the vaporization when the surfa ce is coming in 
contact with  heated air or hot ambiance , then the surface is getting dried , because the  
moisture is continuously coming out of the surface . Now, if it happen  that from the bulk  
heating is also possible . So, the internal va porization rate is exceeding the vaporization 
rate at the outer surface , in that case the hydrostatic pressure difference may generate and 
that can cause the  drying . 
So, basically then from this means we can see the n drying  can be broadly categorized  
into convective and conductive drying method . Convec tive drying method is that mostly 
when  we dry  the product by the hot  air. Moist dry hot air we use  so, that the moist of the 
food moisture  of the food can be taken away by the  hot and dry air. Another is the 
conductive  drying method or it is also called the  boiling drying meth od. in this  case what 
happen that the liquid is  itself  boil and the pressure  the pressure and temperature of the 
chamber is such that th e liquid will boil and eventually it will be  coming out of the  of the 
food matrix . 
So, this kind of system we can see in case of the  vacuum drying or drum drying kind of 
mechanism . So, there liquid directly boils  of because of the excessive heat and then i t 
will come out from the  material . And, it is taken away by the  by the  prevailing ambience . 
In the vacuum also we can maintain the complete  vacuum , we lower  the vacuum level  
i.e. lower the pressure level compare to the atmospheric pressure . For example, general ly 
atmospheric pressure is  101.32 kilo Pascal  and when we perform the vacuum drying , we 
keep it from 6 to 25 kilo Pascal  inside the vacuum chamber . (Refer Slide Time: 14:16 ) 
 
Now, the very important  topic is the psych rometry . As I said if we categorize  broadly the 
drying  mechanism , convective drying  is the very important and ve ry widely used 
method . So, for convective drying we used the  air which is  having  the moisture content , 
but not fully saturated . So, it is generally  we try to get the  dry and hot air . So, that air has  
the capacity to draw moisture from the food product when they come in contact with the 
food right . 
However , the air we are dealing with is not completely  moisture  free. So, that a ir the 
ambienc e air that we are utilizing  for drying mechanism . So, to understand the property 
of the  air plus the water vapor  which is already in it , the science of Psychometry  is 
developed . So, Psych rometry  is basically deals with the study of  thermodynamic 
propert ies of the mo ist air ; that means, the air plus the water vapor  present in it . 
So, we will see that  there are certain laws that we should know that prior . So, that we can 
understand the concept of psychrometry better  one such law is Gibbs -Dalton  law. So, 
what it says that f or a mixture of a perfect gases  the total pressure exerted by the mixture 
is equal to the sum of the partial pres sure of the constituent gases . For example, there is a 
gas mixture of 3 gases . Total  pressure , Pt = P 1 + P 2 +P3 +……………  
So, applying this equation  for moist air:  Pt = P a + P v 
Where, P t = total atmospheric pressure ,  P a = partial pressure of dry air &  P v = partial 
pressure of water.  So, based on this and how this changes as  I said that the thermodynamic proper ties of 
moist air i.e.  the science of psychometry  has been developed . So, we will try to 
understand the psychrometry first that , when a different  stream of air is coming in 
contact with a moist  food, how the drying  can take less , and how the temperature or 
moisture content or other properties of that air , which is coming in contact with the food 
and then going out of the dry air  so, how that evolve s? So, all such thing is important to 
know  for d rying analysis . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:38 ) 
 
The psychometric  is an very interesting phenomena and it gives us many property of that  
dry air plus  moist ure present in  it. So, this combination this  moist air  property , we can 
analyze  by psychrometric chart and there are many properties , we can  find one such is 
dry bulb  temperature . Another is wet bulb temperature , dew point temp erature , humidity , 
relative humidity , degree of saturation , humid heat , and finally  humid volume . 
So, we will discuss them one by one detail . Normally  the dry bulb  tempe rature is the 
temperatur e which we can directly measure  by a  normal  thermometer . wet bulb  
temperature that is when  we keep the bulb of the thermometer wet completely and the 
equilibrium will is attained by that we then measure the temperature . So, it is always 
lower than the dry bulb temperature for a  particular  case or a condition of the air. 
Dew point temperature  is specifically , when  the air become  saturated with the moisture  
present in it . So, at that temperature this condition happens is basically the dew point temperature . Humidity we know the amount of moisture present per unit of  dry air . 
Relative humidity that how much amount of moisture is there compared to the saturation 
stage .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:31 ) 
 
The first one is the D ry Bulb Temperature in short we can write it  as DBT  temperature of 
the mo ist air as measu red by a standard thermometer . Dew point  temperature the 
temperature of the moist air at which water vapor  in the moist  air starts condensing ; that 
means,  suppose we have now measure d dry bulb  temperature of  the air as you know 38 
°C and you know  moisture conten t is measure d some amount of value of h humidity . 
Now, if with the same humidity this air needs to be saturated , then what we need to do 
we need to lower  the temperature of the  ambient . Now, if we consider this room  if we  
want to attend the dew point te mperature , we need to lower the temperature of the air . 
When  it lowers in  at certain value  so, that the moisture  present in it first make the air 
saturated and if further we cool it  they will try to condense out of the  air. So, that 
temperature is cal led the dew point temperature , where this c ondensing start ; that means, 
the air becomes fully saturated . Here, we are not allowing  any moisture  to enter  from the 
outside . The air is being saturated by the moisture present in  itself . 
Specific humidity i.e.  kg of water  vapour /m3of dry air . So, when we call specific  
humidity  specific what actually  signifies when  we want to mention that how much 
amount of water present in  1 m3 of the dry air .  Humidity ratio or absolute humidity , it is defined as the mass of water vapor  per unit 
mass of dry air . So, when we talk about specific humidity we are considering the 
mass/ volume  i.e. kg of water per meter  cube of dry air , when we consider the humidity  
ratio or simply absolute humidity , we are considering mass by mass basis . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:07 ) 
 
From gas law we know that,           PV=nRT =mRT/M   
Where, M is the molecular weight  and m is the mass of  the water . Applying gas law for 
dry air & H 2O vapor .                        mw=18.015p v/RT, m a=28.966p a/RT   
Now, when we talk about humidity  so, humidity will be equal to  ratio of  mw & m a. So, 
ultimately we are getting  
𝐻=0.622 𝑃𝑣
𝑃𝑎 
We know that , P = P v+Pa 
H=0.622  Pv
P−Pv 
Relative  humidity is the ratio of mole fraction of wat er vapor  in a given moist air sample  
to the mole fraction in an air sample saturated at the same temperature and pressure . i.e. 
∅=𝐱𝐰
𝐱𝐰𝐬=𝐩𝐯𝐩 
𝐩𝐬𝐩 =𝐏𝐯
𝐏𝐬 
 when relativ e humidity  =100% then DBT=DPT=WBT .  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:07 ) 
 
The degree of saturation is the ratio of the humidity ratio ( H) to the humidity ratio of a 
saturated mixture ( Hs ) at the same temperature and pressure.  
                                           μ = H/H s =  Pv
P−Pv×P−Ps
Ps = ∅×P−Ps
P−Pv 
Humid  volume (V H) is volume of 1 kg of dry air plus water vapor  in it. 
                          VH = (0.00283 + 0.00456 H) (t + 273) m3/kg of dry air  
Where,  H= humidity ratio,          t= DBT (oC) 
Suppose , we are we are talking about a temperature of 35 oC and the humidity is H1. So, 
here we will put H1 to find the humid  volume and here instead of t we will put the 35 
degree right . So, this is how we can calculate the humid volume of the air 1 kg air at 35 
oC and H1 humidity .  
Humid heat  (Cpm) is defined as heat required to raise the temperature of 1 kg of dry air 
plus its accompanying  water vapor  by 1 oC. Because , we know that the  heat required  to 
increase 1 oC of moisture  is different from 1 oC requirement of dry air right . So, both the 
case we need to give different amount of  heat. So, that is  why we separately calculate 
both and then add.  
Cpm = specific heat of 1 kg of dry air + specific heat of accompanying water  vapour  
                             Cpm = CP + H.C PW 
                             Cpm  (kJ/kg -k) = 1.005 + 1.88 H  Where,  CPW = specific heat of water vapour  
CP = specific heat of dry air  
H = humidity ratio, kg of water/kg of dry air  
Enthalpy  is the heat content of moist air . i.e. sensible heat of dry air + sensible heat of 
water + latent heat of water . Sensible  heat of course  whenever , the sensible heat  you 
know temperature increases or decreases . So, then that part we need to  take that is 
mC pΔT. In case of moistu re plus dry air in instead of  Cp we will use Cpm. Next part will 
be latent heat . Whatever  moisture  is there that needs to be  in the vaporize condition . So, 
at that  temperature the latent heat of vaporization  that should b e multiplied with the 
moisture content  will gives the latent heat of water . 
 hmoist air  = sensible heat of dry air + (sensible heat of water + latent heat of water)  
                                 = Cpt+H(C pw.t +λw)  = C pm.t +H λw = (1.005+1.88H)t +2501H  
                                 = 1.005  t + H  (2501+1.88t)  
Where,  λw = latent heat  of vaporization, kJ/kg   = 2501 for water at 0oC reference tempr 
t= dry bulb temperature,  K 
 (Refer Slide Time: 31:04 ) 
 
Now, adiabatic  saturation temperature  so, temperature at which  air is brought to 
saturated condition adiabatically by evaporatin g the water into the flowing air . So, air is 
becoming saturated adiabatically . Adiabatically  means there is no change in the  sensible 
temperature  but we can make  by evaporating  the water into the flowing stream . So, we will eventually  come into the ps ychrometric chart  reading and that time it will be clearer  
to you , that how we can  find the adiabatic saturation temperature . So, it is kind of  if you 
can if you can think physically of  a phenomena like there is a  closed chamber where  
liquid is sprayed and that that liquid that make up liquid  is again you know channe lized 
there and here is a  here is a airstream is entering , which is not saturated initially let us  
temperature is T1 and the humidity is H1. So, when this will go out of this chamber , it 
will become saturated Ts and humidity is will become Hs, because it has absorbed  all the  
all the moisture from it ok . 
So, then it has become the air has become adiabatically  saturated . So, there is no change 
of temperature has happened , but becaus e the moisture  has been added to this . So, 
because of that this change happened because of the latent heat  exchange . So, here the 
same phenomena has been considered , where the moist air  with the temperature T1 
moisture content W1 and at a pressure P, it is entering . And, here a thermometer bulb has 
been dipped into the water , which is at T2 and the whole  chamber is being insulated 
properly . This moist air  is moving over  the water which is kept inside the chamber and 
moist  air leaving out with the temp erature T2 moisture content P2 at the same pressure . 
So, what will happen if you , do the  enthalpy balance  
Cs(t1-t2)+H 1λ2 =H 2λ2 
And finally, what is the  moisture content of the final stream  in the in the evaporated 
state? So, if we solve this we are getting : 
 𝑡2=𝑡1−λ2W2−W1
1.005 +1.88W1 
 (Refer Slide Time: 35:20 )  
Now , wet bulb temperature measured by thermometer whose bulb is covered with the 
wet cloth . So, again when we covered it  by wet cloth . So, moisture  will continuously 
evaporate and  will take the latent heat from this bulb only. So, when this  bulb the closed  
bulb i s coming in equilibrium with the surrounding that  temperature  we can note down  
as the wet bulb temperature . So, that will be definitely  lower than the  dry bulb 
temperature . 
                                          
𝐇−𝐇𝐰
𝐭−𝐭𝐰=𝐡𝐌𝐁𝐤𝐲 
𝛌𝐰  
Where,   h/M Bky= psychrometric ratio  
h= convective heat transfer coefficient  
MB=molecular weight of air  
ky= mass transfer coefficient  
t, tw = dry bulb & wet bulb temperature of air  
H1,Hw = humidity ratio  
λw =latent heat of vapor ization at t w  
So, if you  look into  the equation that we are getting. we can calculate that how that , what 
is the heat requirement or what is the amount of heat needed to evaporate this moisture 
content from the  wet bulb.  
if we  look into t his psychometric chart in the x axis we are getting the  dry bulb  
temperature . In the y axis we are getting the humidity ratio , which is expressed in kg of H2O per kg dry air. And, along  this along this yellow line we are  getting the constant 
enthalpy line s and the orange line we are getting the line of the constant wet bulb 
temperature  ok. So, we will stop here  we will continue in the next class . 
Thank you . 