Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 21 
Heat Exchangers  
 
Hello everyone . Welcome to NPTEL  online certification course on F unda menta ls of 
Food Process E ngineering . Today we are going to  start a new chapter on Heat 
Exchanger . Normal  water cooled condensers or  radiator  are some common examples of 
heat exchangers.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:08)  
 
The topic covered will be  definition of heat ex changer , different type of heat exchanger , 
analysis  of heat exchanger in terms of Log Mean Temperature D ifference LMTD  for 
both parallel and counter flow heat exchanger , overall heat transfer coefficient , fouling 
factor , correction factor , and effectivenes s of heat exchanger again both for parallel flow 
and counter flow . Apart from this , a few application of heat exchanger in food industry 
will be covered with  some numerical problems .  (Refer Slide Time: 02:45)  
. 
Heat exchanger  
A heat exchanger is defined as equipment  which transfers  energy from a hot fluid to cold 
fluid without allowing them to mix  and provide maximum heat transfer  rate with 
minimum investment and running cost . 
Let us consider a 2 concentric pipe  through which hot fluid is coming in and go ing out 
and there is another pipe  which is surrounded  the inner tube or inner pipe through which 
the cold fluid is flowing . So, heat will exchange over the surface of th e inside tube , 
inside the cylindrical section or the tube . There is no mixing between t hese 2 fluid and  
obviously, there will be temperature difference between these  2 fluid , one will be  hot 
fluid and another will be the cold fluid  because  temperature difference should be the 
driving force for heat flux to be  moved from the higher side to th e lower side . So, that is 
the heat exchanger .  (Refer Slide Time: 05:03)  
. 
Example s 
 Intercoole r- where there is from one side the hot fluid is entering and there is 
tubing inside the tube there is a exit and very small fins are there inside  this system th at 
will increase the heat transfer area.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:54)  
. 
 Condenser - condenser it may be air cool condenser or water cool  condenser . 
From the  compressor high pressure vapour will enter in a  tube and there are  coils tubes in the form of coil th ey are  fix here in the condenser , and there is an  exit end from the 
bottom which is going to dr yer the high pressure l iquid. So, the vapour is  condensed in 
the condenser and the heat given or from the  refrigerant is going to the surrounding air . 
So, that i s the heat is going to the air and here the temperature is not  changing for this 
condensing vapour to liquid , because  only phase change happen for heat transfer occur .  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:29)  
 
Others are Automatic radiator s, regenerator . Regenerator ( basically regenerators are one 
kind of heat exchanger where  heat exchange between  2 fluids , but phase  change does  not 
occur right ). (Refer Slide Time: 08:33)  
. Types of  heat exchanger  
 Heat exchanger  can be classified in many ways  
 nature of heat exchange  process . That means, whether heat is  being exchanged 
via any surface or direct mixing of the  gas and the liquid is taking place .  
 relative direction of fluid flow  
 Design and constructional features   
 physical state of fluid  
 (Refer Slide Time: 09:54)  
 
Nature of heat exchange process   
 Direct contact heat exchanger (open source heat exchanger ). So, direct contact 
heat exchanger ; that means, as the name suggest that there will be mixing of the fluid , 
streams  
 Indirect contact heat exchanger - regenerator  
In direct contact heat exchanger w hen steam is entering into the open source heat 
exchanger  and cold water is also entering into the  heat exchanger . So, the latent heat of steam will be taken by  the cold water and that is released as hot water and the non-
condensable  gases  will be vented out . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 12:20)  
. 
Relative direction of fluid motion  
 Parallel flow or unidirectional flow - direction of the  2 fluid streams  
  Counter flow - the fluid stream are coming from  2 different direction or opposite 
direction . 
The parallel flow or unidirectional flow  – In the above figure, hot fluid i s entering from 
this inner tube. So, th1 is the inlet temperature , th2 is the  exit temperature whereas, the 
cold fluid is flowing in the outer tube. D irection of the cold fl uid and the hot fluid are in 
the same direction . So, this is called the parallel flow heat exchanger . Now the 
temperature distribution will be that the inlet temperature of the hot fluid  th1 will decrease 
to th2 where the cold fluid which is entering at  tc1 going to increase temperature  to t c2. So, 
initially the deviation  was very high and eventually that will reduce . So, this is the 
parallel flow or unidirectional flow . 
In the  counter flow heat exchanger  the direction of the flow is reverse . So, in this ca se 
the temperature distribution can be  plot in a similar way across the length. So th1 is 
decreasing to  th2 whereas,  tc1 going to increase to tc2 and here the difference between 
those  2 temperature are almost  similar  Δt1 and Δ t2.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:58)  
. 
 Cross flow  
Cross flow heat exchanger  can be  considered as  two types i) unmixed type ii) mixed 
type. In mixed type, flow of cold fluid ensures uniform temperature at any section. 
Temperatures vary only in the dir ection of flow. The unmixed flow pattern of cold fluid, 
results in non -uniform heating.  
In mixed type heat exchanger, hot fluids are entering in the stack of pipe and cold fluid is 
entering in a heat exchanger at a cross flow direction or the  perpendicular  to the direction 
of the flow of the hot fluid . 
In unmixed type heat exchanger, there are segments or baffles  provided in between  2 
entry point of the cold fluid . So, they are not getting mixed , as they enter from one 
channel they are exiting from the othe r. So, these baffles  are helping them to  channelize 
unidirectional  cold fluid .  (Refer Slide Time: 10:01)  
 
Types of heat exchanger    Features:  
 In parallel flow heat exchanger the hot and cold fluid temperature difference goes 
on decreasing  
 In counter flow  heat exchanger the hot and cold fluid temperature difference 
almost remain constant  
 In case of cross flow heat exchanger mixed hot stream ensures uniform 
temperature at any section, whereas unmixed flow pattern of cold fluid results in 
non-uniform heating . (Refer Slide Time: 19:44)  
. Design and constructional features : 
 Concentric tube  
 Shell and tube  
 Multiple shell and tubes  
In concentric tube heat exchanger, two concentric tubes are used for each of the fluids. 
Direction of flow may be either parallel or counter. In case of shell and tube heat 
exchanger, the bundles of tubes are enclosed in a shell.  So, in industry application or 
processing plant or condenser, all those cases this kind of configuration shell and tube 
heat exchanger is used. But it is not used in the application where very light weight 
configuration is needed for example, radiator that is transport application or in aviation.  
With the use of multiple tubes, the heat transfer rate is increased due to the increment in 
surface area.  Multiple Shell and tube enhances the overall heat transfer. The shell is re -
routed. Compact heat exchangers have lager surface area. They are employed when 
convective heat transfer is associated with one fluid is much smaller than other fluid.  
In case of shell and tube it is the most common configuration that is one shell pass one 
tube pass ; that means  there is one big shell and in the shell fluid passes through  the inlet 
of the fluid and through the tube it is going to the other side , and exiting from the outlet . 
So, as the fluid is passing the whole shell , the fluid will  interact with the shell fluid.  
In one shell pass one tube pass there are baffles provided not just to hold the tube 
properly or to give mech anicals strengths for proper holding of the tubes , to com bat 
heavy pressure and thus damage . Also these baffles  are orienting the shell fluid to a 
particular direction . So, here the shell fluid is almost coming in a cross fl ow direction 
with the tube flow . But if the baffles are not provided  so, then the shell f luid it is entering 
from the inlet  side and straight away going to the other side . So, it may be counter flow 
arrangement in this particular  case; however, through  baffles here cross flow 
arrangements are maintained . Other configurations are one shell pass  2 tube pass or  2 
shell pass  4 tube pass .  (Refer Slide Time: 24:40)  
. 
Compact heat exchanger  - to deal with the area density function . If the area density is 
very high it is known as  compact heat exchanger . Area density is  generally  define d by 
the surfac e area available for heat exchange divided by the volume  of the  liquid that the 
heat exchanger is going to handle . Area density function is around 700 to 1000 for  
compact heat exchanger  e.g plate fin or tube fin heat exchanger . 
Fins are increasing the heat  transfer area to a very large extent . So, that is very effective  
method and another method which is the plate heat exchanger . In plate heat exchanger 
there are many number s of plates which are stacked consecutively and the  2 fluids are 
channelized t hrough  different plates so there will be no mixing . It is normally used in 
milk chilling plant or regeneration plant . The flexibility of plate heat exchanger is that to 
increase the capacity extra plate can be attached in series which is not possible for shell 
and tube kind of  heat exchanger . The problem also that  in th is kind of plate heat 
exchanger 2 different state of fluid  like one vapour and one liquid  can not be used , 
because  it will develop a huge pressure difference involved in the  handling the vapours 
and the liquid . Because vapours are in the pressure  in the range of megapascal and for 
the liquid it is in the kilopascal range . So, because of that large pressure variation these 
plates  might be getting damage  which can be avoided by shell and tube  heat exc hanger.  (Refer Slide Time: 29:00)  
. 
Features  
 In concentric tube heat exchanger, concentric tubes are used for fluid flow   
 In case of shell and tube heat exchanger, the bundles of tubes are enclosed in a 
shell and the heat transfer rate is increased as su rface area increased  
 Multiple Shell and tube enhances the overall heat transfer. The shell is re -routed.  
 Compact heat exchangers are employed when convective heat transfer is 
associated with one fluid is much smaller than other fluid . 
Suppose  one liquid  is flowing  in one stream and  hot liquid are entering in one stream , 
with hin and h out which means th in and t h out . So, in that section if we increase the surface 
area by using  fin, very thin protruding or extension  on the surface . 
So, those fins are utili zed for larger amount of heat transfer , because in this side there is  
air. So, convective heat transfer takes place and that has to be increased  to higher 
amount . (Refer Slide Time: 30:38)  
. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 31:20)  
. 
Physical state of fluid   
 condenser   
 evaporator  
In case of condenser , hot steam is entering , and coming to the liquid  state. So, there is no 
change in the temperature . So, th will be constant throughout whereas,  tc1 that is of the liquid or air for condensing 
that will increase its value . So, θ is the difference between those cold and hot fluid  which 
will gradually reducing .  
Similarly for evaporator, the refrigerant that is evaporating , that will be constant that is  
going to  change from the liquid state to the vapour state and it is taking the  heat from the  
air in that section for exchanging heat , but the temperature of the cold fluid will remain 
constant . So, these are the condenser and evaporator that we can separate  based on the 
physical state of fluid . 
Thank you .  