Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of  Agricultural and Food  engineering  
Indian Institute of Tec hnology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 27 
Drying Technology (Contd. ) 
 
Hello everyone . Welcome to the NPTEL  online certification cours e on Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering . In the last class we have started  Drying Technology . Drying 
is a very important unit operation for  food processing and we have started the basic  
understanding of  drying mechanism  the different objective of drying. 
And, then we have moved on to the  psychrometric , which is  the import ant study related 
to the moist  air properties . And, it is very important for  identifying the air condition s, 
when we  expose any  food material to the convective drying or any drying  experiment 
where we use the dry air to remove the moisture from the food product . 
So, today  we will continue with the different  psychrometric  properties and  different  
operation , different  conditions , when drying , heating , humidifica tion, all this phenomena 
happen  then w hat is the condition of the drying air  and also we will  see the  further  drying 
mechanism , and the different rate of the drying process . For example, the constant and 
falling rate . 
So, let us  start from the psychome try. (Refer Slide Time: 01:59 ) 
 
Psychrometric  properties : we have discussed wet  bulb temperature , dry bulb 
temperature , then humidity  ratio, specific humidity , humid volume , and then  enthalpy . 
So, today we will see that  wet bulb tempera ture in a bit detail . 
Wet bulb temperature is the  temperature measured by thermometer whose bulb is 
covered with wet cloth . That means, when we normally measure the  temperature  in a dry 
bulb situation , where we do not  cover the bulb of the thermometer with  a wet cloth that 
time the normal temperature of the air that we can measure is called the dry bulb 
temperature . 
Now, when we cover ed wet  week  the bulb of the thermometer , then what happened is 
that it will try to come to an equilibrium situation , because all the moisture  will 
evaporate when it  comes in contact with the dry air. So, the air  starts to get saturated . 
However, since the moisture  takes  the latent heat of vaporization from the  thermometer  
liquid  itself. 
So, the temperature  is reducing and that can be shown here by a lowering in the 
temperature . So, this is calle d the difference of this dry bulb and wet bulb is called the 
wet bulb depression . And, thereby the wet  bulb temperature is always lower  than the dry 
bulb temperature . Wet bulb temperature can be obtained  from following equation:                                       
𝐇−𝐇𝐰
𝐭−𝐭𝐰=𝐡𝐌𝐁𝐤𝐲 
𝛌𝐰  
Where,   h/M Bky= psychrometric ratio  
h= convective heat transfer coefficient  
MB=molecular weight of air  
ky= mass transfer coefficient  
t, tw = dry bulb & wet bulb temperature of air  
H1,Hw = humidity ratio  
λw =latent heat of vaporization at t w  
Now, if we look into the  psychrometric  chart . So, the horizontal line at the bottom  is 
showing the dry bulb  temperature . And, this ordinate is showing the humidity  ratio that 
is kg of moisture H2O per kg dry air . This yellow line is showing the constant enthalpy 
line and his orange line is constant wet bulb line. 
For example, if we take a dry bulb  temperature here . And, then for this dry bulb  
temperature , if we cover the  cover the bulb of the thermometer with the wet cloth . Then  
we try to make it equil ibrium then it follows this  wet bulb line  and reaches this 100 
percent saturation . So, if we measure the wet bulb temperature that will be here . So, this 
will be  tw where  this will be  t. 
Now, there is  a slight difference between  line of constant wet bulb  and line  of the 
constant enthalpy . However, in many cases we cons ider them  equal , but there is a little 
difference , this is  because the constant wet bulb line  we can get this  situation by many 
combination of humidity and dry bulb  temperature . So, we can take  any humidity ratio 
value and any temperature that will  follow this constant wet bulb line. 
Now however, when we talk about enthalpy , that is enthalpy of the dry air plus  the 
enthalpy of the water vapour  so, it has been seen that a little difference we can observe 
between these two values . Therefore, when we consider ed the  difference of  enthalpy 
from a fixed point  so, better to considered  that enthalpy directly from that point and  the 
other point when we finally, reaches . So, the difference between these two will give us 
the enthalpy difference  of those two point s, but that does not  follow the  exact line of the 
wet bulb  temperature . (Refer Slide Time: 08:24 ) 
 
So next is , what are the parameters that we can read from the psychrometric  chart . 
Psychrometric chart although  available for different pressure and temperature condition , 
but mostly that we used for the drying  air analy sis that is ranging from  0 to 50 °C at 
atmospheric pressure . 
Although , as we  have develop  different  condition , different psychrometric  chart for 
different conditions ; for example, minus 40 to 10 °C or even  very high temperature as 
well, but for our need we will consider this one and if the chart has been drawn at 
atmospheric pressur e. And, we know any two properties  of this  moist ai r. So, the all 
other property we can calculate . For example, if we know the dry bulb temperature  and 
any other condition . For example, the relative humidity ok , then all other condition we 
can calculate . 
So, here we can see that the green  slanting  line these are  the wet bulb line . The white line 
these are call  the specific volume line  and the line which is  making this  curve line 
towards the  left end  that is saturation curve  or the relative humidity line . First one is 100 
percent saturation and then as we move towards the  right side the relative humidity is 
reducing . The vertical straight line these are the dry bulb temperature line  and saturation  
curve is the 100%  relative humidity  curve . (Refer Slide Time:  10:26 ) 
 
So, we will see that how from two data of the any property of the psychrometric chart we 
can calculate the all other  another properties . For example,  here in this psychrometric 
chart , we have  we have taken a condition th at is dry bulb temperature  is 32 °C and 
relative humidity is 60 %, determine the remaining psychrometric properties . 
So, in the  dry bulb  temperature  line that is this  ordinate , we can first see the 32 °C. So, 
this is here 32 °C and then when it reaches to 60 % RH. So, we will draw a vertical line . 
And, then we come to this point that is 60 percent relative humidity . And, then we 
horizontally move  to the right to find out  the specific humidity . 
And at this point  we will get the specific humidity . Here the unit has been  given as gram 
moisture  per kilo . So, here we are getting 18 we can convert it to kg moisture per kg dry 
air as well. 
And, then from this point  we can calcula te that , what is the  value of the humid  volume ? 
So, we follow this slanting  line we can see that this is coming around v =0.89 m3/kg. So, 
humid volume that we can get from this line , also we can get the enthalpy , if we draw a 
line straight away through the  constant enthalpy line . So, we can  find that enthalpy is 
coming 78 kJ/kg air.  
So, this is how we can calculate all the  parameters  of the psychrometric  chart . Now, then 
what  we can calculate is wet  bulb temperature and dew point temperature . So, what is wet bulb temperature ? Now, we have to follow the  constant wet bulb  line. Which is  
many a  case is just to be taken  as similar to the enthalpy line  and then we need  to reach 
the 100% RH line or saturation  line. 
So, here we will follow that and  when  we reach the 100% saturation and then we draw a 
vertical line . So, this vertical line is coming 25 °C. If you follow that from this point , 
which is  the jun ction point of the  60% RH and 32 °C dry bulb temperature . We will 
move along the  constant wet bulb line and when we reach the 100 percent saturation we  
draw the vertical lin e. And, then we can find out what is the wet bulb temperature and  if 
we go by cons tant wet bulb  line we can see that , the humidity is also increasing  right 
when humidity is also increasing . 
So, what is dew point temperature that if we  do not  increase the humidity of that  air, but 
that air b ecomes saturated with the moisture  present in it? Then what we can do  we 
shoul d lower the temperature of it , with the constant specific humidity and then when  it 
reaches the 100% saturation . Then, we can draw a vertical line  to find  the temperature . 
So, this temperature is coming 23 °C. So, DPT D ew Point Temperature is 23 °C, wet 
bulb is 25 °C, enthalpy is 78 kJ/kg dry air , and specific volume is  0.89 m3/ kg. So, in this 
we can calculate the different properties of the psychrometric chart . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:09 ) 
 Now, there are different processes that we can very clearly show in the psychrometric  
chart . Because many time we need only the sensible heating or cooling mechanism . And, 
in many process , what we can do is cooling and humid ification that is the temperature of 
the air is reducing at the same time moisture content is increasing , or cooling and  
dehumidification that is moisture  is also  getting lower ed with lowering of temperature . 
Then heating and humidification heating and deh umidification and mixing of a ir streams . 
So, if we look into this psychrometric  chat. So, if we follow the sensible heating , it will  
go through  this line . Sensible  coolin g will be lowering of the dry bulb  temperature  so, it 
will follow this line . If, we say that heating and humidification  so, heating if we move 
towards the right direc tion that is heating . And, since here  humidification is needed . That 
means, the moisture  content & specific humidity should increase . So, this will follow this 
line, the reverse could be dehumidification with cooling . So, we will follow this line  and 
humidification and cooling . 
. So, temperature should be reduced at the same time  humidification will be there . So, we 
will follow this line and dehumidification with with desic cant will follow this line , and 
humidifying and dehumidifying  without change in temperature . So, this is this vertical 
line. Now, we will see  these  processes . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:16 ) 
 
First, let us see  sensible cooling . Ok. So, what happened during this process ? The 
humidity of the air remain  constant , but it is temperature dec reases as it flows over the cooling coil . When  the air is passing to the co oling coil  whatever humidity  it has it will 
retain that  however,  its temper ature reduces . So, sensibly  the temperature is  reducing and 
since temperature is reducing the ir energy of this  air will change .So, how much will be 
the change ? So, that we can calculate  
                                       Qc=m a(ho- hA) = m acpm (To – TA) 
During  sensible heating this process the humidity of the air remain constant , but  its 
temperature increase s as it flows over a heating coil . So, here just the  reversing we can 
observe that , since when the air gets cool. So, its energy reduces  i.e. ma(ho- hA) when it  
increases the temperature of the air i s increases , that time the energy will be  positive . So, 
energy will be gained by the air . So, this is the condition , now to change in enthalpy we 
can get by this equation . 
                          Qh=m a(hB- ho) = m acpm (TB – To) 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:53 ) 
 
During  cooling and humidification  process that the air temperature drops and  its 
humidity increases . 
So, cooling and humidification  means  the air temperature will be drop  but the humidity 
will increase . This happen in case of spr aying of cold water o n the  stream  of air. So, 
what happened that the air  which is entering from the inlet side having the temperature 
T0, moisture content  W0, enthalpy h o, and the mass of the air is m a. So, this ai r when  flows  over the spray  of the water  then its temperature, moisture content & enthalpy 
changes only the mass of the air  remain constant . 
 Now, if we see this behavior that in let air  enters T0 i.e. the dry bulb  temperature . It has 
passed to th e water  spray . So, its humidity increases  from WO to WE. Humidity  was WO 
initially . 
Now, this is WE and the temperature change to TE; so if not fully saturated after certain  
increase  of the RH may happen . So, corresponding to  whatever  the moisture has been 
added to it we will  calculate ; what is the exit temperature of what is the dry bulb  
temperature now . 
And, then if we  want to know the difference in the enthalpy . So, we will take the 
difference of the first point and  when it reaches in the second point . So, what is the 
difference in the enthalpy that also we can calculate from this ? And, if we  want to find 
the DPT  that is if this  is the air  is saturated with whatever moisture , it has then it has to 
follow this direction . 
And should  reach the 100 %RH  line here  and then we  find out the dew point 
temperature . So, in this case the temperature of the  exit air should be within the  dew 
point temperature and the inlet temperatu re. So, it should be higher than the dew point , 
but lower the inlet air temperature . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:53 ) 
 just now we have seen that cooling and humidification , now, when moist air is cooled 
below  it is dew point . So, if it cools below  it is dew then some moisture will condense  of 
the air and leave s the air stream as liquid . As a result both the temperat ure and the 
humidity ratio of the air decreases . 
So, what happened we can see in the psychrometric chart that cooli ng and 
dehumidification . In the initi al condition one when the dry bulb  temperature was DBT1, 
that time when if the air gets c ooled, it reaches to  condition 2. So, first it will come to  
this condition DBT1, but since it reaches  you know  100% R H some moisture  will be 
condense . 
So, then we can calculate that , if those  moisture will be condense out then with the 
remaining  moisture  initial the specific humidity was he re. Now, when some amount of 
condensation has occurred then , the humidity has reduced from here to here . So, the dry 
bulb temperature of the exit will be this one  and enthalpy if you want to know . 
So, enthalpy at the first one we will foll ow the constant e nthalpy line . So, h1 and in the 
second position also we will follow the constant enthalpy lines . So, we will get h 2. 
Because  some has been some  moisture has been condense d. So, they have  release the  
heat to the ambience . So, we are getting  slightly lo wer in the  enthalpy value . 
So, this kind of  phenomena  we can observe in the air conditioning system . Although , in 
our case most of the time when we perform the drying operation . So, the air  has to take 
the extra  moisture of the food s. (Refer Slide Time:  25:25 ) 
 
So, most of the time  we are interested in the humidification of the  humidification of the 
air and the dying of the product , but since the psychrometric  chart deals with all the  
required ope ration ; so we are just giving  understanding of that how w e can calculate ? 
Next process is heating and humidification  if you want to per form here is a heating coil 
when  through which the  air when enters , it will first get heated and then again flows over 
the water spray . And, then because of that  it is temperature and  the humidity  specific  
humidity  both increases . 
So, it is follow this line ok . And, we can calculate the difference in the enthalpy .  
ma (W D –Wo) = m w  
Qh= m a (hD-ho) - mw.hw  (Refer Slide  Time: 26:46 ) 
 
Heating and dehumidification , in this process the air temperature  air temperature 
increases and  it is humidity decreases . So, in this process what happened that  when  air is 
coming and it is crossi ng through a  heat exchanger . So, it is taking the heat . So, 
temperature is increasing . And, then it moves over the desiccant rotors . So, that is taking 
away the moisture of it. So, that we are getting  the dry  and heated air out of the system . 
So, it wil l follow  from this point  if you consider  from this point to  heating and 
dehumidification point 2 . So, we are  getting the dry bulb  temperatu re here , we are 
getting a lowering  of the  humidity and also we can assess the difference in  the enthalpy 
between these two point . (Refer Slide Time: 28:02 ) 
 
Then  mixing of air streams ; so, mixing of air streams  also important in certain cases of 
the drying operation , where  we want to  recirculate some amount of the exit air with the 
inlet air . Because , in some  hot air drying  this kind of phenomena is being done to make 
the product quality better , because if we use  excess amount of  hot and  dehumidified  air 
and sometime case hardening in all this phenomena may happen . So, that is  why this 
kind of  recirculation or mixing of the air stream may be done . 
So, what happened in this case that during this process 2 stream  having the mass flow 
rate ma1 and ma2 and also having different moisture content a nd enthalpy are getting 
mixed . And, most of the time they will end up in a int ermediate condition .  
So, we can calculate the  mass , humidity & enthalpy  by using following equations.                   
ma1+ m a2 = m a3 
ma1W1+m a2W2= (m a1+m a2)W 3 
ma1h1+m a2h2= (m a1+m a2)h3  (Refer Slide Time: 29:49 ) 
 
So, if we  take an example , air at  20 °C, 40 % relative humid ity is mixed  adiabatically 
with air at  40 °C , 40 % RH in the ratio of 1 kg of former with 2 kg of the latter on the 
dry basis . Find the final condition that is h umidity and enthalpy of the air . 
So, what we can do from the psychrometric  chart for the condition one , because we 
know that 2 condition  if it is given . So, we can ca lculate all other conditions . stream 1 is 
at 20 °C, 40 % relative humid ity. So, we can calculate  what is the humidity of that from 
the ch art? So, we are getting  0.0058 kg H20/g dry air  and also we have calculated 
enthalpy of that . Similarly condition  2nd 40 °C, 40 % RH corresponding to that what is 
humidity specific immunity and what is the enthalpy ? 
So, we will  use this equation to solve the  humidity of the final stream and also  we will 
use this equation that is mass into enthalpy  balanc . So that; that will give us the value of 
what will be the enthalpy of the stream that is after mixing . 
So, we will stop  we will continue in the next class . 
Thank you . 