Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 02 
Food Rheology  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to NPTEL  online certification course on F undam entals  of 
Food Process E ngineering . So, our first lecture  started with Food R heology . Rheology is 
a very important  parameter for  you know  to ide ntify any material property . So, in today’s  
class will see that what are the various  kind of  relation  we can observe i n the food 
rheology . 
So, first let us see  what is rheology actually . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:52)  
 
The definition is rheology is the branch of physics , in which we study the way the  
materials deform or flow  in response to the applied forces or stresses  right . So, whenever 
we do any food processing operation ; that means, the food which is either liquid , solid or 
semi solid that is exposed to certain kind of forces . So, forces again maybe of different 
types and tha t force will cause  sudden  stresses to it , and b ecause of that stress the 
response of different food is in different way . So, that is the concern of our study . Now,  in the context of physics , flow can be defined as the continuous deformation over 
time ok . So, flow is the continuous deformation over time  and it can we say that all 
materials can flow . All materials can flow , but the di fference is that the degree of f low 
will differ in case of different material  ok. So, the ability to flow is not only possessed by 
the gases an d liquid because we know  obviou sly these materials f low, but also by the 
solids , but not with the same degree as it happens in case of the liquid and the gases . 
Now, the main fac tors that influence the flow are temperature and time  ok. Because  you 
know temperature is when we increase th e temperature most of the cases in case of the  
liquid , their flow ability  increases . That means  there is a property that is providing the  
resistance of the flow  that is going to decrease  if we increase the  temperature . Similarly  
if the same  temperature inc rease can cause a reverse  property change in case of the gases  
and since  the food is mostly mixture of different composition , and different kind of 
material not  only pure liquid there is suspended matter in it  dissolve d matter in it . 
So, generally  the beha vior of food  in terms of rheology if you want to assess, that is 
become a typically complex  phenomena . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:40)  
 
So, first we will see the elastic  properties ; so elastic property which is  basically  seen by 
the solid material ok . So, what is that this is a force and deformation behavior  and if we 
want to  you know as sess that what are the different kind of  forces . The first kind of force 
that we can analyze  is that , when the food or any material is exposed to uniaxial  loading ok. That means, in one direction in axial direction either  we are pulling  the body from 
both the side or we  are compressing it from  you know axial direction . 
So, in that case what happened that , there is some elongation we can observe  on the body 
in the axial direction or in the direction of the applied force ok . So,  this kind of force 
causes this is called the normal  the force is ac ting in the normal direction . So, the stress 
generated is called the normal stress . Then if we look into the  second p icture where from 
all the side forces acting on a body ok . From all the  3 direct ion that is x , y and z the force 
is acting on the body and therefore, causi ng the decrease in the volume . 
So, this kind of phenomena  is called the bulk compression loading , which results in 
volume change in the solid body  ok. So, the first thing first  force that is axial  force or 
uniaxial  loading that can cause change in one  dimension one direction . However , the 
bulk compression  changes the body from all  three  sides  or all three  direct ions. 
Now, the next one kind of force may act on a body that is called the Shear force ok . So, 
what is that ? Let us say first we can consider a block  resting on a  on a floor  or on a 
ground . If we apply a force Ft parallely on the  top surface ok . So, top surface will try to 
pull it on the x direction because of this force  Ft, whereas the bottom surface which is fix 
on the ground will have a reverse direction al stress , because this will n ot try to you know 
flow with the upper layer . So, because of inertia  this kind of behavior  we can observe . 
So, in this case what will happen ? The body will de form , but not the similar way it ha s 
happen ed in case of axial loading or bulk compression , but it will  you know some kind 
of be nding or twisting will be observed and the body will be deform from its  longi tudinal 
position by an angle ‘γ’. And from using tha t ‘γ’ we can measure the deformation by the 
distance  the layer has moved from its eq uilibrium position divided by the distance 
between these  two layer ok . So, that is basically tan (γ) right . So, so then these are the 
different kind of forces that can act on a body and because of  these  three  different kind s 
of deformation we can see . (Refer S lide Time: 07:40)  
 
 Now the thing is as we have mentioned that when we  apply the uniaxial  loading that 
time it may  be you know  when we are pulling the body apart it is tensile force . And 
when we  you know compress the body from both the side it is  comp ressive force and we 
know that force  divided by  the area on which it is acting , give us the concept of the 
stress . So, we can get the tensile stress or compressive stress ok. 
Now, why this concept of stress is more important than the force and deformation 
beha vior? Because if we look into these  two diagram  let us  say that these are of the same 
material ok . So, this is also material  ‘A’ and this is also material A ok; however, their 
shape is different ok . 
So, in the first one w e can observe that length is high  compa red to the  width, height is 
more you can considered in that way he re the height is less and width is high . On both 
the material we are applying the same axial  force  ‘F’. So, since the area is difference and 
the geometry of the figure are different . So, both the cases of deformation we c an 
observe in terms of ‘Δl’ that may vary . I mean  they that will definitely vary because 
these two shapes are different ok . 
So, the ‘Δl’ here is much higher compared to this ‘Δl’; that means, if you analyze  the 
force and  deformation that cannot give you th e property which is a material  property , 
because this ‘Δl’ will change from different shape  of the material . So, we want 
something that will be of t he material property that does  not change when the  geometry changes right. So, because of that to understand the material rheological property force 
and deformation will be changed to some other parameter  that is stress and strain  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:57)  
 
So, the elastic property of a material can be best understood by the relation between the 
stress and strain , and the quotient  of the force over area is ca ll the stress expressed in 
N/m2. Whereas , the re lative change in length is call ed the st rain, which is the 
dimensionless parameters of ‘Ɛ’. 
Stress,  σ =F/A 
Strain, Ɛ = Δl/l 
So, when a material exhibit a linear relationship between increasing stress and strain , it is 
said to be a classic elastic material that follows H ooke ’s law  ok. So, Hooke ’s law if  we 
can plot the stress strain diagram that will  do now . So, that is express ed by the  Hooke’s  
law that is stress ; stress is proportional to strain and t he proportionality constant is ‘E’ 
which is modulus of elasticity . 
Now, this modulu s of elasticity is the material parameter ok . So, whatever may be the 
shape and size of the same material , we can get the modulus of elasticity fi x ok. So, that 
is the advantage of using the  stress strain analysis of any material . (Refer Slide Time: 11:39)  
 
So, the next stress  we will now look into the general stress strain diagram . So, let us see 
that here we have express the strain  in percentage in the x direction , and stress in N/m2 in 
the y direction , and we try to increase  strain  and we measure the record  stress 
continuously . So, along the graph if you can follow initially we are getting a straight line 
portion ok . So, in this straight lin e zone , the stress is proportional to strain ok . So, the 
material obeys  the Hooke’s  law material  obeys  Hooke’s  law here. 
Now, after this portion there the curve starts deviating  from linearity  right . And till this 
again we can we can consider the  proportional limit , because till then we can considered 
more or less  straight line behavior  beyond this p oint, the slope i s starts changing ok. So, 
in between these zones  if we want to  withdraw the  stress at any moment  the material will 
regain it s initial  shape ok. 
Now, beyond that if further we increase the stress what will happen that , a point will 
come where without increasing the  shear , shear  without increasing the stress strain will 
start increasing ok . That means, the mate rial will yield at this point , and beyond which  
even with less or no change of the stress the material starts flowing . 
So, beyond this if we want to withdraw the stress , we can  it get back to the  initial 
condition . So, beyond that zo ne the plastic deformation will be there , again the stress will 
increase up to a maximum point that  we normally defined as  σm and after that the ru pture will happen ; that means, the material have  when fully exhaust that cannot withstand the 
stress to a higher extent . So, it will break ok . 
So, this is a gener al nature of a material  if you draw th e stress strain diagram . So, here as 
I mentioned that change  in strain in response to increasing stress can be approximated by 
the linear function that will appear as a straight line through the origin  on a stress strain 
diagram . So, modulus of elasticity is the slope of the straight portion and that is given as:  
E=dσ
dε=differential  stress
differential  strain 
Now, the condition is that we have understood that elastic and plastic deformation . So, 
these general phenomena we may not observe in case of the  biolo gical material . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:04)  
 
What happened in that case ? For example, any f ood material the sharp  change from the  
you know elastic to  plastic state is not visible in case of the biological material . So, for 
that what we do is that if we  see tha t how the  plot is look like here  the strain (%)  we have 
plotted  and stress is there . So, we can see that a gradual dome has been generated  there is 
no transition  point , there is no fixed  yield point ok . 
So, initially there was a linear region and then it starts deviating  and then we are reaching 
a maximum  stress and then rupture happen ed at point B. So, what we do  is we fix  at 
technical limit of elasticity  that is used to  specify the stress at which the permanen t stra in 
reaches a value of 0.2 % this reaches a value of 0.2% of the strain  ok. So, that point we consider  as yield point ok . So, this linear region shows the elastic 
behavior  from which the slope will give the  value of the modulus of elastici ty. And here 
at this point we will consider the  yield point  based on the 0.2 % strain if it generate in the 
in the body . So, the similar fashion we  are calculating the  modulus of elasticity or  this is 
also called the Young’s  modulus . We can also do t he same thing for the bulk 
compression and  shear  stress  because  we have know by now there are forc es where we 
can apply the axial  loading or we can apply the bulk compression or shear force . So, we 
will eventually come on those studies . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:20)  
 
So, Young’s modulus  as we have seen for any biological material if you plot the stress 
and strain curve like this . So, we will get a straight line d portion . So, from the slope of 
the straight line we can get the ide a of Young’s modulus . So, Young’ s modulus gives an 
indication of how easily a material can be stretched or contracted  right  and is sometime  
referred to as stiffness of the material . So, it is a property t hat is defined as stiffness  of 
the material right . 
So, here if we measure the angle that straight line has been  drawn with respect to the 
horizontal  so, that will be ‘tanα’. Now stress  is given by:  
F/A = E. Δl/l 
Where, ‘E’ is Young’s modulus  of elasticity. We can write further  F=E.A.∆l
l=D.∆l Where , D is Hooke’s  constant . i.e D  =E.A/l intial. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:48)  
 
So, next in a very  concise manner we will just see  that the differe nt terms for 
interpretation of stress strain diagram  ok. So,  what will h appen is that if we consider if 
we first plot the plot the diagram like  you know the way we have done that , if you 
remember . So, first a straight line will be there then it start decreasing ok . 
So, the elastic ra nge; that means, the range whe re we are getting  ‘dσ/dƐ’ i.e. the 
differential  change in the  stress was  with the ratio of the strain th at is constant , that 
signify that s train is completely reversible ok . So, this is the status of the strain in case of 
the elastic range  and non elas tic range ; that means,  dσ/dƐ will not  be constant ok . 
So, in this zone strain  is not complete ly reversible  then dσ/dƐ =0 indicate the yield stress . 
So, the point at which it happened the slope will be 0. so, that stress will be yield stress . 
So, from there the flow  starts  and the strain continues  without  increasing stress . So, from 
this point onwards the strain  continues  without having change in the stress . Now ‘σmax’ 
when we reach the peak value where  we can observe the highest stress . So, that is the 
maximum strength of the material  and the corresponding strain we can measure that will 
be the  strain at maximum stress . This is not the maximum strain which  is strain at maximum stress  and technical limit of 
plasticity because  plasticity is actually that the term is  used when  the material ne eds to 
flow, some materials  are there where as instantly the force applied on them and they  start 
flowing  those are  called the viscous material , but certain material  are there whe re they 
need an initial stress to flow ok. So, beyond  that initial stress onl y they will  flow below 
that stress they does  not flow . So, the technical limit of plasticity in case of the biological 
material we considered a s Ɛ=0.2% if the strain reaches this value . So, this deformation 
we can cons ider th at yield  point has  been occurred and the flow starts . 
So, σ will be the stresses for 0.2% strain , which is considered as permanent strain and 
strain goes 0.2% of the permanent strain that we can measure  now rupture point where 
‘σ’ shows  sudden drop ok. At this point when sigma shows  sudden drop that is the 
rupture  point  and stress we can measure that  what is the stress we have applied here , and 
strain at the  point of rupture  we can measure  what  was the strain at this condition when 
the rapture has happened  ok. 
So, this is  all about  now next is  next is bulk modulus ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:51)  
 
So, bulk modulus as  I have mention already , that the body  is compressed from all the 
direction  x, y and z direction  if you con sider in a Cartesian  system . So, the elastic range 
of compression and the no n elastic  range of compression maybe there . So, if the positive 
stress  we apply that is that is cause  the pressure . So, that will result in reduction in the volume of the sample  or if  the negative str ess generated that is expansion  so, that 
increase the volume  or the volume dilatation  may happen ok. 
So, when the volume dilatation  can happen ; that means, if the product is under pressure , 
you are you  are performing sudden  operation and suddenly the press ure has been 
released ok . So, that that is called a negative pressure and then the volume will be 
increased . For example,  if some  of you have known  the concept of extrusion what 
happen if extrusion ? This is some kind of  technique where we combi nly perfo rm many 
unit operations like heat ing, cooking and we also apply shear force on the body  of the 
material that is being extruded . 
So, in the dye, when t he food is coming out of the dye; so, it suddenly the  pressure 
released on the body . Because  initially in  the inside of the barrel in the inside of the 
screw of the ex truder  there was excessive pressure  and shear force will be there . So, 
when it comes out from the dye to the atmospheric  pressure . So, pressure release  that is 
why the y expand  and we are getting a very high  you know porous structure  you might 
have seen in the kurkure and then  many kind of this extruded  snack item ok . So, that 
happened because of this  negative pressure  that is a case of a  bulk expansion  and. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:14)  
 
So, next is  now if we consider that we consider that a element  a block of the food 
sample , and then we are applying bulk compression from all the side on this . So, what will happen ? Volume will decrease because this is a compressive force in nature . So, 
positive force  so, volume  will be decre ase that is why we have written in this manner :  
−dV
V=kdP 
‘-dV’ is the decrease in the volume of the initial volume , ‘V’ is initial volume  and ‘dP’ is 
the pressure  change that is needed to cause ‘dV’ amount of vo lume  reduction  in the 
sample . So, we can write : 
1
k=dP
−dVV  
Here, ‘k’ is termed as compressibility  whereas, when K=1/k is bulk modulus  bulk 
modulus . So, that unit of  the bulk module s is in  Pa and ‘k’ is compressibility in  Pa-1. 
So, this we can term it as  dP/(dV/V ). So, the pressure required to cause the relative 
change in the volume . So, it is the ratio of these  two. So, that is why we can termed it  as 
the bulk modulus  and it is decreasing because  increase in the positive pressure will cause 
the reduction in the volume . So, -ve sign has been given . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:47)  
 
So, the bulk modulus ‘k’ characterizes how a material  can withstand an  elasti c 
compression and is sometime referred to as firmness ok . So, first one that is  Young’s 
modulus that is  the concept of stiffness we are getting there . Here what we are getting that is concept of firmness , which is how a mat erial can withstand an  elastic 
compression . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:19)  
 
Now  isotropic and anisotropic material ; because sometimes we handle the food material 
those are not h omogeneous  in nature . So, because of food having  you know the 
composition of carbohydrate , fat, protein and many  other nutrients , vitamins and all and 
their distribution in the food m atrix may not be same all the time right . So, for those  kind 
of isotropic  material where the homogeneous  property we can see and there  are certain  
ok. So, for the isotropic solid and normal fluid  the modulus ‘k’ can be  expressed  in this 
manner ok . 
There are  9 components Kxx, Kxy, Kxz, Kyx, Kyy, Kyz, Kzx, Kzy and Kzz ok. So, bulk 
modulus in the  normal  direction and also in  the shear modulus  I mean  in the direction of 
the other  two faces , if you a re co nsidering the x  directions . So, x directional change that 
will also have effect on the other  two direction ; so this is simply written as K =K ij which 
is the bulk modulus , and k=1/K  which is bulk compression .  
Now, what happen that  if the material  is isotropic?  So, when we are applying  bulk 
compression or compressive  force from all th e side . So, it will  deform uniformly from all 
the side ok . So, the structure  size and shape that we will get the size will be lower , but 
the shape will be same . However, in case of an anisotropic  material it will not be same, b ecause the compression 
the bulk com pression that we are giving that will not felt by t he material in all the side 
equally , because of their different property they will behave in a different fashion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:36)  
 
And another thing which is the shear modulus; s o, what happened that as we have 
mentioned that if a dotted block is a stationary  block kept on a surface and then we start  
pulling the  upper  plate with a with a force  ‘Ft’, then what will happen it  try to bend 
towards the  you know horizontal side  it will be pull ed down and an angle will be made 
from t he equilibrium  position . i.e. ‘γ’ 
So, this is a rotational change or torsional  change  and the angle of deformation is called 
here the shear deformation . So, if it has  moved  X direction in the direction of the  applied 
force  and the height between the  two layer is Y. So, X/Y that will be the expression of 
the deformation here that is equal to tan γ. (Refer Slide Time: 31:42)  
 
Shear stress is expr essed  as,                  
τ=tangential  force
area  =Ft
A 
Elasticity  is                                       τ = G.tan γ. 
For the small deformation we can approximate  tanγ = γ therefore, we can write τ = G.γ. 
So, solid s with ideal elastic behavior  show a linear relationship between the shear stress 
and shear strain . So, solids  with ideal elastic behavior  will can give this kind of a 
equation . So, the m aterial property  ‘G’ is called shear modulus and unit is N/m2. So, we 
have by now  familiar with the  Young’s modulus , Bulk modulus and S hear modulus . So, 
it gives an indication of how easily the material will be  bend  or twist in response to  an 
applied stress which is some time call  rigidity ok . 
So, this is all about this different kind of  modulus . (Refer Slide Time: 33:20)  
 
And next is  just I will talk about a strain stress tensor for a moment , because you might 
be knowing this concept in y our fluid mechanics class or transport phenomena , but we 
are not going to cover all these heat transfer , mass transfer momentum in our this 
fundamental course . However , just to  give you an idea that how we can express them 
because this t erm you may get some time in the c ourse . So, that is why we are  expressing 
here is that stress is defined as force per unit area and usually expressed  in Pa, maybe 
tensile compressive  or shear  we know that . 
So, nine separate quantities are required to complete ly describe the state of shear  in a 
material  basically this is in case of a fluid  in a in a flowing situation we need this . So, if 
this element we consider  here. So, we are getting that there is σxx, σyy and σzz. So, these 
are the  normal stre sses. So, there are we can see that there  is two suffix ij  that is  needed 
to express the  stress es in this case , and the other  stresses whic h is called the shear stress 
are xy, yx, zx, xz, yz and zy. 
So, the point is  that if we write the stresses in terms of  σij, i and j  will be same for the 
normal stresses and  i and j will differ for the shear stresses . Now how we can  explain this  
σxx and σxy like that  normal and shear stresses . σxx will be the stress acting on a plane 
perpendicular to the ‘x’ direction , because of x dire ctional force  whereas, if we consider  
σyx that is stress acting in ‘y’ direction because of the ‘x’ directional force ok. So, all this  
we can we can categorize  all such forces and  when whenever we want to discuss or we can analyze any such process . We can discuss t hat in which direction the flow  is actually 
happened because most of the cases w e are  handling uni directional flow. And, that time 
the other direction  we may not need to  take into account for the calculation  so that w e 
need to keep in mind right . 
(Refer Slide Time: 36:14)  
 
So, basically stress tensor is state of stress at a point inside a fluid the deform  fluid in the 
deform state can be summarize  as stress tensor , written in the form of a matrix in this 
way: 
𝜎𝑖𝑗=  𝜎11𝜎12𝜎13
𝜎21𝜎22𝜎23
𝜎31𝜎32𝜎33  
So, generally this tenso r is of symmetrical in nature under equilibrium condition  and the 
diagonal elements are the normal stresses . 
σij = σji 
σ12 = σ21 
σ31 = σ13 
So, we will stop here. We will continue in the next class . 
Thank you . 