Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian  institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 24 
Heat Exchangers (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to NPTE L online certification course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering ; we are discussing now  Heat Exchanger ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46 ) 
 
So; we have already covered  few topics  including the  definition , types of heat exchanger , 
then we have discussed the analysis of heat exchanger .  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:59 )  
Heat exchanger effectiveness and number of transfer units (NTU):  
To determine the inlet and outlet temperatures for a particular heat exchanger, the 
analysis done more easily by a using a method based on heat exchanger effective ness 
and number of transfer units (NTU).  
The heat exchanger effectiveness (ε) is defined as the ratio of actual heat transfer to the 
maximum possible heat transfer.  
 
The actual heat transfer of heat exchanger is given by:  
 
So, actual heat transfer means the  heat transfer from the hot fluid to t he cold fluid that we 
are getting ; that means, the m Cp Δt for the hot fluid or m Cp Δt for the cold fluid . So, 
effectiveness ε that is equal to actual heat transfer by maximum possible heat transfer  so 
Q /Q max.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 08:40 )  
The maximum p ossible heat transfer will occur if the outlet temperature of the fluid with 
smaller values of heat capacity (C h or C c) is equal to the inlet temperature of other fluid.  
So C h or Cc which is  respectively the heat capacity of hot fluid and cold fluid  which  is 
equal to (ṁ h × Cph ) and (ṁ c × Cpc ). Now if the flow rate the hot fluid is less or if the 
specific heat that is heat required to  increase per unit temperature for that particular fluid 
is lower  so Q will  be lower and similar is the case of cold fluid .  
 So we can  say, 
 
Q max will be minimum among these two values.  
 
So heat transfer is given by the following equation,  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 15:17 )  
Number of transfer unit method (NTU):  
Heat exchanger effectiveness is a function of several variables. But it is in convenient to 
combine them in a graphical form. Heat exchanger effectiveness can be expressed as a 
function of three non dimensional parameters, which is known as NTU method.  
Dimension less parameter:  
1. NTU = (UA/C min) 
2. R = C min/ C max 
3. Flow arrangement.  
U = overall heat transfer coefficient  W/m2 °C, A is the area m2, C min that is ṁ (mass 
flow rate) ×  CP (specific heat ).  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:40 )  
Effectiveness of parallel flow heat exchanger   
The heat exchange dQ through an area dA is given by:  
                                                
  
So, U into d A that is the elemental area  multiplied with temperature difference between 
the hot and cold fluid  so this difference  is the driving force for moving d Q amount of 
heat through the d A amount of area from t he hot fluid to the cold fluid . So, for the hot 
fluid we can write ; ṁh Cph dth and we are putting minus sign , because  it is reducing with  
increasing A that is equal to ṁc (cold fluid flow rate ) × Cpc × d tc so this is increasing 
towards  increasing A.  
So, Ch and Cc heat capacity of the hot and cold fluid respectively .  
 
  (Refer Slide Time: 21:31 ) 
 
Integrating we get,  
 
 
We know,  
 
 
 
 So, th2 will be the lower temperature than th1, similarly tc2 will be higher than t c1 because , 
tc1 is going to  increase to tc2. So basically , this is kind of the  fraction that we are  
achie ving by the ratio of C min /Cc so, if it is very close to this  so, we can get  
effectiveness  higher .  
So, because  if effectiveness will be 1 in that case C min will be equal to Cc and this  tc2 will 
be eventually  th1 so this is how we have found out th2 and tc2. Now, in the previous in this 
case that we are we are getting th2 minus t c2 here we will substitute these two  equation s. 
So, from here th2 - tc2 we will put th ese two equation s to remove this value t h2 and t c2 
right . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 26:56 ) 
 
Elimin ating t h2 and t c2 from the above equation we get,  
 
Now the thing is which one is minimal Ch or Cc based on that we can define 
effectiveness , 
1. If C c > C h, then,   
2. If C c < C h, then,  
 
Combining both the two equation we get,  
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:36 ) 
 
The effectiveness of parallel flow heat exchanger is given by,  
 
In this case the temperature of the both the fluid decreases along the length of heat 
exchange. So the heat flow equation is given as follows:  
 
Rest of the derivation approach is same as parall el flow case. So, the final derived 
equation is follows:   
Thank you . 