Fundamentals  of Food  Process  Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta  Mitra  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  Of Technology,  Kharagpur  
 
Lecture -29 
Drying Technology  (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone . Welcome  to NPTEL  online  certification  course  on Fundamentals  of 
Food Process  Engineering . We are continuing  the topic  of Drying Technology . In the last 
class  we have  discuss  the constant  rate drying  period , how to calculate  that and drying  
characteristic  curve , which  is the drying  rate versus  moisture  content  and also the 
moisture  content  versus  time curve . Now, today  we will continue  with this topic . So, 
drying  time calculation  for the constant  rate period  we have  done  in the previous  class  
for only convection . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:07 ) 
 
And, today’s cl ass we will  see the constant  rate period  for combined , conduction , 
convection  and radiation . 
But, before  going  to that I would  like to remind  you the equation  that we have  developed  
in yesterday’s  class . So, for constant  rate drying  we have  found  that if we want  to 
calculate  the drying  rate.  
 
R=−Wd
AdX
dt  
else we can calculate  the constant  at drying  period  or the time record  for having the 
constant  rate drying  phenomena  by integrating above equation.   
For example, when  we perform  the constant  rate drying , let us see this is a bed of wet 
food material  and constant  rate will prevail  till the surface  of the food will have  some  
moisture  i.e. the free moisture  availab le at the surface . And, let us say this is the air 
which  is havin g the temperature  T, humidity  H and mass  flow rate let us say ma, where  
the surface  is having  the temperature  Ts & humidity  Hw or HS. So, what  happened  that in 
this case if the air velocity  or air temperature  or humidity  changes . So, these will  going  
to affect  the constant  rate drying  period . 
For example, we know  that the heat is coming  from  the air, to the wet food material  by 
convectio n because  we have  developed  the equation  for convection  now, but the similar  
equation  can be derived  for other  heat transfer  mechanism . So, if we considered  that the 
amount  of heat q that is coming  from  the ambient  air to the product .  
 
Now, this time will perform  in the wet bulb temperature  always . So, this was the case 
and then we have  seen that h, which  is the convective  heat transfer  coefficient  is relate d. 
h is related  to G, which  is nothing , but mass  velocity ( ρv). So, “ρ” is the density  of the 
moist and hot gas that is that is passing  over the food product  and “v” is the velocity . So, 
naturally  if the velocity  “v” increases ; that mean s, the heat transfer  will increase . So, if 
heat transfer  increase , then the drying  rate will be faster  constant  rate Rc will be faster  
and time required  for that drying  will reduce . If the humidity  is increasing  so; that means, 
the gradient  of moisture  transfer  will reduce , because  that the difference  Hw - h will be 
lowered . 
So, in that case the Rc that is rate of moisture  evaporation  will be reduced . And, since  we 
are considering  the convective  heat transfer  coefficient  and the moisture  transfer  from  
the surface  only, the thickness  does not  cause  any direct  effect  only it will prolong  the 
the time, but does not  change  the rate of constant  heat moisture  transfer  or moisture  
removal  during  the constant  rate drying  period . However, if we increase  the temperature  
qc=hA(T−Ts) of the air which  is used for the drying  phenomena  then the gradient  T- Ts this will be 
increasing . 
And, because  of that the drying  rate will be faster . So, then we can see that all the 
parameter  that is the air velocity . Then air temperature  air humidity  all have  effect on the 
constant  rate drying  period . Now, in the previous  class  we have  considered  that only 
convective  heat transfer  is the mechanism  by which  we are utilizing  the heat of the dry 
and hot air to dry the surface  of the food material  by constant  rate drying  mechanism . 
Now, if we think  about  all 3 modes  that means  that conduction , convection  and radiation  
right . So, if all the 3 mode  contributing  in a case where  heat transfer  is occurring  and 
drying  is taking  place  from  a wet food surface . 
Then, how we can calculate  the heat transfer  rate and the constant  rate drying  so, that we 
will see now. So, let us consider  a case where  there  is a wet solid . Solid as a food 
material , which  is a wet solid  material  and that is kept on a metal  tray, the food is kept on 
a metal  tray and the block  of food is exposed  to a hot and dry gas or air stream . So, air 
stream  is passing  over the surface  of the wet food material  and also the same  air is 
passing  below  the metal  plate  where  the food is being  kept. 
Now, what  will happen  that the convective  heat transfer  from  the air stream  to the wet 
surface  of the food will be one mode  of heat transfer ? And the same  you know  air that is 
passing  below  the metal  plate  as well. So, that will also first heat the metal  tray and then 
from  the metal  tray it will be conducted  from  the bottom  side to the upper  food material . 
And, also within  the food it will be transferred  by conduction  mechanism . And, apart  
from  convection  and conduction , if we talk about  another  method  that is the radiation . 
So, if you have  some  source  of hot radiating  surface . So, that is giving radiation  heat to 
the food material . So, radiation  heat qR which  is also coming  to the surface. 
Obviously  since temperature of radiative  source  that TR is much  higher  than the surface  
temperature  of the food right . So, now, we need  to combine  all the mechanism  of the 
heat transfer  that is convecti ve qC, conductive  qK and radiative  qR. All this heat transfer  
will cause  evaporation  and drying  from  the surface . So, first let us consider  the 
convective  heat transfer . Convective  heat transfer  by convec tive heat transfer  from  the 
air to the food surface  will be 
 
qc=hA(T−Ts)  
Where, ‘T’ is the temperature  of the air stream  or gas,  ‘Ts’ is the temperature  of the 
surface , ‘h’ is convective  heat transfer  coefficient  and ‘A’ heat transfer area.  
Then, next we can consider  the radiative  heat transfer  and it is given by the equation:  
 
 
Where  ‘σ’ is the Boltzmann  constant  (5.67 ×10-8), ‘Ɛ’ is the emissivity  of the material , 
‘TR’ is temperature of radiative  source  and ‘Ts’ is the temperature  of the surface .  
So, convective  and radiativ e heat transfer  we have  expressed . Now, if we want  to express  
the conductive  heat transfer  that is from  the bottom  from  the bottom  this conduction  heat 
is coming  through  the metal  tray to the food material .  
 
Now, we have  taken  ‘U’ instead  of a conductivity , because  here we need to take the 
combine  effect  of convective  heat transfer  from  the gas to the metal  body , then 
conduction  from  the metal  through  the food and also through  the food conduction  from  
the bottom  to the top surface  that is the Ts right . So, we have  combined  all the resistances  
together  and convert  to the overall  heat transfer  coefficient  U. So, the expression  would  
be 
 
Where,  hc is convective  heat transfer  coefficient  
Lm is height  of the metal  tray  
km is thermal  conductivity  of the metal  tray  
Ls is the thickness  of the food and ks is the thermal  conductivity  of the material  
Then, we can calculate  the constant  rate by this method . Constant  rate is actually  the 
amount  of moistur e removed  per unit area per unit time. So, that will be equal  to 
Rc=q
Aλs 
 
qR=hRA(TR−Ts) 
hR=5.67×10−8ε(TR4−Ts4)
(TR−Ts) 
qk=UA(T−Ts) 
1
U=1
hc+Lm
km+Ls
ks Where,  q is the total heat trans fer and λs is laten t heat of vaporization . Since  ‘q’ is 
combination  of all three modes . So, togethe r we can write   
Rc= hc+U  T−Ts +hR(TR−Ts)
λs 
Now, this much  heat is utilized  to evaporate  the moisture . So, that the humidity changes  
from  H to Hs because  that is  the difference . we have derived  in the previous  class  that 
amount  of heat transfer  is will be equal  to amount  of moisture  evaporated  into the latent  
heat of vaporization . Using  this one now we can generate  this expression . i.e. 
Rc= hc+U  T−Ts +hR(TR−Ts)
λs=kyMB(Hs−H) 
 
Where,  H is the humidity  of the entering  gas, Hs is the humidity  at the surface , MB is the 
weight  of molecular  weight  of the air and ky is the mass  transfer  coefficient . The factor  
h/kyMB is called  the psychometric  ratio. 
So, this is how we can develop  the relation  in case of combined  conduction  convection  
radiation , we can develop  the expression  of the moisture  transfer  with the heat transfer . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:59)  
 
And, then we wil l move  on to the falling  rate period . Now, when  constant  rate will end 
and the falling  rate will start we have  discuss ed a bit of that in the curve  of the drying  
rate versus  moisture  content . So, we have  seen that there  is a constant  rate. So, if we 
express  the drying  rate with moist ure content . So, we are getting  a constant  rate first and then it starts  dipping  there  may be you know  different  pattern . For example, you may 
find a linear  path instantly . And, then you may get a second  fall in the curve  as well. So, 
the point  when  constant  rate completes  and the falling  rate starts  so, this point  we can 
measure  the moisture  content  and that is called  the critical  moisture  content  Xc. 
So, this signif ies that there  is no more  free moisture  or the layer  of moisture  available  on 
the surface  of the food. So, constant  rate constant  rate drying  does not  occur at that point  
and from  this point  falling  rate drying  starts . So, before  this falling  rate the controlling  or 
the governing  property  would  be the air velocity  or air humidity  temperature  etc. and the 
drying  happen  at the wet bulb temperature . Now, the moment  constant  rate completes  
and falling  rate starts .  
Let us say this was the food and the air is coming  over it. So, the surface  has started  
increasing  the temperature  from  the wet bulb temperature . So, initially  when  the constant  
rate drying happens  the temperature  was fixed  at the wet bulb. Now, whatever  heat is 
transferred  from  the air to the surface  of the product  is not utilized  for evaporation  of the 
moisture , because  the moisture  is not available  freely  at the surface . Therefore, the 
temperature  of the surface  starts  increasing , temperature  of the food starts  increasing  and 
from  that point  the falling  rate starts . 
Now, the falling  rate may continue  as proportional  to the moisture  content . So, R may be 
proportional  to the moisture  content  ok. It may be linear  and may not be linea r, but first 
we will consider  the case of linear . we can consider  a case where it is linear  and passing  
through  0; that means, there will be no intercept  in the in this case and lastly , we will 
also see that if the curve  is not linear . Then, how we can define  the case of you know  
falling  rate falling  rate moisture  transfer . And, in this falling  rate the moisture  which  
needs  to travel  from  the bottom  of the food material  to the surface . 
in this case the moisture  is not uniformly  distributed  in the food, because  of mainly  the 
food is most  of the time is not a homogeneous  entity. And, because  of the drying  also 
there  may be some  change  in the structure  may happen  some  force  mayb e collapse . So, 
somewhere  maybe  the capillary  may build  up. So, to the capillary  diffusion  the moisture  
can transfer  or some  somewhere  the moisture  can be transferred  to the vapour , because  
of the vapour  diffusion . So, many  mechanism  can prevail  during  the falling  rate period  
and it is very difficult  to identify  exactly , what is the mechanism  or how much  amount  of moisture  exactly  travel  by which  mechanism  so, that it needs  to come  from  the you know  
come  from  the core of the food to the surface . 
And therefore,  the rate of mois ture removal  is reduced  in a signific ant manner. So, all 
such happens  during  the falling  rate period . So, basically  the rate of drying is decreasing  
as the free moisture  decreases . So, free moisture  is actually  the moisture , which  is in 
excess  of the EMC  present  in the food. So, now, what  we can do is for drying time 
calculation  we can go by different  method , one of the method  is by graphical  
interpretation . So, in that what  we can do is we can plot  1/R versus  X. 
And, then we can integrate  for the different  X, that we are getting  having  the range  of X1 
to X2 where  X1 and X2 both are lower  than the critical  moisture  content  Xc because  only 
below  Xc moisture  content  the falling  rate starts . So, here what  will happen  that we can 
plot it? So, the way we have  calculated  the constant  rate drying  period . the way we have 
calculated  for the constant  rate now the similar  thing  we have  we have to do for the 
falling  rate as well. 
 
Now, when  the rate is a linear  function  of X that mea ns, the R=aX+ b and  dR=adX . The 
process  will be like if the drying rate in the falling  rate zone  is you know  it is coming  
linear  function  then we can take any 2 segment  as X1 and X2.  
 
Since R 1=aX 1+b and R 2=aX 2+b:    a=(R 1-R2)/(X 1-X2)  & R= R C(X1-Xe)/(X C-Xe)   
Final expression for time of falling ra te period   
 
Where,  Wd is weight of dry matter R is the rate of the falling  rate period , Rc is the 
constant  rate, Xc is critical  moisture  content  & Xe is equilibrium  moisture  content . So, 
this will be the expression  of falling  rate time period  for drying mechanism , if we 
consider  that the drying  rate is proportional  to the free moisture  content  or it is a linear  
funct ion of the free moisture  content  in this fashion  aX+b. 
tf=Wd
A dX
RX1
X2=Wd
A×area  under  the curve  
tf=Wd(XC−Xe)
ARCln(X1−Xe)
(X2−Xe)  
tf=Wd
aA dR
RR1
R2=Wd
aAlnR1
R2 (Refer Slide Time: 29:38)  
 
Now, another  case will be when  the rate is a linea r function  to the origin . i.e. R=aX and  
dX=dR/a . 
 
In this case X1=X C and R 1=RC therefore Slope  (a) =RC/XC. Expression  for falling rate 
period is given by  
  
Here  RC/R2=X C/X2 so above equation becomes:  
 
if we consider  that the slope  is not linear , if we plot the drying  rate versus  moisture  
content . So, the slope  is not linear  in that case, we can considered  that this is because  of 
the diffusion  mechanism  right . 
So, for the diffusion  mechanism  since , the mass  transfer  is here the governing  function  is 
the diffusio n mechanism  in the falling  rate. The structure  or shape  of the material  
changed  because  shrinkage  has happened . So, therefore,  this drying  rate in case of the 
falling  rate period  governed  by the diffusion  mechanism , will be presented  by Fick’s 
second  law of diffusion , which  is which  is the diffusion  equation  for the unsteady  state 
unsteady  state diffusion . 
tf=WdXC
ARClnRC
R2 
tf=Wd
aA dR
RR1
R2=Wd
aAlnR1
R2 
tf=WdXC
ARClnXC
X2 So, using  that liquid  diffusion  of moisture  in the falling  rate, we can we can write  the 
expression  as  
 
So, we generally  take the first term only there are other  terms  where , but when  we 
consider  that long time diffusion  mechanism . The first term will give us reasonable  
accuracy  in the calculation  and also we can consider  we can consider  Xe as 0. So, in that 
case simply  we can express  this in terms  of X/Xc. So, that has been  done here in this 
equation . function  t has been  considered  as a as a time record  in the falling  rate period  
that is tf So, here “a”that is  the characteristic  dimension  and it is taken  as a half thickness  
for the slab, when  drying  occurs  from  both the slide  both the sides . And, if it is from  one 
side only we can take the thickness  as the dimension  “a”. 
And, if it is a you know  cylindrical  object . So, most  of the cases  if we deal with the 
infinite cylinder  we can take the radius  as the dimension  and for sphere  also we can take 
the radius  as a charact eristic  dimension . So, eventually  we are getting  that the time here 
will vary based  on the free moisture  available  that is X1/Xc. So, Xc that is the critical  
moisture  content  or here it is X2 star that will be fixed  for a particular  case. So, it will 
vary only with the free moisture  that is X1 as Xc or here X1*that is available  and also it 
will vary with the diffusivity  DL. And the characteristic  dimension  ‘a’ that will also be a 
signific ant parameter  in this kind of falling  rate calculation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 35:10 ) 
 
tf=4a2
π2DLln8X1∗
π2X2∗ Now, if you see one problem  where  Mango  slices  were  dried  from  40 % to 10 % in 2 
hours  the drying  rate remains  const ant up to 15%, if the EMC  is 2 %.calculate  the total 
time required  to dry from  40 % to 4 %.  all moisture  contents  are represented  in dry 
basis . So, here 2 phases  are 2 rate period  are involved  constant  rate and falling  rate. 
So, first we will have  to see that what  is the constant  rate period  here? So, it has been 
ment ioned  that 40 % to 10 %. So, 0.4 minus  0.15 this much  has been  removed .  
For constant rate period: t c = (0.4 -0.15)W d/AR c =0.25W d/AR c 
So, these  2 hours  will combine  the constant  rate as well as the falling  rate period . So, that 
is equal  to  
 
 
So, for the second  case,  
 
we can get that is 3.15 hour. So, instead  of 2 hour if we need  to further  dry it from 10 
percent  to 4 percent  we need to extend  this much  time 1.15 hour extra . 
So, we can see that as the falling  rate time increase  because  more  moisture  we need  to 
evaporate  in the falling  rate zone  time requirement  will be significantly  higher , because  
the rate and the falling  rate drying  period  will be very much  less. We will stop now we 
will continue  in the next class . 
Thank  you. 
2=tC+tf=0.25Wd
ARC+Wd(0.15−0.02)
ARCln0.15−0.02
0.1−0.02 
Wd
ARC=6.3874  
t=tC+tf=0.25Wd
ARC+Wd(0.15−0.02)
ARCln0.15−0.02
0.04−0.02 