Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 30 
Drying Technology (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone . Welcome to the NPTEL  online certification cours e on Fundamentals of 
Food Process E ngineering . In the last class , we have discuss that drying  phenomena in 
the constant rate and falling rate  period . In the constant  rate, we have discussed that  
when only the convective heat transfer  will be  creating the d riving force for mass 
transfer from the product  then what will be the drying rate . 
And, also we have seen that when all the 3 modes  that is conduction convection and 
radiation exist in a case , then how we can calculate the  phenomena in the constant r ate 
drying period . 
Also, we have seen that different kind of mechanism in the falling rate  drying . when the 
drying rate and the falling  late period will be linearly proportional to the free moisture  
available . And, also when the drying  rate will not be linear ; that means  the drying  will 
basically governed by the diffusion mechanism . 
So, then also how we can calculate the drying  time we have seen that . Now, today we 
will start a problem that is based on the principle that we have a derived in the last class 
we have  discuss in that , based on the drying  time calculation using the effective 
diffusivity  and then we will move on to the other topics . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 02:02 )  
So, let us  see first  the problem on drying time  calculation . Average diffusion coefficient 
moisture in a product is 3×10-6 m2/h. product is dried from 29 % ( db) to 9 %( db).product 
(slab) of 25mm thick is dried from both sides by hot air.  Calculate  the time required for 
drying . Given that equilibrium moisture content of the product is 4 %( db).  
Now, we need to  find the sol ution of that we have discuss that characteristic dimension , 
in this case that we need to use will be half of a thickness if t he drying  takes place from  
both the side . So, here we will consider “a” i.e the half thickness of 25 mm = 0.0125mm . 
Then  we need to calculate the free moisture  available . 
     X1* = X 1-Xe = 0.29 -0.04 = 0.25                                                                       
    X2* = X 2-Xe = 0.09 -0.04 = 0.05  
Then, we need to apply this equa tion t f  
 
 
So, putting all th at values here we are getting that t f will come 29.52 hour. So, this is how  
based on ef fective diffusion coefficient or average diffusion coefficient , we can calculate 
this one ok. Calculate that time according the time falling rate period . So, we call it an 
average diffusion , because an every instant place of the product this diffusion , the rate of 
diffusion is not constant , because the re are many factors the structure of the cell the  
porosity , the shrinkage what happen in the product , the non-uniform  distribution of the  
tf=4a2
π2DLln8X1∗
π2X2∗ 
tf=4(0.01252)
3.1422×3×10−6ln8(0.25)
3.1422×0.05=29.52 hr moisture . And, and there is mini mechanism  may prevail not only  the liquid diffusion 
always . So, together to simply the equation we consider this as a effective diffusion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:50 ) 
 
So, then we will see the mass and energy balance for continuous dry er. 
So, if you see the configuration  it is like a drying  chamber is there  where the feed with 
the rate of ‘F’ kg/hr  at temperature ’ T1’ and moisture content  ‘X1’ is entering . And, the 
inlet air which is supposed  to be a hot air  with lesser humidity is entering with a mass 
flow rate ‘ma’ kg/hr .  
Because of this inter actio n of this feed  and the  air, the product is coming out  at a rate ‘P’ 
with T2 temperature and  X2 moisture content . And, the in let air is lea ving with a 
temperature T1 and mass will be same and humidity W2 will increase . And, also there 
maybe heat loss to the ambien t because it is not an insulated system . So, maybe some 
heat loss to the surrounding may happen there . 
So, ma is the mass flow rate of the air in kg/hr  .F, P and Md are mass flow rate of the 
feed, product & of dry solids . T1, T2, Ta1 &T a2 = temperature of feed, product, inlet & 
exit air . And, W1 and W2 is the humidity of the inlet and exit air, whereas  X1 and X2 
moisture content of feed an d product in the dry basis. it is given in the fraction . (Refer Slide Time: 06:49 ) 
 
Now, we need to see the equation of the mass balance . So, mass balance w ill be what is 
coming in the drying  system and what is going out . So, simply we can  perform like this  
mdX1+m aW1= m dX2+m aW2 
So, if there is no heat loss , then the energy balance will be enthalpy of the inlet  feed+ 
enthalpy of the air = enthalpy or heat content in the dried product + enthalpy in the air. 
So, we know already that using the psychometric chart we can calculate the enthalpy of 
the airstream provided the 2 prope rty of the airstream is known to us and in  this 
particular case we know the temperature and humidity specific humidity . So, utilizing  
that we can calculate the  enthalpy at the 2 point  and also  we can calculate in this manner  
as the h 1 and h 2 which is the  enthalpy of the feed and enthalpy of the product . 
So, if we take the reference temperature as 0.  
h1=C pd(T1-0)+C pwX1(T1-0) 
h2=C pd(T2-0)+C pwX2(T2-0) 
Now, we know that humid  heat of the air is  Ca = 1.005+1.88W   
So, by this we  can calculate all the properties . And, then we can use this to identify the 
mass balance and energy balance in case of a continuous dryer  system . (Refer Slide Time: 09:58 ) 
 
Let us take a small problem on that , if we  considered a  continuous dryer used to dry 450 
kg dry solid/h containing 0.05 kg moisture/kg dry solid to 0.02 kg moisture/kg dry solids. 
Solids enter  at 25oC & leaves at 60oC. Hot air having humidity 0.01 kg H 2O/kg dry air 
enters at 94oC & leaves at 40oC.  Take, C pd=1.5kJ/kg dry solids, λ0=2501kJ/kg. Calculate  
the mass flow rate air.  So, what is the  amount of air that is required to flow per unit time  
so, that this much  drying  effect can be achieved ? 
So, first we will do the ma ss balance ;  
450×0.05+0.01m a= 450×0.02+m aW2 
So, one relation between ma and W2 we have  created here ok . Now, the energy balance 
would be  
h1=Cpd(T1-0)+C pwX1(T1-0)= 1.5×25+4.187×0.05×25=42.73 kJ/kg  
So, we are getting 42.73 kilo jo ule per kg ok . So, this is the enthalpy of the inlet feed . (Refer Slide Time: 12:42 ) 
 
Similarly , we can calculate h2 which is coming here 95.02 kJ/kg . Here  we need to take 
the temperature 60 °C and the reference will be  0. Now, for the incoming air we are 
getting  121.24kJ/kg . Similarly, we need to calculate the entha lpy of the outgoing stream . 
So, W2 will b e factor that is changing . In terms of W2, we are getting this relation .  
ha2= (1.005+1.88× W 2) (40 -0)+2501× W 2 =40.2+2576.2 W 2 
Now  putting all the values  in into the energy balance equation  we can get  1 relation 
between m a and W2. Now, solving these two relations  we can get the values of W2, 
which is the humidity of the exit air and also the mass flow rate of the air required . So, 
W2 is coming  0.02279  kg H 2O/kg & ma is coming  1054.7kg/h . (Refer Slide Time: 14:06 ) 
 
Now, just we look into the different types of dryer and we would not  discuss in much 
detail , but just we will see that , what are the different mechanism available , and what are 
the different drying  methods available . So, basically  conduction convection and radiation 
these three  are the modes based on we can  you know dry the material . 
So, conduction drying  that is drum dryer and rotary dryer these 2 are exclusively work 
on the principle of conduction heat transfer . If, we look into the c onvection heat transfer 
this is the most common method for  normally used for t he drying  mechanism , because 
that the cabinet dryer , which is also called the tray dryer . That is  most co mmonly used 
also we can use that tunnel dryer , spray dryer , spouted bed dryer and fluidized bed dryer . 
So, this different configuration and different geometry has been developed for ease of 
handling of the product  based on the quality  of the product  required and also the c apacity 
of the product required . Then there is radiation drying  like sun drying , which is y ou 
know continuing since ancient times and  this is very simple people just spread over the  
you know clean cloth or the grass or the floor for basically grain drying this is used in 
some places . 
Solar dr yer is  one radiative  radiation drying  based on  the natural energy available . The 
microwave drying , which is also becoming very popular because of  it is efficient drying 
operation . So, we will see  some of the se dryers now . (Refer Slide Time: 16:02 ) 
 
So conduction drying , which is contact drying  convective drying we have already 
explain that , how it has been done and  in maybe in the in the detail you might be  you 
know reading in your heat transfer  so, I am not going to  go into the detail of  that. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:21 ) 
 
So, solar dryer s no fuel or mechanical energy is required in this case , drying  cost is 
there fore low as compared to the mechanical drying  , but the probl em is that 
uncontrolled and non-uniform  drying  because for the solar  radiation there is no certainty 
of the intensity of the radiation to be uniform  that is  one problem . So, in a single day the variation is there  of the intensity of the solar radiation and also throughout the year there  
will be variation . 
And, there are effects  of the wind velocity dust and all that may not be controlled  
properly . So, there is a problem of the so lar drying of this non uniformity . There is also 
direct and indirect kind of mechanism . So, one case is that  in the direct type mechanism . 
So, sunlight is fall on a glass ok . And, the cold air which is passing through the product 
will getting heated by this radiative  effect of the  solar radiation . And, the product will be 
getting dried ok. So, hot air is going out the product is gettin g the radiative heat as well 
and because of this he ated air also some effect  they might be  getting because of the 
convective heat transfer as well . 
So, there is a insulated casing is there . So, that no heat loss will be there whatever heat is 
coming by rad iation will  be there in the in the chamber  itself. Whereas,  if we see the 
other method . So, which is kind of an  indirect drying . So, indirect in the sense first we 
utilize  the solar radiation to heat the air and that air is again passing  through  the grain 
bed or  the bed of the food material for drying  by the convective mechanism . So, there is 
an inlet and exhaust of the air and that the drying shelves are there . So, hot air i s going to 
the going to the material  and then how this is how they dry the product ? 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:40 ) 
 
The most common dryer which is based on convective drying mechanism  is the cabinet 
dryer . It consists of a closed compartment in which the tra ys containing  product  are kept and the tra ys rest on a shelf  with adequate spacing between them . So, that the heated air 
can blow through or can pass through  the food material , and heated dry air circulates  
between the shelves . 
So, look into the cabinet dryer system  one is the drying  chamber this one is the drying 
chamber , two is the drying trolley . So, this has been given the drying  trolley  is given 
where  the trays are there.  Drying  trays  are there  is a heat exchanger , because whatever 
air is coming through this duct there is a blow er, which is  you know taking the air from 
the ambient and it is pulling inside it is passing through the heat exchanger . 
That heat exchanger is increasing the temperature of this  air the cool air or fresh  air that 
is coming . So, the temperature is increasing and when this air is passing over the weight 
surface of the food , its humidity is also increasing  ok. So, at 4 there is a circulation fan , 
which is circulating the air again 6 is a control panel . So, by this we can control the 
temperature of t he air stream . How much we need to heat it? Ok. Then what should be 
the, you know flow rate of the of the air stream that also we can control by this . 
And there is a exhaust damper also , now in such kind of a mechanism there are . So, 
many designs  you know p arameter that we can change or the efficiency that we can  
generate for that matter we can do some recirculation of the exit air , because the exit air 
is having high humidity and inlet air is most of the time is very dry . In this case  so, to 
keep the produc t quality better , because when the product is exposed to very  very low 
humidity and high temperature environment  so, it may happen that the outer surface will 
shrink much higher rate ok . 
So, to control the quality of the material sometime we circulate the  exit air  and mix it 
with the inlet air to some extent . And, then we can operate the dryer . So, this kind of 
optimization , we can perform based on the quality of the product . (Refer Slide Time: 21:31 ) 
 
And, there is a tunnel dryer . So, this is  one kind of a continuous  drying method  it 
consists of a long tunnel through which trucks carrying the stack of tray can travel with 
or against the  stream of the drying air. So, how the  flow rate of the air will be there , I 
mean the direction of the air can be control  that is  again our design  issue that  we can  
always work on to increase the  efficiency . So, there is a  tunnel  dryer operate in co 
current counter , current or mixed current fashion as  I was telling that the flow of the 
material and flow of the air will have a similar d irection or opposite direction or you 
know  perpendicular direction , all this can happen and this is a  very efficient and  
continuous system . 
So, it is being used in many  food processing operation  so, also works on the convective 
mechanism . So, air is coming through and then passing through a heat exchanger and 
then it flows over the surface and then goes out of the exit duct. (Refer Slide Time: 22:47 ) 
 
So, just to some extent different than the tunnel dryer where the belt is operated inside  a 
tunnel  in a belt dryer , it can operate in the  in the open as well or  it can  it can  operate in a 
close  chamber . Metal belt or conveyor heated by the contact or  radiation by the hot 
element install on both the side . So, that we can use , there is a  feeding pu mp, which is in 
a control  rate put the product on the wet product on the surface of the belt . 
And, there is a conveyor belt we can adjust the speed of the belt and as long as it reaches 
the end of the belt the drying will complete . So, we need to design th e length of the belt 
and wi dth of the belt dimensions in such a way . (Refer Slide Time: 23:43 ) 
 
That so, that by the time the product reaches to the  other end t he product will get dried 
and at the end we can c ollect  the dry  product there is a  discharge ro ll we have attach  
here. So, by that or  any kind of discharge mechanism we can put . So, by that the control  
rate of the product will come out . And, sometime  if we want to you know break the 
material , because if it kind of a slurry  or material which has been  which need to be  you 
know fragment in then we can add a crusher roll at the end . 
So, that will crush it in a small bits form or powder form we can get the product out of 
the chamber . And, if the product is heat sensitive we can perform this op eration under 
vacuum as well . So, that the boiling point of the water will lower  so lower temperature , 
we can dry the  product and the product quality of the heat sensitive material will retain . 
So, we just we need to add  one vacuum pump here and then  we will run it for the 
required  level of the vacuum . Foam -mat drying this is a method by which a liquid food 
concentrate  along with the suitable fo aming agent  and this is whipped to form stable  
foam and is subjected to dehy dration in the form of a mat or foam . 
Foaming agent we use G lycerol Monostearate , egg albumin , groundnut , protein isolate . 
So, rate of drying in this process is  comparatively very high , because of an  enormous 
increase in the liquid gas interface . Because , since we are creating foa m so, there is 
enough surface area available for the air to dry the material and the product quality is 
also very good in this case . (Refer Slide Time: 25:54 ) 
 
Fluidized bed drying , this the product pieces are suspended in a heate d area throughout 
the time  required for the drying . So, this arrangement is done basically to increase the 
area of contact between the air and the product to in to be increase . So, that the product 
will be in a fluidized state and air  should pass t hrough all the pore spaces available  
through the product . And, by that the drying will be fast and the quality of the product 
will also be good . 
Because  it is not that from  one side only it is getting the heat and the charring effect or 
the heat induced dama ges happen  in the lower section and the upper  section is quite good 
and the drying rate is very slow at the upper section . So, in those kinds  of phenomena , 
we want to avoid this utilizing  the fluidized bed drying . And therefore, it results in 
uniform and ra pid drying mechanism . It can be applied to particulate  solid non sticky 
food with a particle size within the range of  0.05 to 10 mm depending on the density . 
So, when the bottom the hot gas hot flue gases coming and then  it is a perforated a 
perforated tra y is there on , which the product is  kept and through those perforations  the 
hot air is coming . Then we can we can continuously fill the  wet material from  one side 
and the dry material we can take out from the other side . (Refer Slide Time: 27:27 ) 
 
Puff drying , this process is accomplished by exposing a relatively small piece of product 
to high pressure and high temperature for a short time . And, after which the product is 
moved to atmospheric pressure . So, the products produced by the puff drying  have  very 
high porosity with rapid rehydration characteristics . 
So, we are exposing into high pressure and high temperature for a short time after which 
the product is moved to atmospheric pressure . So, maybe because of this sudden release 
of the pressure ther e is expansion in the volume may happen to the product . And, 
because of that lot many pores  generated and the product quality is improved . (Refer Slide Time: 28:17 ) 
 
Osmotic dehydration , this is used for partial removal of the water from plant tissue by 
immersion in a hypotonic solution . So that means, if the concentration of the solution in 
which we are dipping  the food material is higher than the food . So, the moisture from the 
food will  go to the sol ution . So, this is  how the osmoti c dehydration happens . High 
retention of the vitamin and minerals by this method because there is no change in the 
temperature level . So, we need not to expose the food to high temperature . So, that is  
why the vitamin and minerals and the color fl avor taste all will retain  in the food . 
And, osmotic dehydration the solute used is generally sugar syrup with fruit slices or 
cubes and salt or brine with vegetable . This is done  because there is a chance that while 
doing the  osmotic dehydration this is a two way transfer . So, as the moisture  is moving 
out of out of the food material o r the cell of the food to the hypertonic solution . 
Similarly , the solute of that solution may enter into the food matrix . 
So, therefore, we need to use such produ cts that if they come into the  in the product also 
the product will be in good quality and condition . And, that is  why there also  one can 
think of doing optimization  that, how much  how much  transfer of salt or sugar in the 
product is allowable . 
So, these are some  kind of  osmotically dehydrated  fruits and vegetables these are 
available in the in the market also , like for the  Amla, Papaya and some raisins  
pineapples , mango , all such slices have been dried using the osmotic dehydration . So, the color  and flavor  will be intact little bit change in the salt and sugar concentration may 
happen . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:27 ) 
 
Rotary dryer s, this is consists of a metal cylinder with inlet flight . So, the feed is entering 
from  one end and the p roduct is  you know passing from the from the bottom side . It will 
move along with the movement of this rotary dryer to the other section . And, the air  is 
also entered  from the in let section airflow will be utilized  to dry the material , and from  
the exhaust section the air is going out and the dried product will be collected . 
So, in the in this case the cylinder we kept slightly inclined . So, it will help in the better 
passage  or flow of the product . And, the material is fed in the  high end  discharge at the 
low end . Hot air is blown in a co  current or countercurrent direction , we can provide this 
and there  are flights to proper you know circu lation of the produc t inside the rotary 
dryer . (Refer Slide Time: 31:42 ) 
 
In the drum drying w hat happens that the horizontal metal cylinder  is heated by steam 
condensing inside right , and the outside  the layer of the dried  product is getting 
deposited . So, as drum is rotating the feed is stick to the wall of the drum and as it rotates 
and it the product is coming to the other end there is a knife attach at this end .  
So, that is scratching out all the material that has been stick to the surface  and it is 
collected  by another  conveying system . Also, here also after collecting that we can grind  
those material i f needed and all this heat transfer is by conduction mechanism as we have  
already mentioned that drum is operating on a  conduction heat tra nsfer mechanism . 
So, all the steam is giving the heat that is conducted through the metal wall of the drum 
and coming to the product giving the required  heat for the moisture  evaporation and the  
material is get dried . So, temperature of the cylinder wall  is generally  120 to 155 °C 
vacuum is applied to highly heat sensitive material . So, that you know it can be dried at a 
lower temperature ; tomato puree , milk, skim milk , whey , beef broth , yeast , coffee , and 
malt extract all these things  can be dri ed by this mechanism . (Refer Slide Time: 33:26 ) 
 
In the drum dryer  we can have single and double drum feeding  method . So, roll feeding , 
nip feeding , or dipping method spr aying, and splashing different kind of method maybe 
there . 
So, we can see that the discharge mechanism here the feed is here  that we can give by  on 
the surface of the product . So, here the two roles are moving in opposite direction . So, 
these  are the different arrangements . These  are dip method that we have just now  
discussed. So, here those two are moving in the direction of  one another and in the dip 
method , this is moving in opposite direction . So, any kind of  method can be there . (Refer Slide Time: 34:24 ) 
 
Spray drying , which is again very important drying mechanism in  which we first 
partially concentrate the liquid matrix and then , we enter into  drying chamber . It is 
consists of a drying chamber atomizer through , which very fine and minute particle of 
the liquid drop let us , we deve lop and then it is  release in the chamber . 
There is a feed pump which control the liquid flow rate , there is a cyclone  separator and 
also there is a  system of  air spring in here . So, heated air we pass through there is a twin 
screw kind o f nozzle from  one nozzle the air stream is entering or release in the in the 
chamber and the other , the droplet are introduced in the chamber . 
So, here the inlet air temperature is 200 to 250 C° drying of the liquid food products i s 
generally perform in spray drying . Because , then that only we can make  atomize  here 
production of the milk and whey powder , coffee  creamer ,cheese powder , instant coffee 
and tea that we can develop . Spray  drying  mechanism is done basically on the  on the 
principle of that adiabatic saturation . And, the condition in the drying chamber is such 
that the particle when released from the atomizer will be exposed to the heated a ir 
condition  200 to 250 °C. 
And, instantly getting dried  so, the moisture  will evaporate and the particle will come to 
the you know  downward . So, before hitting the wall it should be completely dry . So, that 
it would not  stick to the wall and will come to the bottom and through the cyclone 
separator it can be  collected and separated . So, the drying is very fast air and therefore, the heat sensitive material  is used in  the 
spray drying , it is one of the most practice method in the specially the  milk powder  
drying industry or some case the the fruit pulp powder also can be used , but there is a 
problem that because of because those material develop  a stickiness . 
Those  material s cannot be handled  very efficiently  in spray drying . However, we can g o 
for other heat se nsitive  drying methods like drum drying or  vacuum drying , where the 
heat sensitive material can be handle at the end if  require  we can  we can develop the 
different  different fraction of the powder as per the requirement . 
So, this is all about the  drying  technology , we will stop here and definitely we will take 
question if  anyone of you have any questions . So, we will definitely address them so . 
Thank you . 