Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian In stitute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 31 
Freezing & Freeze Drying  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the NPTEL  online certification course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process E ngineering . Today we will start a new chapter on F reezing  and Freeze 
Drying . We have just now seen the  in the previous chapters  one important unit operation 
that is drying . And drying is a method of  preserving the food by l owering the water 
activity  to the safe storage level . Similarly , freezing is also one very important  operation 
by which the food material can be store d or preserve d for longer duration of time . 
However, the difference is th at freezing is a low temperature preservation .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 01:11)  
. 
Freezing is the most common operation to preserve  the fruit and vegetable . Frozen 
products are  kept for longer duration  and the advantages that  when we freeze the 
material and after  certain time of storage if yo u want to reuse it , so, we can get the  initial 
quality and the  structure  of the food in tact. So, that is  not available if we preserve them 
by drying . So, drying causes  shrinkage  and case hardening and the deterioration of the 
structure , quality , flavor , color etcetera . Whereas, freezing  can preserve those quality very well ; therefore, it is very important operation . Also,  freezing is  very common for the 
muscle foods  such as fish , meat products etcetera .  
Another low  temperature preservation is  chilling , but the difference is that , chilling  and 
freezing in both the cases temperature  is lowered , but chilling is done above melting 
point  and freezing is done  below melting point .  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:59)  
. 
Now,  in this  chapter the concept of food freezing , freezing time calculation by plan ks 
equation  and Pham equation , different types of freezer , quality changes  during freezing 
will be covered .  (Refer Slide Time: 03:25)  
. 
Food Freezing  
 Freezing involves c hanging physical state of substance by converting 
water  into ice by cooling below freezing temperature.  
In normal drying, the product  can be preserve d at normal ambient temperature  after 
drying. Because the water activity is  so, low. So, generally the contamination does  not 
take place  and also  it can be kept  at certain temperature and relative humidity  and based 
on that  combination the sa fe storage moisture  can be decided  and it can be  dried after 
that level . However, if the product is  preserved by freezing , then the condition  or the 
temperature  should be kept  intact till we  consume the product . If the fluctuation  of 
temperature happens  then again the ice to water phase conversion will be there  and it will 
cause some undesirable changes in the quality of  food. Therefore,  for frozen storage we 
need to maintain th e cold chain throughout the  production processing to the 
consumption . 
 It controls the physico -chemical and biochemical reactions that deteriorates 
the food quality.  
Now this reaction minimize  because  by conversion of water to ice , we restrict the 
mobility of the liquid water . And along with the liquid water , the dissolved solid  and enzymes  are restricted to some  certain locations . So, there mobility is restricted and 
because of that  the changes will be minimal . 
 Variation in storage temp and duration imparts  slow and progressive changes 
in organoleptic quality.  
That means, while performing the freezing operation  it can be t he slow freezing or fast 
freezing/ quick freezing . So, both the cases , formation of ice crystal or the structure will 
be different  and the y will affect the food quality in different way . 
 Freezing process immobilizes the random motion and rearrangement of 
molecules in the matrix, hence water is not readily available for microbial 
growth  
So, not only chemical reaction , but microbiological reac tion is also minimized . So, the 
difference  from the previous method is that , in case of freezing we are not removing the 
water , but here restricting the mobility of the water by converting the water phase  to ice 
phase  and thereby we can keeping the  moistur e of the product intact . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:51)  
. 
So, when we want to consume the entire  product we bring it to the  normal ambient 
temperature  and then we can get the initial quality almost the initial quality of the food .  
 Freezing curve  for water  and food   
In the figure the temperature versus time  curve  is plotted . Let us say  there is a container  
where  one part is ice in th e closed chamber and other is  the liquid water . It will try to 
come to an equilibrium situation . So, the liquid will come to the  interface of ice and 
water and it will try to convert to  ice. So, the latent heat of fusion  will be released  and 
similar molecule will  convert from ice to water . So, this process is going on when it 
comes in the equilibrium situation . Molecular mobility in  the liquid water is quite high . 
With  lower ing of  the temperature  initially the molecules  those were in random motion  
will try to restrict the  velocity . As temperature will lower  they will try to have minimal 
movement and come very close  to each other  and after certain time they will try to  form 
aggregation . That certain  aggregation  in places  is the onset of nucleation ; from w here 
again when  this aggregation will attain  minimum amount of  diameter , so, then fur ther 
crystal growth will start from this place. With lower ing of  the temperature  freezing will 
takes place to convert liquid water to  frozen state . 
In the figure the upper plot is for the pure water  and the lower one is for the  food 
material . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:21 ) 
 
Point AB: sensible cooling of wat er From  point  A to B with lowering  of the temperature of liquid water , sensible heat  are 
extracted . So, with time, the curve  A to B showing the decrease in the temperature 
because of sensible heat removal  and also the food is cool ed below freezing point  that is 
lower than 0° (super cooling)  and then the nucleation process starts . Nucleation is the 
association of the molecules  into tiny order particle  sufficient to survive and serve as a 
site for the crystal growth . So, at point B for in case of the food sam ple this nucleation 
starts . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:29)  
. 
Point BC:  
It can be observe d that in both the plot  for pure water and for the food sample there is a 
little bit increase in the temperature from  B to C zone  because  of the latent heat of 
crystalliza tion. So, as the crystal form , heat will be released  that is  latent heat of 
crystallization will be released  and that will enhance the temperature of the  food a little 
bit. So, slight increase in the temperature from  B to C is observed here . So, latent hea t of 
crystallization is  released and that is temperature rises rapidly  to the freezing point . 
Giving of the latent heat of fusion  and i ce now starts to form . 
So, once  nucleation happened , that is a first crystal formation is being done  then it start  
increa sing as we further  lower the temperature . Now id eally the phase transition should 
happen at constant temperature  that is  0° for pure water . So, in the pure water plot, there 
is not much  change in the temperature . However, in the case of food material we ca n observe a gradual decrease in the temperature . It resembles the  evaporation  process , in 
which the boiling point elevation occurs when the solutes  are dissolved into the  water . 
Similarly,  when the liquid will  convert to ice, as the concentration  of the so lutes in the 
food material  will start increasing because less water available and solute concentration 
remain same . So, because of that  the freezing point of the water will be lower .  
So, that is why freezing point depression occurs in this case  for the  food material .  
So, C to D  major part of ice formed here  in unfrozen liquid there is an increase in the 
solute concentration  that is why temperature falls slightly . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:12)  
. 
Point D to E 
This is  not available in the pure water . So, this p roperty that is  because of only the food 
material or  a mixture  kind of material this kind of behavior can be observed . So, one of 
the solute  become supersaturated and crystallizes out. Latent heat of  crystallization is 
released  and the temperature rises to  the eutectic point of the solute . 
So, eutectic  point means lowest melting point of the eutectic mixture . The eutectic 
mixture is that when we mix two component  and those are not  reacting with each other , 
but they can mix properly and create an uniform mix ture, in that case if we  try to  freeze it. So the minimum temperature at which the  melting  occur  is considered as the  eutectic 
temperature . The point  can be  observe d at E which is the eutectic temperature .  
Point F to G 
Till point  F all the water has been frozen  and then from F to G shows the  sensible 
cooling of the frozen material . So, temperature of the ice water mixture falls to the 
temperature of the freezer  and some percentage of water  remain unfrozen  as it has 
become  so, much concentrated . So, its fre ezing point will be lower to a higher extent  and 
food frozen below  point  E forms a glass which  encompasses the ice crystal . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:23)  
. 
Concept of ice crystal growth and  nucleation  
 Water ice transformation leads to crystallization - formati on of a systematically 
organised solid phase from solution (solute and water) or melt (ice and water).  
 Nucleation -association of molecules into tiny ordered particle of size sufficient to 
survive and serve as the site for the growth of crystal.  
 Initial fr eezing point temperature - at which a tiny crystal of ice can exist in 
equilibrium with the liquid phase.   (Refer Slide Time: 17:45)  
. 
Two types of nucleation:  
Homogeneous and heterogeneous or catalytic occurs in food materials which involves 
formation o f nuclei adjacent to suspended foreign particles, surface films or on the walls 
of containers.  
So, these are the places where some induced  nucleation may happen .  
Crystal growth   
It occurs  just below the melting  temperature . And at near to the melting poin t because 
crystal growth happens below the melting temperature  that is why we have receive one 
super  cooling  before formation of the  ice crystals . So, then crystal formation will start 
and little bit temperature rise we have observed .  
At near to the melti ng point temperature  the addition of the water  forms new  nucle i and 
more the nucle i forms the solut e concentration increases .  
Crystallization is governed by heat and mass transfer rate . 
Heat transfe r is important because the rate at which we remove the he at or the lower the 
temperature causes the  nucleation and crystal growth .  (Refer Slide Time: 19:19)  
 
Rate of nucleation & crystal growth with temperature  
So, it can be observed that from  0 to -40°C; that means,  we lower  the temperature  and at 
some point , when the rate of nucleation happens t hen this is the initial super  cooling  
point . So, then rate of heat removal ; that means, when this nucleation starts  and then its 
rate will propagate  with further lower ing of  temperature  and here  in the second picture 
the rate of crystal growth  with temperature  is observed.   
So, once  the crystal growth has occurred ; once the formation of ice  has been done , it will 
start from the 0 ° and it will  go up to  as low as  -40 or - 50, because  as the water will be 
freezing solute concentration increases . So, eventually the temperature will also  
decrease . (Refer Slide Time: 20:49)  
. 
Rate of nucleation and  crystal growth with temperature ;  
Rate of ice  crystal  growth is generally not limited  by mass transfer process  except during 
the later stage of freezing  when temperature is low, viscosity is high and unfrozen water 
is low ; that means, initially we have mentioned that it  is governed by  both the transfer 
process .  
Heat transfer limit the rate of crystallization because  of large laten t heat of crystallization 
of water needs to be  extracted from the material to cause the  freezing of the  water . So, 
growth rate is increase greatly with increase in the heat removal therefore,  at this stage  
heat transfer  causes the higher effect compared to  the mass transfer .  
Thank you . 