Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Ag ricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 33 
Freezing and Freeze Drying (  Contd.  ) 
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the NPTEL  online certific ation course on  Fundamentals of 
Food Process E ngineering . So, today we will see  that what are the changes , what are the  
quality  changes  takes place  during freezing . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:09)  
. 
Effect of freezing  rate or crystal growth on product quality  
During freezing of the product , the nucleation  happens with lower ing of  the temperature  
and the n the crystal growth starts . And the rate at  which t his process will take  place 
which means  the rate of heat removal will have definite  effect on the quality of t he food . 
As it is known, f reezing is a very effective method  as we can keep the nutritional  quality 
almost intact , and can preserve the flavor  and colour to some extent  well compared to the 
other  preservation techniques , where lower ing of  the water activit y by heat treatment 
mechanism . But the problem arises with  the texture of the food. In the biological cell, in between the 
two cells the  intercellular fluids are there . So, that fluid having the  dilute  concentration is 
compared to the cellular material . So, when we lower  the temperature then intercellular 
moisture  will try to freeze out  first. So, the nucleation starts  with further freezing . The 
osmotic  pressure differential that  present in the  intercellular fluid and between the inner 
cell structure , that is maintained  by the cell membrane or cell wall  (which is called as  
targer of a cell ). Now because of this pressure  balance the structure of the cell is intact . 
Another  phenomenon  takes place due to the pressure differential; t he moisture fr om the 
cell sid e will go to the intercellular space . So, during freezing  these two mechanisms  can 
happen  one is because of the water vapor pressure fluctuation , the in ner cellular moisture  
may come out to the intercellular spaces . 
And another thing may happened that because of r ate of freezing ( slow freezing or  fast 
freezing ) the different crystal growth formation takes place  and that may cause  breakage 
or destruction of the cell wall  and for that also the  structure or texture of the food  will be 
hampered . Because of the freezing , moisture in the intercellular space will freeze and 
then it will become more concentrated in the solute . So, that moisture cannot be regained 
during th awing . 
For reusing  frozen food  and to consume  it has to be  regain its initial  structure by 
thawing. So, the moisture  within the cell will not be regained . So, that is although  not 
very much significant compared to the other drying mechanism because with normal 
drying  by heat  treatment and food will be rehydrated  for consumption of the food . So, 
then the structural  damage is permanent most of the cases  therefore, there is a gap 
between the adsorption  and des orption curve call ed as  hysteresis.  
In case of freezing  there is no  much damage , but some cellular structure damage  may 
happen . And also the freez ing at a faster rate that is the rapid freezing , due to which  large 
number of nucleation happens  in more  uniform or distributed pattern  and there is not 
much large crystal growth at any point  that can break or disturb the cell structure . 
However  if it is a  slow freezing process , then point of nucleation is very less  and once it 
happens , because of slow freezing  also the molecular mobility is less , but they try to  
adhere to the small  nucleation that happens and that eventually bigger ice crystal 
formation ta kes place and that will  cause the destru ction  in the cell  structure . Also they will break the structure and intercellular material can come out  and all these things may 
happen . So, the structural damage may be there . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:15)  
. 
 Faster rat e of freezing is marginally  better than the slower in most of the food 
products .  
 In plant tissues formation of large ice crystal can cause mechanical damage to the 
cell wall  and also the cell dehydration . Because the cell moisture is  coming out  of the 
intercellular spaces . Cell dehydration will happen which is a permanent phenomenon , 
where regaining the initial stage  during the th awing process  is difficult or impossible . 
 Larger the freezing  time means development of large crystal heterogeneously and 
smalle r the freezing time means h omogenous  nucleation in large numbers . 
 The rapid freezing of  cellular starchy food resulted in a better quality product 
than the slow freezing . If the structure  is having uniform effect during the freezing then 
thawing  also will be uniform . (Refer Slide Time: 08:32)  
. 
Physical change and quality   
 During freezing most of the food products are  susceptible to differ ent 
deteriorative  and enzymatic reaction , which may affect the shelf life . If any temperature 
fluctuation happens  durin g freezing  the frozen  stage to the liquid water conversion may 
happen , then the quality or degradation may be there . And also the  deteriorative  reaction 
may happen because  of the unfrozen moisture  in a food . 
With  lower ing of  the temperature  the water will become more concentrated in the solute 
present . So, it may happen that  at -40 °C, also some amount of  moisture  remains and that 
has become concentrated in  a particular solute or in  enzyme s which may cause some 
deteriorative changes .  
 Weight loss in animal tissue happens as they lose moisture  during freezing 
process , because their surface  is exposed to heat and moisture gradient exist within the  
environment . (Refer Slide Time: 10:08)  
. 
Freezer burn  
It occurs as moisture  evaporates from the surface . So, it m ainly happens due to  
dehumidification or oxidation . This will form a dry grainy brownish area  that becomes 
tough eventually and it can be controlled by humidificati on or proper packaging and 
storage  temperature .  
Occur while freezing an unpackaged food ite m in blast freezers unless the velocity of air 
is kept at about 2.5 m/s . So, this may not make  food inconsumable , but desirability will 
be slightly reduce d as the colour  formation may not  be liked by the consumer . (Refer Slide Time: 11:30)  
. 
Functional pr operties  
Properties such as rheological (both flow and dynamic), textural, mechanical, 
consistency, appearance, water -holding capacity and sensory attributes have been 
associated with freezing.  
 Textural changes has been noticed as water freezes, ice crysta l grows and 
expands the food which may be responsible for rupturing of the cell.  
Sensory characteristics changes as development of rancid flavour during frozen storage 
of marine products. Due to freeze concentration decrease in pH causes faster protein 
denaturation  
So, sometimes the  product is exposed to the  ambient air or  where the oxygen 
concentration will be higher  and then can lead to some oxidative changes  in fat.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:28)  
. 
 Rancidity  develops due to the rapid acceleration of lipid ox idation in frozen fish.  
 Colour  also affected during frozen storage. The green color of vegetables is lost by 
chlorophyll degradation during freezing and frozen storage. In poultry carcasses with 
rapid surface freezing, which generates a smooth chalky white  surface.  
 Flavour and aroma loss for frozen strawberries as a result of rapid degradation of 
esters.  
 The destruction of vitamin  C (ascorbic acid) occurs during freezing and frozen 
storage.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 14:22)  . 
Freeze drying  
Freeze drying involves  freezing of  the liquid water to ice first  and then removal of  it 
from the food material . It helps to get a product as dry and its quality colour , flavor  
remains  intact.  
Now, freeze drying  is very costly  method . So, it has been mostly use d in the  
pharmaceu tical or biotechnology sector , for antibiotics and  all those application , but after 
1950  freeze  drying has been used in a significant amount for the food material  also.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:46)  
. So, first we will see  all such contents one by one ; and here we can see that  freeze dried 
products looks very  nice and the colour  flavor  texture is  intact  and we are getting very 
good  porous  structure  in the freeze drying . The structure  is not collapse like all othe r 
drying method s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:17)  
. 
Freeze drying   
It is also termed as  Lyophilization .  
The product is dried by direct sublimation of the ice crystal under reduced pressure . In 
sublimation  ice is converted  to vapo r directly without any  intermediate liquid phase. And 
it is dried to final moisture  content of 1 – 4%. The fresh fruits and vegetable ,muscle food  
like prawn,  fish, meat product  can be freeze dried . 
Freeze drying involves the freezing step then the product is kept in the vacuum chamber , 
then about  90 % of the food moisture  is drawn b y evaporating the ice at the temperature  
as low as  -50 °C. After freeze drying , the dried fruit is packed  in a proper  package and 
then sealed at proper conditions so that the  moisture formation or gas formation will be 
least. After rehydration  we can use t hem and we will get the  most of the initial  quality of 
the sample intact . (Refer Slide Time: 19:10)  
 
Comparison between Freeze drying and Conventional drying  
Conventional drying  Freeze drying  
The food material is exposed to a 
continuous flow of hot strea m of air where 
moisture evaporates  Removal of ice or other frozen solvents 
from a material through sublimation  
Temperature range 37 –93ºC  Temperatures below freezing point  
Atmospheric pressures  Reduced pressures (27 –133 Pa)  
Movement of solutes and somet imes case 
hardening  Minimal solute movement  
Stresses in solid foods cause cell rupture 
and shrinkage  Minimal structural changes or shrinkage  
Solid or porous dried particles often having 
a higher density than the original food  Porous dried particles havin g a lower 
density than original food  
Odour and flavour frequently abnormal 
,reduced nutritional value  Odour and flavour usually normal, 
nutritional value retained  
  (Refer Slide Time: 22:00)  
. 
Thermodynamics behind freeze drying  
In the phase diagram of water all three phases that is solid, liquid and gas is three phases 
and triple point which is the point where all three phases coexist . So, we need to  perform 
the operation somewhere below  a point  so, that ice can be  directly convert ed to vapor . 
In hot a ir drying liquid to vapo r transfer  takes place by providing latent heat of 
vaporization  and moisture comes out . Similarly , in the freezing  phenomena first sensible 
heat reduction  and then latent heat  of fusion is to be  extracted  or removed from the  
water .  
So, in freeze drying to sublime ice to vapor  a large amount of heat is to be provide d. So, 
direct transitio n from the solid to gaseous state  without going to the liquid stag e and this 
can occur only if the vapor pressure and temperature are below the tripl e point of water 
that is , below  611.73  Pa and 0.01 ° C. 
So, freezing is at  normally  0° and also it is for the pure water  super  cooling will be the re, 
which is a  meta  stable  state. But in this case for sublimation we need to go below  0.01 ° 
C and 611.73 Pa which is below  the triple point . 
So, sublimation  is the process of solid to gas transfer and  deposition is gas to solid 
transfer . So, in case of freez e dry ing, first we  freeze all the moisture  in the pro duct under the low temperature situation  then we keep  it in inside of vacuum and we will try to 
remove all the ice crystal formed in the food sample .. 
Thank you . 