Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 35 
Freezing and Freeze Drying (Contd. ) 
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the NPTEL  online certificat ion course on  Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:33)  
 
Components of a freeze dryer  
• Vacuum chamber ---Contains trays to hold the food during drying  
•  Heaters --- to supply latent heat of  sublimation  
• Refrigeration coils ---to condense the vapours directly to ice  
• Vacuum pump ---to remove  non condensable vapour  
•  Condenser ---vapors contact the condensing surface, they give up their heat 
energy and turn into ice crystals  
• Control and measurement units  So, that the vapo rs can be conve rted to ice  and also it needs to lower  the temperature of 
the product  to freezing point because we need to first freeze the material . So, therefore, 
we need it and  vacuum pump is needed to remove the non-condensable  vapo r from the 
chamber . Later on when th e sublimation will occur then, the vacuum pump will  operate  
to take the vapour  out from the chamber and then it will come to the condenser . First it 
will condense and then will be  taken out. And vacuum pump will be continuously on to 
maintain the  lower pre ssure level inside the chamber .  
In control and measurement unit , first is the temperature of the sublimation front  so the 
temperature control should be proper and for that we need to maintain the source  
temperature from where  the heat is coming . So, wheth er that is a convective source or a 
radiative  source ; so, the source temperature  we need to  control . We also need to control 
the level of vacuum inside  and the rate of heat transfer  to the material .  
Different configuration may be of shelves in chamber, vi als arrangement depending on 
the requirement that whether we are going to dry the direct  fruits and vegetable or 
muscle food or some  liquid sample , the medicine  essential  components bioactive 
components like that .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:54)  
 
   Contact (o r conduction) freeze dryers  
• Food is placed onto ribbed trays which rest on heater plates  with uneven contact  • Dries more slowly as heat is transferred by conduction to only one side of the 
food 
• Have higher capacity  
So, in this  kind of a system  heating plate is at the bottom . In this case,  the material will 
first freeze , and then the heat is going to  transfer from the bottom to the material , and the 
mass transfer will be from the top . So, the upper layer will be getting dried  so the 
moisture will be transfer red through that . 
And we have developed the equation of mass transfer with the relation with the 
sublimation front T i and the temperature of the shelf which is  here To, partial pressure 
here will be the pressure of P 0 ( kept under vacuum ) and P i. And th e permeability 
through the dry layer that is П all such parameter we can calculate .  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:28)  
 
 Accelerated  freeze driers  
• In this equipment, food is held between two layers of expanded metal mesh and 
subjected to a slight pressure on both sides’  
• Rapid heat  transfer  
• Reduction in dry ing times  So, if these two heating plate s are provided at the  top and bottom and there is a mesh so; 
obviously, from both the side , heat transfer will take place and  the drying will be faster 
compared to the single side drying . And since  these are these ar e the mesh so; obviously, 
we can we can accept that here the radiative  source of  heat will be given to the material  
and the and eventually the material will be dried from both the side .  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:35)  
 
 Radiation freeze dryers  
• Infrared radiatio n from radiant heaters is used to heat shallow layers of food on 
flat trays  
• Heating is more uniform than in conduction types  
• Constant drying conditions  
• Vapour movement is approximately 1 m/s  
• Little risk of product carryover  
 
 
 So, we need to design the sys tem in such a way that infrared can easily penetrate and  
based on the p enetration property we can decide the thickness of the food materials . So, 
since here the , we can not get very high  penetration that  is why , a thin  layer  should be 
taken .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 10:50)  
 
Microwave heating in freeze drying .  
• Special oscillators known as magnetron generate high frequencies  
• The interaction of electric and magnetic fields results in the development of a 
space charge  
So, microwave heating  which is a volumetric he ating ; obviously, the heat generation will 
be very fast . So, products are kept on the trays and the volumetric  heat is generated by 
the magnetron  for that  vapor will come out . Vapor will be collected at  the condenser and 
that will form ice crystal and cons tantly this vacuum level or pressure level is maintained 
by using this vacuum pump .  (Refer Slide Time: 12:00)  
 
Disadvantages  of microwave freeze drying .  
Microwave  radiation when being absorbed by the material in the food which is a 
dielectric material . So, because of the dipole rotation and ionic polarization the heating 
happens in the microwave . And there are some  hot pockets will generate in case of the 
microwave , now all the food cannot be uniformly heated .  
 Uneven heating.  Different components (e.g.,  fat) have different loss factors. 
Particles of different sizes absorb microwave energy at different rates. Changes in 
formulation (e.g., addition of salt) may affect the rate of heat.  
All the components in the food are not of same  dielectric property and also if we 
consider the moisture distribution  that is not also similar in all the situation  and also the 
radiation is not  uniform . Turn table  is used  inside a microwave , but distribution of heat 
will not be similar . These changes in the formulation and add ition of salt may affect the 
rate of heat . So, there are many parameters that can cause the uneven heating in case of 
the microwave freeze drying . So, this is property of the microwave not for freeze . 
 The risk of melting. The loss factor of liquid water is  considerably higher than 
that of ice; thus any amount of local melting would cause rapid propagation of 
melting and collapse.   Gas ionization, glow discharge. Ionization of the gas in the microwave cavity 
and the occurrence of glow discharge are undesirabl e effects that may take place 
when operating with microwaves at high vacuum.  
Dielectric constant determines that  how much will be the absorption of  microwave 
radiation and dielectric loss factor signifies that what will be the dissipation of the energy 
in terms of heat . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 14:49)  
 
Different types of commercial freeze dryer  
In case of freezing damage may cause because of the large crystal development and the 
cell disruption  happened. So,  in the  cell structure there is an intracellular fluid  and large 
number of  ice crystal will be there which may break the structure . But in case of rapid 
freezing the very small i ce crystal does  not damage the  structure of the biological cell 
material . Also, during sublimation  if the uniform ice crystal  format ion is there  that will 
directly sublime to the  ambient ; where the vacuum level is maintained  and very well  
perforation or porous structure will form.  
In freeze drying the density of the product will be even lower than the  other drying 
method . Because of large porous  structure  the texture of the material does  not damage 
and that will be intact . And that  is how it is very important there is no shrinkage and  the 
quality looks like the original as it was in the fresh condition .  (Refer Slide Time: 17:35)  
 
Different  types of commercial freeze dryer  
Multi batch freeze dryer - Insulated wall  are provided  so that all the heat to be supplied 
to the  frozen layer will be use for sublimation of ice to  vapor , but not for  any other  heat 
leakage or removal . There is a cond enser in these two sides . So during drying  the vapo rs 
will come out and will come to the condenser first and will  form the ice crystal . 
There is the vacuum pump , oil trap, motor , and there is a refrigerator . It has two purpose 
first to lower down the tempe rature of the shelves  to bring the material to the  freezing 
point  and another is to make the condenser  temperature low enough  so that the vapor can 
be converted to ice there . It is a batch system  so one batch by batch product will be 
loaded and removed  by the front door . 
Continuous tray freeze dryer .  
There is a vacuum pump , condenser , and again  two more vacuum pump is there . Two 
lock gates  are provided  from where we can discharge and  load the material . Here product 
can be fed  continuously  to the  first lock gate and then can  product can be taken out  from  
second . (Refer Slide Time: 19:31)  
 
 Vibrational freeze dryer   
Product is fed from a  control hopper system . Flow rate can be adjusted as per the 
requirement a nd then the product is  coming on a tray which is  hinge d with the spring  to 
cause that vibration  and the product is out from the bottom . It is conveying  with 
vibration  at the same time because it want to expose all the surface to the  chill 
temperature  and also the ambient  where the partial pressure is ver y low for water and  
inside it is very high .  Two heating plates are at top and  bottom . 
Continuous circular plates dryer  
Entry of the plates from the top  is a product path which is provided with  a condenser  and 
also from the exit this  vapor will be taken o ut. (Refer Slide Time: 21:21)  
 
 Vacuum spray freeze dryer   
 Product atomized by fluid nozzle and frozen by evaporative freezing  (That means 
it is exposed to  reduce  pressure level and lower temperature  so that it will be  
evaporate ) 
• Sublimation of frozen at vacuum chamber (nearly 67 Pa)  
• Up to 15% of moisture loss can takes place in this mechanism . 
• Obtained particles about 150 mm diameter  
There is a  jet through which the spray is coming into the chamber . Refrigeration coil  will 
lower the temperature of the  chamber condition . There is a hopper and there is a moving 
belt with the  heating plate  to provide heat of sublimation .  (Refer Slide Time: 23:29)  
 
Freeze drying  related process  
Pre freezing  
It is to reduce the freeze drying time cycle .  
So, direct and indi rect both can be  tried. In the direct contact freezing , the product is 
directly exposed to the refrigerant and in the  indirect contact  freezing the  food is exposed 
to or kept on a  material which is being cool ed by the  refrigeration . 
So, direct contact with  the refrigeration  does not takes place that is there  is a physical 
barrier or a plate to transfer  heat. But pre freezing can be done in case of immersion 
freezing where we directly expose the material to the refrigerant .  (Refer Slide Time: 24:33)  
 
Freeze concentration  
• Involves the fractional crystallisation of water to ice and subsequent removal of 
the ice.  
• This is achieved in a paddle crystalliser  
• Potentially attractive method for concentration of  fruit juices, coffee, tea and 
selected alcoholic bevera ges. 
• The separation process of ice crystals is done in wash column.  
In the figure,  there is a paddle crystallizer which is constantly  rotating  for better heat 
transfer . So, feed is passed through a scraped heat exchanger and comes to crystalizer. 
From ther e the ice slurry has been taken  to a filter attach ed with a melter . So, high purity 
water will be taken away from that melting section . And there is a compacted ice bath 
where this ice slurry is deposited . The liquid concentrate which is going out  that can  be 
recycled if needed.  
If in cer tain cases where we can not take out the moisture  completely or in the pure form  
or if some dissolved nutrients are going away with that  so in that case we cannot perform  
this function . For example for the milk concentration  there will be a problem if we use 
this one because some milk solid will be l ost in that case . But in fruit juices or coffee, tea this kind of  beverages it is used because in that case most of the water can be take n out 
by this method . And since it is done  without heating so, the quality of the product  that is  
heat sensitive compounds for example, on the polyphenols in the tea and antioxidants of 
the fruit juices  will be  properly preserved .  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:03)  
 
So, in the juice we freeze it first an d then the separation of those two phases concentrated 
juice and the ice  will take place . This is the flow diagram how freeze concentration is 
being done . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:15)  
 Defrosting  
 Amount of ice deposited in condenser grows, the removal of th e ice is called 
defrosting.  
The defrosting may be done : -  
 Passing hot air  
 Hot water, or steam  
 Using a heating element  
Defrosting is very important because if the ice de position is very much high in the  
condenser it will not work further unless we defrost it properly .  
So, the defrosting fluid is  input in this section  and there is a line to the vacuum pump. 
Also it consists of c ondenser coils  with baffles and air tight chamber is there , where the 
heating pla tes are kept . There is a ball valve  which is regulating this transfer of  air and 
there is a drain valve also. During  defrost ing, hot stream of water will be  circulate d to 
melt ice which can be taken away .  
Thank you .  