 
 Fundamenta ls of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 34 
Freezing & Freeze Drying (  Contd.  ) 
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the NPTEL  online certificat ion course on  Fundamentals of 
Food Process E ngineering . We will co ntinue with the topic of Freeze Drying  today . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:29)  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 02:15)  
  
 In case of freeze drying,  first the food sample  will be frozen by lowering the temperat ure. 
So, all the moisture in the  food become frozen , converted to ice  and after that we will 
apply  heat source, so that as the heat will be transferred to the frozen  layer , it will 
directly sublime under  vacuum  condition . 
During the sublimation process, specific volume of the  vapo r will increase enormously . 
So, to take  out all the vapo rs using a vacuum pump , it will require a very high capacity 
of the pump . So, therefore, it has been  design ed in such a way that this  vapo r will come 
in contact with a condens er and there it will again  form the ice crystal  and then it is taken 
out from the condenser .  
As the ice crystal will  sublime , there will be a dry lay er and gradually this ice front  will 
recede  to the centre . It depends on the configuration and geometry wh ere we keep this 
product . So, if the drying  is taking place from  one side or all the side or from top and 
bottom , so, based on the configuration  of the freeze dryer , we can define the dry layer  
section and the ice crystal for the frozen portion . 
(Refer Sli de Time: 03:33)  
 
Heat transfer  
The interface between the frozen zone and the dry zone  is called the sublimation front . In 
the diagram , the deeper  line is for the heat transfer and the lighted line is showing the 
mass transfer .  
 a) H eat transfer through the  frozen layer  that means  heat is conducting to the frozen 
layers . So, here the conductivity of the frozen material will  play the  role as a parameter 
in the transfer of heat  and then this  will go  in to the dry layer  and eventually the  moisture 
otherwise wil l be sublime directly , so that layers will eventually getting dried . So, mass  
transfer is taken from the top side. It is gradually the sublimation front  is proceeding 
backward . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:53)  
 
b) Heat  transfer from hot surface through  dry layer .  
In this case, the product is getting heat from both the side . So, as it is coming from the 
dry layer , the conductivity again  will be different  for the dry layer . The rate of heat 
transfer  from the source to the frozen layer will be different  as it is ge tting dried from 
both the side . So, eventually  the time  requirement  will be actually half as from the both 
side it is drying . At the center , it will be drie d from both the side , so that is why mass 
transfer is in the  reverse direction of the heat transfer . 
c) Heat generated in ice by microwave ;  
Microwave  causes volumetric heat generation  because of  dielectric  property  of the 
material  due to presence of  the moisture . Due to internal heat generation,  the mass 
transfer will be  toward s both  the dire ction  and in this case heat will be  evolved  
 depending on the dielectric property of the material , which will govern the  rate of heat 
transfer for sublimation . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 07:17)  
 
Rate of mass transfer  
Moisture content falls from initial high level in frozen zone to a lower level in dried 
layer . In this particular case , considering a slab of the material heat is provided from both 
the side.  
Figure shows that the temperature or  the heat given to the material from  both the side  
and it is coming through  the dry layer . The moisture  profile shows that the moisture  in 
the centre is high . And at the surface it has been reduced , so that means, it is getting 
dried from both the layer and eventually when it reaches the central line  that means, the 
drying front  will comp letely  merge  from both the side and the product will be  dried . 
Now, if we look into this  transfe r from the frozen to the dry , it is kind of a step function , 
so the moisture content from  very high to a very low value if it is suddenly  dropped to 
that condit ion. It is not kind of a gradual transition , so it is an  average transition because 
of the sublimation .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 09:17)  
 
Drying  kinetic s model  
Consider a homogeneous slab of frozen food, calculation of the freeze -drying time of the 
slab is requi red. The following assumptions are made:  
 The slab is dried from one side only. Both heat transfer and mass transfer are 
unidirectional.  
 Heat is supplied to the surface of the slab by radiation from a hot surface at a 
distance from the slab.  
 All the heat su pplied is used exclusively for the sublimation of ice crystals. As 
long as sublimation occurs, sensible heat effects are negligible.   
  (Refer Slide Time: 10:31)  
 
 There is a sharp sublimation front between the totally iceless (dry) zone and the 
frozen zone.  
 The vapors are condensed on a cold surface (condenser) as ice.  
 The resistance of the chamber space between the slab surface and the condenser 
to mass transfer is negligible because of the high vacuum. Hence, the water vapor 
pressure at the condenser surf ace is nearly equal to that measured in the chamber.  
 The temperature at the slab surface is kept constant, by controlling the 
temperature of the radiating body.  
We will presume that it will be instantly getting  extracted from the chamber . 
Three distinct  processes  will happen . First is  freezing for formation of ice because of  
lowering of temperature and after that sublimation by keep ing it in vacuum  followed by  
removal of ice  crystals . Also some amount of heat is provide d to directly sublime at that 
reduce p ressure condition . So, sometime it has been taken as the  primary drying  and 
secondary drying  condition .  
Because of very large amount of  specific volume of that vapor  at reduced pressure , it 
will be difficult to take out all that . If it cannot be removed through the  high capacity 
vacuum pump , that has been  removed  by using a condenser . The vapor comes in  contact  
 with the condenser  and there t hey will form ice crystal which  will be again removed . So, 
because of that vacuum it is considered  that the resistanc e of the chamber space between 
the slab  surface  and the condenser to mass transfer is negligible . So, the water vapo r 
pressure at the condenser surface is nearly equal to that measure in the chamber . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:25)  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 13:37)  
 
 The temperature of the frozen product and hence of the sublimation front  is 
constant ( by controlling the source of radiation ).  
 The gas in the freeze -dryer chamber consists, practically, of water vapor only. The 
proportion of non -condensables (air) is negl igible . 
The heat is coming through  the dry zone to the frozen zone and mass is transferred  
through that dry layer  only.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:43)  
 
Assume that an incremental thickness dz of the slab is dried in a time increment dt. The 
rate of ice sublim ation dw/dt is:  
 
A= area of the slab surface, m2 
ρi = density of the frozen food, kg/m3 
wi, wf = initial and final water content respectively, kg/kg  
dz/ dt = distance sublimation front  is moving  with time dt  
At steady state, the rate of sublimation must be in accordance both with the rate of heat 
transf er to the sublimation front and with the rate of mass transfer from the sublimation 
front.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 16:59)  
 
Let us consider heat transfer first . The rate of heat supply q  (J/s) must be equal to the rate 
of sublimation multiplied by the latent he at of sublimation λS 
 
On the other hand, q is given by the rate of conductive transport from the slab surface to 
the sublimation front through the dry layer  
 
k = thermal conductivity of the dry layer, W. m-1.K-1  
T0 , Ti = Temperature at the slab surface and at the sublim ation front respectively, K.   
  (Refer Slide Time: 18:45)  
 
Combining both Equations and integrating from z  = 0 to z  =Z, we get,  
 
Let us now consider mass transfer. At steady state, the rate of sublimation must be equal 
to the rate of removal of the vapors by mass transfer through the dry layer:  
 
П = permeability of the dry layer to water vapour, kg. s-1. m-1. Pa-1 
pi, p 0 = water vapour pressure at the sublimation front and at the slab surface 
respectively, Pa. s.  
So, permeability on generally we express that in terms of diffusivity multiplied wit h the 
solubility . So, permeability express in kg per second per meter  per pascal pressure 
differential .   
 So, from the first equation , the heat transfer  is related  with the amount of moisture 
removal  and time . So, there we have found that  t that is the  time required for freeze 
drying has a linear relation with thickness z 2, so that means, that if thickness varies  
significantly time will vary . And it also has a n inverse relation with conductivity  and the 
temperature gradient  and direct relation with the mois ture differential between  the slab 
surface  and the frozen layer . 
So, from this we can  get the idea that which parameter will going to affect the time in 
what way  and accordingly we can op timiz e the freeze drying time . And in the second 
case, we have seen t hat what will be the permeability  of the dry layer to water vapo r 
because whatever moisture  will be evaporate that has to go through the dry layer  to come 
out through  the chamber  and then from there to the  condenser . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:13)  
 
After integration we obtain:  
 
  
 We can get this expression from both the  equation of time where it is related with  the 
heat transfer  and in another case we are  relating that time with the moisture permeation  
through the dry layer . So, with these two , we ca n get this expression .  
 
So, T0 is the temperature at the surface of the slab  and Ti is the temperature at the 
interface of the frozen layer for the sublimation front .  
λ s is the latent heat of  sublimation ; p i and p  0 as partial pressure at the sublimation front 
and partial pressure in the chamber .  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:05)  
 
The drying time (t) depends on :- 
  Max permissible surface temperature (T s) (ºC) 
  Temperature a t the sublimation front (T i ) (ºC)  
  Initial and final moisture contents ( wi, wf) 
  Bulk density of the solids ( ρ) 
 Thickness of the slab (z)   
   Thermal conductivity of the dry layer (k)  
 inversely proportional to the permeability  
Thank you . 