Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 03 
Food Rheology (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone welcome to the  NPTEL online certification course on Fundamentals  of 
Food Process Engineering . So, we will continue with Food Rheology  today ; in the last 
class we have seen the  material property of  solid and we have also learned the  three 
different modulus , that is  Young’s modulus , bulk modulus and shear mod ulus. And also 
we have  familiar with certain parameter  of the rheological  nature of the solids and stress 
tensor also we have discussed a bit. And today  we will move further to very important 
concept that is called the  Poisson’s ratio.  
Now, when we have  discussed about the unidirectional  or uni  axial force ; that time  we 
have noticed that when we are pulling  the body  from the both end in a unidirectional 
manner the; so the elongation has happened  in the body . That means, in the direction of 
the force , the bo dy has been elongated some deformation or some length s in hands in 
that direction right . Now since  the body  volume  cannot be changed because we ar e not 
exposing it to the bulk com pression  right . So,  in th is case if suppose  some  changes 
happened  in the  longitudinal direction . So, definitely some amount of change will also 
need to happen in the transverse direction because the volume should remain constant  
right . (Refer Slide Time: 01:58 ) 
 
So, Poisson’s ratio deals with this concept that is  because the volum e of the sample 
cannot change under simple axial loading . If a unidirectional tensile stress increases the 
dimension in one direction , the dimension in the transverse direction  must decrease  ok. 
And the relative change in  the thickness i.e.   ‘Δd/d’ is called the transverse strain  and the  
it depends on the axial strain that is Δl/l. So, the ratio of the transverse  strain to the axial 
strain produce s a proportionality factor that is called the  Poisson’s ratio ‘μ’.  
So, Poisson’s ratio ‘μ’ that i s equal  to transverse strain by axial strain and this is very 
important parameter ; if we know the  Poisson’s ratio and we know that  any other  
parameter between all the  3 modulus that is  E, K and G we can find out the other  
parameters . So, the interrelation can be visible from this table that we have taken  2 
material  case A and case B. (Refer Slide Time: 03:12 ) 
 
So, in case A what we are getting that  μ=0.5 and case  B, μ=0 where ‘μ’ is the  Poisson ’s 
ratio.  
Poisson’s  ratio =transverse  strain  
longitudinal  strain  =∆dd 
∆ll  
so, μ=0.5 that means the  transver se strain that is  equal to half of the long itudinal  strain in 
the first case , where as in the second case μ=0. 
we know  that there are different interrelation  like shear  modulus  G, bulk modulus  K and 
Young’s modulus  E that can be expressed in terms of  these other modulus .  
G=E
2 1+μ  
 
So G =E/3 & G  = 3*K/2 for case A & case B respectively.   
Similarly  K that is the bulk modules . so that is coming infinity ok , so bulk modulus 
coming infinity ; now what is the bulk modulus ? That is the rel ative  change of pressure  
needed to cause  the relative change in the volume . That means, the pressure  the 
requirement of the pressure will be  so high to cause the  change in the volume in this kind 
of a sample  and here because we have got this one in G =E/3. Similarly  in case of B,   
G=E
2=3
2×K 
 
And further we can  get the expression of  K in terms of Poisson ’s ratio only that is  
Poisson’s ratio in an  shear  modules ; so all the interrelation  can be generated . So, if we 
try to find all the values of this kind of  2 material . So, from material A we are getting  K 
is very large that we are getting from here . 
So, the bulk modulus will be very large , ‘E’ is small  and Young’s modulus is  small ; that 
means,  if you if you plot this stress versus strain in  this particular matter . So, we are 
getting a very low slop e so; that means, the change  of the  change to cause a certain 
amount of  strain  small amount of stress is required  ok. Similarly  G is also we are getting 
small , but for material  B where  the bulk mod ulus is small . So, E we are getting very 
large and  G also we are getting very large value  ok. So, K, G and E all we can relate with 
their; with the other property or in terms of the  Poisson’s ratio ok; so this is the 
expressions . 
Now, we will move on to the  next thing that is the fluid behaviour or viscous property . 
So, till now we have mostly concentrated on the  rheological behavio ur of the solid that 
what happen when a solid material is  you know exposed to normal or shear stresses  ok; 
also the concept of  stress tensor is very much appli cable to the fluid . So, now  we will 
going to see in a bit detail that what other the fluid behaviour or viscous properties .  (Refer Slide Time: 07:39 ) 
 
So fluid behaviour in a steady shear flow ; so the way in which liquid form to an applied 
stress is flow that is  the continuous deformation with time . So, let us take  fluid which is 
kept in between  2 thin plates and the gap s between  2 plates are very less . So, gap is very 
less and from the rest po sition if the bottom plate is fixed to the ground and we start 
giving the top plate of velocity . So, stop when the top plate starts moving with a vel ocity 
v in the x  direction . So, it tries to  pull all the fluid element or the molecules that  is in 
contact with the plate , it also try to move it along the plate ; however, the bottom plate is 
fixed . So, all the fluid element of fluid particle that  is in contact with the bottom plate 
will try to restrict that flow ok . 
So, they try to have in the  same resting pos ition; so because of that  this kind of a profile 
will generate the linear profile will generate  ok. So, if we want to measure the shear ; in 
this case the shear rate that we can measure by how long the top plate has moved on the 
particular point and what is  the distance between these  2 plate . So, if we consider the 
continuous shearing at a constant rate ; that means, this top plate  is moving with the fixed 
velocity v towards x di rection , then shear  rate that is also called the strain rate is defined 
as 
. So, 
  is the shear rate or strain rate or rate of strain any  way you can express it; that 
means, the change of shear  with re spect to time . So, d
/dt; so it is a time dependent 
material function , so now  d
 is the  shear . 
So, we can express this as  small distance if it has changed .  Poisson’s  ratio =dγ  
dt=d dldh  
dt=v
h  (Refer Slide Time: 10:37 ) 
 
So, now fluid behaviour in steady shear flow ; so, to completely describe the state of 
stress or strain  three directional flow should be considered for stead y simple shear flow . 
In the Cartesian coordinates , the stress tensor  is used to express the flow as I have 
mentioned already in the last class .  
Now, viscometric flow or simple shear flow ; so, what is that ; that linear relationship 
between the shear stress  and the rate of shear strain governed by the viscosity of the 
liquid . Now what is viscosity ? As we have seen in the in the earlier diagram that , if 
unidirectional shear stress  is applied that is towards the x direction , the plate has been 
moved with a vel ocity constant velocity v; then because of the fluid property it try to 
resist the flow ok . So, that is te rmed as viscosity and if we plot the linear relation 
between the shear stress and shear rate we will get a straight line and the proportionality 
const ant is mu or viscosity  ok. (Refer Slide Time: 12:06 ) 
 
So, here is the  expression graphical expression  that is shear rate we have  expressed in x 
direction  and the corresponding shear stress which is expressed by  τ that is being given 
in the  y direction . So, straight line we are getting and from the slope we can get the idea 
of viscosity  ok. Now, those material s which  show this linear behaviour between the  shear  
rate and shear stress is called the  Newtonian  materi al because they obey the  Newton’s 
law of vi scosi ty.  
τ = μ
 
So, in case  Newtonian  fluid ; if we want to plot the ir viscosity  at different shear  rate; so 
we will get a str aight line . Because from this plot  also we can see that the slope does  not 
change ; it is a straight line . So, the slope is actually the idea of visco sity the concept of 
viscosity . So, any point ; any increasing sh ear rate if you want to me asure you will get the 
same slope . So, apparent viscosity  does not change viscosity or apparent viscosity  does 
not change . Normally in case of  Newtonian  fluid ; the viscosity is represented by mu  and 
in case of non  Newtonian,  we regionally express them by a pparent vi scosity eta  and also 
this the slope that we are getting this  system as  dynamic viscosity .  
So, dynamic viscosity here remain s constant for  all shear  rate. So, dynamic viscosity 
μ=dτ/d
. Now here are certain common  liquid  that is you know food  only or the 
application of  different food is related with this kind of liquid s. So, in them we can see that for water this value of dynamic viscosity is  1.002;  the unit is in  Pa.s. Ethanol , we are 
getting 1.20 milk; we are getting  2 olive oil , we are gettin g 84. So, you can see that that  
viscosity is changing  or increasing  in this particular  material .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:08 ) 
 
So, viscosity is therefore a property , but resist the flow of the fluid s and like we have 
learnt about the dynamic viscosity ; we can also express the kinematic  viscosity in ter ms 
of μ/ρ ok. So, dynamic viscosity as  I said that  Pa.s is the  unit in the in the  SI scale poise 
in the  CGS system  and ‘ϑ’ that is the kinematic  viscosity express ed in m2/s. This is 
actually the similar  to the  heat transferred ‘α’ that is called the thermal diffusivity and 
also the mass diffusivity .  
So, this is similar in case of the momentum  transfer if you consider you will express the 
this particular parameter by the kine matic viscosity ; ρ is the density  of the fluid in kg/m3 
and μ which is the re verse of viscosity  this is called the fluidity or flow ability ok; so 
flowabilit y is just like 1/μ.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:17 ) 
 
Now, viscosity of the fluid is a consequence of the molecular interaction within the 
molecular structure of the material . So, this is very important because what happened 
that why we feel the  you know viscosity will change from material to material . Because 
there is molecular interaction playing a role and not  the molecular interaction among all 
the material is not  of similar type ; there are  different kind of  interactive forces acting in 
them . And molecular thermodynamics reveals that the temperature has a direct effect on 
the molecular motion . So, there is a some kind of  tradeoff happened between the thermal  
energy and the  molecular energy  intra molecular energy .  
So, viscosity there fore, must also depend on temperature because some time when we 
apply  heat to the material , what happened to the vis cosity ; for the liquid if  you have 
observe that the viscosity lower s right and in case of the gas viscosity increases . So, the 
inter particular  particle attraction or interaction force  reduce be cause of the thermal 
energy and  then the viscosity lowers ; so the interaction  plays an important role .  
So, viscosity will decrease with increasing temperature ; if no other  reaction or 
transform ation are involved  some time  say for example, starch gelatinization  if we 
provide heat  to the  starch  in the moist condition . So, gelatinize happen and that will  
change the structure of the material  and gel formation will be there and the viscosity 
increase s. So, the nature of the temperature dependency of  viscos ity can be expressed as 
arrhenius  kind of equation . 𝜇=𝐴𝑒𝐵
𝑇=𝐴𝑒𝐸𝑎
𝑅𝑇 Ea is the activation energy , R is the universal gas constant ; that means, if it follows this 
kind of an equation  and one temperature  at a particular temperature ; if we know the 
viscosity then we can express the viscosity at any other temperatur e following this 
behavior  right . 
 
Because for a particular fluid  if you are  considering ; so activation energy will be same , R 
will also be  same , but T will be d ifferent and  because of that the viscosity will be 
different . So, for any fluid  we can apply this equation to  see the temperature dependency 
of viscosity  ok. So, this is the  normal expression the units of all these parameters . So, as I 
said that bonding energy and thermal energy ; these  2 will play a role in  you know 
increasing or decreasing the  viscosity  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:08 ) 
 
So, next is  viscous fluids ; so viscous fluid  tend to deform continuously under the e ffect 
of an applied stress they can be cat egori zed as  Newtonian  or non -Newtonian  fluid . So, 
by now  what we have learned is that  if we apply a steady shear on a material  that will 
flow instantly  those are  fluid material . But if we plot the  nature of the shear stress and  shear rate  in y and x directions 
respectively . So,  what is the nature  of that plot ? Ok if that  nature  is linear then those  
fluid s will be considered as the  Newtonian  fluid . And if they are not linear  then we can 
termed as the  non-Newtonian fluid ok. So; obviously,  Newton’s law of fluid  Newtonian  
fluids ; they we will follow the  Newton’s law of the  viscosity and viscosity is c onstant 
and independent of shear  rate. 
For example, gases , oils, water and most liquid that contain more than 90 percent water 
such as  tea, coffee , beer, carbonated beverage , fruit juices and milk ok ; so, these show  
Newtonian  behavior  right . So, definitely you need to take  a fluid element if you if you 
consider  whole vegetable or fruit . Although sometime they consider  you k now they have 
higher than 90 percent  water , but they cannot be considered here you have to look for the 
fluids ok . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:01 ) 
 
So now non -Newtonian  fluid ; so, here is the  plot that  shear rate and shear stress we have 
plotted in  x and y dire ction respectively . So, the straight line the straight line where the 
slope constant that comes under  Newtonian  you know that already . Now these  2 plot 
where we are getting one curve that is changing its slope at every instant of  changing in 
the shear rate  and as shear rate increases ok. 
As shear rate increases , we are getting  a decrease slop e right ; similarly the other  the 
lower curve if you can see where which  change in shear rate ; we are getting an increase  slope right . The other particular nature here we  can observe that is the  straight line , but 
that straight line  does not pass to  origin ok. 
So, all such characteristics that is deviating from the ideal  Newtonian  behaviour , where 
the stress and strain  shear rate relation will be straight line and that wil l pass to the origin 
is not being fulfill . So, these all are  comes under the  non-Newtonian fluid  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:38 ) 
 
so they do not follow the  Newton’s law of viscosity shear thinning and shear thickening  
fluid and  they obey the power law mode l this is also called the Ostwald -de Waele 
equation ;  
𝜏𝑦𝑥=𝐾 𝑑𝑣𝑥
𝑑𝑦 𝑛
 
So, see τyx; that means, if we  consider the  floor is in is in x direction  you are considering 
the flow is in x  direction ; so vx. So, the stress shear stress felt in y direction because of 
flow in the x direction . So, that it that it indicate s a dimension in my last class as well . 
‘dvx’ that is change in the  velocity  in the dy .  (Refer Slide Time: 24:44 ) 
 
So, K is the consistency index and n is termed as the flow behavior  index . So, the unit of  
K is in Pa.sn and n is the flow behavior  index  for shear  thinning fluids . As I said that the 
slope is decreasing ; that means, viscosity is  decreasing wi th every increase in the shear 
rate. So, then n  is <1 and the other case where the shear thickening happ ened n is >1.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:16 ) 
 
So, non-Newtonian flow behavior  that is viscosity is not the same at different shear rate 
non-linear  relationship  between shear stress and shear rate  gamma  or the flow behavior  curve  does not pass th rough the origin . That is another case happen in case of  bingham 
plastic fluid ok. 
So non -Newtonian fluid  that is why we c all the apparent viscosity eta  and for the purely  
Newtonian  viscosity ; Newtonian  fluid we use  the viscosity ‘μ’ now the ratio of shear 
stress to the corresponding shear rate is therefore, called apparent viscosi ty the ratio of 
shear stress ok . Shear stress to the corresponding  shear rate  is therefore, called the  
apparent viscosity at that shear rate because as shear rate changing this val ue also 
change .  
So, η which is the apparent visco sity that is a function of shear  rate here because at a 
fixed shear apparent  viscosity , it will it will vary at different  shear rate . So, η at a fixed 
shear rate  
 because it  is a func tion of 
  i.e. τ
. Because ultimately what is apparent 
viscosity ; if we  if we  plot the shear stress versus shear rate ok , then we get the slope of 
that that is called the apparent viscosity .  
So, this apparent viscosity is  which is , viscosity in case  Newtonian  that is fixed that does 
not change with the shear rate . But here it is changing with the shear  rate in case of  non-
Newtonian fluid ; so, we can write  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:37 ) 
 Intrinsic  viscosity can be determined from dilute solution viscosity data as the  zero 
concentration li mit of specific visco sity ( ηsp) divided by the concentration (C). So, η and 
ηs are viscosity of the solution and the solvent respectively .  
 
 
 (Refer Slide Time : 28:18 ) 
 
So, as I mentioned that shear thinning  behaviour , where  we can we can observe that the 
apparent viscosity is d ecreasing with increasing shear rate. So, this is shown by  this 
strain ; so apparent viscosity here we are plotting  is τ = K 
 n-1. 
So, shear thinning  is this behaviour  and the flow behaviour curve has a  convex profile in 
which the tangential slope is de creasing that we hav e seen in our  stress versu s strain 
shear  rate plot  ok. If you remember  the is ‘τ’ with respect to  
. We have got this kind of a 
plot for shear thinning and  the reverse we have got for the shear  thickening . So, shearing  
causes  what kind of changes  in a food  ok. So, it causes entangle d long chain molecules 
to straighten  and because of their s traighten out they become aligned  with the flow  
reduces friction between the  2 layers and also reducing the viscosity . So, because of this 
kind of nature some  food or  some material  show this kind  of behaviour where upon 
higher shear or  increasing shear  rate their viscosity reduces .  (Refer Slide Time: 30:01 ) 
 
So, example of  this pseudo plastic food; t hat is shear thinning  food are  fruit and 
vegeta ble products such as apple  sauce , banana puree and concentrated fruit juice , cake 
batter etce. So, for all this is if you put  higher shear  rate we can get the viscosity as  will 
be reduced . Now, rheological behavior  of the food may change depending on 
concentration . So, because  they are not  that is why the concept of the intri nsic viscosity 
is important . Because when the concentration is high then the viscosity will change and 
sometime it also happened that because of higher concentration sometime agglomeration 
may also happen . So, the bonding in shears between the fluid a nd the particle  will be 
changed and the particle interaction will increase right . 
So this happen in case of  concentrate d grape juice where  82.1° Brix showed shear 
thinning  behaviour ; however, diluted sample that is 52.1 to 72.9 ° Brix were found  to be  
Newtonian . So, what happened is that  you know when see 52.1 to 72.9; so  this much 
degree  Brix concentration when we have considered . So, we are getting a  Newtonian  
trend  ok; that means, as shear stress  is increasing shear  rate is also increasing . Now what 
happened that when we reac h a higher  concentration then may be  the you know the grape 
juice in that the particle that that were emerged . So, they will be  coagulated or they  will 
be agglomerated ok . So, because of that their interaction with the  fluid particle will be lower ed ok. So, shear 
thinning behaviour we can observe ; so because of that agglomeration  the behaviour of 
the liqu id will be totally changing .  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:10 ) 
 
The reverse  strain that is shear  thickening which is the behaviour where shear stress and 
viscosity increasing at an increasing rate with increasing shear rate. So, normal ly this is  
seen in high concentrated suspension ; for example, corn starch suspensio n waxy starch  
that is maize , rice, barley and potato .  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:35 ) 
 And this also called the dilatant  behaviour that is with increasing  shear rate  the liquid 
between the solid particle is squeeze out and  in turn more friction will be generated right . 
So, this increasing friction account for increasing shear stress and  increasing the 
viscosity experience as shear  rate that is also increasing , but because of squeezing it 
causes dilation  that increase in volume  of the suspension and therefore, this phenomeno n 
is called the dilatant  flow behaviour .  
Now, you often may get to  get to accommodate  with this term  like true dilatancy and 
apparent dilatancy  ok. So, true dilatancy means  that when you  apply the increasing shear  
rate your behaviour changes ; that means, your shear thickening  happens . But when you 
withdraw  the stresses or the sh ear rate is again  come to  0 you ca n get back the initial 
viscosity . 
So, those mat erials show the true  dilatancy , but certain material because of their  
permanent structural changes may happen in them . So, when the shear rate is again 
reduced to  0, also their viscosity  does not come to initial condition right ; so, those are 
called the  apparent dilatancy .  
(Refer Slide Time: 34:05 ) 
 
So, simply if you compar e the apparent  viscosity with increasing shear  rate for  
Newtonian  for lower and higher shear ; you will  get the same apparent viscosity  where  as 
the non-Newtonian fluid ; you can not be sure of ; they may go very low  with higher shear  rate or even go  little bi t lower compared to the  Newtonian  or compared to th eir initial 
value when the shear  rate is increasing  ok. 
So, this is the different kind of nature  we can observe . So, therefore, the viscosity will 
depend on the  stress condition that is shear rate and ofte n on also time in case of the non-
Newtonian fluid . So, we will stop here  I will continue  the next class . 
Thank you . 