Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 39 
Size Reduction (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone. Welcome to the NPTEL online certification course o n Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering. Today we will continue with the topic of size reduction . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:35)  
 
In our previous classes we have discussed about the  introduction and particle size 
distribution then energy requirement in size  reduction . And then we have move on to the 
different types of size reduction equipments. That we will discuss today. So, in that we 
have crushers, grinders and ultra -fine grinders , cutting and slicing machines, and 
homogenizers which is for liquid foods. So, first we will see one by one that what are the 
different categories  in which we can  classify the v arious size reduction equipments , and 
what are the functions, and what are the  speciality or characteristics of all those 
equipment.  (Refer Slide Time: 01 :36) 
 
So, here is the flow chart; which shows different kind of size reduction equipments. 
Starting fro m the left here is a crusher  then grinders, then ultrafine grinder, cutting 
machines. In the crushers we can get again  different kind of crushers which is jaw 
crusher then gyratory crusher crushing rolls.  Then  we have different grinders such as 
hammer mill, then tumbling mill attrition mil . In the ultra -fine grinders, we are getting 
agitated mills . In the cutting machines we have rotary nice cutter.  
So, all this work on certain principle of impact, compression, shear or cutting mechanism 
and most of the cases not only one single method , but maybe more than two,  in 
combination more than two  forces are applying in different size reducing  equipments . 
So, if we considered the grinder we can we can again classify them into intermediate 
grinder and fine grinders. Intermediate grinder they produce the product  which can pass 
through 40- mesh screen . We will discuss in detail today what is the  40 mesh screen how 
this specification of mesh size has been done , and fine grinders which  can pass through 
the product  200 mesh screen . 
Crushers  are generally used for the coarse material oand they crushed into lumps. 
Ultrafine grinder such as agitated mill  so, the feed is gen erally  less than 6 mm and 
product is  varied from 1 to 50 micrometre. So, we can see that there are various range of  
product as well as  feed also in some cases we cannot give higher size feed into that 
particular  mill. So, now, we will see  in a bit detail a bout all such equipment.  (Refer Slide Time: 04:29)  
 
First is jaw crusher : it is a particular crusher consists of two  jaws. One is stat ionary and 
another is movable . So, it moves at about 200 to 400 times per minute. These  jaws form 
a ‘V’ shape opening wit h an angle which may vary from 20 to 30 °. Solids  are broken as 
they caught  between the jaws due to compression. So, when we  feed the product, we can 
feed by  direct feeding or by hopper or the maybe some feed roll , which is controlling the 
rate of feed  and when they come into this V shaped grove, which is having an angle 
between 20 to 30 °. So, then the solids are broken, between the two  jaws because of the 
compression force.  
Large lumps of solid material, between the upper part of the jaw. They will come and  
subsequently broken and dropped into the narrower space below. Because since  it is a V 
shaped grove. So, the upper part which is having a broader part therefore, the lumps are 
coming and in the bottom section where the space is narrowed down there the bro ken 
particle will dropped into.  (Refer Slide Time: 06:04)  
 
Here is the diagram of jaw crusher . And here the feed is coming into the broader section, 
then because of compression , it gets into smaller particle and from the  narrow space at 
the bottom it is c oming the this jaw is left one is fixed one, and this right one is movable  
based on that pivot joint and the angle  is maintained as 20 to 30 ° as mentioned . 
There are sometime feed  roll flywheel is provided to pass this  material to the grove . So, 
there are may be a different kind of arrangements , but mostly the principle will be based 
on compression force the particle the larger size particle will be  reduced to a smaller size 
even though this size is  higher than the grinders, ok.  (Refer Slide Time: 07:09)  
 
In gyratory crusher,  we can see that there is a gyratory movement  that can takes place in 
the inner conical shaped portion. And from all the side  that means, from the inner core 
and the periphery or the  or the  casing in between these two  the product is com ing. Then  
the product is crushed and produced in the shape. So, in the gyratory crusher a conical 
crushing head gyrates inside a funnel shaped casing . So, this is our conical crushing 
head .  
So, solid caught  into the ‘V’ shaped space between head and the  casing. So, in the in 
between these section  in the in the annular space basically so, that will caught and then 
they we will break. The speed of crushing head is 125 to 425 gyration s per minute. 
Power  requirement for gyratory crusher is low as  compared to t he jaw crusher . So, 
because of this gyratory movement , the less force is required to break this and power 
requirement is also less, which is high in case of the jaw crusher . (Refer Slide Time: 08:43)  
 
Now, moving on to the next  equipment that is crushing roll. So, in crushing roll  we can 
use two smooth faced roll, rotates in op posite direction at same speed and  size reduced 
by compression alone. There also can be serrated or toothed rolls. So, two  serrated  faced 
rolls rotates in opposite direction at diffe rent speed.  
So, we can see carefully that when we use the  smooth faced rollers . They  rotate in 
opposite direction at the same speed but when we use serrated roll, they rotates in 
opposite direction at differential speed. So, that means, all this different  kind of 
arrangements needed for different kind of  requirement  different grain size and different 
kind of particle  size reduction. So, when we want a shear kind of effect, we apply certain 
differential speed . So, that it will  break, and then  the upper surf ace and the lower surface  
will b e getting differentiated . So, these are the mechanism . 
So, here in the second case as I mentioned that along with the compression wh ich was 
there in the first case  Shear and impact will also be there. So, for the smooth roll  size 
reduction is because of compression alone for the serrated or toothed rolls size reduction 
is by compression , impact, and that is sudden  high blow of force and also because of the 
shear. For example, extraction of juice from sugarcane , making of food  grain flakes. For 
making food grain flakes we use the  serrated kind of  toothed rolls . (Refer Slide Time: 11:01)  
 
So, these are the crushing roll, we can see here two  smooth rolls are there moving at a 
same speed and  here we can see that  there is a serrat ed rolls are there , which is moving at 
a differential speed and product coming out of that and the crushing will takes place . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:30)  
 
So, in this particular case when we want to analyze further that what will be the angle 
when the when the prod uct is coming in between these two  rolls, we can analyse angle of 
nip. Angle  of nip (2α), the angle between the two common tangents to the particle and 
each of the rolls .  
So, actually if we take certain  product in between two rolls.  Let us say thi s is one roll and 
there is a little gap when the product will be there. And there will be another roll . So, that 
that two  common tangent to the particle and each of the role. So, if we make that 
common tangent he . So, we can get the angle of nip that is co ming 2α. So, here instead 
of that particle we have taken a roll which is representing the  product.  
Here  the roll of the crusher having the radius  of r 1 the second  one also r 1 because the  
dimension should be similar . And here this one is the product that that i s having radius of 
r2, and the gap between this  vertical lines  from the centre of that product to the  peripheral 
distance of the roll that is ‘b’. And the angle it has made at the centre  if the centre line of 
this product and the centre line of the roll in  both the cases. So, they are making an angle 
‘α’. Now, from the geometry of the system that the angle of nip we want to calculate so, 
the value of ‘α’ if you want to calculate.  
 
Here, r 2 is the radius of feed, r 1 is the radius of crushing roll and 2 b is the distance 
between these two  rolls.  
(Refer Sl ide Time: 14:56)  
 
 Now, if we take a problem  that if crushing roll 1m  in diameter are set . So, that the 
crushing surface are 12.5 mm a part, and the angle of nip is 31 °. What  is the maximum 
cos α= r1+b
r1+r2 size of the particle which should be fed to the rolls? And if the actua l capacity of the 
machine is 12%  of the theoretical capacity , calculate the throughput in kg/s  when 
running at 2 Hz if the working face of the roll is 0.4 m long a nd the bulk density of the 
feed is 2500 kg /m3.  
Now, will see how we can solve this. First we need to  calcul ate the value of the angle 
‘α’. So, from here the particle size may be obtained . Because nip angle 31 ° is given now, 
we need to we need to calculate the particle size that that can be  calculated from  this 
data.  
So, cos α = 0.964  
We can calculate the value of b. So, b = gap/2 =12.5/ 2, So, we are getting 0.00625 m. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:51)  
 
 
 
So, we are getting feed size (r2) has 25 mm.  
Cross sectional area for flow  = (0.0125×0.4) = 0.005m2 
The volumetric flow rate = 2× 0.005 = 0.01m3/s.. 
0.964 = 0.5+0.0625
0.5+r2 So, cross and cross sectional area is given multiply with the velocity we are getting the 
volumetric flow rate.  
Now, the actual throughput = 0.010 ×12/100 =0.012 m3/s.  
To convert  this to kg/s we will multiply this with the density of this material.  So, it is 3 
kg/s.  
Yes, actual capacity of the machine is 12 % that we have taken. Calculate the throughput 
in kg/s when running at 2 hertz actual frequency. So, we have calculated all the 
parame ter that has been asked here . So, this is the frequency that has been given, this is 
the area. Now, from that the actual throughput will be  the percentage  we have to take 12 
%  of that. So, that is why we are getting this one, and with that multiplication of the 
bulk density we are getting capacity in the actual thr oughput in kg /s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:33)  
 
Now, next we will see the hammer mill. This is another size reducing equipment. So, 
what happ ened in case of hammer mill  the material is sent from top of the casing to 
control the flow rate also we can design  the feeding system. So, from there it is coming 
and grinded by the impact of the hammers. So, the hammers will be  maybe swinging 
form or may be fixed with the rotor that is moving. And the grinded product is passed 
through the bottom of the screen . So, if we  look into the diagram . So, the product is coming  from the top section,  here the 
blades are attached ok. So, this may be swinging or that is there freely moving at a pivot 
point or they are fixed to it . Now, when they are hitting the materia l, they are  giving an 
impact force on that  then they will grind and at the bottom there is a perforated tray by 
which the part icle which are lower than that size  will pass through and which are not 
reduced to that much size will be there. And they will be ag ain circulated in the channel 
unless the size is reduced t o the particular size fraction sieve  if that is attached at the 
bottom section.  
Hammer speed  is generally  1500 to 4000 rpm. Hammer mill used for poultry feed 
grinding , spice grinding, etc . Also this kind of hammer mill is used for the millet 
grinding operation. Now, advantages that less chances of the damage of the mill, and 
disadvantages high power requirement needed for running a hammer mill.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:53)  
 
Now, tumbling mill, tu mbling mill is a cylindrical or con ical shell, rotating abou t its 
horizontal axis. And half of it is volume  is filled with grinding medium  that is rods or 
balls. In rod mill, we use the rods of dia 25 to 125 mm.  Here in case of tumbling mill  the 
compression force and attrition force attrition because there is a rubbing effect between 
the rods or the balls that has been given there inside the mill . 
So, because of that attrition effect is also coming . Then when the mill is rotated the balls 
are picke d up by the mill because of the rotating motion  and. So, the mill wall will take them u p and carried nearly to the top.  Where  they break the contact with the wall, and 
fall to the bottom of the  cylinder by gravity. So, most of the  most of the reduction is done 
by impact of the balls.  
So, rod mill and ball mill  that that we have seen. In case of the rod mill we have seen that 
compression and attrition, and when we use the ball mill we are getting the  impact force 
along with the attritio n effects. So, if you see this kind of a cross  sectional area, we can 
we can view where alm ost half  his fill with balls . And as this rotated so, this balls are 
from the horizontal section to this upper section it is picked up , but since it is half filled 
and then when it rotates to the other section this balls will again try to fall down and 
because of that impact the product will be  grind and also because the effect of the 
attrition.  
If the speed is too high  however, the balls stick to t he wall and not released from the top. 
So, no impact occurs . This condition is said to be  centrifuging.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:24)  
 
So, as I have shown you that this kind of effect is the re when the speed is reasonable.  
That means, not very high and not  very low. So, the balls will come with the rotational 
speed and stick to the wall up to certain extent then they will force the impact on the 
product, and while moving inside they will give the attrition effects. And this is the last 
one is the centrifuging effect, when because of very high speed the balls are stick to the 
wall not coming to the bottom because of gravity.  So, this fall will take only when the force on the on the particle because of the rotational 
movement will  be lower than the force of the gravity. But in this case the gravity force is 
lower than the centrifugal force that these those particles are getting . Now, the speed at 
which the centrifuging occurs is called the critical speed. So, here we can see in act ual 
case how it looks like when it is filled with the balls, ok. This is a driving gear at the top 
one is a feed inlet from here we are sending the material, and this is the product outlet. 
There is a conical  grate given and the size of the balls is also diff er here the larger balls 
are the n the smaller balls also is there.  
Now, we need to we need to calculate the speed at which it should run properly. So, that 
is that is called the critical speed  
 
Where,g= acceleration due to gravity, m/s2  
            R, r= radius of the mill & ball, m  
Rotational speed of the ball mill for wet an d dry grinding are 65 %t and 80 % of critical 
speed respectively.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:11)  
 
Now, we will see that how we have derived that critical speed formula. So, for that see 
here we have a cylindrical section  the radius of ‘R’. There  is a small ball at the top whose 
radius is ‘r’.  
nC rev s  = 1
2π g
R−r Now, these balls  are rotating along wit h the cylinder that is rotating.  When  it comes to 
the top section  always  there  is gravita tional force acting down word . So, this diagram has 
been taken from  and then everything has been given in FPS system , but you can take this 
as ‘mg’ only instead of ‘mg/c’. 
So, this is the downward gravit ational force is coming and here ‘mv2/r’ is the centrifugal 
force is acting on the par ticle which is in the outward . So, this particle has a tendency to 
to throw it to the outward direction, based on this force and it is also having a downward  
force that is because of the gravity. Now, if we split the force  if it makes an angle with 
the line joining the centre of the mill to the centre of the particle. So, the angle it will 
same, later say this is  ‘α’. So, we can  we can di vide this force m g to mg cos α and sin α. 
So, mg cos α will be just oppo site to the centrifugal force . And the distance from the 
centre of the mill to the centre of the ball will be ‘R-r’. 
Now, centrifugal force: (R -r)ω2/gC  
ω= 2πn, so, we can write : centrifugal force: (R -r)ω2/gC = 4π2n2(R-r)/g C 
Component  of this gravitat ional force which is ‘mg cos α’ acts oppo site to the centr ifugal 
force . Now, they will be one situation when this  will come further in this direction these 
2 forces are equal.  So, if we consider that  that means, there will be α = 0° so, cos α =1.  
So, we can  take straight away  write: mg cos α/gC =4π2n2(R-r)/g C 
At critical speed:  α=0, n=n C then: 
 
So, basically what we are doing we are equating ‘mv2/r’ with mg cos α.  Where  α = 0° so, 
cos α =1. So, here this ‘r’ is actually  ‘(R-r)’. Because we are we need to take the centre 
of the mill to centre of the ball. So, this is how can calculate the critical speed of the  ball 
mill. So, we will stop here and we will continue in the next class.  
Thank you.  
nC rev s  = 1
2π g
R−r 