Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Departments of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 36 
Size Reduction  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the NPTEL  online certification course on Fundam entals of 
Food Process Engineering . We will start today a new topic on Size Reduction . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:34)  
 
This is a very important unit operation in food as well as in the  chemical engineering 
industries. We will cover the introduction about size reduction, particle size distribution, 
energy requirement in size reduction, and types  of size reduction equip ments like 
crushers, grinders and  ultrafine grinders, cutting and slicing machine, homogenizer for 
the liquid food . 
So, since size reduction  can be applie d to both solid and liquid material , although  we will 
cover in very much detail the  size reduction related to solid  particles a nd also we will see 
the homogenizer which is specifically used for  making fractions of liquid particles, when 
we try to prepare a liquid -liquid emulsion kind of operations . Those are also very 
important  in some  food application. So, let us see  what are the , you know introduction or 
the requirement of size reduction unit operation in food industry.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:50)  
 
Size reduction or comminution  is the unit operation in which  the average size of the solid 
pieces of the food is reduced by the application of grinding, compression or impact 
forces.  
Now, there are  different forces that we use to reduce the size of the part icle from the 
bigger one to the smaller one. We will see that in most of the time  these different forces 
not alone work  in a particular operation . The combination of more than one  type of 
operation or forces may work on the particle . There  are different ki nds of operation like 
cutting, chopping, grinding, milling or  all are used in certain kind  of size reduction 
operation. Similarly, for the liquid and semi solid like, when we want to do atomizing or 
homogenizing applications , mashing e tc. 
So, one such example we are  we can observe here that is the coffee bean to coffee 
powder preparation. This is done by grinding to increase the surface area that is one 
operation and  there are other operations that we will see.  (Refer Slide Time: 0 3:23)  
 
The basic objective of this is  accelerating the heat and mass transfer. So, what happened 
that when we grind a particle for example, coffee bean here  for preparation and 
extraction. Now  what happened that in extraction  what we are doing is when we have 
extraction we need a solvent and we need a solid (Refer Time: 03:55) or particles from 
which we want to extract the  bioactive compounds . So, in that case we have a continuous 
solvent and in that we have you know different particle smaller or b igger . 
Now , as much as the interface area  that means, the contact between a particle and the 
surrounding solvent we can increase so, the extraction will be faster . Similarly, if you 
want to  you know perform certain drying operation where we finally, need some  
powdered form of material.  So, if we grind it and then it is exposed to the hea t source, so 
that heat can penetrate faster into the  center  of the material a nd also the moisture can 
transform faster from the  inner core to the surface. So, grinding  in a way is results  the 
increase in the surface area and thereby helping certain other operation like heat transfer , 
mass transfer etc .  
Another is that to facilitate separation processes for example, m illing wheat to obtain 
flour and bran separately  or filleting of fish.  Now, what happened that when we want to 
separate the  bran from the  wheat kernel, for similarly we want this kind of operation in  
separation of the rice bran also . So, in this case we want to separate two  different part of 
a grain which is having somehow different composition or they have different use. For example,  we separate the rice bran to extract the  oil from the rice bran . So, that is why 
we need the rice bran separa ted from the kernel . So, all this operation that is to facilitate 
the separation process sometimes we need to use the  milling or size reduction operations.  
Suppose  in the filleting of fish  we want to develop certain special kind of  product of fish 
muscle, where we want to separate the  bones from the  fish. So, we are doing the filleting 
so these are the special requirement of different  food processing sections. Then  
facilitating, mixing and dispersion  for example  milling or crushing ingredie nts for dry 
mixing. Now , if the bigger siz e of particle we are using and two  different spice mix for 
example, we want to prepare . So, then if the particle size are bigger so mixing will not be 
proper and a non -homogeneous structure will be there. And when we  want to use  that 
mixture into food so what happened that  we will have trouble in optimizing the quantity 
of the mixture.  
So, you might have seen that nowadays very  readymade, spice mix  are coming  different 
branded company for you know the noodles maki ng company. So, they are giving that 
particular kind of spice mix . So, grind they are drying and grinding different  spices. And 
then they  mix them together, and then they use  it in certa in applications.   
Another  is to obtain the pieces and particle of defined shapes and sizes also . Now , what 
is that if we consider the different  shapes then different operations are there where we 
need a particular kind of let us a spherical shape or a particular kind of  structur e, then we 
want to grind it and sieve it in those particular kind of  predetermined perforated  screens. 
So, that we can get the particular  shape or else if we want to determine the different size 
fraction for example, in the wheat milling  we want  Suji which is  one fraction and we 
want  the whole wheat flour that is a finer  fraction. And also we sometime need Dalia 
which is a coarse fraction of that. So, we can get different fraction of same grain sample 
from size reduction operation . (Refer Slide Time: 09:05)  
 
So, as I mentioned that  in the food industries here are  many applications , cereal milling 
which is to obtain different kind of flour. In  nowadays not only the one grain sample, but 
multigrain  products are  becoming more and more  important in terms of  consumer 
preference, because  many grain if we mix we are getting  multivitamins and mineral rich 
products . For example, the multigrain flour is used for  Chapatti making . They different 
atta sample are prepared out of that bread sample are prepared . So, cereal grains to obtain 
flour this is one of very important application.  
Then flaking of soya bean prior to solvent extraction.  So, not only soya bean if you want 
to extract  any other for example, rice bran or any other  oil extraction. So, some 
optimized size we need to prepare because if we make a bigger size  flakes. So, extraction 
will not be efficient since the  heat and mas s transfer will not be that much efficient right. 
So, for that this flaking is done and after that the proper size reduction of those flakes is 
important . 
So, this is one operation, then cutting of vegetable and fruit to desired shape. So,  this is 
of cours e, done for the preparation of different recipe and cutting off paneer, cheese etc  
in desired shape . So, this is also one type of operation in that we are reducing the  size. 
Fine mashing of baby food because  they do not have that taste for chewing . all those to 
reduce the size. So, we need to finely mash t hem and for preparation of that  the companies which are  you know going to prepare baby food kind of product, they  do it by 
proper size reduction . 
So, these are the commercial  application, then homogenization of milk and cream 
because that if you take the raw milk and boil it. So, you will get the cream  separated 
from the milk . So, the cream because of the lighter they come on come and float on the 
surface. Now , when w e want to  sell the milk or we want to pasteurize the milk s o in the 
milk processing plant. we need to homogenize the milk and the cream properly. So,  here 
the, you know this is a kind of liquid particle reduction and mixing properly. So, there 
we apply the  homogenization.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:09)  
 
Now,  size reduction mechanism in solids. So, definitely in the solid and liquid the  
method by which we or the mechanism by which we reduce the size will be different. So, 
first we will see the mechanism in the s olid sample. One half one-fourth that we apply 
for reducing the size in the solid is compression, wh ere particle disintegration by t wo 
rigid forces. Compression is used for the coarse reduction in size of brittle hard materials 
and compressive forces tend to  produce relatively few fines . So, compressive generally 
we are getting a large particle bigger sized particle out of that.  
Next is the impact force  so, particle concussion by a single rigid force is impact , in that 
we do by forcing a heavier impact on a particle. So, this is kind of a unidirectional  force. 
When material subjected to a sudden blow of force in excess of it is strength then it will fail. So, like cracking of nut with the help of hammer , if you have seen that in cashew nut 
processing, also  you know different  research is going on to develop the sheller . Cashew 
nut sheller by mechanical means, but normally if you go to the villages where large scale 
cashew production is there . You will see that they do the hammering at a particular angle  
and the  junction of the two shells  to break it . So, they will  they will blow it in every blow 
they will break the shell of the cashew nuts.  So, this is the mechanism by which they  
operate it. So, impaction is relevant to coarse, medium and fine reduction of the hard  
material . So, there are many application of this impact force we will  discuss them . Then 
another is the shear so produced by a fluid or by particle interaction . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:37)  
 
Then  size reduction mechanism is Attrition ; attrition arising from  particle scrapping 
against one another or against a rigid surface. Attrition tends to produces very small 
particle from softer material. Cutting which is accomplished by forcing a sharp edge 
knife through the material. And  this is used to produce definite  size and shape from 
tough ductile and softer materials . 
So, if you see the force and the principle a nd also the equipment where these  forces are 
being used. So, compressive force this is used in the nutcracker  in the method is crushing 
rolls. Impact this i s used in the hammer.   Attrition  force is used in the disk attrition mill. 
Then there is cutting , this is used in rotary knife cutter the mechanism is like scissors . So, 
these are the different forces that are  used for size reduction in the solid material.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:06)  
 
Now,  when we discuss the particulate solid the problem is that; when we deal with the 
fluid material we consider them as a bulk fluid flow. And it is very  you know  little bit 
easy to understand the behavio r we can categorize them in the Newtonian or non -
Newtonian fluid. And then we can  calculate easily  the, what will be the velocity and 
what is the shear force acting at different location . So, when we use the bulk fluid we 
even can we even assume that the uniformity in the material is existing , but when we 
deal with the solid material  particulate solid material specially.  
So, these are  you know having a very complicated system. So, to defining them  in a 
uniform way is a challenge. And most of the ca ses if you look into the food industry 
where we handle the bulk particulate solid for example, any flour mill or any kind of  
processing where bulk dry material flow is involved . For example, before extrusion also 
sometime we want mixing of differe nt kind of  raw grain sample or powdered sample. 
Then we mix it and then we send it to the some other channel. So, that time the 
challenges we face because  the particulate solids are generally a complicated system than 
fluid . 
As I mentioned because of the c omplex geometrical arrangements they possess and also 
because of the basic problem in defining them completely in terms of the physical state 
of the material.  The problem is that  there are many irregularities in the particulate solids  in their  shape, 
their sizes and their uniformity because sometime they may form a clump sometime 
there will be a porous structure, where  lot many air pockets are there . Obviously , non 
uniformity  of the  size and shape is a major concern. Therefore , the characteristics of an 
individual particle are  important . If we want to express  based on certain criteria so that is 
important first.  
So, once we see that how we can define a single particulate solid then we will move on 
to the different size reduction op eration. So, first we will see now that how we can define 
the particulate solid in terms of what parameters. Then how those parameters categorized 
and classified in different category. And then we will see that what the mechanisms we 
can apply on them are . 
So, to characterize an individual particle first is composition is very  essential . So, 
composition is the first important thing . This affects the density  and conductivity of a 
material. If it is of  one grain particle it will have a uniform characteristics if it is a 
mixture of  you know different  grain so, its  composition will vary so therefore, the 
composition is one important thing that affect the density of the pr oduct and also the 
conductivity of the product. Suppose  you know in terms of  thermal conductivity or heat 
transfer as well . 
If you have a different kind of mixture and there are fat, protein, carbohydrate and 
different kind of  material. So, then  for each o f the different kind of material the 
properties will be different right , so first this is important.  So, the particle is completely 
uniform or porous or it may consist of a continuous matrix in which small particles  of a 
second material is distributed.  
Second is the size,  size affects the property such as surface per unit volume. This is very 
important because  the surface area if we are getting bigger surface area or larger surface 
area for a sm all unit volume then  obviously, the transfer processes will be  increased . So, 
therefore, surface per unit volume this we can get  the idea from the size and the rate at 
which the particle will settle in a fluid. So, all such depend on the size of the parti cle. 
Now the  last thing is shape . Now how this shape plays an important role, what happened 
that in a particulate solid you will get regular shape of the particle and irregular shape of 
the particle. Now , it is very easy for a scientist to identify what to  categorize the regular size of particle . For example, if you take a  crystal cube or  if we take the spherical 
particle, round shape particle . 
So, regular particle if it is there in the bulk solid. So, then to categorize them or to apply 
different forces or  to analyze their behavior becomes a bit easy. Now , if those are 
irregular shape then to handle their irregular ity becom es a challenge. And then we  try to 
define this irregularity with  some kind of regular material. We replace this ir regular 
material and we  define certain kind of factor which correlates the  irregular with the 
regular particle.  We take those regular particle sizes  and take them in  modeling of the 
phenomena because any particle characteristic or bulk  solid flow behavior when we want 
to analyze. So, we need  the regular shape particle  and then we use them in the modeling. 
So, all those irregularities are there we need to relate that how much they are close to a  
regular shaped particle . So, therefore, th e shape of the part icle is also very important.  
Once we kn ow all this three it is easy  to identify the particle behavior.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:18)  
 
So, bulk solid in industrial scale when we want to analyze now . We have learnt that what 
is the  basis  of a characterization  of a single particle  that we have learned now based on 
composition,  their size and the shape. Now again the problem is we cannot get one size 
in a bulk mixture . So, we need to  transform our analysis from distribution of particle 
sizes because when we try to handle the solids in the bulk scale or industrial scale we 
cannot get  uniform particle size . There are very rare ope rations  where we can get this  uniform particle size. Mostly ranges  
of particle s ize we can get in that  fraction of each size are present, and maybe they are 
dominated by one  or two  major size fractions.  
So, particle size to distribution of particle size then  we need to do in the mixture a nd to 
define a mean size, which represent the beha vior of the particulate mass on the whole. 
So, we need to develop a mean size out of all the lot of the bulk sample  we need to 
identify th is. Further this mean size we will we will take a representative of all this bulk 
solid and do the any kind of ana lysis; whether we want to analyze the energy 
requirement for the for the combination process or we want to do any kind of bulk flow 
modeling . 
So, it is frequently necessary to reduce the size of the particle or alternatively to form 
them into aggregate or centers. So, these are the operation we made equal in industrial 
scale. It may be necessary to mix two  or more solids and also their fraction size and 
shape is defined in most of the cases . For example,  I have discussed the concept of 
instantization in the d rying.  
So, instantization in that we need to have a particular side. So, that when that  you know 
the particles are  dipped into the liquid, where they where they should mix properly. So, 
they will not form a clump or agglomerate and they will unifo rmly dissolve in that. So, 
for that in instantization it happened that after spreading also we form certain kind of size 
increasing operation or a little bit of clump formation. So, that the particular size that 
optimized size that we want can be  can be  you know  produced . So, those are the 
different operations that we need.  Now there may be a requirement to separate a mixture 
into its components or according to the size of the particle.  
Finally , the interaction between the particle and the surrounding f luid so , that is a case of 
extraction as I mentioned. So,  extraction is very much important nowadays we try to  
extract many  important bioactive and  heat sensitive compound out of the matrix . So, 
therefore, we can use them . 
One more thing I thi nk we will mention it somewhere  that I would like to tell at this 
point that all the grinding operation that we perform  has different requirement . Now if 
we try to produce the particle whi ch are very much heat sensitive  where we ar e 
producing some kind of particle fractions or want to extract certain component, which is very much heat sensitive. So, in that  there are different operations  to perform this size 
reduction under different temperature condition as well . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:44)  
 
So, particle characterization , single particle we want to you know make it into the most 
common and most useful  shape so that is the sphere right. So, why we use spher e most 
commonly because of its  symmetrical structure. Sphere is from the all s ide it is same so 
there is no problem of orientation in the bulk fluid, or in the liquid mixture. So, that  from 
the every side the analysis can be uniformly done.  
So, sphere is the most common shape we try to assume in this kind of bulk fluid  material. 
The size of a particle of irregular shape is defined in terms of the size of an equivalent 
sphere. So, whatever irregularities we found as I mentioned that we relate them with the 
known regular shape i.e. sphere  some important  size of the equivalent sphere. So, these 
are represented as the sphere  of the same volume as that of the particle or the sphere of 
the same surface area as that of the particle.  
That means we are having an irregul ar particle . We measure the  surface area of  the 
irregular shape particle a nd then we take a sphere wh ich is having the same area.  The 
diameter of that sphere we will take as the equivalent diameter. S imilarly, there maybe 
certain sphere of the same surface area per unit volume of the particle or may be the  
projected area of the particle to a plane perpendicular to its direction of motion . So, suppose there is a there is a flow and there is a p article. So, flow pass  this particle is 
going so in the direction of the flow, we take the projected area of this . And then that we 
will take the distance  between the two  points  in that the tangential point and then we will 
measure the diameter. Or else we will also do  that the particle should pass through the 
same size of the sq uare aperture as the particle a nd also settling velocity as a particle in a 
specific specified fluid so all such are different  expression of the equivalent diameter.  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:47)  
 
The size of an irregular shape is also expressed, this is kind of a tabulated form all those 
things that we have just discussed that based on surface area, based on sieve opening, 
based on projected area. This can be categorize under different category like sieve 
diameter, surface diamet er having the same surface area, Surface to volume diameter  
which is also called the Sauter diameter having the same surface to volume ratio , laser 
diameter like  having the same interaction or the  diffraction pattern with the la ser beam . 
So, irregular shape particle which his having the  similar diffraction pattern having a 
spherical shape is taken here and the equivalent diameter are taken. Stokes diameter is 
diameter of particles of equal density falling at the same terminal velocity of a in a given 
fluid. So, all such diameters are used for  analysis of the particle size.  (Refer Slide Time: 31:54)  
 
Now,  one common  expression is sometime use  that is called the Feret ’s statistical 
diamete r, which is the mean distance apart of two  parallel lines which are tangential to 
the particle  in an arbitrary fixe d direction. So, these are the two  parallel line which are 
tangential  to the particle. And this is  irrespective of orientation of each particle coming 
up in the inspection . 
So, the orientation may change at any time, but we will take the two  tangential parallel 
lines and take the diameter which is called the Ferrets diameter. Now , as I have 
mentioned tha t we take the  common  shape of a sphere and try to relate the irregular 
shape particle with that.  
So, that relation is developed by serricity . That relation is developed by the wise serricity 
that is nothing but the surface area of a sphere of same volume of a particle to the surface 
area of the particle .  
𝜑=surface  area  of a sphere  of same  volume  of a particle
surface  area  of the particle 
So, we will stop here and we will continue in the next class . 
Thank you.  