Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering   
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 41 
Mechanical  Separation Techniques  
 
In food processing , different phase of material or diffe rent kind of material need to  be 
separate d for example, sometime the liquid and gasses need to be separated , sometime  
liquid and vapour need to be separated  or sometime different liquid samples need to be  
separated . All these separations  are done based on  certain principle for example,  
diffusional mechanism , molecular  diffusion mechanism  or some  chemical  based on 
certain chemical parameter , but there are  certain  requirement also there , in that case a 
mechanical means  can be used  to separate different  size fractions or different material . 
The mechanical separation , is being done based on the physical parameter or physical 
properties of food .  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:57)  
 
Separations  are extremely important unit operation ; basically in food and chemical . Most 
of the processing equipment s are used to separate one phase or one material from the 
other . Similarly in  the diffusion ; that means, separation is done in the molecular scale , 
that is  maybe for separation of the  gas and liquid or vapour and liquid etcetera . But mechanical separation these are applicable to heterogeneous mixture  based on 
physical differences between them . That means, physical differences between the 
particles that we want to separate will be size , shape or density or surface property , 
surface  charge , wettability all such may be the parameter  on which the separation will 
take place  by using  the mechanical  force to separate these particles .  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:11 ) 
 
Classification  of mechanical separation methods  -  
So, mechanical separation , can be  based on selective barrier such as screen or filter cloth . 
It is called as  selective barrier because the shape or size of that  screen is fixed, so that a 
particular fraction can pass through and all other can retain over there . So, filter cloth or 
screen also can be select ed and another is based on the difference in phase density  alone  
which means the hydrostatic separators . So, that work s based on the  phase density 
difference between the two  material or different phases . 
Others are  based on the  fluid and particle mechanics ; based on the surface or electrical 
characteristics of the particle . And based on all these above classification mechanical 
separation can be categorised as screening , filtration , centrifugation and sedimentation .  (Refer Slide Ti me: 04:50)  
 
A. Screening  
The different fraction , the different size of the particle can be  calculated. F urther for the 
size reduction and then for analysis of those different fractions , we use  a screen . There 
are many method s, but screen is one effective method . 
Similarly for mechanical separation  according to the size screens  are used . Standard 
screens range in mesh size from 4  to 400 mesh and woven metal screen with opening as 
small as 1 micro meter are commercially available . In screens the particles dr op to the 
opening by gravity , brush or centrifugal force . And coarse particles drop easily through 
the large opening , but with fine particles the screen surface must be agitated by shaking 
or gyrating or  vibrating motion , otherwise fine particle may clog t he pores  of the screens . 
So, to separate to get a particular size fraction we can use a screen , and the size opening 
or the mesh size of that screen can give us two fractions , one is retain over the  screen and 
the other which is pass through the screen . (Refer Slide Time: 06:39)  
 
Now, feature of different types of  screens mainly used  that is first one stationery and 
grizzlies . A grizzly is grid of parallel metal bar set in a n inclined  frame . As it can be seen 
in figure, the parallel metal bars  are set on a n inclined frame from one side series 
entering and the undersized which is passing through the screen that is come from the  
down section and the over size is moving with the stream . 
The slope and the path of the material are generally parallel to the lengt h of the bar . 
Slope is generally parallel to the length of the bar and the s pacing between the two bars 
is 2 to 8 inch. They are very effective only with coarse free flowing solid containing few 
fine particles . So, grizzlies are not suitable for the fine p articles , they are  good at only 
handling the large size particles . (Refer Slide Time: 07:50)  
 
B. Gyrating screens . So, gyrating screens in this case  the casing and screens are  gyrated 
in vertical plate , about the horizontal axis by an eccentric  that is se t halfway between the  
feed point and the discharge . And the rate of gyration is again varies from  600 to 800 
revolution per minute . Finer screens are gyrated at a feed end in a horizontal plane  and 
the discharge end reciprocates  but not gyrates .  
(Refer Sl ide Time: 08:53)  
 
C. V ibrating screen ; 
This is another  screen  layer which can be vibrated horizontally or vertically . So, these screens  are rapidly vibrated with small amplitude  and are less likely to blind that 
gyrating screens . So, because of this vibra tion, small amplitude vibration provided to the 
screens is  less likely to blind than the gyrating screen . 
So, small particle would not  clog or  fill the small fine particles in the screen  which is 
beneficial compared to the gyrating screens . The vibration m ay be generated 
mechanically or electrically . Mechanical vibrations are usually transmitted from high 
speed eccentric to  casing of the unit and therefore, to the steeply inclined screens . 
Generally these screens are a bit incline to have a n easy flow of th e material ; electrical 
vibrations from  heavy duty solenoids are transmitted to the casing or  directly to the 
screens . So, thereby the casing will  vibrate with small magnitude . So, the first one , the 
first figure shows the heavy duty vertically gyrated  and the second one is the electrically  
vibrated screens .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:29)  
 
Now, motion of screen can be of many types ; (a) gyration in horizontal plane , (b) 
gyration in vertical plane , (c) the eccentric gyration - gyration at one end shaking at the 
other end ; gyration at one end and shaking at the other end , (d) shaking only and  (e)  the 
mechanically vibrated screen and (f) electrically vibrated screen . 
So, all are the different arrangement of the screen that can  be used based on  product to 
product or  based on the efficiency . So, because inclination also is  the flow of the  grain forward direction , gyration and shaking both  help in the  proper screening , and it prevent 
the clogging of the mesh . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:33)  
 
Mesh size : 
Mesh size indicate s the number of opening per linear inch ; as per example 5 mesh means  
there are 5 numbers  of openings per linear inch . If 200 mesh size  will be considered ; that 
means, the 200 openings will be there per inch length so ; that size fraction will be 
smaller one  than 5 mesh . 
Now, if size of the screen of opening = O, and the mesh diameter =  D, the percent of area 
opening is given by this equation  
 
Where , mesh diameter = D and size of screen opening =  O.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:10)  
 
Material balance over screens  
Whenever some material  were passed  through a particular size  of the perforation of a 
screen , so, some material will definitely retain over the screen and some will pass 
through . To categorise that , it will  have three fraction s (i) the feed that is the size o f the 
input that is coming on the screen , and (ii) is the oversize that is retain on the screen , and 
(iii) the undersized which is pass through the particular dimension or the particular mesh 
size of that screen . 
So, if F, D and B are the mass flow rate of  feed, overflow D and underflow B of the 
material  respectively . So, let us assume the separation of the mixture of A and B and the 
mass fraction of A in all three streams that is inlet stream or feed stream , overflow 
stream, and underflow steam are categor ised as X F, X D and X B. Mass fraction of 
material B, in all the three streams that will be (1 - X F) that is in the feed , then (1 - XD) 
that is in the overflow and (1 – XB) that is in the underflow. Because all the overflow and 
underflow or in the feed t he total fraction will remain 1. So, (1 - X F), (1- X D) and (1 - 
XB) will be the mass fraction of the material B in the feed , overflow and underflow.  
Now, according to the mass balance , feed will be divided into or distributed into two 
sections , overflow D and underflow B.  
So, F = D + B.  Now applying natural balance we can write  
 F X  F = D X D + B X B.  
So, in the graph the cumulative mass fraction  larger than a particular size B has been 
plotted  with D. So, this kind of  plot the cumulative mass distribut ion plot is also used in 
the particle size reduction . So, here the undersize and the oversize and also the feed  has 
been plot in . So, we can get that if the critical diameter  Dpc we want to calculate that  for 
Dpc if it is the feed . So, what will be the ove rsize sample and what is the undersize 
sample of that . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:29)  
 
From both the equation we can get  
 
XF –XB = (amount of fraction of A in feed X F) – (amount of fraction in B that is the 
underflow ).  
XD – XB = (amount of fraction of A in the overflow ) – (amount A going in the 
underflow)  
 Similarly , we can calculate B by F.  
Screen effectiveness   
The effectiveness of a screen is a measure of success of a screen in closely separating the 
material A and B. So, it has been ideally  separate A and B; completely the size has been  
define in such a way , a common measure of screen effectiveness is the ratio of the 
oversize material A that is actually in the overflow to the amount of A enduring with the 
feed. 
So, screen effectiveness or oversize mate rials are  given as follows .  
 
DX D = fraction of A that present in the overflow  
FX F = fraction of A that present in the feed  
Similarly, the screen effectiveness of undersized material is given as well  as follows  
 
B (1- XB) = the undersized fraction that has gone to the undersize ,  
F(1-XF) = undersized  fraction present in feed  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:46)   
A combined effectiveness is a measure of the product of two individual efficiencies  that 
is two efficiency based on oversize and undersize .  It is given a s follows:  
 
Replacing the values of D/F and B/F in the above equation, we will get  screen 
effectiveness as   
(Refer Slide Time: 20:02)   
Capacity  and effectiveness ,  
Screen efficiency is a measure of  how closely A and B can be separated. A nd capacity of 
a screen is measured by the mass of material that can be fed per unit time to a unit area 
of the screen , Capacity and effectiveness are opposing factor in practice a reasonable 
balance between capacity and effectiveness is desired . The capacity of a screen is 
controlled by simply varying  the rate of feed to the unit .  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:42)  
 
Effect of mesh size on capacity of the screen ;  
The probability of passage of a particle through a screen depends upon the fraction  of the total surface represented by screen opening .  
It depends upon the ratio  of diameter of the particle to the width of an opening of the 
screen on the number of  contact between the particle and the screen surface . Many 
factors are to be considered.   
(i) The ratio of the diameter of th e particle to the width of opening of the screen  
(ii) O n the number of contact between the particle and the screen surface . 
 So, the size of the largest particle is just equal to the width of the screen opening which 
is Dpc = critical diameter  of the larg er size and the largest particle , and the number of 
opening per unit screen area is proportional to 1/ D pc2. So, the particle size that has been 
retained on that ; that means it is having a  bigger size  particle and perforation size or the 
screen mesh size is lower than that .  
So, mass of one particle is proportional to d pc 3 because volume that is d pc 3 × density  (ρ) 
therefore, the capacity is again based on the area  and area  is here proportional to 1/ D pc 2. 
So, capacity/ unit time of the screen will prop ortional to 1 /D pc2× D pc 3; that means it will 
vary directly with the D pc that is the critical diameter which is the size just above the  
mesh opening size of a particular screen . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:51)  
 
 Problem:  
A quartz mixture having the screen  analysis shown in  the below table , screen to a 
standard ten mesh screen , calculate the mesh  mass ratio of overflow or underflow 
to the feed and overall  effectiveness of the screen . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 23:56)  
 
 
Solution:  
• The cut point diameter is the mess size diameter of the 
screen, which is 1.651 mm (from table).  
• For this screen,  
 • The ratio of overflow to feed is:  
 
• The ratio of underflow to feed is:  
 
• The overall effectiveness is given as follows:  
 
 
 