Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering                                                                                                     
Professor Dr. Jayeeta Mitra                                                                                                                                                
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering                                                                                                               
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur                                                                                                                
Lecture 4 7 
 Mixing and Agitation  (Contd.)  
 
Hello, everyone . Welcome to the NPT EL Online Certification Course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering . We  are continuing with the topic of Mixing and Agitation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:29)  
 
In the last class, we have discussed about what is the importance of mixing and agitation , 
what are the different purpose and what are the cases where we use thi s. We have started with 
the Solid Mixing first . And then we have discussed Mixing Index and Mixing Process.  
Now, today, we  will start from the Mixers for Dry Powders. And then we will  move on to the 
other topics that is Mixer for Cohesive Solid, Liquid  Mixing and Power Requirement for 
Liquid Mixing.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:11)  
 
So first , we will  see the Powder Mixers. So, as we know that  the bulk flow characteristics of 
the liquid and the solid are very different , that is why the mixer  used for solid material and 
for the liquid material is totally different and the liquid mixing part , some extent , we might 
have seen in your fluid mechanics class as well. So here , we will  see the mixer  for the solid . 
One such mixer for the pow der is Tumbling Mixers.  
There may be a horizontal drum, double -cone type , V-cone type , Y-cone type and also like 
cube type . These are operated in batch mode being partially filled with the solid. So, as we 
need to mix it thoroughly,  we need to give some fr ee space to revolve it completely and to 
have all those mechanism as mentioned that the conv ective , diffusive or shear mixing.  
So therefore, we cannot fill it completely for mixing , for a certain degree of fill is desirable. 
So, these are operated in batc h mode , all such horizontal drum or tumbling mixer, because as 
the name suggests, we need to perform those tumbling operation here . Tumbling mixers are 
run at a fraction of the critical speed required for centrifugation with a practical maximum 
speed of ab out 100 rpm. 
So, we can see that the speed is not very high , very low rpm we run this and such mixers may 
have baffles , baffles fitted to the inner wall , which helps to lift the solid or alternatively may 
be fitted with the plough to assist the convection . So, the barrels are like if you have , this is a 
tank or this is kind of a mixer that you are using. So, in the wall , there are baffles . So, this 
will help in lifting of the solid that is there in the , in the chamber , some portion of t he filling will be there. So, that lifting will be you initiated or that will be easier if you use the baffles 
there. So, these are the tumbling mixer.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:09)  
 
Then we will  see, Horizontal Cylinder kind of mixers will be there.  Double Cone Blender , the 
double cone blender consists of two cone -shaped sections typi cally with an angle of 45 ° 
slopes. So here , first one is the horizontal cylinder . We can see that there is a  horizontal ly 
oriented  barrel and it is ro tating based on that central shaft , and thereby it is initiating the 
mixing. So, most of the , I mean , there is likely to cause diffusive mixing where the particle is 
constantly diffused into the inter particle pores . Then, double con e blender and V -cone 
Blender.  
The d ouble cone b lender consists of two cone -shaped sections , typically w ith 45 ° slope . We 
have the diagram , we will show you . And then the V-cone  blender , these are consisting  of 
two large diamete r pipe sections cut at 45 ° and welded tog ether to form a V . Y-cone blender 
in the same way , the Y-cone blender has the third section. So, with that , V-cone, there is 
another section that extend s the volume of the blender in a bisectional direction with respect 
to the other pipe sections. So, we w ill see the geometry here . (Refer Slide Time: 05:45)  
 
Double con e type is this one and there is spiral blades are also there , which will help you to 
initiate proper mixing . And there is V-cone type, so V-cone type is this one . And these are 
also, can be revolved freely . There is a Y-cone type mixer, this there is a , there is a 3, 1 extra 
cylinder added to the V-cone, a nd this will also give some extra volume and better mixing. 
So, these are the tumbling mixers, different kinds of tumbling mixers used for solid mixing . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:37)  
 
Now, the  Ribbon Blender,  this initiate the convective mixing, if you remember the , that was 
also one mechanism. So, it consists of a trough and shaft with two helical screw s. There is a 
trough , this one and there is a central shaft is there , this one is the shaft with two screw , this is 
one and this is one , two helical screw is there. So, if you can see in this diagram also , it is clearly visible that the two different screw are th ere, one is rotating in the inner side and 
another is the outer side. So, inner helical ribbons moves the solid slowly in one direction as 
the convective motion or convective mixing takes place , while the outer one moves it quickly 
in the opposite directio n. 
So, inner helical ribbon m oves the solid sl owly  towards the forward direction , in one 
direction , where the other moves the, quickly in the opposite direction.  So, because of this 
change in the movement , the mixing will be done . There is a result movement of the solid in 
one direction due to the difference in peripheral speed of the ribbons. So, this is how the 
ribbon blender operates.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:27)  
 
Now , Radial Mixing also achieved due to rotational motion of the ribbon . In a radial direction 
also mixing is being done as associated with the movement of the ribbons.  Now , mixing is 
strongly conv ective and segregation is far less pronounced than in the tumbling mixers .  
So here , so that means it helps in prope r mixing , segregation is not there. Then Dry 
Applications , this is use d for the cake and muffin mixture, flour, bread improvers , cereals, 
trail mixes, snack bar , spices and herbs, tea and coffee. So, all these cases , these applications  
will be there .  When  the dry blending food products , relatively small amount of liquid maybe 
added to the solid in order to coat or absorb  colouring, flavo uring, oils and other additive 
solution s. So, these are the application , where this , the dry mixing will take s place . (Refer Slide Time: 09:58)  
 
Next is the Vertical Screw Mixer . So,  we can see here that the cylindrical or cone shaped 
vessel are there . And in that , the spiral screw will be there . So, the screws may, will be either 
centrally mounted as in the figure 1 or this is set in a , this is orbit around in a slanting side of 
the conical vessel , and it is moving with a , orbiting around the central axis or moving around 
the cent ral axis. So, t hese are called the screw mixers , vertical screw mixers.  
Materials are lifted from the bottom are then exchanged with the material on the way up. So, 
from the bottom , because of the screw motion, the material will be lifted to the top and then 
again it wi ll be mixed with the materials . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:12)  
 This kind of mixers, vertical screw mixers are useful for mixing small quantities of additives 
into large masses of the material. So, when a small fraction of one component has to be added 
to the larger fraction of the other component , then we need to use this one, so that a thorough 
mixing from the bottom to the top layer will be there. A nd this will be even more suitable if 
we use the orbit mounted or orbit kind of screw mixers,  so it will initiate the better mixing . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:57)  
 
Next type of the mixer is called Fluidized Bed Mixer. The resulting turbulence of passing air 
through a bed of particle material causes material to blend properly because in fluidization , 
what we do is, there is a perforated sheet or cloth or trays there , through which we send the 
high velocity air, s o that  the particles which  needs to be dried or need to be mixed properly , 
that will become in a suspended state . And thereby , the proper mi xing will be there. S o, 
because  they are kept at a suspended or fluidized s tate by application of high velocity air, we 
call it the fluidized bed mixer . 
So, materials to be mixed have to be relatively fine and fairly narrow in their size distribut ion, 
as well as not too cohesive , because if they are a fine particle then only the proper fluidization 
will be easier. And if they are cohesive then also , they will not be exposed properly on the on 
the fluid stream and the proper mixing will not be done .  
Mixing times required in fluidized bed are significantly lower than those required in 
conventional powder mixer . So, mixing time require d in fluidized bed s are significantly 
lower than those required in a conventional powder mixers . So, this is because  when we use 
the fluidized bed, so each and every particle , these are in fluidized state. A nd from the, all phases , it is open to mix with the other composition . But that cannot happen when we use the 
powder mixer, conventional type , tumbling type like that.  
So, then what happened that to get an uniform composition , time requirement will be more , 
because with every instant , very-very small fraction will be come in contact with the , with the 
material and the uniformity to take the whole zone will be of uniform  composition , so that 
extent mixing will take a longer time.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:28)  
 
Next , we will  see the mixers for cohesive solids. Now, the property of the cohesive solid is 
again different from the property of the free -flowing solid material. For that, we have used 
the tumbling mixers or fluidized mixer , but we cannot use those for the cohesive solids. The 
mixing elements cannot generate the flow current . 
Mixing elements cannot generate the flow current , because if we use any , this kind of a mixer 
that is used for the solid particle. So, even in the solid also they generate some kind of flow, 
but these cohesive solids because they have very high viscosity and cohesive in nature , so 
therefore, they cannot generate flow currents .  
High power consumption , this is one significant thing that is needed for the cohesive solid . 
types will be Change -Can Mixer, Kneaders , Dispersers and Masticato rs, Mixer extruders and 
Mixing Rolls. Mixing is by combination of low speed shear , smearing, folding, stretching and 
compressing. So, here , we can see that there are a lot many indivi dual applications tha t 
combine ly used in the mixing of the cohesive solids, those are the low speed shear , smearing, 
folding, stretching and compr essing. So, those might have seen the dough making process in the, or have seen the analysis , there we use this kind of a shear mechanism to knead the 
dough properly.  
So, there  is a kneader blade and a very particular shape of the kneader blade is use d, so that it 
can give a proper shearing action to the material and eventually make it often uniform 
composition even if the moisture content is very high.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:50)  
 
So first , we will  see the change -can mixer. T he princ iple is change -can mixer work by the 
relative motion of the blad es and the ca n. So, the types are  Pony Mixer and Beater Mixer. I n 
the pony mixer, the rotating agitator carries several vertical blades position ed near the vessel 
wall. T he can is driven by a turntable in a direction opposite to that of the agitator . 
So, we have see n that lot of blades are there that i s mounted on the top section. So, the 
rotating agitator carries  sever al blades. So,  these are rot ating and the blades are also rotating 
with that rotor and they are positioned near the vessel wall . The can is driven by turntable in a 
direction opposite to that of the agitator.  
So, they are rotating in a opposite direction. There  will be very less space between the  blades 
and the periphery or the barrel inner side. So, in between that small gap , the dough will be 
sheared  and because of this shearing action, the mixing will take s place.  (Refer Slide Time: 18: 22) 
 
So, in that category , another is the beater mixer.  So, in the  beater mixer, what happen that, 
there is a can or vessel which is a stationary one and agitator has a planetary motion.  
So, this is called a beater and there  is a change can , there  is a cart, there is a planetary gear 
which helps in rotating this arrangement. So, the agitator has a planetary motion and beaters 
are shaped to pass with close clearance over the side and bottom of th e mixing vessel. So, at 
one peripheral sid e and also at the bottom , it may have some kind of geometry like this. So , at 
the bottom and the periphery , it will be utilized for sh earing of the dough material for proper 
kneading . (Refer Slide Time: 19:51)  
 
Then Kneader Mixer , working principle is tha t some kneaders achieve their mixing action by 
squashing the mass flat, folding it and squashing it again. So, this is a common mechanism if 
you see knea ding action in home or any small scale industry if you have visited , so first the 
sheeting thing is don e or squashing is done, and then this is  rolled , this is roll ed properly . 
Then  again , squashing or stretching forces will be g iven. So,  these are the normal action of 
the hand by which we need normally any dough and the same action has b een simulated 
using a particular kind of blade , so that will do the act of kneading. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:55)  
 
So, other s tear the mass apart and sh ear it between a moving blade and a stationary surface.  
So, two kinds of kneader we may get in a normal pr actice in the industry . One is called the kneader , where the mixing action is by squashing the mass flat , folding it and against 
squashing . The other method is that shear it between a moving blade and the stationary 
surface. So, it consists of two contr a-rotating arms , which fold and shear the material . And 
the arms rotate  at differential speed s, nearly 3:2. So, the speciality is to contra -rotating arms 
is there , which fold and shear the material . 
Cooling is provided commonly , so we can use a jacket ed kind of system where if the excess 
heat will generate , so that can be cooled immediately and large energy requirement. So, for 
kneading operation , the energy requirement is a bit high because these are highly cohesive 
material and to make it in a , to ma ke it in a movable or foldable condition or to stretch it 
properly , to squash it properly , lot of energy requirement is needed.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:28)  
 
Now, coming to the different kind of blades of a kneader mixer. W e have seen that one kind 
of blade is Sigma Blade. This is used for general purpose kneading and edges are serrated to 
give a shredding action. So, with shearing , here we are providing shredding action also.  
Shredding  means we tear them in many parts. So, these are the sigma bla des. Then S -type 
Double- naben  (Fish-tail Blade ). These are effective with heavy plastic materials and develop 
high shear force , this S-type blade. T he other type is Z-type D isperser Blades.  
So, what it does ? The heavier , and develop high shearing forces . Z-type dispers er blades , 
these are heavier blades and develop high shearing forces. So, the cases where high shear 
force  is require d, very coercive kind of sample , we can use this  dispersed powders or liquid into r ubbery masses. Another  application of this Z-type of dispers er, it disperses  powders or 
liquid into rubbery masses.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:49)  
 
So, these are called the kneader mixer , as I said the sigma blade, sigma blade is the first 
figure. This is the sigma blade  and the seco nd one , which is the S-type double naben fish-tail 
blade,  which is  look lik e an S.  the other  one, which is used for very viscous material , so this 
is the Z-type blad e. 
So, we have seen that  in a dough kneading in a farinograph, either this sigma blade or Z-type 
blade , these are used normally. And here is also one kneader mixer, t he picture is given that 
these two blades are attached and there is a trough , where these are rotat ing, and in between 
there is also one demarcation is given , so that  one blade is moving in one trough and the other 
blade is moving in the trough , and they are rotating in a differential speed and making the 
mixing properly . (Refer Slide Time : 25:02)  
 
So here, we will  stop and we will  continue in the next class. Thank you.  
 