Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 04 
Food Rheology (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the NPTEL  online certification  course on  Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:38)  
 
So, we were discussing with the property of the fluid food in the last class . We will 
continue with different , Non Newtonian  behavior  ok. So, in the Non Newtonian,  we have 
discuss  the pseudo plastic and the dilating  flow behavior , which is termed as shear 
thinning and shear thickening behavior . 
Now, in this particular class , we will first see the plastic flow  behavior . So, what is  
plastic flow behavior ? Is that, some kind of materia l will need some  initial stress value  
before it  flows ok . So, the initial  stress  i.e. τ0 cause  flow in this kind of a material , but 
when they start flowing they will follow the linear pattern ok ; that means, again the slope 
of the shear stress versus shear strain  diagram  will be constant and one prope rty will 
enough to explain their  flow behavior  in this region , that is called the plastic viscosity . And this τ0 which is called the Yield stress . So, this kin d of flow behavior  is termed as 
Bingham  plastic behavior . So, fluid will not begin to flow until a  minimum shear stress is  
exceeded  and this  minimum shear stress is called the yield stress . So, for an example , we 
can see the toothpaste , where we need to put some initial  stress , then only it will squeeze 
out. So, flow will start . 
So, this kind of material , we can express by  the equation  
 
k the consistency index and dv z/dy is the shear  rate. Now  if we try to analyze the 
apparent viscosity  in this case .  
 
 
So, the intercept on the stress axis at zero shear rate ok . This is the yiel d stress and in this 
region since , we can , will observe that . Although,  we are putt ing stress , there is no 
change in the  strain  ok. So; that means, the viscosity is mathematically  the derivative of 
the flow behavior  curve . So, the yield str ess on the viscosity curve appear s to originate as 
an indefinitely high  viscosity  ok. So, this shows the indefinitely high viscosity and 
because of this no flow we can observe  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:54)  
 So, viscosity is actually to resist the flow , then, we can see that  for a Non Bingham  
plastic fluid . So, Bingham  plastic fluid  means,  the fluid which follow the Newtonian , 
law, but need some yield  stress , but Non Bingham  in the sense , they will also need an 
yield stress , but when this starts flowing , they does not follow the , linear pattern like the 
Newtonian  fluid  ok. 
So, if we plot that  Shear  stress versus Shear  rate the curves will be a non-linear  and in 
this particular case , it is again showing a shear thinning kind of a behavior . So, this kind 
of phenomena can be mathematically expressed as Herschel  Bulkley  model .  
𝜏𝑦𝑧=𝜏0+𝑘 𝛾 𝑦𝑧 𝑛 
The example will be minced fish  paste  and raisin paste . They  obey the Herschel  Bulkley  
model and flow behavior  of the rice flour based batter , because sometime we use the rice 
flour based batt er for prepa ring different snack item , or the fried products . So, they will 
follow the Herschel  Bulkley  model ; that means the Non Bingham  plastic behavior . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:29)  
 
 Now,  another model which is called the Casson  model ., Casson  model wil l also show 
the Non Bingham  plastic  nature of the food , this is shown as  
𝜏𝑦𝑧0.5=𝜏00.5+𝑘 𝛾 𝑦𝑧 0.5 
 
Specially  this kind of phenomena ha s been found in case of molten milk chocolate . (Refer Slide Time: 06:01)  
 
So, then we will consider the  fluid which of time dependent . So, till now , we have 
considered the behavior , which are time independent . So, their viscosity will change on 
the rate of shear , but does not change with time , but now, we will consider certain Non 
Newtonian  fluid , which will also , show different  rheological behavior  with time if the 
Shear  rate is  constant  ok. 
So, first one that will consider that is Thixotropic  flow behavior . So, in case of 
Thixotropic  flow behavior  if we apply a constant shear  rate, then also the stress is 
decreasing or the viscosity will be decreasing  and another flow behavior  is there , where 
we a re getting just the reverse strain  that at constant shear rate with increase in the time 
the shear stress is  increasing . 
Ok; however, for the time independent fluid like Newtonian  fluid , we are , we are getting 
that, there is a constant shear stress with respect to ti me for a constant shear  ok. So, the 
shear stress or viscosity that decreases over time at constant shear rate , this caused by a 
decrease or break down in the intermolecular interaction with in the molecular structure 
of the material . For example, gelatin e gg white and shortening . 
Now, here also  we can see this kind of behavior  like true Thixotropic  and apparent 
thixotropic ; that means, the material , which  show  decreasing nature of shear stress at 
constant shear rate over time  and when we , you know , when we want to  show the effect 
of the , I mean , when we want to change it , it is force or, or the shear  rate and bring it to the initial condition , then it 's viscosity will be recovered then we termed it as , two 
thixotropic . 
But if it is structure h as been changed completely and initial condition cannot be 
regained when we have , remove , the shear stress then we can call it apparent 
Thixotropic . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:47)  
 
So, Tixotropic ; that means, may be  partially  reversible or irrevers ible when the applied 
shear is removed . So, fluid is allowed to be  at rest and  with time  we can see this 
behavior . So, Irreversible  Thixotropy  is also called Rheomalaxis  or Rheodestruction . 
So, what happen that with time , if at constant  shear rat e, we apply and the stress is 
gradually reducing , then at certain time if we rest it at that position . So, what happen that 
the some material can completely recover that , if the shear is removed  those are called 
the reversible and some may partially can ga in the initial structure , those are called the  
partially reversible thixotropic behavio r and some material were they cannot regain at all . 
So, they will just whenever we again apply shear , they will start from that point only 
where  it has already reached when the stress condition . So, these are the nature . 
Now, so, Shear  stress versus Shear  rate curve , if we plot in case of a , this kind of a 
material as the shear  rate is first increased ok . As the shear  rate is increased towards this 
direc tion and t hen it again decreased , we will get a hysteresis loop ok . So, here, in case of Thixotropic  behavio r, we can observe that when we  increase the shear  rate, the curve 
that will get and when we decrease the shear  there will be certain change . So, this change 
happened of some change or some permanent  deformation that has happened in the 
structure of the material . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:10)  
 
Rheopectic  behavio r, which is just reverse of Thixotropic  that Shear  stress and apparent  
viscosity increase s with time . There  is the structure builds up and the shearing continues . 
For example, bentonite clay suspensions , it is clearly observed in foods system . So, 
example is fenugreek paste , this e xhibited the Rheopectic  behavio r ok. So, at a constant 
shear ra te, if time increa se, a shear stress and viscosity increases , this happen because of 
some kind of , interaction  molecular interaction between the product and it has , increase 
it's viscosity o ver the time . (Refer Slide Time: 11:53)  
 
For example , the starch milk and the sugar paste . So, the pasting process  can happen at 
85 and 95 °C. This exhibited a thixotropic  behavio r; however, pasting at 75 °C behave as 
a rheopectic  fluid . So, here temperature is a fac tor that is causing some ch ange in the 
material property and , because of that the structure has been taken or the viscosity has 
been increased . 
So, it was noted that the thixotropy  occurred at high shear  rate that is above 50 Pa and 
the rheopexy  occurred at low shear stress belo w 45 Pa. So, all such food material they 
are very specific kind of nature , because there is no generalized  way of that , because 
processing has been done in different pressure , different shear , different temperature , 
different duration of time . 
So, all such are the research based on the research based results and , and there are certain 
modeling  has been developed for the different  and from where we can gain this kind of 
inferences . 
For example ; when soy protein was added to tomato juice , thixotropic  behavior  was 
observed at low shear rate , but this was followed by a transition to rheopectic behavior  at 
high shear rate ok. So, thixotropic ; that means, viscosity was reducing with time as at the 
constant shear and just reversed and we are getting  when we just increase the shear rate 
ok. So, whenever we perform any kind  of industry , industrial process  for, for product development and . So, we need to therefore, very much aware , should aware of the all the 
rheological nature . 
Because when we mix an d when we  see the different fluid line or, or the different  
capability of the pumping and all will be changed based on this nature of change of the 
material . Therefore , the rheological understanding of the product , that we want to make 
in a processing plan  is very important to assess . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:17)  
 
So, on the whole if you can see the classification of rheology . So, rheology as can be 
termed as  can be categorised into two broad cat egory , deformation under flow . So, the 
flow is  basically the property of the fluid that will show continual deformation over time 
and it can be categorized as  plastic and viscous material , plastic material that nee ds an  
initial stress to flow ; that means, initially they show the  infinite viscosity un less they 
reaches the  or they exceed the yield stress . There  again Bingham  and Non Bingham  
nature . Bingham  means those material , which show the Newtonian  behavior , when they 
attend the yield stress . 
And the Non Bingham,  when they does  not show the Newtoni an behavior , starts flowing 
viscous then will be  Newtonian  and Non Newtonian.  Newtonian,  they will follow the 
Newtons  law of viscosity  that is linear relation between stress and shear  rate Non 
Newtonian ; that means, this material , this fluid will does  not obey  the Newtonian  
behavior . Neither  they will pass through the origin  they will follow the power law equation  then fro m the deformation , we can categorize  them elastic and inelastic 
material . Elastic material follow the Hookean  deformation or non hooke an whereas, 
inelastic is viscoelastic and viscoplastic right . 
So, viscoelastic ; that means, they have possess ed both the  property of the viscous 
material  that, that a fluid behavior  and plastic nature , they need . They  need some yield 
stress  to flow visco elastic . This is very important in terms of  food, we will eventually 
discuss in our later class regarding this , because most of the food items comes under this 
category  visco elastic . For example, you do ugh and many kind of ba tter or, or mix ok. 
So, this wil l possess the viscous property as well as the elastic property ; that means, they 
have some , some quality , because of that they can regain it 's initial behavior  partially . 
However , some deformation will happen that is a permanent deformation that cannot be  
recovered ok . So, this is all about the overall classification of Rheology . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:42)  
 
 And lastly , there  are m any rheological functions are there . Mathematical  equation s that 
describe the  various flow  behavior  curve on Shear  stress and Shear  rate diagram . . So, 
Rheology  of the fluid food , if we consider Rheological  models can be grouped into three 
categories empirical theoretical and structural  empirical , in the sense when we plot the 
shear stress and shear rate diagram and we prior does  not have any idea about what ? 
What  is the structure , we can not do any modeling , unless we get the  trend of that change of shear stress and from that  plot what we are getting ? We can derive or we can generate 
certain kind of a model . 
So, we termed them in Empirical  model . Theoretical  means that derived from the  physics 
based principles that already  we know  the physical  expression or the  relation between 
the, stress and strain . So, from that we can categorize  these model s structural models . 
This based on the  internal  structure  or the composition of the  food. So, all three kinds of 
models are available for analyzing  the, rheological behavior  of different food sample . So, 
we will stop here . 
Thank you . 