Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering    
Professor . Dr. Jayeeta Mitra   
Department of Agriculture  and Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture No.  48 
Mixing and Agitation  (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone, welcome to the NPTEL  online certific ation course on  Fundamentals of Food 
Process Engineering. We will discuss today M ixing an d Agitation  and it is a continuation of our 
last class.  
(Refer Slide Time : 00:37)  
 
In our last class  and before that  we were discussing abo ut Mixing Operation, Mixing and 
Agitation.  We have by now completed introduction , mechanism of solid mixing, mixing index 
and mixing process, mixers for dry p owders and we have  started in the last class the mixer of 
cohesive s olid. So, we will  continue with that today also.  (Refer Slide Time : 01:06)  
 
First we will see that  we have finished here where we were discussing about the Kneader mixer . 
So, this is one kind of mixer t hat is used for  mixing of the cohesive material. There  are three 
differe nt kinds  of blades as we can see that is used one is Sigma blade , another is the S type, 
Double -naben  fish-tail blade and the third  is the  Z-type D isperser blade.  
(Refer Slide Time : 01:38)  
 
Now, next is Mixer E xtruders. So, here is the picture of  an mixe r extruder . So, mixer e xtruder  in 
the sense that they are not onl y mixing but  extruding that is  also one operation that will be there . 
And here also th ere is  a central shaft is which is  groov ed and two blades are there. Tw o Z-type blades are there. So, that discharge of continuous kneader is restricted by covering it with an 
extrusion die.  So, we have fixed  die, so, that the otherwise that because of this motion the 
continuous discharge will  takes place. So, by fixing a di e we are restr icting that movement.  
So, pressure is built by reducing the pitch of helix or by reducing the diameter of chamber or 
both. So, we can see that there is a pitch  in the screw that is the , that we can change the pitch . So, 
pitch is from on e all the grooves are there, so from , so, you are  not having that color pen here, 
but anyway, we will just infor m you that if you see the groves  different  grove s are there.  
So, from one top of one screw  top of one rotation to the other top end that whole length is called 
the pitch and that p itch can be adjustab le you can change the screw in such a way  so  that the 
pitch will be lowered or h igher.  And because of that, the pressure will bui ld up and also  we can 
reduce the size of the chamber as it is mentioned or both the thing can be done i.e . change of 
pitch as well as change of the chamber size s o that we can get the high pressure built in the inside 
of the chamber .  
Material is cut and folded and subjected to additional shear.  So, because in the small zone along 
with that pre ssure development and the Kneader  blade will also will move in the whisk in the 
cohesive material.  So, because of this special  shape as we have mentioned in the  Z shape blades, 
so they will cut and fold and s hear it . So, additional force will be exerted on that . And heating  
jacket is also provided. So, because of all this a ction that is a movement of the barrel , movement 
of the blades, there  will be high pressure development. So because of all that the heat  energy will 
be generated.  
Heat energy should be neutralized by circulating the chilled water  around the C asing . If you 
record some cooking effect to this, then we can use some heating jacket. So, in that case it will 
add some extra heat to the  material so, that partial cooking will also be done along with the 
shearing or mixing action.  So, then it is called the mixer extruder because in extruder  along with 
the mixing many operation happen that is t he shearing , kneading, mixing, c ooking and then  
finally, the product will come out there expansion or puffing. So, in such kind of a system 
thereby we provide the heating jacket as well . Because in extrusion we generally need a very 
high temperature . 
(Refer Slide Time : 05:59 )  
Till now, we were discussing about the solid mixing and c ohesive solid mixing. N ow, next we 
will jump into the liquid  mixing. So, the nature of the liquid mixing is totally different from what 
we have s een in the solid  mixing . Because also the power requirement in the liquid mixing is 
quite le sser than the solid or  cohesive  material mixing  and the mechanism is also very different.  
So, liquids are mixed usually by I mpellers we have seen that in case o f dry powder, we have 
used th e tumbler  mixer  or double cone mixer s, kind of  horizontal mixer , barrel kind of mixer . 
For cohesive mat erial, we have used blades because the high shear force is to be applied there. 
Now, for the liquid m ixing, we use the impel lers. So, the impeller those ar e mounted on a central 
shaft or a centrally mou nted impellers are there in the tank or barrel where the liquid is kept.  
Liquid is mixed usually by impellers which produces shear force for ind ucing the necessary flow 
pattern in the mixing container. So, now, creating flow is a bit easy in the liquid, but what will be 
the direction of the flow that matters in many times . Or if you are not mixing only two liquids, 
but there is a liquid and solid mixing. So, then also what kind of flow pattern you are generating 
so, that is important. Therefore, the impellers produces the shear forces for inducing the 
necessary flow pattern in the mixing container.  
Now, mixing occurs due to the resultant effect of  three  component acting on the liquid , one is the 
Radial component another is the Tangential or Circular component and third is the Axial or 
Longitudinal component. So, component of what actua lly those impeller  that is rotating because of that the part th e liquid will have a dire ction in all three ways either Radial direction or 
Tangential direction or Axial.  
Radial direction in the sense  from  the barrel si de to the inner side or the reverse . Tangential that 
is the particle or the fluid el ement that is at the end of the impeller that is being thrown in a 
tangential direction .  Axial  that means, along the impeller shaft they are moving.  So, the vertical 
mixing will takes place.  So, all s uch phenomena in many cases  may happen or combin ation of 
them.  
So, the type o f flow actually depends on the T ype of impeller that we are usin g, because  not all 
the impellors  will generate these three  kind of different motions, there may be variations. So, that 
depends on the type of impeller that we are us ing a nd also the C haracteristics of the fluid that is 
whether it is a mixer  of two different fluid of having different density or these are of so me, a 
dispersion kind of material.  So, what kind of material or what is the viscosity of the fluid that is  
also important .  
So, the characteristics of the fluid is important parameter . Then the S ize proportion of the tank 
baffle and impellers. Now, when we see the geometry o f this kind of a liquid mixing tank or 
barrel, we wi ll see that there are some specific geometries are there . We use some time baffles 
around the periphery inner size of the periphery . And th is is used sometime  to restrict the vortex 
because the vortex will generate the proper mixing.  So, because of that the baffles are used and 
the impeller or the length of the impeller shaft.  
So, many parameters are there that will help or that will define what kind of flow will be 
generated in the liquid mixing a case w hether it will be longitudina l or will be the Radial flow or 
Tangential  flow like that . Another thing is the S ize proportion. So, if suppose your impeller blade 
is not sufficient and they are only rotating central part and the other part of the barrel, the liquids 
are not initiated fl ow in them , so, they wil l be untouched. So, the  zone of  non mixing will happen 
in the central zone only in the bottom portion of the impeller but not will be uniform mixing.  
So, the size proportion of  the Tank dia,  Impeller dia  also the impeller blades di mension , the 
baffle , height of the tank  everything is important . So, all such parameters are important and 
based on that we can de fine that what kind of flow regime is there , what kind of  flow velocity is 
there and how far it is affecting th e mixing process in a particular liquid  mixing.  (Refer Slide Time : 12:09 ) 
 
So, we will  see for the R adial component . Now, here we have the diagram where the top view 
and the side view is given. So, the outside white f rame is signifying the barrel of  the tank, in 
which the baffles are attached, you can see a particular thickness of barrel is there and centrally 
one shaft is mounted and the impeller is attached to it at the end, which is rotating at a particular 
speed , angular speed and it has four impeller bla des that we can see . Four blades are there and  
there are baffles, s o, it will create th e small flow or vortex  there .  
And this small flow if you look into from the top view that the direction of the liquid mixing is in 
the radial direction from the center to the periphery and again periphery to the center.  So, the 
flow pattern will be following the R adial direction. So, these are the radial component if the 
radial component of flow will exist that will be shown by thi s kind of pattern in a liquid mixing 
case.  So, this acts in the direction perpendicular to the impeller shaft.  
So, these are acting perpendicular to the impeller shaft and its effect will be excessive radial flow 
takes some material to the containers wall . Then the material falls to th e bottom and rotates as a 
mass beneath  to the impeller.  If the excessive radial flow takes place then the condition will be 
like this , that the material falls to the b ottom and rotates as a mass beneat h the impeller.  
(Refer Slide Time : 14:21)   
Now, for the T angential component, you can see the flow pattern will be like this . Here is a tank 
and there  is an impeller which is at quite high from the bottom of the tank and  there are this 
impeller which is which is rotating this is circulating the liquid in a tangential direction. So, if 
you see the top view, there are  the motion of the liquid particle is in a tangential fashion.  
So, you if it happens then how it is going to affect the fluid mixing or flow pattern. So, thi s acts 
in the direction  tangential to the circle of rotation around the impeller shaft . If the shaft is placed 
vertically and centrally , tangential flow follows a circular path around the shaft and creates a 
vortex in the liquid.  (Refer Slide Time : 15:35 ) 
 
So, creation of the vortex will be beneficial because then the mixing will be good . Now, Axial  
component when we see . So, in this figure, the blades are this is kind of  a curved bla de we use 
and this curved blade will initiate an axial or longitudinal flow . These  are also call ed a p ropeller 
blade or curved  blade . So, this acts in a direction parallel to the impeller shaft. So, this is the 
shaft and in a p arallel direction the flow of the liquid will be there.  So, it invert the liquid in the 
in the longitudinal direction.  
So, if the inadequate longitudinal component takes place that will cause the liquid and solid to 
rotate in layers without mixing. So, th at if this actual component of the mixing should be proper . 
Particularly  when it is a case of the solid and liquid mixer . (Refer Slide Time : 16:39 ) 
 
Now, types of different A gitator and I mpeller , there are different kind of Impeller or A gitator 
and that will be useful for a p articula r kind of liquid  or liquid solid or  different kinds of Mixers. 
For example, paddle mixers  are there, propeller mixer s are there , turbine mixers  are there . Now, 
paddle agitator is looks like this , where as central  shaft is there and the paddles  are there . These  
are simple and straight blade kind of a gitators.  This consists of a pair of flat blades mounted on a 
shaft .  
These paddles  rotate at a low spe ed of 100  rpm. So, a pair of  flat blade are there , that is called the 
paddle a nd these rotates at a low speed that is 100  rpm. They push the liquid radially and 
tangentially with almost no axial  action . They pull the liquid radially. So, if it rotat e, you can 
visualize that it will throw the liquid in a tangential direction that is one and some may be in the 
radial direction. So, no axial  direction will be there unless the blades  are pitched blade . (Refer Slide Time : 18:09 ) 
 
Then in next case, we will  see that for the deep tank several paddles are attached one above the 
other on the same shaft. So, this is another mechanism that in the same shaft if we us e more 
number of paddles if for a particular kind of large or very high tank , then there  will be 
advantages . Vortex  formation is not possible with paddle impellers , because of the low speed 
mixing  and disadvantage is that the mixing of the suspens ion is poor therefore, the baffled  tanks 
are required.  
 another kind of agitator  is the a nchor agitator . This is used for the high viscous fluid. T hese are 
anchor agitator s o, the blades are t he shape of kind of anchor and since it surrounds the whole 
region and it has high power of mixing. So, i t is used for the high viscous fluid because it has a , 
is a kind of a shearing and a blade it will it will help in moving the v iscous liquid because the 
thrust  will be m ore because o f the length  of the blades.  
So, this is one kind of a nd here, we ha ve seen that the vortex formation is not possible that 
consid ered as an advantage because if  vortex formation will be there the chances of the local 
mixing will be high but uniform mixing will not be there in the  whole  chamber  therefore, the 
vortex formation is prohibited by t his mechanism . (Refer Slide Time : 20:01)  
 
Now, next type of agitator or impeller is  Turbine mixer . In turbine mixer , the impeller co nsists of 
a large number i.e.  four or more number of flat or curved blades . These are mounted on a usually 
vertical shaft. So, they exert considerable shear on the fluid and are therefore, suitable in 
application involving mass transf er. So, because of this the curved  blade they exe rt considerable 
shear on the f luid and therefore, suitable for application involving the mass transfer . 
As for exam ple, oxygen transfer in fermento rs or phase dispersion , emulsification and 
homogenization. So, in homogenization we also do another application along with this dispersion 
of the f lat globules into  the other liquid that is  the liquid milk . What it does is it with mixing it 
reduces the size of the particle as well. So, that is  why the diffe rence in the homogenization is 
such that, it initiate the particle mixing as well as the size reduction.  
Now, the diameter of the impeller is typically one third to one half of the diameter of the vessel . 
Vessel or Tank di a. So, with that one third or one half of the diameter we cons ider specially in 
case of this T urbine mixer . (Refer Slide Time : 21:49)  
 
So, here is  the type  of agitator or impeller  given  is Curved  blade  turbine . This is also can be of 
many  types. So, here this is the curved  blade this ca n be a flat as well as little cu rve section and   
disc turbine where the flat disc is there in that the blades are attached . Whereas, in the in curved 
blade  turbine  there i s no disc portion is there  only with the shaft the curved  blades a re attached.  
So, these are the various kinds of agitators or impeller.  
(Refer Slide Time : 22:33) 
 
Now, another is the P ropeller kind of I mpellers . So, here is the picture how the propeller type 
agitator  looks like. So, these are as the picture is shown it  is kind of initiating the axial mixing of the liquid.  Primarily  used to blend low viscosity liquids  and impeller diameter is much smaller 
than that of the turbine mixer  and the mixer  shaft is usually positioned on an angle and off 
center . Two are more p ropellers are used for deep tank. T wo or more propellers that are in the 
same shaft mor e propellers we can use , this is the advan tages high mixing capacity and 
disadvantage is not effective with liquid  of viscosity higher than 5 Pascal second.  
So, for the low viscous  sample only this propeller type of impellers are used. So, thes e are about 
different kinds of I mpellers. We will  stop here and we will  continue in the next class. Thank yo u. 
 