Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 45 
Mechanical Sepa ration Techniques  ( Contd. ) 
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the NPTEL  online cer tification course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering . We were discussing about the Mechanical  Separation . 
Mechanical Separation Techniques and we will continue with that topic today also . So, 
by now we have discussed about the sedimentation then  filtration and today we will start  
floatation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46 ) 
 
Flotation  
 Flotation is used in case of settling the fine particle .  
 Depends upon the relative tendency of air and water   adhere to the particle surface   
 The action of floatation  depe nds upon the surface forces . So, 
  It can be  promoted by addition of the suitable additives . Additives which will  adhere to 
the particle surface and they will add to them  and either they will  increase the  
homogeneity or they may  decrease which  may work in r everse way .   So, the application of floatation  in the food industry is to separate the small fat  particles 
from the water . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:26 ) 
 
Centrifugation  
Centrifugation is a mechanical separation  operation . In the figure, many  plates are there 
and when the liquid enters  from the bottom it will be thrown  towards the channels and 
eventually passed the length and it will go to the  peripheral distance . And this speed will  
be governed  based on the  mass of the particle because if it is heavier particl es that will 
get higher amount of the  centrifugal force and they will be thrown  towards the outward  
direction . And those are the lighter  that will be near to the  central section . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 03:27 )   
  
 In short centrifuge is the  settling or separa tion of particle  from a fluid by centrifugal 
force acting on the particle . And eventually the separation of the heavier and lighter 
particle will be there .  
Advantages  
 It increases the forces on the particle . For example, if we try to separate  the 
particl e by sedimentation there only the gravitational force is applied , but here because 
of the centrifugal force much more forces  occurring on which will separate the particle 
effectively.  
  Centrifugal forces do not change the relative settling velocity of smal l particles , 
but these forces do overcome the disturbing effect of the Brownian  motion and the free 
convection current , that prevails  in the system .  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:55 ) 
 
The simplest form of centrifuge consists  of a bowl  spinning about a vertical a xis.  
The liquid / liquid separation conical plates are arranged to separate the two liquid . 
Heavier particle moves towards  the outermost region of the bowl  whereas, the lighter 
particle moves towards the center. 
In the conical bowl centrifuge, because of t he centrifugal force the  heavier liquid  will be 
thrown  towards the outward  direction  and the lighter will be near the  central section . Similarly, if the slurry is of liquid and the solid particle ; then the dimensions will be like 
the 2nd one (steep slope) . Solid particle will be thrown out and towards the periphery 
because they are heavy compare  to the  liquid and the solids are collected . Whereas, the 
lighter liquid and heavier liquid those have different channels . Lighter being  closer to the  
centre and  the liquid far towards the peripheral  zone , that is the heavier liquid . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:53 ) 
 
Cent rifugation : Application   
Centrifugal settling or separation is employed  in many food  industries .  
For example, brewery , vegetable oil processing , fish prot ein concentrate processing , fruit 
juice processing to remove the cellular material , etcetera .  
Centrifugal separation is used in  drying crystal and for separating the emulsion  into their  
constituent  liquid or  solid and liquid .  (Refer Slide Time: 07:46 ) 
 
The centrifugal force depends upon the radius and speed of rotation and upon the mass of 
the particle. If the radius and the speed of rotation are fixed, then the controlling factor is 
the weight of the particle so that the heavier the particle the greater  is the centrifugal 
force acting on it. Consequently, if two liquids, one of which is twice as dense as the 
other, are placed in a bowl and the bowl is rotated about a vertical axis at high speed, the 
centrifugal force per unit volume will be twice as grea t for the heavier liquid as for the 
lighter. The heavy liquid will therefore move to occupy the annulus at the periphery of 
the bowl and it will displace the lighter liquid towards the centre. This is the principle of 
the centrifugal liquid separator . (Refer Slide Time: 09:33 ) 
 
Theory  of centrifugal separation  
The centrifugal force on a particle that is constrained to rotate  in a circular path is given 
by  
 
ω = Angular velocity, r= radius  
Now, the pressure gradient at radius r is given by ; 
 
 So, when th e radius of the bowl is R and the radius of the inner surface of the liquid is 
r0. So, the exerted pressure is given by  
  (Refer Slide Time: 12:25 ) 
 
Radial variation of the pressure  
Consider a thin differential cylinder, of thickness d r and height b, the differential 
centrifugal force across the thickness d r is given by equation   
 
Now, dm is the mass of the differential cylinder , ω is the angular velocity of the  cylinder 
and r is the radius of the cylinder  
    (Refer Slide Time: 13:52 ) 
 So, ρ is the density of the liquid and b is the height of the cylinder , the force d Fc acts 
over the area  2πrb.  So, we can write  
 
Where dP is the differential pressure across the wall of the  differential cylinder . 
Similarly now the differential pressure in a centrifuge between the radius r 1 and r 2 can be 
calculated by integrating d P and letting the pressure at the radius r1 be P1 and at r2 will b e 
P 2.  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:34 ) 
 
Now, again if you see , that two different liquid we want to separate  in a disk bowl  
centrifuge . So, in that case the geometry can be like this , if there is two channels , when 
the liquid  is fed  from the bottom and it is  coming in the zone of centrifugal force it will 
be separated by the means of centrifugal action depending on the mass .  
So, radius r i is of the we ir meant for the less dense liquid  that will correspond 
approximately to the radius  of the inner surface of t he liquid in the bowl .  
Separation of two immiscible liquid will happen at  the outer w eir r w must be such that . 
the pressure develop at the wall of the bowl of radius R by the heavy liquid alone as it flows over the wall is equal to the pressure due to th e two liquids within the bowl . So, 
the density of the light and the heavy liquid is defined as ρ 1 and ρ 2, respectively and the 
radius of the inner phase  (interface)  between the liquid  is rs. So then we can write that  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 20:10 ) 
 
If Q1 and Q2 are the volumetric rate of feed of the light and heavy liquid respectively , on 
the assumption that , there is no slip between the liquids in the bowl ; the residence time 
required for two  phases are given by  
 
Then the retention time is given by this  expression .  
 
So, Q 1 which is the  volumetric feed  rate of the light and Q2 volumetric  feed rate of the 
heavy ; we add them together Q 1 plus Q 2 and V’ is the volumetric hold up of the liquid 
in the bowl .  
  (Refer Slide Time: 22:51 ) 
 
Problem  
If a crea m separator has discharge radii of 5 cm and 7.5 cm and if the density of skim 
milk is 1032 kg m-3 and that of cream is 915 kg m-3, calculate  the radius of the neutral 
zone so that the feed inlet can be designed.  
For skim milk, r 1 = 0.075m, r A = 1032 kg m-3, cream r 2 = 0.05 m, r B= 915 kg m-3 
Solution  
ρA ω2 (rn2 - r12)/2 = ρB ω2(rn2– r22)/2 
                     rn2 = (ρAr12 - ρBr22) / (ρA - ρB)                                                           
                     rn2 = [1032 x (0.075)2 - 915 x (0.05)2] / (1032 - 915) 
                          = 0.03 m2 
                      rn = 0.17 m  
                          = 17 cm   (Refer Slide Time: 24:49 ) 
 
Cyclone separator  
 For separation of very small solid particle or mist  from the gases specially in case 
of the low velocity gases . So, the gas solid mi xture is coming into from a tangential  inlet 
or entry  and as it  comes towards  the centre this generate a  swirl or a circular motion and 
because of that centrifugal force and the  solid will  then come to the bottom . The solid 
will hit in the conical  section and try to  come to the  outer outward  directed  section is the 
outlet or solid collection  section . However , some particle , which are very fine particle 
cannot be separated because  those will be carried  away with the exit  air.  
 Cyclone separator  is a combinat ion of various forces  to get an effective 
mechanical separation .  
 Centrifugal force combined with  external gravity force , so this centrifugal force  
when it comes to the bottom there also gravity force  will also act on the particle and 
thereby it is very ef fective method .  
 Combine forces are also used in some rotary  mechanical classifier and in ring 
dryers .  (Refer Slide Time: 26:49 ) 
 
 Now, it is basically consist of a vertical  cylinder with a conical bottom . 
 The gas solid particle mixture that enters  in a t angential inlet near the top section , 
then comes in a rotating motion  and the vortex form ed develop s a centrifugal force 
which throw the particle radially towards the wall and fall downward leaving out the 
bottom of the cone. ( So, all the particle will be thrown  radially outward  and fall 
downward  because when they will be thr own out based on their difference in mass  they 
will hit the body eventually . And they will come  in the downward direction because of 
gravity . So, first of all the heavier particle will come very easily and then the  
comfortably finer particle will come out ).  
 The outward  force on the particle at high tangential velocity is many times the 
force of gravity . Hence gives better separation efficiency than the  settling alone .  (Refer Slide Time : 29:30 ) 
 
In the  cyclone separator the inlet may be of  round shape or  rectangular shape that 
depends and from based on this the flow rate of the inlet air , the air which  comes into the 
inner side , can be calculated . After  enter ing into a tangential direct ion and it generates 
the centrifugal force as it enters into the cyclone barrel and develop that vortex which 
will eventually come down , but since  there is an open portion at the top air will be suck 
through the central section towards the upper direction and with that  some fine particle 
may also come out .  
 So, the centrifugal force in a cyclone ranges from about 5 times  gravity in large 
and low velocity units to 2500  times gravity in the small , high resistance unit .  
 On entering the air in the cyclone flow s downward in a spiral or vortex adjacent 
to the wall . When the air reaches  near the bottom of the cone  so, it spirals upward  in a 
smaller spiral  in the centre of the cone and the cylinder . Hence a double vortex is 
present . So the direction of the both the  swill will be similar .  (Refer Slide Time: 32:01 ) 
 
Application  
 In spray drying  of food where the dried  particles are removed by the cyclone . So, in 
cleaning dust laden air  these are the application . In removing the mist droplets from the 
gases  there als o cyclone  separator  is used . And these are  least expensive means of gas 
particle separation   
 Generally applicable in removing particles over 5 μm in diameter from gases . For 
particles over 200 μm in size gravity settling chambers are often used . And then wet 
scrubber  cyclones are  sometime use where water is sprayed inside  helping to remove the 
solid . So, in that case  wet scrubber  cyclones are use d.  (Refer Slide Time: 34:11 ) 
 
Terminal velocity in cyclone separator  
It is assumed that the particle on entering a cyclone quickly reach their  terminal settling 
velocity . So, particle size are usually  so small that Stokes ’ law is considered valid and for  
that centrifugal motion the terminal radial  velocity VtR is given by this equation  
 
 
vtan  is the tangential velocity of the particle at radius r . 
 
vt is the gravitational terminal settling velocity .   (Refer Slide Time: 37:31 ) 
 
Cyclone separator: E fficiency  
 Smaller particle have smaller settling velocity and do not have time to reach the 
wall to be collected . And they go with the exit air  that is coming out at the top of the 
cyclone separator .  
 So, larger particle are more readily collected  so effici ency will be ; obviously, 
better for the larger particles compare to the various  fine particles .  
 So, the efficiency of  separation for a given particle diameter is defined as the 
mass fraction of the size particles that are collected , the efficiency of sepa ration for a 
given particle diameter . For example, a particle diameter D c which is given . So, for that 
efficiency will  defined as the mass fraction  of the size  particles those are collected at the 
bottom .  
 So, a typical collection efficiency plot for a cy clone shows  that, the efficiency 
rises rapidly with particle size . So, if particle size increases the separation  efficiency will 
also increase . So, the diameter we say that the cut diameter ; that means, the extent to 
which it can separate easily  the cut di ameter is the diameter for which one  half of the 
mass of the entering  particle is retained . 
Thank you .  