Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering                                                                                                            
Professor. Dr. Jayeeta Mitra                                                                                                                                                
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering                                                                                                               
Indian Institute of Technology, Kh aragpur                                                                                                                
Lecture No.  46  
Mixing and Agitation  
 
Hello everyone, w elcome to NPTEL  Online Certification Course on Fundamentals of Food 
Process Engine ering. Today, we will start a new chapter on Mixing and Agitation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:31)  
 
So, mixing is an important unit operation. And there are many instances in food process 
engineering , where mix ing of liquid  solid or  two different liqui d or two different solids or 
even gas and liquid , this kind of mixing operations a re very important. An d we will  
differentiate the whole content of this particular chapter in several headings.  
First, we will  tell a bit introduction about the mixing and agitation  process . Then, we will  see 
the mechanism of solid mixing first, followed by the mixing index and mixing process. 
Mixers for dry powders, then mixe rs for cohesive solid , after that liquid mixing, in that we 
will also see the different flow pat tern while mixing and the types of agitators. Finally, we 
will see the power requirement for liquid mixing.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:50)  
 
So, let  us start with the introduction. So, mixing, not merely making a homogeneous sample 
is the , only purpose of it . There are  lot more functions associated with mixing . And if it is not 
done properly, then the texture or the quality of the food process may be hampered. So, what 
are the main functions and purpose of this , we will see . If we talk abo ut agitation , agitation is 
establishment of a particular flow pattern within the liquid .  
Usually , we perform a circulatory motion and agitation  may be,  any kind of motion we can 
initiate or induce in a liquid . And for having agitati on, one component is also , I mean , one 
component if there in the particular liquid, then also we can initiate agitation . Mixing 
however, is random distribution throughout a system of two or more initially separate 
ingredients.  
Therefore, agitation can be do ne with one liquid or one solid sample, but the mixing cannot 
be done , it is basically , may takes place from two distinctly separate material s when they 
come in contact , and we want to make a homogeneous sample out of that . Then, the uni t 
operation mixing is to be applied . Single homogeneous material can be agitated , but cannot 
be mixed until some other material will be added to it .  
For example, if you see in this figure, that some solid sample salt or some chemicals that 
need to be diss olved in the liquid, so  here we can put it  in that , and then we stir  it with a  glass 
rod to make it a uniform sample. So here , mixing may be there. However, the agitation in the  
in that  upper figures we can see that agitation simply , we can make in a one component 
system.  (Refer Slide Time: 04:37)  
 
Now, what are the objective s? As I have mentioned that homogeneous  mixture preparation is 
one important part of , or aim of mixing. So , first is to increase the homogeneit y of the bulk 
material. The other purpose is to bring about intimate contact between different species in 
order for a chemical reaction to occur . Now, sometime , we want the se two component 
mixing, so that every molecule will come in contact with the other m olecules , so that the 
reaction will be proper.  
However, this may not be limited to only the reaction process , it may happen that for 
extraction also i f the component , which the solvent , let us say , which we are using for extract , 
extraction of some bioact ive from the other  kind of thing . And if proper agitation is done, 
then the extraction will be even better. So, that is one function of the mixing operation . Now, 
to enhance the heat and mass transfer, many food processing operation is such tha t to initiate 
or to increase the rate of heat transfer or mass transfer, we need to give some agitation.  
For example, if we want to cool a glass of milk, if we agitate it, and then we  blow air over the 
glass , then it will be cooled faster. So, there are m any operations , where to increase the heat 
transfer , for example, if suppose you are heating a food , a liquid food and there may be some 
deposition or sedimentation may takes place at the bottom of the pan. So, if you agitate this 
continuously, so no depos ition may  be there at the , at the bottom and then it will increase the 
heat transfer , so, these are the functions . 
Then to change the texture , so if the two component s that we want to mix properly, when the 
homogeneous sample will be prepared, so that may hel p improving the texture . And in other way, you can say , like suppose you want  to make a dough sample and for  proper  leavening, 
you are giving some ingredient to it . Now, if the proper mixing does not  takes place w ith the  
flour materia l, so the texture of the final product will not be good.  
So, the expansion will not be proper , the quality of the final product will not be proper. So, 
because of that , the purpose of mixing and agitation is to change the texture also . Then, i t 
dispenses a liquid , which is immiscible with the other liquid by forming an emulsion or 
suspension of few drops.  So, this is another function if we want to make an emulsion of one 
liquid which is immiscible in the other liquid , so there also  we can  use this unit operation to 
make a uniform suspension .  
And to suspend s relatively lighter solid particle. if the particles are lighter and we need to 
make it in a suspended  situation , so we need to agitate it continuously , so that it will be 
disperse d properly in the liquid sample. So, these are the functions , these are the objectives or 
aims that we fulfil by using the agitation  or mixing operation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:07 ) 
 
So, Liquid Blending , this is one operation , where we use the unit operation mixing , where 
two different , two different liquid are mixed together to make some different food product . 
Then, Solid Suspension , Gas Dispersion , sometime we want that to dispe rse the oxygen gas 
in a liquid sample , so then we use this operation . Then, Dissolving Solids, Preparation of 
Emulsion or Paste or Creams . So, we know that for whipping  of creams , we need to mix it 
thoroughly , and then that texture , the creamy texture will also develop . The proper paste can 
make out of this method.  So, various applications are there in food processing especially.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:08)  
 
Now, let us see the different mixing mechanism. So, there are many different methods by 
which the m ixing of two different components or solid , two  different solid f ractions will 
takes place.  So, the three  mechanisms are there for mixing . First one is the Convection. So, 
convection  as the n ame suggests that there must be  positional displ acement of the solid 
particle in the whole mixture. So, movement of groups of particle , because of the direct 
action of an impeller or a moving device.  
So, what it says , that movement of group of particle , that means  group of particle or section 
of the particle is moving to wards the another section in the front because of the spiral action 
of the ribbon , so the material is conveyed from one location to the other and thereby this 
process is continuously performed. So, this is called the convection  mixing. Now, next is 
Diffusion mechanism. So, diffusion refers to random dispersion of individual particle in the 
inter particle void spaces throughout . 
So, simple barrel mixtures , comes under this diffusion mechanism . So, if you visu alize this in 
case of conv ection , there is a trough , and there is a central ribbon is there , some kind of metal 
ribbon or mixer , special kind of mixer blade are there. So, what it does actually , it is rotating 
continuously , this ribbon is rotating continuously . And because the particle will move from 
one place to the other and eventually get mixed up properly and also propagate towards the 
forward direction .  
Whereas, in the diffusion , if we see that suppose a barrel  is there , a barrel mixture. So here , it 
is rotating , there is a shaft will be there , and there are the blades with it.  So, when it rotates , if you see the front view , so it takes the particle with it . And because of angle of repose of this 
particle  at one point , it will again try to fall down and again it is mixing as the rotation will 
continue.  
So, diffusion refers to random dispersion of individual particles in the inter particle void 
spaces throughout the mixture. So, this continuous rotation tak es place and because of that 
the particle will move to the inter particle space , again it will move , so this process will goes 
on and the diffusion phenomena takes place , by that the mixing will takes place . An example 
is the Simple Barrel Mixture . 
Then, Shear Mixing . Groups of particles are mixed through the formation of slipping plane s 
developed by the action of the blade. So, groups of particles are mixed through the formation 
of slipping planes developed by the action of blade . Newly form ed slipping pla nes in turn 
allow particles to diffuse through the new void spaces. So , continuously the shea ring will 
takes space and continuously the formation of stripping plane will be there.  
And again , it will be disrupted , the particle will diffuse , new void spaces will be created and 
again the shearing action of the blade will continue. So, because of that the shear mixing will 
takes place.  So, we have seen the convection  mechanism, diffusion mechanism and shear 
mixing.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:37)  
 
Now, some other c lassifications for mixing mechanisms . So, according to the type of motion 
applied to a bulk , we can categorize them as , first is the mixing with bulk material, then 
centrifugal mixing, then mixing in a fluidized bed, mixing solids in a suspended conditi on. 
So, mixing with bulk material , that, this is also one case , the different kind of specific 
impellers are used for mixing the bulk material .  
And centrifugal mixing is , that by using the centrifugal force when we want to mix  two or 
more different components . In a fluidized bed , that means, we are making the particle in a 
suspended condition , and because of that it will be getting mixed with the other component or 
other fraction of the composition . Solids are mixed  in a suspended condition , that is another 
category . 
In freefall mixing due to gravity,  when applying the gravitational force, different component 
of the mixtures are freely fall from a major height and then they will getting mixed. So, and 
this is again repe ated, the, those process. So, by that we can also have the mixing operation . (Refer Slide Time: 17:21)  
 
Now, to what extent , the mixing has been done, whether we have achieved the final desired 
uniformity or homogeneity in the sample , that can be assesse d by Degree of Mixing. And the 
degree of mixing is , also depends on the sampling procedure. So, since we want to measure 
the random samples from the whole bulk of the material , and those random sampling , we will 
measure the fraction of the component , one component fraction , and from that we can 
measure the other component as well.   
So, from all such small -small  fraction or sampling that we will collect , we will measure their 
distribution . And also , from that , we will calculate that what is the desired compo sition and 
how far we have reached to that desired , desired mixing and in what time. So, Mixing Index 
is a dimensionless fractional measure of variance or standard deviation that can be correlated 
with time . it's a dimensionless fractional measure of varia nce.  
                                                                        
  
M is the mixing index in fraction , s2 is the variance at any given time.  ‘s’ can be written as  
 
 
Now, x is at one sampling , when you take some sample , you get the fraction of the de sired 
component.  So, that is a fraction that you are getting .  ‘
’ is the mean fraction o r the des ired 
fraction of that particular component that is to be there when the complete mixing will be 
s=   x−x  2
n−1n
1  done . ‘n’ is the number of sample. So , either standard deviation or variance , we can calculate 
based on this .  
As I said , that X1 X2 and Xn, these are the fra ctional composition of component X in 1, 2 and 
nth sample. So, you are collecting the sample from the bulk randomly from , suppose n 
number of sampling is done and then the fraction of the particular material that you collect , 
that you measure each time , so that will vary for the first sample X1, for the second sample X2 
up to nth sample Xn, and then we will calculate the S2 for putting into the equation of mixing 
index.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:45)  
 
So, let us see the degree of mixing in a bit elaborate  way. Suppose, sample X is there that 
contain the pure p , where fraction of p in the sample X is 1, because it is a, it  is a pure 
material that has only that particular component , so the fraction will be 1. Now, deviation 
from the mean composition would be  1-p. And sample Y, which contains pure q , fraction of p 
in the sample Y will be equal to 0, so deviation from the mean composition would be 0-p. 
Now, for an unmixed system of two separate components ,      So2
 = p(1 - p) 
Variance after complete mixing,                                    
 (1-p)/N 
N is the number of particle s in a mix sample. So, when th e complete mixing has been done .  
If sample is large quantity then n is also large  (infinite), then      
  
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:43)  
 
Now, let  us see one problem  on it. A  biscuit dough is prepared by mixing floor and other 
ingredients along with tracer material  of 2 percent. T racer we put actually to see that when 
suppose those material are of same colo ur and then the homogeneity visually measuring is 
very diffi cult thing , so sometimes we add a tracer material , that is an inert material , not 
reacting with any of the component , just to have an idea that the complete mixing has been 
done.  
So, here are ingredients , with these ingredients , tracer material , which is 2 percent  of the total 
mass has been added . After 10 minutes of mixing, 6 random samples are collected and their 
composition which is a percent of tracer material is given below. So, after 10 minute , the 
fractions , the 6 random samples having the fraction of tracer material as 2.021 , 1.925 , 1.826 , 
2.125 , 2.210 and 2.015 . Calculate the mixing index after 10 minute of mixing.  
So, we need to put the data , first calculate the s2, so2 and s∞2 then we need to put it in the 
equation of m ixing index. So, “p” which is a tracer particle , that is given , added to the system 
at 2 percent mass, so fraction of p will be 0.02 and q is 0.98 , sample number is 6 . So, average 
composition of tracer material  is 0.02. Now, by using the formula ,  
 
s=   x−x  2
n−1n
1  (Refer Slide Time: 25:20)  
 
So, S will co me 1.8762 ×10-4. So, what we will  do is , the fraction after 10 minutes i s given , 
the desired fraction , which will be average of this or the desired fraction we can consider as 
this what is given , that is 2  percent.  So, that means 0.02. S02 is coming 0.0196 . Now, fo r 
larger s ample as n= ∞,  
 . 
So, using  formula  
                         
  
So finally, the mixing index after 10 minutes is coming 0.99 . So, we are getting quite high 
mixing .  (Refer Slide Time: 27:01)  
 
Now, rate of mixing . So, how we can define it ? Rate of mixing at any time under constant 
working condition ought to be proportional to the extent of mixing remaining to be done at 
that time. So, this is almo st similar whenever we have model led the screen analysis or we 
have modelled that this kind of cases , always we have used this concept that H time t 
whatever remaining thing , we have model led the rate of change , which proportional to that , 
the remaining am ount.  
So, here also , the rate of mixing that is d M/dt at any time has been model led as proportional 
to the extent of mixing remaining to be done at that time.   
So,                                             
  
Where  (M) is the mixing index and K is a constant, and on integrating from t = 0 to t = t 
during which (M) goes from 0 to (M),     
                                                            
  
 
                                                                     
  
                                                               
  
So, th is is how we can calculate the rate of mixing.  (Refer Slide Time: 29:08)  
 
Now, in a batch mixer, blending starch and dried powdered vegetable for a soup mixture, the 
initial proportion of the dried  vegetable to starch were 40: 60. The variance of th e sample 
composition measured in terms of fractional composition of starch was found to be 0.08 23 
after 300 seconds of mixing . For how much longer should the mixing continue to reach the 
specified maximum sample composition variance of 0.02?  Assume that sa mple contains 24 
particles .  
So we  have got the time , we have got the number of particles. So , and also , the proportion of 
the two components that is the starch and the dried powdered vegetable, those things are 
given.  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:18)  
 we will  calculate   So2
 = p(1 - p) its coming 0.24.  
Then  variance after complete mixing,        
 (1-p)/N = 0.24/24 = 0.01.  
Now, after 30 second , S value will be 0.0 823. then M will be this value , 0.685.  
So, putting the value of M in the mixing rate equation 1-M= e-Kt, then we are getting 
K=3.85 ×10-3. And what else is asked ? Let us see that  p, q and N given . We are asked how 
much longer should the mixing continue to reach the specified maximum sample composition 
variance of 0.02 . So, ‘s0’, we have calculated . Based on that , s∞. And ‘s’ also we have 
calculated for a certain time and then we found ‘K’.  
Now, K value is 3.85×10-3, then variance is given as 0.02 . So, then what will be the value o f 
M? So here , we have calculated M as 0.957 i f the is S value is 0.02 . And then we will  put it 
here in that equation , K is known to us , so t we will calculate. So, ‘t’ will be 820 second from 
this equation  i.e. 1-M= e-Kt. So, then this will be the required time.  So here , we have found 
out what will be the K, that is what will be the rate.  
So, we will  stop h ere and we will  continue in the next class. Thank you .  
 