Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering    
Professor . Dr. Jayeeta Mitra   
Department of Agriculture  and Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture No. 49 
Mixing and Agitation  (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone, welcome to the NPTEL online certific ation course on  Fundamentals of Food 
Process E ngineering.  We have started discussion on M ixing and Agitation  in our last class a nd 
today, we will  continue with that.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37)  
 
So, by now, we have covered these contents i.e.  the basic  introduction about mixing  and 
agitation process t hen the different mechanism of solid mixing, mixing index and  mixing 
process . Then  we have seen the mixers for dry powders  also we have seen for cohesive solids . 
The differ ent kind of K neaders , different blades use d for those different mechanism a nd also, we 
have started the liquid mixing , its flow pattern and types of Agitators . So, we will  continue with 
this topic in a bit detail today and also we will see what is the power requirement for liquid 
mixing . (Refer Slide Time: 01:26)  
 
So, first let us see that we have discussed a bit of the diffe rent flow characteristics in a liquid  
mixing. So,  if you see that we had a tank , we had a tank that w here we want to have that liquid 
mixin g operation . So, there  is a shaft mounted in that and we  have seen that t here are many kinds  
of impeller ; different geometry of the impell er is required depending on kind of mixing , kind of 
particle size , viscosity of the liquid  and kind of motion we want.   
So, we have seen that three  motions prevail in a particular liquid mixing . One is the  radial flow. 
Another is the a xial and the third one is the tangential. So, when the radial flow will occur, w e 
have seen that if you see the front view  and your impeller blades are like that.  So, we see that this 
kind of motion of the fluid will be there . That is the direction of the flow will be perpendicular 
on the impeller and this will cause the r adial mixing  of the liquid.  
If we go for the axial  kind of flow in that case what will happen that the liquid will mov e parallel 
to the shaft on which the  impeller is mounted . So, then th is parallel flow  will help in mixing of 
the different layers  of the li quid in the tank.  This will continuously help in the l ongit udinal or 
axial mixing.  
However, if we see that T angentia l flow  prevail i n a particular kind of liquid mixing, so, then 
what will happen that if we see the front view and this i s our the impeller, so, this will initiate 
this kind of  a tangential liquid motion and if that happene d that caused a vortex around the inside 
the cylinder or the barrel where the mixing will take s place . This creation of vortex is actually not desirab le because that will cause many unwanted phenomena happening inside the mix ing 
and that in a way,  hindering the proper mixing of the liquid.   
So if you want a proper m ixing we want this Radial flow and axial  flow. So, that each layer will 
be properly mixed . Now, we will see that  what is the  consequence of the v ortex formation . If it is 
there a t all what will be the ca ses? 
(Refer Slide Time : 05:16 ) 
 
So, when  an impeller ro tates the liquid is likely to swir l in a mass and a vortex will form.  Here  
we can see that if this impeller is rotating around this cylindrical tank and because of t hat 
tangential motion has been g enerated here that we can see . So, because of that the liquids are 
rotating in a layer but no  lateral mixing is taking place. If this happened one problem is that the 
proper mixing will not be there and the liquid will move around in a layer that  is one problem.  
Now, the more bigger concern is that if this liquid is h aving  dispersed particles  that we want to 
mix with the liquid and want to make a homogeneous solution, but because of this vortex 
formation, the centrifugal force will be generated on the particles and the particle will be thrown 
radially towar ds the wall and eventually t hey will come down at the  bottom . 
So, because of that also there will be action of the gravity on that and since, because of 
centrifugal force this will be thrown away this will be hit towards the wall and they will come at the bottom. So, deposition of the particle at the bottom will be more as we can see in this figure 
as well. So, then there wi ll be a distinct separation  of the liquid  layers  and t he solid parti cle. 
So, it is against the mixing , it is actual ly forming concentration that  is the another  problem is 
since this will form a layer because of the centrifugal force the layer will be such that a  void will 
be created at the center and the liquid level will rise at the peripheral si de. So, some portion  of 
the shaft it will rotate in  air only . It will not cause  mixing phenomena properly. So, this will 
cause many problem in the mixing phenomena that  is why we always tried to prevent this vortex 
formation.  
So, in a proper mixing case,  we will always try to prevent this vortex formation  and wastage of 
energy as the impeller rotates partly in air as we can see here that the impeller is rotating partly 
there the liquid level has been received towards the periphery and then and the particl es will be 
settled at the bottom because of this tangential motion and vortex formation. So, unwanted 
dissolution of air will be there and therefore, our requirement is how to control the vortex.  So, 
controlling the vortex is the main criteria then.  
So, what we c an do that one  method  is by you using the baffles. So, baffles  we can put here. So, 
around the periphery of the c ylinder we can put baffles. depending on the size o f the tank, we can 
put 4  to 16  number of baffles generally 6 to 8  is the average which is enough to create a proper 
mixing . So, one is by using the baffles . So, then what will happen that this tangential force that 
will be hindered by those baffles and then can convert it to the radial motion they will t ry to  
circulate in , a proper mixing will happen in between the two baffle sections.  
So, there will be not any proper t angential motion and vo rtex formation . Another  method  is the 
positioning the mixer shaft off center . So, that will another important design as pect that you can 
think of while doing  all such analysis in the inner mixing or designing a proper mixer for some 
liquid mixing operation . And third one is the draft tube. Now, we will  see how by positioning we 
can change ? We have a diagram for that.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:24)  
 
So, here if y ou look into it carefully, so, offset angle m ounting what we are doing  here, we have 
making that a shaft that is actually in normally it was vertically mounted . Now, we hav e made an 
incline with the central l ine that is 10 to 1 5° angle . We have met because of that while rotating it 
is not creating those vortex. So, there will be prope r mixing and some kind of axial  flow will be 
initiated here.  
other thing is we can offset the vertical mounting by some distance radially . So, this is another 
case so,  if you look into the top view , this is the center and we take th e shaft here . That may be 
one case or maybe one case that is that just radially we have shifted here and  then it is rotated. 
So, in those cases, there will not be  vortex  formation and therefore, the mixing will be proper .  
As it can be seen by this figure and in that c ase the solid particle  will be in a homogeneous 
fashion in the whole tank . So, these are the different configuration that we can try. Now, the next 
thing is the utilization of d raft tube.  So, we will  see that . (Refer Slide Time: 12:17)  
 
Yes, we have a diagram for that. So, draft tube  how it helps in analyzing the mixing prope rly. So, 
here, what we will  do, we can see a side view of baffles here and top view of that, again we can 
see that  the draft tube in this right side diagram. First we will  see what the baffles are doing . 
Here is an impeller mounted on a central shaft and t hat is rotating in a cylindrical tank . The two 
baffles we can see in from the front view the two baffles are there.  
So, from  top view the 4 baffles are clearly visible. Now, while this is rotating, this will divide the 
whole flow into two segments one  is that it will throw the liquid in the inner side an d that is 
going towards the up  it may have in a reverse direction as well I mean it  may have suppose you 
have a  tank here where you have your impeller which is rotating and there is a , so, what will 
happen while i t is rotating it will create two kind of different flow , it divide  the liquids into two 
kind of flow .  
One is the liquid will be thrown at the bottom and then again it will come radially and another 
will be destroying the liquids in the upside a nd it is again coming down to the impeller and that  
is why the mixing will takes place. Here again we can see that the liquid is thrown from the 
bottom side and again it is  going to the up because of  this baffles are there and then it is coming 
down at the  center section.  So, it is helping in proper mixing .  
Now if you see the top view, yo u can  see that the  radial flow is being generated because of th is. 
So, what will happen that  the liquid is moving in a perpendicular direction with the impe ller and that is why  all the particle radially the m ixing is better and the homogeneity is maintained across . 
Now, if you see the draft tube, this is the draft tube  that we have placed around the, this is a kind 
of a propeller  mixer is there. If you see the propeller mixer  actually  helping in the axial  or 
longitudinal flow while the impeller mixer  is helping in the radial flow. So, this one was the 
impeller mixer  and here it is the propeller . 
So, what it is doing that it is when it is rotating in the draft tube is given there. So, the liquid is 
coming from the b ottom and it is going upward as it is throwing longitudinal ly or axially . So, it 
is again going through the whole length of the liquid  column and then it is again coming down in 
from the inside of the draft tube. So, therefore, the mixing from the whole zone mixing from the 
bottom to the top layer is possible because if the draft tube would not have been there, maybe 
this liquid will go to some extent and then may drop . 
So, it is helping in mixing the whole zone the liquid from the bottom layer and the top layer. So, 
where the highest rotation , rotational movement is there and where the fluid is still the whole 
fluid is getting mixed prop erly. So, it is helping in  proper movement and it is hindering the 
formation of vortex. So, these are the different kinds of arrangements that we can think of for 
proper liquid mixing phenomena.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:57)  
 
Now, next we will s ee tha t how we can analyze the p ower requirement i n case of a liquid mixing. 
So, power requirement is very important aspects because, whenever we want to design any kind of liquid mixer , our main aim will be what will be the energy requirement of mixing system. So, 
that depends on many parameters . So, the first obviou sly will be the geometry of the tank and the 
baffles , the impeller. So, all these are very important .  
Next is the height of the liquid column and the density  and  viscosity   of the liquid.  So, all such 
paramete rs are very important and we can think of relating them empirically if  it is not possible 
or direct relation. So, we can t hink of an empirical relation development  so that we can ve ry 
easily analyze the P ower requirement in case of mixing.  
Now, scientists have done that they ha ve tried to  model the power requirement based on several 
parameters and they f rame this relation in a dimension less form that we have often seen in 
various analysis . dimensional analysis is an important part in we have seen this in fluid 
mechanics as well in some operations.  So, here also we will see that how the dimensionless 
number s can be framed and with that how the power number can be related in case of liquid 
mixing operation.  
So, first we will  determine several s hape factors. S hape factors are nothing but some ratio of the 
dimensional parameters of the tank and its differen t geometric parts such as the impeller and 
baffle s etc. So, number of those shape  factors we need to know so, that the whole design can be 
fixed.   
S1= D a/Dt 
Da is diameter of the im peller and D t is the diameter of the tank .  
S2 is the h eight of the liquid column in a  tank divided by the  diameter of the tank. So, some 
parameters has been fixed based on the initial  analysis by different scientists. So, it has been seen 
that we should keep the l iquid level at least equal to D t or even higher than D t for proper mixing.  
So, gen erally we fix  S2= H/D t = 1. 
Then  S3= J/D t where J  is the width of the baffles and that should be 1/12 to 1/18  compared to 
diameter of the ta nk. Then we have S 4.  i.e. S4= B/D t = 1/3  
 ‘B’ is the number  of buffers . and S5= W/D a. where, W is t he width of the impeller blade , Da is 
the impeller dia . And also we have S 6 i.e. L/Da. L is impeller blade length . So, these are the 
shape factor and with that now, we also look into the property of the fluid.  
(Refer Slide Time : 21:41 ) 
 
So, P ower requirement depends on the shape factor, those are the dimensionless numbers, then 
density , viscosity and also the velocity of the liquid. So, for initial calcul ations we have omitted 
the s hape  factor and first we have seen that how it is being affected by the parameters such as 
density of the fluid , viscosity of the fluid , diameter of the tank , revolution or the speed of the 
movement of the im peller and g  which is acceleration due to gravity.  
So, with that we have framed the dimensionless number . Power  (P) is a function of all such 
parameters along with th e dimensionless numbers or Sha pe factors . So, we have created this  
dimensionless number and trie d to present the power with  respect to these numbers . 
 
  
Now, ND a is velocity , where Da is the diameter of the impeller a nd N is revolution per seco nd. 
So, we can replace this N  Da2 by vDa. So, if w e do that what does it signify? W hat does this 
expression tells us that ? ρvDa/μ is nothing but Reynolds number , NRe. 
P
ρfN3Da5=∅ ρfNDa2
μ m
 N2Da
g n
  And this is N2Da/g this signifies the inertia with respec t to gravity which is called a F roude 
number . And this is i nertia divided by the viscous force. That is called the Reynolds number.  So, 
power number now can be expressed in terms of these two dimensionless number whic h are 
Reynolds number and Froude  number.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:50)  
 
So, so we can say that N P i.e.  
Where,  NP is the power number N Re is the Reynolds number and N Fr is the Fr oude number. It is 
including  the shape  factor because definitely as power is depending on the fluid properties and 
the impeller geometr y, that they  will also depend on the baffle and tank dimension etc.  
So, finally, Np = Φ(NRe, NFr, S1,S2…S n)  
So, this is how we can correlate power with the parameters in case of a liquid mixing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:5 9) 
Np=∅ NRe m NFr n   
Power number, N P is given as  
 
Reynolds  number, N Re is:  
 
Froude  number , NFr: 
 
Particular  case of mixing inside a tank, the laminar flow we can conside r when the N Re <10. So, 
viscous flow and transi tion flow  will be considered when N Re ranges from 1 0 to 104 and N Re 
>104 we will consider the flow as turbulent flow.  
Np=external  force  per unit  volume
inertia  force  per unit  volume= P
ρfN3Da5 
NRe=inertia  force
viscous  force= ρfNDa2
μ 
NFr=inertia  force
gravitational  force= N2Da
g (Refer Slide Time : 27:41 ) 
 
Now, a correlation for impeller used with Newtonian fluid in a baffle tank. So,  that we need to 
develop now, the correlation for impeller used with Newtonian fluid in the baffle tank . For same 
impeller, this  figure is also used for an unba ffled tank when NRe <300. So, we will  see that what 
kind of correlation is has been  developed already and where that can be applied. For definite  
types of impeller power consumption remains un affected between baffle and unbaffled tank for 
NRe <300. 
First condition is that the correlation for i mpeller using t he Newtonian fluid in a baffle  tank, this 
correlation  we have some plot related to this and the same impeller this  figure is also used for an 
unba ffled tank when the NRe <300. The type of impeller power co nsumption remains unaffected 
between baffle and unbaffled f or NRe <300. NRe >300, power consumption in unbaffled tank 
attributes to vortex formation in this region Froude  number becomes more prominent.  
So, what happ ened that when the speed of the impeller increases, and if the tank is unbaffled , 
then the vortex formati on will be there. The solid particles will because of the centrifugal  force 
they will be thrown towards the periphery and then they will come down to the bottom and then 
the gravitational force will be different as it was in case of a homogeneous mixer . So, then the 
Froude  number will be predominant. That  is why for  this ki nd of analysi s when we go for higher 
speed we need to very  clearly kno w that what are the dimensionless number  change in that case 
so that we can assess the exact power requirement.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:05)  
 
So, here is the P ower correlation for Newtonia n fluid in  baffled and  unbaffled tank. This has 
been sourced from McCabe  Smith book of Unit operations in C hemical Engineering. So, here we 
can see  that we have plotted this N Re with respect to NP in a log scale . So, here as  we are 
increasing in the  x direction the Reynolds number is increasin g and initially for to baffle and 
unbaffled initially w e are getting that up to 300 this plot is seen that means there is no change in 
the power number for different ki nds of unbaffled and baffled  tank. And beyond that there is a 
two distinct demarc ation will be one is for the baffle and another is for the unbaffled .  
So, whenever we want to ca lculate this power requirement f irst we will  see what is the Reynolds 
number i n that particular fluid case for that we need to know the diameter of the impeller , the 
density of the fluid , viscosity of the  fluid and also the r evolution of the impeller in the fluid per 
second.  So, we once we got the N Re, then we will  plot i t and find what will be the N P value and 
whether it is a baffled or unbaffled  that also we need to see. So, based on that we can calculate 
what is the N P and N P is a direct relationship with the power requirement. So, from that we can 
calculate the power r equirement.  (Refer Slide Time: 32:06)  
 
So, again there are cert ain different kinds of lines we can see here. So, these are again the power 
correlation with N Re but, the difference is that here that different kind of impeller has been tested 
and empirically these da ta has been plot and  this particular kind of expression has been 
generated. So, w hat we can see here is that curve 1  this is for flat 6 blade disc  turbine . So, there 
is a flat , 6 blade turbine will be there.  So, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 this kind of a flat disc  turbine is there , in 
that case, what is the parameter that we need to know ?  
The parameter when S3 this Shape factor is 1 /12 and S 5 is 1/5 number of ba ffle is 4. A ll this S1, 
S2, S5 these are already given to you that  the ratio of some geometric parameter of  the tank and  
impeller. So, for this one the first cu rve will be  changing, we can see.  So, the power number 
difference is more visible when the Reynolds  number is in the laminar region when it be comes in 
the turbulent region, s o, there is not much chan ge we can see that in the turbulent  region there is 
almost equal constant power number we are getting .  
Curve 2 which is for the flat six blade op en tur bine. Again thi s is also showing the same trend  
that almost near to turbulent  region they are showing the con stant power,  NP value . Fluctuation 
in the transition region is a little bit and the highest change we can observe in t he viscous or 
laminar region . Curve 3 is the 6 blade open turbine but blades at 45 ° angle. So, in that case we 
are getting again this is the third plot.  However , the trend is same that is in the turbulent re gion we are getting constant N P and 
similar ly curve 4  which is for the propeller pitch propeller we know that this kind of  mixing  will 
be in the axial direction mod e. Pitch is given 2 ×Da and baffle number is 4. So, this is the curve 4  
and finally pro peller where pitch is equal to Da and baffle is 4 . So, there we are getting the curve 
5. So, all 5  will we will  look into  what kind of impeller is attached to the shaft and then we can  
design that what will be the N P value.  
(Refer Slide Time: 35:3 8) 
 
So, there is a problem of flat blades turbine agitator with disk having 6 blade operating at 90 rpm  
is used to mix a liquid for which the density is 929 kg /m3, viscosity i s 0.01 Pa .s. Calculate the 
power requirement for mixing and what is given is the tank dia (Dt) 1.83 m, agitater  dia Da is 
0.61 m , liquid height  (H) =  Dt., width is 0.122 m, number of baffle is 4  and width of each  baffle 
is given .  
Now, first we will  see what are the value of those parameter and then we will calculate the shape 
factor s.  
S3= J/D t=0.15/1.83= 1/12  
S5=W/D a=0.122/0.61= 1/5  (Refer Slide Time : 36:57 ) 
 
Now, for this first we will  calculate the Reynolds number.  
 
if we  look into here so, it is coming in that turbulent region. So, then using the curve 1  because it 
is it has been s tated  that 6 blade flat disc so, cu rve 1 we will take . We will get the power number 
value  corresponding power number from this  and we are getting N P as 5.  
Power  requirem ent will be : 
 
So we will  stop here, and we will  continue in the next class. Thank you.   
NRe= ρfNDa2
μ= 929 ×1.5×0.612
0.01=5.184 ×10−4 
P=NpρN3Da5=5×929 ×1.53×0.615=1324  W 