Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 43 
Mechanical Separation Techniques (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone. Welcome to NPTEL online certific ation course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering .  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:15)  
 
Constant pressure filtration  
The pressure may change because of the deposition of the cake on the  filter medium . So, 
if you know the deposition increases so; obviously, the pressure drop will increase ok.  
Now, if the pressure drop increase s that will going to affect the rate of flow. So, 2 cases 
may occur, either the rate we want to make constant ok, or we want to make the pressure 
drop constant ok. So, both the cases wha t will be the  method of analysing the parameter 
of the  cake and also the filter media . 
By reversing the previous equation,  
 So, the equation  has been reversed  in terms of dt by dV now, and  A has taken to the 
other side and finally, we got this equation and can be simplified in the form of (Kp V + 
B). 
Now,  it has been interpreted as dV amount of  filtrate has been passed through the  
filtration system in dt time through the cake as well as through the filter medium.  
A is the cross sectional area of the filte r medium.  
 μ is the viscosity of the filtrate.  
α is specific cake resistance of the cake that has been deposited ;  
c s= kg of the solid present per m3 of the filtrate. V is the volume of filtrate that has been 
pass through in time t  
(- ΔP) is the total pressure dro p across the flow line that is through the cake plus the filter 
media and R  m is the resistance of the filter media . 
 
Similarly,  
  
So, K p is in the unit of s/m6 and the unit of B is s/m3.  
Now, for constant pressure, α that is specific cake r esistance we need to have constant 
and incompressible cake, because if it is compressible then; obviously, the pressure will 
not be constant. So, that is why it is considered as incompressible cake.  
V = volumetric  flow, volume of the flow that has been ta ken place in time t.  
These are the  only variable in this equation to maintain the constant pressure.  
 So, α need to  be fixed and incompressible cake has to be assume d. Only thing V and t 
these are variable . 
So, by integrating 
  
 to obtain the time of filtration in t second ; so, if we take dt and the other side we take dV. 
So, we will get  the expres sion as  
 
So, this is the time required for constant pressure fil tration.  
It can be represented as  
 
So, getting this kind of expression a linear pattern  will be obtained . By plotting t by V 
with respect to V; so, we can get a linear equation in the form  of mx + c. So, from the 
slope and the intercept we can  have the values of other parameter, that is required here  
As already mentioned that the V is the total volume of filtrate that is collected in t 
second. So, V is in m 3 volume of the filtrate.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:38)  
 
So, then to calculate the time for constant pressure  process ; where α and R m is necessary . 
Data of the V collected at different time t these are obtained. So, with that I can plot t by 
V that is s per meter cube divided by V that is fi ltered volume in meter cube . So, then we 
can get one straight line, the slope will give us the value of K  p/ 2 and intercept will be 
the value of B. And since the K p/ 2 and B these are related with α and R  m, as we have seen in the in the previous equation . So, 
  
 
So, Δ P are constant we can get that. So, area is known to us so, then  α value and here  the 
Rm value. So, this way it can be calculated . So,  this is how for the case of a constant 
pressure filtration we can calculate the  time, and all  other  parameters like  specific cake 
resistance and  resistance due to filter medium . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:16)  
 
Constant rate filtration ; 
 So, when the filtration starts actually , there is a n initial  stage of filtration . It frequently 
happen, that filter resistance is large relative to the resistance of the filter K . Filter  
medium resistance is large compared to the resistance of the filter K, because the cake is 
thin in the initial stage right . So, this condition the resistance offered to the flow is 
virtually constant , and filtration  proceeds at the more or less constant rate.  
So, initially when the deposition of the cake is not there , at the onset of this deposition, 
that time the resistance offered by the filter media is high compared to the resistance  of 
the cake  and constant  rate of filtration prevails.  So, this can be  seen as  
  
 
So, K V the unit is in N/m5, and C is N/m2 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:42)  
 
For incompressible cake KV and C are constant characteristics of the slurry  and cake , rate 
of filtr ate flow and so on. Now, a plot of pressure that is ΔP versus the total volume of 
filtrate collected that is V gives a straight line. So, in the previous case when we have 
plotted the constant pressure filtration, that time t / V was only the variable. So,  t / V was 
plotted with V now since  we are dealing with the constant rate filtration. So, pressure 
drop varies here with the volume V. So, it will be plott ed to get a straight line . 
So, for a constant rate since dV / dt will be fixed. So,  the slope of the l ine as K V and the 
intercept is C . The pressure increases as the cake thickness increases , and the volume of 
the filtrate collected into this . So, with that the pressure  will increase, and the equation 
can also be rearrange in terms of Δ P and time t; as we have  done for the Δ P versus V, 
we can calculate ΔP and t as variable. And any moment during the filtration, the total 
volume V is related to the rate and the total time t by the following equation.  
So, 
  So, rate of filtr ation into time, that will give us the total volume of the filtrate that has 
been pass through.  
And    
  
So now, Δ P with respect to t can  be plotted. And here the specific cake resistance is not 
a constant . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:22)  
 
Problem - Based on the constant pressure process .  
The data for a slurry in water at 298.2 K that is 25 °C. These are reported as follows at a 
constant pressure process; where the pressure was 338 kN/m2.The filter area of the plate 
and frame press was a 0.0439 m2, and the slurry concentration was c s that is kg /m3, that 
was 23.74 m3. Calculate the αand R m. So, specific cake resistance and filter media 
resistance; from the experimental data given where t is in time in second and V which 
the filtrate volume collected in m3.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:21)  
 
First, t/V vs V ,  
So, from that the intercept calculate  B, that is equal to 6400 s/m3.  
And the slope K p/ 2 = 3.00 × 106  s/m6.  
K p = 6.00 × 106  s/m6. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:50)  
 
Given that at 298.2 K the viscosity of the water is 8.937 × 10 -4 Pa.s.  So, by substituting  this data,  
                               
 . 
α =1.863×1011 m/kg  
Rm= 10.63×1010 m-1 
 (Refer Slide Time: 21:29)  
 
Types of filter and filtration mechanism  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:33)
   Now the basic requirement for filtration equipment are  
1. mechanical support for the filter media.  
2.  Flow accesses  to and from the filter medium,  
3. provision for removing the excess filter cake .  
Filter selection  
1.The most important factor as we know is specific cake resistance  
2. If the cake has to be washed, the rotary drum is to be preferred to the rotary leaf  
 3. If a high degree of washing is required, however, it is usually desirable to re pulp     
          the filter cake and to filter a second time  
 4. For free -filtering materials, a rotary vacuum filter is generally most satisfactory  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:37)  
 
Filter Media  
The function of the filter medium is generally to act as a support for the filter cake, and 
the initial layers of cake provide the true filter.  
Filter must meet the following requirements : 1. It must retain the solids to be filtered, giving a reasonably clear filtrate.  
2. It must not plug or blind.  
3. It must be resistant chemically and strong enough physically to withstand the  
    process conditions.  
4. It must permit the cake formed to discharge cleanly and completely.  
5. Sterile filtration  imposes a special requirement since the pore size must not   
    exceed the dimension of bacteria or spores.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 23:45)  
 
Filter aids  
The object of the filter aid is to prevent the medi um from becoming blocked and to form 
an open, porous c ake, so reducing the resistanc e to flow of the filtrate. The particles must 
be inert, insoluble, incompressible, and irregular shaped.  
 filter aids: diatomaceous silica, perlite, wood cellulose, or other inert porous solid  
 The filter aid may subsequently be  separated from the  filter cake by dissolving 
away the solids or by burning out the filter aid. If solids have n o value, they and 
the filter aid are discarded together.  So, because filter aids are getting mixed up with the  solids or the deposition ; so, both are 
discarded if it if they are not required if the solid cake is not required . 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:53)  
 
Mechanism of Filtration  
Filters are divided into three main groups:  
• Cake filters.  
• Clarifying filters.  
• Cross flow filters.  
Featuress  
 surface filter s are used for cake filtration in which the solids  are deposited in the 
form of a cake on the up -stream side of a relatively thin filter medium.  
 Cake filters separate relatively large amounts of solids as a cake of crystals or 
sludge, as illustrated the fi lter medium has a relatively low initial pressure drop.   (Refer Slide Time: 25:39)  
 
  In a depth filter the particles are smaller than the medium openings and hence 
they proceed through relatively long and tortuous pores.  
 Clarifying filters differ from sc reens in that the pores of the filter medium are 
much larger in diameter than the particles to be removed.  
 Clarifying filters remove small amounts of solids to produce a clean gas or a clear 
liquids.   
 The solid particles are trapped inside the filter medi um or on its external surfaces.  
 In cross flow filter the feed suspension flows under pressure at a fairly high 
velocity across the filter medium.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:19)   
Thank you . 