Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Dr. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 44 
Mechanical Sepa ration Techniques  (Contd. ) 
 
Hello everyone . Welcome to NPTEL  online certificat ion course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering . In the last class , we were discussing about  the filtration 
process and the resistance offered by the deposition of the cake  from the slurry and also 
the resistance offered by the filter medium . 
Now, today we will  continue some  more things in the Mechanical Separation 
Techniques . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:50)  
 
We have discussed different kind of filters ; cross flow filters  and dead end filters , cake 
filters etcetera . So, today we will continue with that cake filters . Although it is used 
mostly for this  kind of the slurry separation , but there are some problem that can be 
observed at the initiation of the filtration operation . 
What is the problem ? The problem is some solid particles enter into the pores of t he filter 
medium  and the y are immobilized and because of that they  hindered the path of the 
liquid to flow . So, that there is that is one problem , we often encounter  that a cake of appreciable thickness builds up on the surface and that must be periodicall y remove . So, 
that the filtration process ( the rate of filtration ) will be  constant . Then this cake  filters are 
used almost entire ly for  liquid -solid separation . 
But there is some exception such as  bag filters that is used for the gas cleaning  and also 
this cake filters may operate with above atmospheric or with vacuum level . So, this is  
also a specific  characteristic  of this kind of filter . It can be continuous or discontinuous , 
but because of the difficulty of discharging the solid against the positive pr essure , most 
pressure filters are of discontinuous type . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:53)  
 
Bag filters  
Bag filters although  these are  now replaced by  different kind of  filters which has some 
advanced design aspects than the bag filters . But looking into the appl ication of this or 
the operation of this bag filter , there are a number of  long thin bags are attached . These 
are attached to a horizontal frame , horizontal feed tray and the liquid flows through this  
under the action of gravity  so, that the rate of filtra tion per unit area is very low . It is 
coming down because of gravity without application of  any pressure over here . So, that 
is why  the rate  is a bit slow . And it is possible to arrange a large filtering area in the plant 
which can be go as high as 700 m2. 
And usually  it is arranged in two sections ; so, that each may be inspected separately without interrupting the operation . So,  this is how it is coming into and then the filter  
inlet is here . And the filter outlet when this  liquid  is going through this  bag, the thin 
filter s it is going out and then at the central location there is a filter outlet section  and the 
solid that has been filter will be discharged from the  bottom . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:01)  
 
Industrial filters  
It can be categorised into different  groups for example, a) gravity filters , b) vacuum 
filters , c) pressure filter and  d) centrifugal filters .  
a) Gravity filters , these are  the simple one , which is employing thick granular beds and 
these are widely used in filtration water filtration specif ically  e.g sand filters .  
In sand filters,  different sizes of  sand and bigger particles are stack ed from fin er to the 
coarser particle . And the inlet of water is from the top section  and then the clear liquid 
will be filtered and that will be going out fro m the outlet . 
b) Vacuum filter  
Vacuum filters operate practically at higher pressure than the gravity filters . It may be 
continuous or batch type . And the most useful vacuum filters again can be categorised 
into two  distinct  types ; one is the rotary vacuu m filter , another is the leaf filter .  (Refer Slide Time: 06:56)  
 
Rotary vacuum filter  
So, in large scale operation or continuous operation  is sometime desirable and it may be 
necessary to filter slurries containing high pro portion  of solid . 
So, the rotar y filter is a continuous  system and has  a system for removing the cake that is 
formed over the surface of the drum . So, it is suitable for use with concentrated slurries  
and it can be  the rotary filter for continuous operation on large scale quantities of the 
slurry . And the other is the suitable for slurry contains considerable amount of solid in 
the range of 15 to 30 %.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:06)  
 
Continuous rotary vacuum filter  
It consists of  a drum , which is rotating at a define speed and that speed is  based on many 
parameter like i)  required rate the filtration , ii) the concentration of the slurry , iii) 
thickness of the cake can be deposited and can be taken out by the knife . So, considering 
all that , the revolution of this drum  can be fixed , it is sub merged into the slurry to certain 
thickness . 
Another part is a vacuum  pump which is creating  vacuum inside the  inside the drum  in 
near the section where the submergence has been done . Because of the created  negative 
pressure this filtration process will ta ke place . 
So, there is filter  valve slurry which is feeding continuously and rotating . Formation of 
the cake will be there as the filtration will proceed and the filtrate which is  because of the 
vacuum will come f rom outer section to inner section. An d this will collect in the filtrate 
collection channel  and this will be taken out by the filtrate pump .  
And there is a deposition , the cake deposition over the surface and one knife is attached  
and its distance or gap at the surface of the drum also can be  adjustable . Because  we 
need to fix it based on the thickness , that is being deposited on the drum and it will  cut 
the thick layer and that way it can remove it . So, this can operate continuously . 
However there are some limitations , this is not suitable  for co arse or fa st settling particles of solid  as the coarse particles cannot be suspended well  in the slurry trough and 
the cake that form often will not adhere to the surface of the filter drum . So, in this 
situation a top feed horizontal filter maybe used .  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:02)  
 
Horizontal  belt filter   
It is suitable for the coarse feed . It consists of a main frame, filter medium, Vacuum 
pump which is creating a negative pressure inside the other side of the filter medium . 
There is a feed box  and the bel t speed can be maintained.  
And cake discharge mechanism is  provided at the end . So, one section when it proceed to 
the other section by the time , the filtration has been  done because of the negative 
pressure  and the cake deposition at the end has been remo ved by some suitable  
mechanism or some knife or blade arrangement etcetera .  
Leaf filter  
 The leaf filter is consisting of a frame enclosing a drainage screen or grooved 
plate, the whole unite being covered with filter cloth.  
 The operation: The leaf filter  is immersed in the slurry and a receiver and a 
vacuum system connected to the filtrate outlet.   
  Advantages  
 (Refer Slide Time: 12:27)  
 
 The slurry can be filtered from any vessel.  
 The cake can be washed simply by immersing the filter in a vessel of Water . 
 Removal of the cake is facilitated by the use of reverse air flow.  
The leaf filter is most satisfactory, if the solids content of the slurry is not too high, 5 % 
being a suitable maximum  
 (Refer Slide Time: 14:16) . 
 Leaf filter -constant pressure filter   
 Pressure difference across which the filtration takes place that is constant and  the 
number of  leaf or the plates  can be increase d or decrease d. This is also based on the 
capacity of the plant  we can upscale or downscale as per requirement . 
 This press is made up of two units, known respectively as plates and frames, with 
a filter medium, usually filter cloth, between the two.  
 The frame is open, with an inlet for the slurry, while the plate has grooved 
surface to support the filter cloth, and with an outle t for the filtrate.  
 Feed is entered through the feed section to the filter medium, clear filtrate will be 
collected from the outer section. Some backup plate were also kept stand by when some 
plates are operative . The cleaning is also bit easy , the whole frame and plate assembly 
can be dismantle d and we can clean it effectively .  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:47)  
 
Advantages of the filter press  
(a) Because of its basic simplicity the filter press is versatile and may be used for a wide 
range of materials under va rying operating conditions of cake thickness and pressure.  
(b) It provides a large filtering area on a small floor space and few additional associated 
units are needed.  
(c) Most joints are external and leakage is easily detected.  (d) High pressure operatio n is usually possible.  
(e) It is equally suitable whether the cake or the liquid is the main product.   
Disadvantages of the filter press:  
(a) It is intermittent in operation and continual dismantling is apt to cause high wear on 
the cloths.  
(b) Despite th e improvements mentioned previously, it is fairly heavy on labour.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 18:22)  
 
Centrifugal filters  
 A centrifuge consists of a basket in wh ich mixture of solid and liquid , or mixture 
of two liquids is rotated at high speed so that it is separated into its constituents by the 
action of centrifugal force.  
This can be washed easily and then can  be spun  it dry. So, mostly filtration is done when 
there is any  even if it is low , but some concentration of solid should be there . So, that 
will be deposited on the filter medium and the clear filtered will be taken out . So, this is 
very effective because in some c ases when the pressure difference cannot be create d 
enough to cause this filtration that time it can be used  to get a  higher  force to cause  the 
filtration . (Refer Slide Time: 21:21)  
 
Advantages & Disadvantages  
• Advantages of a centrifuge   
1- It is very com pact, occupying very little floor space,  
2- It is capable of handling slurries with high proportions of solids .  
3- The final product has generally, very low moisture content if compared to a filter cake 
of a similar material.  
• Disadvantages   
1- Batch proce ss 
2- It involves a considerable labour cost, making the process expensive.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:25)   
  Application of solid or liquid filtration ,  
• Improvement of the appearance of solutions, mouth washes, etc.....  
• Removal of potential irritants, e.g. f rom eye drop preparations or solutions 
applied to mucous membranes.  
• Recovery of desired solid material from suspension or slurry ,e.g. to obtain drug 
after crystallization process.  
• Certain operations, such as the extraction of vegetable drugs with a solv ent, may 
yield a turbid product with a small quantity fine suspended colloidal matter; this 
can be removed by filtration.  
• Detection of microorganisms present in liquids, This can be achieved by 
analyzing a suitable filter on which the bacteria are retaine d .This method can 
also be used to assess the efficiency of preservatives.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 25:01)  
 
Sedimentation  –  
• In a cylinder in which a uniform suspension is allowed to settle, various quite 
well-defined zones appear as the settling proceeds. At  the top is a zone of clear 
liquid. Below this is a zone of more or less constant composition, constant 
because of the uniform settling velocity of all sizes of particles. At the bottom of 
the cylinder is a zone of sediment, with the larger particles lower  down. If the 
size range of the particles is wide, the zone of constant composition near the top 
will not occur and an extended zone of variable composition will replace it.  
.   (Refer Slide Time: 26:11)  
 
So, sedimentation  generally occurs because of the gravitational motion  and this  most 
commonly performed when the concentration is high . So, the bigger particles or higher 
concentration of the solid will be settle down at the bottom because of the gravity flow . 
In a continuous thickener, with settling proc eeding as the material flows through, and in 
which clarified liquid is being taken from the  top and sludge from the bottom.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 26:58)  
 
 Now, the velocity of raising the fluid in a thickener can be given as follows    
So, vu is the upward velocity of the flow of the liquid, F is the mass ratio of liquid to 
solid in the feed, L is the mass ratio of liquid to solid in the underflow liquid, d w/dt is the 
mass rate of feed of the solids,  ρ is the density of the liquid and A is the settling area in 
the tank. If the settling velocity of the particles is v, then vu = v and, therefore  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:10)  
 
So, in the sedimentation the gravitational force is used to separate the particu late material 
from the fluid streams . 
 Particles are usually solid , but they either be small droplets of the liquid or gas . 
 Sedimentation used in food industries i) to remove the debris from the raw material , ii) 
then to separate the crystal from the mother  liquor and iii) dust from the air . 
 Sedimentation follow the stokes’ law.  (Refer Slide Time: 28:59) . 
 
In the above  arrangement the slurry is fed from the bottom ( inlet section ) and then it is 
spread continuously in the whole  system or the tank . During the sedimentation  process  
the solid particle  with higher concentration will  settle down at the bottom  which to be 
removed by  the sludge  collection trough and the decantation or the outflow or the  clear  
liquid that can be collected from the top . Sludge scrappe r arm is also provided  at the 
bottom . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:50)  
 
Now,  then we will see then how using the Stokes ’ law, we can  calculate settling velocity . So, stokes law states that the force that retard s a sphere moving through  viscous fluid is 
directly proportional to the velocity of the sphere and the radius of the sphere and the 
viscosity of the fluid .  
And for that certain assumption s are,  
i) the particles are of spherical shape , ii) the fluid is flowing in a  laminar flow , iii) the 
composition is uni form  and also of the fluid that is uniform ,  iv) the particle surface are 
smooth , v) particle do not interfere with each other  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:18)  
 
Derivation  
So, as the grain begins to settle, the force of gravity exceed s the combine d force of 
buoyancy and drag , and then  only the particle will accelerates . So, when it tries to fall , 
the opposite force i) liquid  exert on the particle that is the drag and  ii) buoyancy that is 
acting on the upward . 
So, if we consider a cylindrical channel is there , where a particle is falling ; so, the two 
force that is acting on it in upward direction that is FB = buoyancy force and FD =drag 
force and here FG that is the gravitational forces acting . So, when the gravitational force 
is at least equal or greater than , this will settle . So, we will balance this or we equate this 
with the buoyancy force and drag force .  
So, for spherical particle we can write  
 
  = density of the solid  
  = density of the fluid  
  d = grain diameter  
V is the velocity of the settling grain,  and g is the acceleration due to gravity  
In the equation 1st term and 2nd term belongs to buoyancy  force  (that is exerting in an 
upward direction) and drag force respectively.    
Cancelling the term we can rewrite  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 34:39)  
 
Solving for  V, the velocity of the settling grain, the equation becomes the following  
 
Where, C D = drag coefficient =
   
And    
  
The derived final equation for settling velocity given as follows  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 35:38) . 
 
Problem  
 Calculate the settling velocity of dust particle of a 60 mm and of 10 mm diameter  in air 
at 21 °C and 100 kPa pressure . Assume that the particles are spherical and of the density 
1280 kg /m3 and the viscosity of the air is 1.8 × 10-5 N s m-2. Densit y of the air is 1.2 kg 
/m3. 
Solution: For 60 mm particle:  
  vm =    (60 x 10-6)2 x 9.81 x (1280 - 1.2)  
                     (18 x 1.8 x 10-5) 
       = 0.14 m s-1 
For 10 mm particles since v m is proportional to the squares of the diameters,  
  vm = 0.14 x ( 10/60)2 
       = 3.9 x 10-3 m s-1. Checking the Reynolds number for the 60 mm particles,  
(Re) = ( Dvρb/μ) 
       = (60 x 10-6 x 0.14 x 1.2) / (1.8 x 10-5) 
       = 0.56 
 (Refer Slide Time: 39:57)  
 
A continuous separating tank is to be designed to follow after a water washing plant for 
liquid oil. Estimate the necessary area for the tank if the oil, on l eaving the washer, is in 
the form of globules 5.1 x 10-5 m diameter, the feed concentration is 4 kg water to 1 kg 
oil, and the leaving water is effectively oil free. The feed rate is 1000 kg h-1, the density 
of the oil is 894 kg m-3 and the temperature of the oil and of the water is 38°C. Assume 
Stokes' Law.                  
Viscosity of water = 0.7 x 10-3 N s m-2. 
Density of water = 1000 kg m-3. 
Diameter of globules = 5.1 x 10-5 m  
Solution :     
  
  vm = (5.1 x 10-5)2 x 9.81 x (1000 - 894)/(18 x 0.7 x 10-3) 
       = 2.15 x 10-4 m s-1 = 0.77 m h-1. 
and since F = 4 and L = 0, and d w/dt = flow of minor component = 1000/5 = 200 kg h-1,  
    A = 4 x 200/(0.77 x 1000)  
       = 1.0 m2  (Refer Slide Time: 41:02)  
 
dw/ dt is the flow of minor component . So, 1000 / 5 because the total is entering  the total 
feed is entering in that 4 parts is of water and 1 part is of  oil, together if 1000  kg/h is the 
rate. 
So, the rate of minor component will be 200 kg per hour . 
Thank you . 