Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 42 
Mechanical Sep aration Techniques  (Contd. ) 
 
Hello, everyone . Welcome to NPTEL online certifi cation course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process Engineering . In the last class , we have started the chapter on Mechanical 
Separation Technique , today we will continue  in that . So, mechanical separation 
technique deals with the separation of different  phases of the material  by the use of some 
mechanical force . And it has a difference with the  separation based on the size that we 
did in screening or with the membrane separation  where the selected  permission is takes 
place normally . So, in that mechanical separa tion we have  discussed in the last class and 
today we will continue with the  topics first that is filtration . 
Filtration has enormous used in  food processing  industry many methods for example,  
filtration of juice , different kind of slurry  and although  this kind of filtration when we 
use a slurry and we want to separate it from the solid and the liquid part . So, based on the 
requirement sometime the slurry is important , sometime the liquid which is  after filtering 
we are getting that is important or sometime s both are important . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:48 ) 
 
So, filtration may be defined as the separation of solid from liquid by passing through a  permeable  medium . So, we can  see how the arrangement look like . This is the  frame is 
there or support is there for f ilter medium and there is a filter medium this one , this one 
is the filter medium . And as the slurry comes over the filter medium  the liquid will 
filtered through it through the filter medium and the slurry will be deposited on the  top of 
the filter medium  and as time will continue the deposition of slurry will , deposition of 
cake will increase  and because of that  the pressure differential will also change . 
So, initially since the  there was no deposition  so, filter rate of filtration was very high 
and as th e deposition increases , so, the rate will further lower . So, therefore,  with time 
we need to remove the  filter cake  that is  being deposited on the filter medium . 
The suspension of solid and the liquid to be filtered is known as the slurry  and the filter 
medium used to retain the solid that is in the form of cake . So, the valuable stream for 
the filter maybe the fluid or the solid or both and the driving force  across the filter 
medium and the cake is basically responsible for the filtration process  to occur . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:47 ) 
 
So, next we will see  that rate of filtration which is  actually the most important parameter 
for us who wants to  know the  process or want to design any process . So, the rate of 
filtration should be  maintained properly  the fluid passes through filter medium which 
offers resistance to  its passage , under the influence of a force which is the pressure 
differential across the filter . So, to cause the rate of  filtration  we need driving force 
divided by resistance . So, if the driving force increases . So, rate of filtration will increase and if the resistance increases driving  rate of filtration will decrease . 
Resistance arises from the filter cloth or mesh or filter bed and to this the added 
resistance occur because of the depo sition of the cake . Filter cake resistance is obtained 
by multiplying the specific resistance of the filter cake that is the resistance per unit 
thickness  because as the deposition of cake increases  so, it offers resistance  in a higher 
scale  from the initi al condition . So, if we know the specific cake resistance we can 
analyse better that how it going to affect  the rate of filtration . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:22 ) 
 
Now, coming to the theory of filtration , that is what is the mechanism behind  filtration . 
So, here we will assume that with start of the filtration if we continue it for a time , let us 
say t second  then the deposition of cake will occur and the length of that deposition let us 
say L meter . 
So, in that we have taken a section a very small section  of having length d L in the cake  
across the area A of the of the filter medium . So, the slurry is  coming and it is  you know 
flowing  in a cross flow situation as we have taken . So, deposition of slurry will be more 
in this case . So, in that deposition which has occurred in time t second we have taken a 
small section d L across the area A in m2 and also we want to  interested in the  calculation 
of the linear velocity of the filtrate which is here V m/s, linear velocity . 
Now, with that we will start  calculating the c ase for a for pressure drop across the  filter cake. Now , for that we will start from the approach that we normally take when we try to 
analyse any pipe flow . So, when we want to analyse pipe flow for any fluid in laminar 
condition , and in that we want to h ave a distance  pressure drop across a distance Δ L. So, 
then we use Hagen –Poiseuille  equation for laminar flow  in case of a pipe and there we 
use there we try to make a relation between the pressure drop ΔL which is  P1 - P2, 
pressure drop with the diameter of the pipe and the velocity of the fluid  and also the 
viscosity of the fluid . 
So, similarly  here what we will do is we try to first  you know equate this with that 
particular case that is ΔL across the length  L that is  equal to 32 μv by D2 which is 
Hagen –Poiseuille  law. So, the basis is first this law , then what we assume that is instead 
of flowing a fluid through the whole pipe if we fill it with fill it with the  particle of  
similar  dimension  and pack it completely if you pack this completely and we assume that 
there is a  we assume that the pores  betw een them will frame like a channel linear channel  
and through that we want to  flow the fluid and also we want to measure that if the 
laminar flow prevails then what will be the pressure drop . 
So, this kind of analysis  you will  read in transport phenomena  when you try to analyse 
the porous media flow etcetera . So, from that concept we will try to  relate this pressure 
drop for the  filter cake . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:28 ) 
 
So, now,  if we will relate it  by this equation  v =
  
dv/dt  =  small amount of  liquid which has been filtered in time dt  
A = cross sectional area . So, this will give us the idea of linear velocity . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:55 ) 
 
So, then what we will do is , now the velocity through a packed bed that has been given 
by the Carman -kozeny  equation as  I mentioned that when you deal the porous media 
flow you will get to know this equation Carman -kozeny equation and Blake-Kozney 
equation . So, there are different equation which relates the  pressure drop across the 
length of  L in a porous media  and the velocity , also if this equations has been developed 
for laminar flow as well as for the turbulent flow . 
Here we will use the equation for the laminar flow  and the relation is such that  
 
We consider the cake as the as the packed bed  
  = the pressure drop across the  bed, or cake  
 L is the length that has been deposited  So, this parameters are  k1 is the constant whose value generally taken as 4.17 for random 
particles of definite size and shape . μ is the viscosity of the filtrate in Pascal s.  
V = linear velocity based on filter area in m/s = 
  
ε= is void fraction or porosity of the cake .  
L = thickness of the cake in meter , S0 is the specific surface area of particle in m2 of the 
particle area  /m3.  
 = pressure drop in the cake in N/ m2 or Pascal . So, this is the relation now we try to 
relate this with other equation that we can derive from the particular case where  the 
figure we have drawn that the deposition of the cake and the filtrate . So, relating those 
equa tion we will try to get some idea of the pressure drop across the cake . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:47 ) 
 
So, how we can  develop that first we have seen that what will be the flow of fluid 
through that ; that means, about the  filtrate that has been passed through . Now, we try to  
establish a material balance to get some idea then how the deposition of cake has 
occurred .So, for that a material balance through the filter cake we have developed  that is  
you know  L is the length of the  cake. So, if I draw the figure her e, this is the filtered 
medium , and in that  L is the length of that deposition , this area is A, this is the whole 
area of the cake  and there is a porosity that is ε.   
So, ε is the void through which the liquid will pass . 
If c s multiplied at the right side  and in left side  here ρp, where ρp is the density of the  
cake that has been deposited and c s is the kg of the solid per  meter cube of the filtrate . 
So, then we will get this  material balance . 
So, the length of  L × cross sectional  area that is the V (1-ε) that is giving the cake which 
is there into density that is the mass of deposition of the cake will be equal to the volume 
that has been passed through because t his volume also contain c  s kg/m3 of the solid 
material . So, this volume plus the volume which is  you know retaining the cake in the  
pores  
   . So, this is the idea that we are  getting from the mass balance . 
Now, using this equation  and the pre vious equation where we have  got the , you know 
Blake-Kozeny equation relating the pressure drop with the length and  other parameter . 
So, with this equation  we are getting this final equation  
 
which is  
   = v 
-ΔPc = pressure drop across this cake  
So, what we have did , what we have done is that we have replace d this L from above 
equation  and from the previous equation ( Blake-Kozeny equation ) we have replaced  L 
and then we have tried to express  this in terms of v , which is the linear velocity . So, then 
we are getting this equation . So, all the parameter k 1, ε, S0, μ that we have expressed c s, , 
A,  ρp. 
Now, this equation can be further represented as Δ Pc / Resistance .  
Δ Pc the driving force .  So, resistance  =
    . 
k 1 specifically for the bed of particle or the size of the particle if they are uniform .  
So, based on that cake property only porosity also of the property  for cake only , ρ p is the 
density of the cake , S0 is the specific sur face area of the particle  per unit volume . So, all 
these represent the property of the cake specifically . Therefore, we have  combin ing 
express this in terms of α and call it specific cake resistance , multiplied with μ that is the 
property of the filtrate t hat is going out  
c s that is kg of solid per meter cube of the filtrate into volume V by A. 
So, this is how we can express this as driving force  by resistance . So, therefore, we have 
taken all these factor as alpha  
 
And  
  
  
So, this is reducing in that way we have kept minus sign by R which is the resistance . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:23 ) 
 Now, for the filter medium resistance what we can write ? We have seen now then how 
filter cake resistance can be form ed, but definitely some resi stance will be provided by 
the filter medium as well . So, for that what we will do is  we use a factor R m.  
Similarly, we have calculated for the filter medium resistance as dV/ dt /A. Similarly , 
because that linear velocity we assume that will be fixed fr om the cake also and as well 
as for the filter medium as well . So, that will be instead of ΔPc now ΔPf 
 
So, μ is the viscosity and Rm is the resistance of the filter medium to filtrate the flow in 
per meter  and this includes the resistance to flow of the piping leads to and from the filter 
and the filter medium resistance , ΔPf is the total pres sure drop across it . 
Now, since the resistance of the cake and the filter medium are in series because the 
slurry is coming into first the deposition of the cake is there , then there is the filter 
medium is there , and then the  clear liquid is going out . So, they are in series , so, we can 
club those two pressure ΔPc and ΔPf to find the total pressure drop across it . 
 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:06 ) 
 Now, filter cake compressibility  so, all the cake formation that is deposited on the  
surface on the on the  above of that medium and depositing in the form of a cake. So, that 
maybe sometime compressible as well also most of the cases we take it as 
incompressible , but we can find the factor of compressibility . So, what is that  with some 
filter cake the specific cake resistance that is α we have taken varies with the press ure 
drop across it . So, this is because the cake becomes denser under the higher pressure and  
so, provides fewer and smaller passage for flow . That means, the pressure drop  and 
porosity has a relation and the packing is more  mean s pressure is more . So, the porosity 
will be  changing  and the effect is spoken as the compressibility of the cake because when 
the pores  are small  that means it has the compressibility is there . 
So, it is usually possible to express the voidage e  z at a depth of z . So, at a depth of  z in 
the cake if we take a d  z sections , so, what will be the porosity . So, that will be a function 
of the pressure drop from the  top phase where the slurries coming into the z depth what 
is the pressure at the z depth . So, based on that, this porosity wi ll be varying . 
So, therefore, we can define 
  
 (Refer Slide Time: 24:08 ) 
 
Now, also if you look into the expression  of the α that we h ave related with the constant 
k1 with the porosity which the  density of the cake  so, all the parameters were there . So, 
here α is the specific cake resistance  under the pressure  P, Δ P is the pressure drop across 
the filter , α0 is the specific r esistance of the cake under the pressure drop  of 1 atmosphere , and s is the constant for the material call the compressibility . So, here when 
the s relate the compressibility  that means, s can be change for a different kind of a 
pressure . So, the value of s can be change if it is the compressible cake . 
So, from the equation that we have developed for the specific cake resistance we have 
seen that α has a relation that is α = f (ε,S0 ,ΔP) 
S0 = specific surface area = surface area of the particle per unit  volume of the particle  
If ΔP changes porosity changes and for that α is also change . So, this is the factor . 
So, constant pressure experiments at v arious pressure drop develop the relation between 
α and ΔP. So, if you want try to get an idea then how Δp is going to effect the specific 
cake resistance , then what we need to do at different constant pressure we need to 
perform the  filtration operation a nd then we need to see that what is the  value of this  
resistance coming . So, constant pressure experiment at various pressure drop and thereby 
we can develop a relation between  α and ΔP.  
So, if α is coming independent of (-ΔP) that is pressure drop the sl udge is incompressible  
and usually α increases with ΔP, specific cake resistance increases with  increase in ΔP 
since , most of the cake are somewhat compressible and empirical equation of ten, we use 
that is   
 . 
 The compressibility constant s is  0 for incompressible sludge or cake  and the constant s 
usually falls between  0.1 to 0.8, for the incompressible cakes . (Refer Slide Time: 27:20 ) 
 
Factors affecting the rate of filtration .  
So, the rate of filtration is proportional to the pressure differ ence across both the filter 
medium and the filter cake . So, the pressure drop can be achieved in a number of ways 
first one is gravity , where a pressure difference could be obtained by maintaining a head 
of slurry above the filter medium  and depend on the density of the slurry . 
Another method is by vacuum the pressure below the filter medium may be reduced 
below atmospheric pressure by connecting the filtrate receiver to a vacuum pump . So, 
thereby we can create the pressure drop and third thing is centrifug al force . The 
gravitational force could be replaced by centrifugal force in particle separation . So, all 
three  forces are huge in different kind of  filtration mechanism to cause the pressure drop . (Refer Slide Time: 28:36 ) 
 
And, another thing that is the rate of  the area of filtering surface that has an effect on  rate 
of filtration  and the another important parameter is the viscosity of the filtrate . So, 
normal assumption is that it increase in the viscosity  of the filtrate  the resistance of the 
flow will also increase , and increase in the viscosity of the filtrate will increase the 
resistance of flow . Obviously, because if it is a thick viscous liquid , it will not flow  so 
easily , so that the rate of filtration is inversely proportional to the viscosity of the fluid;  
so, that is  why rate of filtration is inversely proportional . So, if viscosity increasing rate 
will decrease . 
Probable solution - By raising the temperature of the liquid t he rate of filtration may  be 
increase . Now, in a practical case we should keep in mind that if we raise the 
temperature whether  any heat sensitive compound will degrade or it will  it can handle 
the filter  medium that we are using . So, looking into all that  we can apply either point 
one. 
Second is dilution is another alternatives . So, in the case where we  can not apply 
temperature we can go for dilution of the slurry . So, in that it will  have the  effect in the 
rate filtration . Another point is the resistance  of the filter cake . So, definitely resistance  
will going to affect the rate and the resistance from the filter medium and initial layers of 
cake. So, this will also have effect on the  factors . So, we will stop here  and we will 
continue in the next class .  Thank you . 