Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Professor Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 56  
Non Thermal Processing  
Hello everyone, welcome to the NPTEL online certification program o n Fundamentals of Food 
Process Engineering.  So, today we will start a new chapter on Non Thermal Processing  which is 
our last chapter of this course. By now we have discussed the various processing methods and 
preservation methods and mostly they are by so me thermal treatments. For example, we have 
discussed the sterilization, pasteurization . We have discussed the drying  mechanism by which we 
can reduce the water activity , and preserve the food for longer duration.  
There is evaporation;  there are many techn iques by which we can reduce the mois ture content or 
water activity. And specifically we do sterilization and pasteurization to inactivate the 
microorganism by thermal treatments. But, we have mention that because of this thermal effect 
many important qual ity of the food may damage. For example, the flavor, colour may hamper  a 
bit; may the quality maybe hampered. So, there are new technologies coming into which are 
based on without heat treatment. So, we keep them in a category  of non thermal processing and  
there are many non thermal processing a s you know coming into pictures nowadays.  
Some of them have  been practiced in industry and all though there are high cost involvement in 
some of the non thermal technique. So, these are inconstant improvement are goi ng on; so that 
these methods can be used in a food industry in a efficient way ; and there cost of production may 
also decrease.  So, in today’s class and in the subsequent classes we will discuss some of the non 
thermal preservation techniques . (Refer Slid e Time: 02:2 4) 
 
So, basically the fundamental concept behind this non thermal we will cover in the high pressure 
processing, which is one non thermal preservation technique. Pulsed electric field technology , 
Pulse light technology, Irradiation, Ozone and cold plasma technology; all this we will discuss. 
And at the end we will discuss a bit on Hurdle technology, which is actually a combination of 
more than one methods . And combinely those methods can cause very wel l inactivation of 
microorganism, and can pr oduce the  safe and quality food product.  So, let us start . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:11 ) 
 So, first of all we can mention that food can be preserved by thermal or non thermal process. 
Before you know the invention of this non thermal technique, the common per ception was that 
for inactivation of microorganism only the thermal treatment will be effective. So, this thermal 
process such as heating and cooking effect affect the quality of the food , in addition to 
inactivating the microorganism . So, they do inactiva te the microorganism, but with that there are 
some heat sensitive element that also are getting affected. Conventional methods of thermal 
processing, often produces a number of undesirable changes in the food. As I mentioned that 
colour, flavour and functi onality can be avoided.  
Even some nutritional components is there which will be damaged. For example, vitamin C; it is 
highly damaged because of temperature fluctuation or storage et-cetera. So, minimally processed 
foods with better nutrient retention, hig h quality and ‘Fresh like’ food product ; this is the demand 
of the consumer nowadays . So, they want a minimally processed food , so that the initial quality, 
which we get during the harvesting will not be altered much ; and the ‘Fresh like’ fresh like 
qualit y will be intact.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:47)  
 
So, the novel technologies that came in due course of time , when the scientist thought about 
some alternative way to preserve the food in a different way than the thermal processing. 
Because there are certain a dvantage associated with that. So, first is retention of nutritional and 
sensory attributes , then the desired texture. Sometime because of heat treatment, the proper texture of the food will get damage; sometime shrinkage may happen that is not required, o r that 
give some undesirable appearance to the product. There  even form  some brown spot because of  
browning action may have occur there . 
And improved functional properties ; so, this is also another desirable quality that we want to 
have. So, novel technol ogies have all this qualities, we can categories them into these two 
segment . So, first is the Electrotechnologies  and the Non -thermal technologies. In the 
electrotechnologies , there are Pulse Electric Field PEF, radio frequency heating, ohmic heating 
et-cetera . And in the non-thermal  technologies we have High Pressure Processing HPP, 
membrane filtration, pulse light treatment, dense phase carbon -di-oxide and many more.   
(Refer Slide Time: 06:31)  
 
So, first we will see high pressure processing . So, high pr essure processing is not very new we 
can say; because it has the first experimentation related to high pressure processing was invented 
around 1889 . And that time it was not that much use only it has been established that high 
pressure processing is effici ent in decreasing the microbial contamination.  
Now, in around 1 999 again scientist started on  experimenting with HPP; so that to assesses 
effect s on the  food. Basically, apart from the inactivation of microorganism what other changes 
the high pressure pro cessing can cause, and still not much work has been done; because of the 
high cost involvement of this high pressure processing.  So, as in the picture we can see that the total process chain of the high pressure processing occurs 
as first. The unprocessed batch of the food this comes into the chamber , where we perform the 
high pressure processing ; so, the product is loaded into the high pressure chamber. After that  the 
vessel pre filling is done,  so the water is entered from the low pressure channel to the chamber;  
where the pressure is intensified to a very high extent. And the food is exposed to that high 
pressure. So, after this pre filling the high pressure generation starts.  
So, this high pressure generation  causes an isostatic pressure distribution. We  can see from all 
the side the pressure is applicable on the food product. And because of this mechanism the 
inactivation microorganism and some enzymes occurs; and because of that the food will be 
intact , the pressure is from  all the side we are providing . So, no visual damage or the physical 
damage to the product does not happen; and it is very much in good quality and then the high 
pressure is released. And the product has been taken out of the high pressure batch process.  
So, mostly HPP is performed in a batch process or in semi continuous process also. But, fully 
continuous high pressure processing has not been used and moreover it is  not been used in food 
as well; s o, this is how it works.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:45)  
 
Now, what is HPP and how it inactiv ate? How it works on the food  products?  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:51)   
So, it is a novel method or non thermal processing method, which works on the principle of the 
Pascal’s law. And it also termed as hyperbaric pressure processing, as a pressure is much hig her 
than the atmospheric pressure ; also called the ultra high pressure processing , high hydrostatic 
pressure processing , pascalization et-cetera .  
It retain s the food quality and natural freshness and extends the shelf life.  So, these all are 
speciality of  this method HPP, and it is very much capital intensive process because the initial set 
up that we require and and this pressurization and depressurization; this cycle we have to 
perform for many times.  
If we want to develop a system of industrial scale  and that has to run for years; s o, we need to 
design a very robust system. So, capital intensive process , although we can perform on ly a small  
batch in every operation; so, these are the limitations of the process. Potential application in 
processing of shel f-stable products, blanching, and pressure assisted freezing and thawing. So, 
there the application of high pressure processing  is normally done.  (Refer Slide Time: 11:26)  
 
So, as we mentioned that it works on the principle of the Pascal's  law, when  an external pressure 
is applied at a point in a fluid contained in a vessel. It is transmitted undiminished and equally in 
all direction. So, this is actually performed that when we apply the pressure isostatically.  So, the 
pressure this distributed uniformly in the who le chamber and around the food; s o, from 
everywhere the equal pressure is exerted on the product.  More than 200 years after Pascal's  
death, a chemist at the West Virginia Agricultural Experimental Station began studying the 
potential application of this law to the preservation of meat, juices and milk.  
So, we can see that this is the beauty of science that when some invention when it occurs; we did 
not even think of that. It can be used for food processing in an efficient way, but nowadays this is  
very promising technology . Although it is cost intensive  but still since it gives a very good 
quality product. So, it has been mostly used in the juice processing and preservation et-cetera . (Refer Slide Time: 12:56)  
 
So, HPP performs the sterilization of food without having any additive to the food material. So, 
that way it is an additive -free method and it prevent s the nutrient destruction ; because no heat 
treatment we are applying to this. Also because of tissue destruction, the extract allergen that will 
be destroyed, and make the food product safe. So, the safety is the first concern that we can get 
by the HPP treatment; second is the control of enzymes. So, by this method we can control the 
enzymatic activity; so that the food can preserve its origi nal flavour and taste.  
For example, if we apply the thermal method, sometime there are enzymes in the food itself. So, 
that can cause some decolouration colour degradation and of f flavour development ; so, those can 
be omitted in the HPP treatment. So, ther efore the nutrition  is also intact.  (Refer Slide Time: 14:14)  
 
So, high pressure processing is applied to many cases in a food industry . For example, fruits and 
vegetable then processed meat products, fish then sea food , minimally processed food; then 
instant food fruits and vegetable. So, all these are area including the sliced ham, salad dressing, 
rice cake, juices and yogurt. So, all these are the the areas where  the HPP is applied not in India; 
maybe it is not that much popular. Now, only for very hig h cost product preparation, we use 
HPP. Although in a research oriented works are going on HPP, but in industrial not much 
utilization we have seen here ; but, in other countries it is in use nowadays.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:17)  
 So, let see how much high p ressure is required to cause the degradat ion of the microorganisms; 
or destruction of the microorganism.  So, very high pressure is required here, the pressure used 
ranges from 100 to 900 mega Pascal; even 1000 MPa in some cases. Using 3 to 4 minutes to 
build up the pressure and holding time up to 5 minutes or more. And as a pressure of 4000 to 
9000 atmosphere, enzymes and bacteria are inactivated; but taste and flavour remain unaffected.  
So, there are range of the pressure  not for every microorganism , the d estruction level or the 
pressure requirement for which they can be inactivated is not same.  
That may vary from microorganism to microorganism, even for bacteria or mold those may vary ; 
and generally the enzymes are resistant . So, for them the high pressure  is required  that is around 
4000 to 9000 atmosphere; however, still the taste and flavour are not affected. So, we have see n 
a chart here that how the pressure varies from atmospheric pressure to autoclaving hydraulic 
systems. Then , Mariana trench which is  the deepest point , where under the sea level in the world; 
where we can measure the pressure.  
And that is still the little higher than the 100 m ega Pascal  and high pressure processing is even 
higher than that. So, you can imagine that how much strong system you have to build? How 
much strong pressure chamber you have to build for the processing of high pressure . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:29)  
 
Let us see the main component of high pressure processing . First we require a pressure vessel 
and its closure; s o, top  and bottom closure and the pressure vessel we need , then a pressure  generation system that is a very important component of the whole system. And the temperature 
control device, although our target is to reduce the temperature ; we do not want high  tempera ture 
in case of HPP processing. But, what happen that these are thermodynamic parameter pressure 
and temperature, and these are having  some synergistic effects. So, when we expose very high 
pressure, some increase in the temperature is inevitable  and we wa nt to control that.  
So, we provided and sometime there are few application not much in food, but in other 
application of HPP; where temperature is also associated with the pressure. And I will need a 
material handling system , just to make the inflow and ou t flow  of the product from the chamber ; 
so, the material handling system is also required.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:41)  
 
Pressure generation in HPP can have by three different mechanism. So, for  this much high 
pressure generation , either we can go for this d irect compression method or indirect compression 
method. And the third one is the heating of the pressure medium.  Now, let us see individually 
that what are these methods .  
The direct compression, indirect compression and the heating of the pressure medium . (Refer Slide Time: 19:18)  
 
So, direct and indirect compression is you can see the diagram A which shows the direct 
compression. So, here the piston is used to direct pressurize the fluid or the pressure medium 
which is here. And there is a  bottom closu re will be there, the piston will be there; there is a press 
frame and a high pressure vessel. So, in the large scale there is this kind of system development 
is a bit tough, because of the problem of sealing of the piston head  and the chamber . So, there i s 
a problem for generating this kind of a system in a small large scale.  
Therefore, it is not much used for the food processing in a large scale equipment ; and there is 
another system, which is the external pressurization or indirect type system. Here, als o the  
geometry is a bit seem  that we have a press frame; we have a top closure and bottom closure. In 
the previous one, we had only the bottom closure because from the top the piston is coming; and 
in this system we had the the direct system , we have the i ntensifier within the chamber. 
However, in the external  pressurization , we have the pressure medium here; we have the high 
pressure vessel, top and bottom closure.  
And we have a different separate pressure medium tank and we have an intensifier externally.  
So, the pressurize liquid is filled into this and then the pressure is increasing indirectly by the 
intensifier. So, these  two kind of systems we can observe ; mostly this system is used in the 
laboratory scale or the batch food processing  equipment.  
(Refe r Slide Time: 21:22)   
And the third one that I told that heating of a pressurize d medium; so that is another method. 
Because we know that when we heat the pressurize medium that the temperature will increase, 
and also the pressure is increase d in terms of  a vapour pressure actually.  So, that is in this 
particular case, we are not going to use that for HPP; but that is also one method. Now, isostatic 
pressing system:  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:53)  
 
Isostatic pressing system can also be of three type . First is t he cold isostatic pressing, also this is 
called the CIP system. So, cold isostatic pressing system is this diagram, where the product is 
there and then the pressure is from all the side, b ecause  it is isostatically filled by the  product that we are keeping  inside the pressurized medium.  So, whatever pressure we are providing that 
pressure from the pressurization shows that is uniformly distributed on the flexible mold. Now, 
in the other case when we see the warm isostatic pressing system; there we have a he ating 
element . 
We have a heating element and across a two electrode we are sending the electrical current , and 
that heat the section , there is a thermo couple attach ed, which control the temperature of this  two 
heating section. And the food is or the mater ial is inside the pressurizing chamber; so this is 
warm isostatic pressure.  
So, this is another method and the third method is the hot isostatic pressing system, where we 
have a heater inside adjacent to the media . And there is a heat insulator ; and the i nert gas 
atmosphere is there where the heater is.  So, in this kind of a system , we provide the hot isostatic 
pressing system. So, that means with pressure we are having the effect of the high temperature as 
well; but, normally for food we are using the col d isostatic pressing system s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:16)  
 
Modes of high pressure processing , as I mentioned that we mostly get the batch processing 
module and somewhere we can see the semi continuous. We hardly get the continuous module 
specifically for fo od we get very less; so most ly these two are we can observe.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:40)   
And this is the batch mode kind of a system, where there is a n intensifier externally and there is 
water inlet. So, this high pressure pump is sending this pressurized  water into the chamber, after 
the loading of the product is done. There is a pressure closure and there is a heating or cooling 
functional option is given, and the wate r outlet is there. When we want  the release of the 
pressure, that time there should be some exist of this pressurized water; so there is a pressure 
release valve and the water outlet. So, this is kind of a system which is called the batch HPP 
system.  
So, what  is the other system? The other system is th is semi continuous mode . When it is 
happ ened that the liquid food we are sending by pump to the chambers an d there are chambers in 
series. So, this is entered into this , pressurize the liquid food entered into the chamber; and then 
after one set of processing , this is entered to the  process liqu id section and it is in series. So, for 
all the consecutive pressure chambers, the feed is entered and then it is going to this channel and 
then enter. So, like that it is going and the after processing, this is coming to the common exit 
channel ; so, the p rocess liquid is going out.  
And the high pressure pump is there which is sending the pressurize liquid here; and that is again 
sending to the other consecutive lines. So, what happen is we make a sequence here, when one 
chamber is in pressurized condition;  the other chamber is in the depressurized condition. So, this 
sequence is maintained in all the condition, all the consecutive section, and that we call a semi 
continuous system. So, we continuously feeding the liquid food in all the chambers and we maint ain the sequence of making one as pressurize the other as depressurize. And the sequence is 
going on and the semi continuous operation is performed.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:36)  
 
So, to summarize the process, first the package food in a sterilized container is given, then that is 
loaded to the HPP chamber. Then fill the pressure chamber with water , pressurize the chamber; 
this is done by the intensifier, then hold under that pressure  for a required period of time . Then 
de-pressurize the chamber and remove the  processed food. So, this is the whole chain that we 
perform in HPP system.  (Refer Slide Time: 28:18)  
 
Now, the most important thing that is what is the effect of high pressure processing on 
microorganism. So, microorganism which in the atmospheric press ure can very well sustain, as 
we increase the pressure up to 250 megapascal . Then  their growth stops and they start 
decreasing.  So, then what happen that when we increase the pressure up to 600 megapascal ; so 
the complete inactivation or the destruction of  the microorganism will be there. So, at 250 they 
start inactivating, and at 600 megapascal  they fully destroyed.  
So, when we release then the pressure and bring it to the normal condition, the microbes will not 
be again can grow and contaminate the food.  So, the lethal effect of HPP on microorganism is 
due t o the several changes occurring in the microbial cell. So, if we see the microbial growth rate 
versus pressure; so the growth rate per hour versus pressure if you can see. So, as we increase the 
pressur e, this is in megapascal ; so as we increase the normal bacteria will destroy as we reach to 
the little bit higher than the 40 -45 around. So, some bacteria are there, they can withstand little 
bit of presure ; so, those are called the piezotolerant.  
There ar e piezophile; so which can sustain  even up to higher that is around 100 megapascal . And 
obligatory piezophile there  is a range of this bacteria ; so, mostly they will destroy  beyond this 
pressure level.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:25)  
 
So, if we see  the destruc tion kinetics of the microbes, as we have seen we have discussed this in 
some of our chapter in this course that microbial death kinetics. How from the initial number of 
N0 to N they are coming with the time T  and how they decrease; s o, here also the same principle 
is valid. Only the difference is that in that case the destruction was because of the thermal effect, 
and here the destruction is because of the pressure effect. So, if we plot that the initial number of 
microorganism with time; we can get the eq uation as as this  
 
 
So, this is called the sterilizing sterlizing value  if you remember. So, this way we can calculate, 
where D is the decimal reduction time and t is the time taken to inactivate the microorganism. 
And Z is that by in case of the thermal effect ; we have discussed that Z value causes the increase 
in the temperature for that one log cycle  reduction will be there . So, this is the effect that  
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 32:21)  
 
So, in this case the destruction  follows this kind of a pattern, which will be explained by the 
Weibull distribution model.  So, this is one model, there are many such kind of model exists in 
high pressure processing;  that has been generated by empirical model development.  
 
where Weibull reliability plot if we draw; where beta varies from 0 to 1, which is this plot beta 
equal to 1 and beta greater than 1. So, for that it has been plotted as  Weibull reliability with 
respect to time.  
It can be simplified as,  
 
Reliable life where the 90 percentile of failure time distribution can be expressed as,  
 
And the d is the number of decimal reduction;  
 
So, this is how th e destruction  the microbial destruction  can happen  for the different beta value . 
And these values  as depends on the average shape parameter that is the beta, and the alpha is the 
calculated scale parameter.  
(Refer Slide Time: 34:35)  
 
So, how that can be i nterpreted that that Weibull distribution model. So, as we mention that there 
is a pressurization initially , then we have to hold it for a certain time; and then again release of 
the pressure will be there. So, here  in this pressure and temperature diagram  this diagram, we can 
see 1 to 2 the pressurization effect or the pressurization will occur.  So, when we have reached 
time time scale here; then from 2 to 3 there is pressure hold. So, we will maintain the pressure 
whatever we have achieved at P 2, up to this time t 3; and then again it reduc es to the atmospheric 
pressure.  
So, this two effect we can categorize into two different graph; one is considering the pulse effect 
that is increase of the pressure and decrease of the pressure. So, this is that and the o ther is 
showing the isobaric kinetic, that is when constant pressure isostatically constant pressure was 
applied on the food; that time what was the degradation.  
here N i is the initial and N o that we are attaining after certain time. So, when we  reach to No, then 
No to N t, initially it was Ni; then we have reached to N o and N o to N t that we hold it , and afte r 
that the degradation will be.  
So, to model this part that is the pulse effect, the equation is pulse effect  
 
. And the  other case the isobaric kinetics that effect is visible as  
 
 So, all together when the destruction is from the initial to the final one;  
 where n average is the average shape parameter, and c is the  calculated scale parameter. That 
means the alpha that we have discussed t here and n average is actually resembles with the beta 
factor.  
 
We can write this the calculated scale parameter b c, 
 
where Z T shows the temperature resis tivity and  
 
So, here Z P signifies the pressure resistivity. So, temperature resistivity and pressure resistivity 
these two are the parameter, by which we can assess that how much the destruction of the 
microorganism will takes place.  
And using this combine equation, we can assess that what will be the mean destruction of the 
microorganism. So, this is how the Weibull model is interpreted, I hope we have reached almost 
the end of this HPP.  
(Refer Slide Time: 38:29)  
 
So, let us just summarize the advantage of HPP. It is not dependent on the size and shape of the 
food and because the shape does not matter in the sense, if you apply the press ure it is applicable 
on both th e sides of all the particles of the food; or all the section  is exposed to the same pressure 
condition. High pressure is independent of time mass, that is , it acts instantaneously; thus 
reducing the processing time. So, it is not that suppose temperature you are giving and gradually 
the temperature is increasing fr om the; or temperature has to reach from the surface to the centre.  
But, here the pressure is instantly distributed throughout the whole section. It does not break the 
covalent bonds; therefore, maintain the natural flavour of the products . It can be appli ed at room 
temperature, thus reducing the amount of thermal energy needed for food products during 
conventional processing. Since high pressure processing is isostatic; the food is preserved evenly 
throughout without any particles escaping the treatment. And the process is environment 
friendly, since it requires only electric energy and there are no waste products  generated .  
(Refer Slide Time: 39:52)  
 
So, that way it is very helpful. It has some specific effect on the proteins and enzymes. Inhibition 
or simulation of enzymatic activity; so it it depends on the processing condition, that how much 
pressure we are providing, how long we are providing.  
Proteins are partially denatured in products, where proteins have not been previous ly modified 
by other proc ess; such as heating, drying and fermentation et -cetera .  So protein are partially denatured in these cases. Pressure affects  hydrophobic bonds and 
electrostatic interactions.  Tertiary and quaternary structure become affected, whereas the 
secondary structu re become affected over 100 megapascal  pressure.  
(Refer Slide Time: 40:39)  
 
So, we can see that when unfolded structure enters into HPP chamber and we provide the 
isostatic  pressure. I t may  happen that the condition A arise that is release of the pressure  will 
cause denatured structure of the protein  or it may happen that the rele ase may cause the 
unfolding or from the unfolding state to the native state conversion will be there.  
So, native to unfold can happen because of the application of pressure , and again the unfolding to 
native may also become because of the release of the pressure.  But, in some cases when 
denaturation happen ; so it is not an reversible process.  So, native to unfolding this part is 
reversible; however, from the unfolded to denatured part; this part is not reversible.  (Refer Slide Time: 41:51)  
 
So, the limitations is that Food enzymes and bacterial spores are very resistant to pressure and 
require very high pressure for their inactivation. So, spores inactivation of spore and enzyme 
require very high pressure. T he residual enzyme activity and dissolved oxygen results in 
enzymatic and oxidative degradation of certain food component. And most of the pressure 
processed foods need low temperature storage and distribution, to retain th eir sensory and 
nutritional quality. So, will stop here and will continue with the next to pic in a next class. Thank 
you. 