Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Professor Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 50  
Mixing and Agitation (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone, welcome to the NPTEL  online certification  course on Fundamentals of Food 
Process Engineering. So , today is the las t section of the mixing and agi tation chapter that we will 
cover.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37)  
 
So, in the previous classes of this particular topic we have dis cussed about the introdu ction of 
mixing and agitation  process , mechanism of solid mixing , that particular solid or powder mixing 
and mixing index , how we can d efine the uniformity in the mixing process , then mixers  for dry 
powder,  cohesive solids and also the liquid mixing . In the liquid mixing different flow patterns 
how we can control them a nd what are the kind of agitator that are used, what is  the power 
requirement for a liquid mixing , how we can control the vortex formation , all such things we 
have discussed.  (Refer Slid e Time: 01:19)  
 
 
Today  we wi ll just continue for the power requirement section a bit more . In the last class w e 
have seen  that for power requirement of N ewtonian fluid and  if this is r otated inside the tank of 
baffle d or un  baffled  condition, s o what will be th e power requirement and how the different 
power requirement can be you know related with the dimensionless parameters for dimensionless 
number those are based on the geometry of the tank and also on the fluid properti es.  
Now, this power requirement they depends on many factors  for example that what will  be the 
circulation , velocity , viscosity of  the fluid and d ensity of the fluid. all those will hav e an 
important effect on that.  So, we will see today that power  requir ement for non -Newtonian fluid. Now , the power input to 
a non -Newtonian liquid may be estimated based on the apparent viscosity, w e know that for the 
non-Newton ian liquid we ca n express the shear stress and shear rate behavior by this factor and 
again  we can  write them as : 
 
For the Newtonian fluid what we hav e done that we have calculated Reynolds number and 
Froude number also, so this Reynolds number and some power factor correlation we did and 
those correlation empirically has been defined for different kind of geometry o f the impeller and 
that helped us to calculate the power in a particular mixing phenomena.  
Now , when we want to use this, so instead  of the viscosity term t hat we have used in the 
Reynolds number now  we need to use the apparent viscosity.  So, in non -Newto nian fluid , 
apparent visc osity varies with she ar rate  then mu  that is the appa rent viscosity is expressed:  
 
Metzner and Otto developed  relationship on that  i.e.  
 
 ‘μa’ is the apparent viscosity , ‘Da’ square is the diameter of the agitator or impeller , ‘ρf’ is the 
density of the fluid , ‘N’ is the revolution per second of the impeller , ‘ϒavg’ is avg shear rate ,  ‘β’ 
is  dimensionless shear rate constant  and ‘n’ is the flow b ehavior index.  
Power  number formula is similar to that of Newtonian fluid that we have developed only wit h 
some change some modification w e have done here because of the non -Newtonian fluid.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:35)   
μa=τ
γ =Kγavgn−1 
μa=τ
γ =Kγavgn−1 
NRe= ρfNDa2
μa=ρfDa2
Kβn−1Nn−2  
So, here we can see that for power requirement of non -New tonian fluid here w e have Reynolds 
number with respect to the apparent viscosity and here we have power number P/ρN3Da5. So, if 
we see the difference between Newtonian and non -Newtonian there is a in the viscous region 
there is not much  effect, in the transition layer actually  we have some e ffect and again in the  very 
high Reynolds number we can observe . The change i s not that much prominent. So, for the non -
Newtonian we are getting a lower power number i n the transition region. This correlation has 
been developed for six blad e fat flat agitator with disk.  (Refer Slide Time: 07:34)  
 
Now, correlation for density and viscosity of mixture. So , empirical relationship are available for 
both the density and t he viscosity of binary mixture. So , what are these correlation ? This 
correlations are available for both density and viscosity of the binary mixture. So , now we have 
seen that when the fluid is there and for the Newtonian and non -Newtonian how the viscosit y 
will be changing , now for the mixture how this density and viscosity can evolve that we will see 
now.  Empirical relationships are available for both the density and the viscosity of binary 
mixtures  
 
Where  ν is the volume fraction and the subscripts c and d represent the continuous and dispersed 
phases, respectively . Volume  fraction of both the case multiplied wit h the respective density of 
the contin uous phase and disperse  phase will give the total density of the mixture .  
Now, for a n un baffled vessel and for baffled  vessel, what will be the case ?  For an un baffled 
vessel : 
 
For a baffle d vessel :  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:54 ) 
ρ=ρcVc+ρdVd  
μ=μcVcμdVd 
μ=μc
Vc 1+ 1.5μdVd
μc+μd    
 
Now , we have a problem again,  pseudo  plastic  mixture (i.e. n<1) if you remember in our 
rheology class  we have seen that non -Newtonian can be straight away differentiated into pseudo 
plastic and dilated. Pseudo  plastic mixture is prepared by mixing two liquids in the vo lume tric 
ratio o f 60:39.9, al ong with 0.1%  emulsion .  
Now, a for baffle d agitat ion tank having 1.2 m  diameter with 6 -blade turbine t hat is 0.8 m  dia 
rotating at 200 rpm  is used for agitation . A draft tube is installed to facilitate higher shear rate , so 
we have seen this that how the draft tube is helpi ng to mix it properly consequently  power 
requirement increases 20% due to installment of draft tube . Calculate the total power 
requirement. Use empirical relation for non newtanian, 6 blade turbine:  Np=0.4486 (N Re)0.4587 So, empirica l relation for non -Newtonian 6 -blade turbine  this is given , this is the power number, 
so you know power correlation earlier w e have tak en from the chart here di rectly t he relation has 
been given we will use this one now.  
So, now continuous phase is liquid A and dispersed phase is liquid B.  for liquid A and B the K 
value are 8 & 6, ‘n’ is 0.63 and 1.3, Densit y is 959 kg /m3 and 105 0 kg/m3, avg shear rate is 10N 
and 38N(D a/Dt)0.5. Where  N is the revolutio n in revolu tion per second here it is given in rpm, so 
we wi ll change it .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:14)  
 
So, first we have conve rted the rpm to rps i.e.  3.33 rps, then for liquid A we need to calculate 
average shear rate and apparent viscosity : 
                                                γ = 10N = 33.3 s-1 
 
Similarly , for liquid B :        γ =38N(D a/Dt)0.5 =38×3.33(0.8/1.2)0.5 =103.31 s-1 
  
Then the mixture a pparent viscosity for the  mixture w e need to calculate . So, putting all the 
value we are gettin g 6.05 Pa .s.  
 
μc=Kγavgn−1=8 33.3 0.65−1=2.35 Pa.s 
μd=Kγavgn−1=6 103 .3 1.3−1=24.12 Pa.s 
μ=μc
Vc 1+ 1.5μdVd
μc+μd  =2.35
0.6 1+ 1.5×24.12×0.6
2.35+24.12  =6.05Pa.s Volume fractions are given t hen density of mixture  is:  
 
Then our aim is to  find the Reynolds number. So, putting all  values we are getting the Reynolds 
number  as 350.3.  
ρ=ρcVc+ρdVd=0.6×959 +0.399 ×1050 =994 .4kg/m3 (Refer Slide Time: 16:26)  
 
So, empirical relation for non -Newtonian fixed blade  turbine has given  as N P = 0.4486(NRe)0.4587. 
so putting the value of N Re we will calculate what is N P that is the power number, so from the 
power n umber will calculate the power requirement . 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 17:32)  
 
P=NpρN3Da5 
P=6.59×994 .4×3.333×0.85=79.29kW  
Now , the next thing i s scale -up of agitator  system . Now, since we have seen suppose in a 
laboratory scale a small liquid mixture or  agitated when we are designing, s o once we have got 
all the shape facto r and the parameters fluid  parameters done , power requirement calculation is 
being done , then if we want to scale up this process for an industrial scale, so w hat we should 
look for ?  
First is we nee d to go by geometric similar ity, s o geometric similarity means that a single ratio 
between small -scale and large -scale applies to  every length dimension,  I mean what scale we are 
increasing one dimension w e will increase in the similar scale or similar f actor increase for all 
other d imension , the next is that kinetic similarity. I n that two  geometrically similar unit have 
constant ratio of velocity at corresponding point along with similar flow pattern.  
So, when the similar flow pattern is existing for example the axial flow or radia l flow, but these 
are sa me and to geometrically similar t hat means let us say both are round bottom ta nk having 
the same kind of same let us say 6 blade flat d isc impeller is attached to both of them and with a 
constant ratio of the of the Velocity. So , kinetic similarity we can maintain to upscale it .  
Third is the dynamic similarity that is all corresponding forces at counterpart location in  two 
geometrical similar unit s bea r a constant ratio , all corresponding forces a t counterpart location in 
the two ge ometric similar units bears  a constant ratio. So , putting th at the dynamic similarity  can 
be ass essed for the two systems.  So, that means ba sically the corre sponding forces we can see 
that are equal in the different cases.  So, for example in at the end of the impeller tip  you have measured the velocity , well  impellers 
velocity  you know, so what will be the fluid velocity at the tip that you have analyzed ? For 
example, t his wil l be your  large -scale impeller dia,  so from thi s point is if what will be your  
velocity of the impeller and it has the you know  radial a nd tangential direction,  if you consider 
the velocity of the of the fluid , so that also you need to calculate that this sho uld be similar when 
we have the large -scale system.  
So, at this point if you want to analyze what will be the force ? So, this will  be the same for the 
other upscale version or else if you for example the any  places you consider that other impeller 
tip or what is the in that draft tube section , so all corresponding forces at the counterpart location 
in the t wo geometrical similar units bears  the constant ratio. So , maintaining these cases  we c an 
upscale the systems.  
So, in that e qual liquid motion  we can ma intain or equal suspension of the solid that we can 
maintain . So, third is t hat equal rate of mass transfer.  So, we can see that for making this  
dynamic similarity we can go for this kin d of systems like liquid motion w e maintain or we 
maintain the suspens ion concentration of solid that we are suspending and we want mixing them 
properly that we can maintain the  equal rate of mass transfer that also we can see or we can 
maintain by this d ynamic similarity. So , these are the thing  keeping  in mind when  we want to 
upscale these systems .  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:26)  
  
So, scale up ratio  is: SR = (V2/V1)1/3 
Also H=D, where H is liquid level  inside a  tank, D is the vesse l diameter . Using  this S R all new 
dimensions are calculated , SR is if thi s factor we are maintaining , so in this f actor onl y will 
upscale or downscale the system . 
SRDa1=D a2,  S RJ1=J2 etc 
So, thus  we can maintain the similarity between  them and to  determine the agita tor speed :  
N2=N 1(1/S R)n=N 1(D1/D2)n 
For equal liquid motion : n=1, then    i.e πD1N1= πD2N2 
For equal suspension solids  ‘n’ is 3/4 and for equal rates of mass transfer : ‘n’ is 2/3                         
i.e ρ1/V1= ρ2/V2 
so these three other cases how we can do the scale up for a agitator. So, in this case while doing 
scaling up S R is V 2/V1, so that means the r atio of t he volume in the  second one divided by the 
first one, so that is eventually the ratio of D 2/D1. Therefore  we have used this one V2/V1 is 
nothing but D2/D1. SR will be  (D2/D1)1/3 with that we can upscale t his case based on these three 
parameter w here n =1 for equal liquid motion, n= 3/4 for equals suspension of t he solid and n=2/3 
for equal rate of mass transfer.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:29)   
Now , condition of an existing agitation  system is as follows. So , the condition given as tank dia 
Dt is 1.83 m , agitated dia D a is 0.61 m , J1 which is the width of a baffle  that is 0.15 m , N 1 =1.5 
rps, density  929 kg/m3, viscosity 0. 01 Pa .s. Scale  up the agitation  system for volume 3 times the 
existing one for the following objectives.  
So, this you can see it will be very beneficial for those who want to work thi s in an industrial 
scale system y ou want to upscale th is, so ho w we can solve this?  This is the problem of a scale 
up based on equal liquid motion. So, first we will consider this case Dt = height of the liquid 
level  (H).  
V1= 3.142(1.83)3/4 = 4.813 m3 
Then  V2 we need three times the existing volume, s o we have  calculated that. Finally S R will be       
SR=(V 2/V1)1/3=1.442 .   
Da1 is known to u s with this f actor will change , so D a2 will b e:  Da2= S RDa1=0.88m    Similarly ,  
J2 = S RJ1=0.216m . (Refer Slide Time: 27:26)  
 
N2 =N 1(1/S R)n 
There are three cases , equal liquid motion , equal m ass transfer an equal suspension, s o for all 
cases  ‘n’ is defined . For equal liquid motion: n=1 , then 
`   N2 = N1(1/S R)=1.5/1.442=1.04rev/s  
 Reynolds number that will be :  
  
So, we are ge tting very high Reynolds number, s o it shows the  turbulence region . Now, from the 
graph we look for the value of N P. So, this is the correlation,  correlation for this pow er number 
with respect to N Re, so we are getting a v ery high range somewhere here corresponding to t he 
value of the R eynolds number w e are get ting a very high range and that f or thi s particular flat 
blade turbine which is showing by curve  one, w e will straight away see what is the value of this 
number is coming.  
So, power number has been taken  as 5 and power requirement is 5×929×1.043×0.885 =2.757  kW. 
So, this is how we can calculate the power requirement and we can scale up also the process . So, 
here we wi ll end the discussion related to the Mixing we have once agai n we can remember that 
we have covered the importance of mixing and what is the case for a solid mixing , cohesive  
powder mixing , mixing index d etermination  then liquid mi xing, different flow pattern, the power 
NRe= ρfNDa2
μ=929 ×1.04×0.882
0.01=74819  requirement in liquid  mixing  for baffle d and  un baffled  tank for Newtonian and non -Newtonian 
fluid also for the di fferent mix kind of an d scale -up of a system.  So, we will stop here and will 
continue with another chapter in the next class. Thank you.  