Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Professor. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture No. 58 
Non Thermal Processing (continued)  
 
Hello, everyone, welcome to the NPTEL  online cer tification course on Fundamentals of Food 
Process E ngineering.  Since the last two classes , we were discussing about the non-thermal  
processing, which are the processing methods by which without heat treatment, we will try to 
inactivate the microorganism . And so  far we have discussed about high pressure processing and 
pulsed electric field.  
So, we have seen that how , in this two method, we can inactivate the microorganism and what 
are the process parameters , that actually can be varied during different inac tivation of 
microorganism, because not all microorganism  need the same intensity of application of any 
particular process, because it varies from types of microorganism . So, all this we have discussed 
and today we will see some more techniques , non-thermal  techniques by which the inactivation 
of microorganism  can be done.  
(Refer Slide Time:  01:29)  
 So, this technique high pressure processing and pulse d electric field technology , this we have 
discussed . Pulse light we will  discuss today followed by irradia tion, ozone and cold plasma 
technology.  And at the end, we will disc uss what is hur dle technology.  
(Refer Slide Time:  01:55)  
 
So, first we will discuss the pulsed light  technology . What is pulse light , pulse light actually a 
broad spectrum white light an d this has capability of sterilizing the material , basically this works 
on the surface, the surface of packaging material or the food contact surfaces , that means the , 
equipment s or utensils that we use for processing the food or for example, the conveyor where 
the food or fresh vegetables or after processing we want to convey that from one section to the 
other section. So, for sterilizing all those equipment, and for sterilizing the packaging material, 
we use the pulse light technology .  
Traditionally in t he industry, this sterilization of packaging material is being done by hydrogen 
peroxide, but we know that hydrogen peroxide leaves the residue both in the packaging material 
or in the food it self and that is harmful. That is why pulse light technology is becom ing 
important nowadays, and it is very effective also. W e can see that pulse light is considered , can 
be considered from 200 nanometers to almost 1200 or 1250 nanometers, this is the range and it 
can include the UV from 200 to 400 then 400 to 700 the visible light spectrum and the infrared 
spectrum .  Although , the inactivation of micro organ ism by pulse light technology , or how they actually,  
have the detrimental effect on the micro organism is not fully understood by now, but whatever 
may be the case , UV definitely playing a significant role . So, that is understood , that UV is 
definitely playing a significant role in decreasing the microbial contamination on the surface 
using the pulse light treatment.  So, we will see now, what are the parameters associ ated with it.  
(Refer Slide Time:  04:19)  
 
So, light pulses application is a non-thermal  method  of food preservation , involved the use of 
intense and short duration pulses. These are very intense pulse  and short duration pulses of broad 
spectrum white light , we have seen the range it starts from 200 nanometers to almost 1250 
nanometer . Light pulses are used to sterilize the microbial population on the su rface of the 
packaging material a nd also on the surface of the processing equipment and food .  
Light pulse s reduce  or eliminate the need of chemical disinfectants and preservative , because this 
is the conventional method we use that disinfectants and preservative and those obviously , have 
some chemical residue. So , that we can eliminate by this use , as I menti oned about H2O2. And 
inactivation of selecte d resistant microorganism requires  treatment with the complete spectrum , 
that means the range that we are having 200 to 1250 and other microorganism are inactivated 
with filtered spectrum that means, from this br oad range that is 200 to 1250 not all the spectrum 
is needed to kill all the microbes , it is specific to some microbes. So, some selected or filters 
spectrum is needed in some cases the whole complete spectrum is required . And the du ration of pulses ranges  from 1 microsecond to 0. 1 micro second.  So, the duration of 
applying pulses is also very less , the fla shes are ty pically applied at a rate of 1  to 20 fl ashes per 
second and at times one pulse is enough to inactivate the microorganism on the surface. So, w e 
can see that this is an effective method and cost involvement is also very less, and there  is no 
residue. So, you know removal of the residue or chemical preservative cost that is also , can be  
nullified. So, that w ay this is very helpful method in the in dustry.   
(Refer Slide Time:  06:49)  
 
Now, the pulse light system , consists of several components. So, what are those components , one 
is the high voltage power supply , that provide the electrical power to the storage capacitor . There 
is a storage capacitor to store t he electrical energy for the fla sh lamp , we gene rally use an inert 
gas lamp, to  have that intense light pulses and that lam p is actually gradually,  glow from the low 
intensity to the high intensity .  
And the pulse forming network is there . This p ulse forming network determines the pulse shape 
that of  which type or which pattern of the shape is generated , and the spectrum characteristics . 
That means the spectrum of what length we are using,  where it is the total pulse we are using , 
total spectrum or a filter spectrum we are using and the pulse shape . There is a gas discharge 
flash lamp is there,  that is the inert gas lamp and a trigger signal is there.  So, this initiates  the 
discharging of the electrical energy to the flash lamp , which is the key el ement of the pulse light 
unit.  Now, when we have a lamp of the inert gas and we initiate the discharge of the electrical energy, 
then that electrons will interact with the atoms of the gas and they produce the high intensity 
white broad spectrum light , that helps in the inactivation of microor ganism  and that generate for 
a very, very small duration as we mentioned about the millisecond to the microsecond range.  
(Refer Slide Time:  08:51 ) 
 
So, this is the system , here we have  the high voltage DC power suppl y, we have a capacitor , 
energy storage capacitor that stores the energy and when we apply the switch, so the flash lamp 
here, it starts , it starts generating the intense intensity of the light from the low to high and a flash 
will be generated. So , that ra diant energy coming to the target of the food contact material any 
surface or other packaging material etc . And there is a pulse shaping inductor which indicate s or 
which determines that what kind of pulse shape will be generated . So, this is the functiona l 
diagram of pulse light treatment.  (Refer Slide Time:  09:48)  
 
So, there are certain terms that we need to know , before applying this pulse light treatment to any  
contact, food contact surfaces or  packaging material . Because on  this pa rameter it depends , the 
intensity of the action of the pulse light will depend.  
So, one is th e fluence rate,  it means the energy received from the lamp by the samp le per unit 
area per second . So, that means per unit area per unit time , that is energy receive d from the lamp 
that is called the fluence rate.  
Now, fluence per d ose signif ies energy received from the lamp  by the sample , per unit area 
during the treatment.  So, this is considering the whole treatment , what is coming not per unit 
time. Then there is pulse width , pulse width is time interval that is fraction of  second during 
which the energy is delivered that is the pulse width . 
Exposure time that is time period in second during which the treatment is given . So, time interval 
there is a fraction of seconds , during whi ch the energy is delivered and the time period in 
seconds during which the treatment is given this is the exposure time .  
What is peak power ? It is measured at the pulse energy divided by the pulse duration , because it 
generates a peak and then it graduall y diminishes. So, we have to determine the peak power by 
the pulse energy divided by the pulse duration . Then pulse repetition rate s o, number of pulses 
per second  that is a frequency of the pulses in hertz and commonly expressed as pulse per second. So, t his is the pulse repetition rate that is in per second how many pulses are generated. 
So, these are the technical terms that we need to look for while designing the pulsed light system.  
(Refer Slide Time:  12:11 ) 
 
Now, the treatment of products by using sh ort duration intense pulse light  is based on the 
penetration of th e light through the product . So, as we are mentioning that , basically it acts on the 
surfaces , or it can penetrate a little . So, what will be that depth and how it can work there. So, 
light penetrates the surface of material according to this law . 
So, it says that  
 
I is the energy intensity of the light transmitted to a  distance below the surface . So, if this is a 
surface and we are applying  this intense radiation.  So, what will be , in this direction what is 
coming in . So, the energy intensity of the light transmitted to a distance below the surface , R is 
the surface coefficient of r eflection.  
So, because what is coming in , some will be reflected , some will be tran smitted. So, the R is the 
surface coefficient of reflection , I0 is the intensity of incident upo n the surface. So, I 0 which is 
coming intensity of the incident radiation.  Here it is light , intensity of  the light which is coming . 
And x is the extinction coe fficient which determines the opacity of the material.  So, opacity of 
the material defined by x that means,  that define that how much the light can penetrate.  
 
(Refer Slide Time:  14:12)  
 
So, first we will see that and then we will  go back to those equatio ns. So, incident radiation when 
it is coming, then it is reflected in some part and some part is transmitted. So, it is transmitted at 
a distance x that , we have defined their ext inction coefficient and there is d. So, her e it is the 
absorbed energy . And t his is the transmitted energy E x. So, this is how when the pulse light 
comes in , on the surface of a material so, the reflection , transmission  and absorptio n of the light 
radiation takes place . Now, we will go back to . So, this expression we have discussed . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:16 )  
So, the next is  the heat ene rgy dissipated per unit area E d,  
 
heat transferred by conduction E x is described by  
 
A that is  the area of the exposure, k that is thermal c onductivity of the material and t which is 
time, dT /dx is the temperature difference , between these , the i n and out of that layer so, the 
distance it crosses and dx is the heat transfer distance. So, across the distance dx if there is dT 
temperature gradi ent, so, the heat transferred by conduction will be this much , kT dT/ dx. Now,  
we have described already that what will be the energy incident , energy then reflected energy , 
transmitted energy or conducted and then absorbed or dissipated at the distance d .  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:03) 
 
So, then there is factors affecting , factors affecting the inactivation of microorganism. Now, this 
depends on 3 things , first is type of microorganism, then the interaction between light and 
substrate and the distance from the  light source. So, type of microorganism because you know 
every microorganism  or if you consider their characteristics are different, some have suppose cell 
wall membrane is strong , some does not  have  cell wall.  
So, there are many kind of microbes and wha t is actually defined that what type of the microbes 
is sensitive to particular spectrum of th e light. So, that is  why we have mentioned initially that 
some for to inactivate , some microorganism we need a whole spectrum of the light and for some 
we need th e filtered spectrum. So, that specifically depends on what  kind of microorganism is 
present .  
Then interaction between the light and substrate , it actually based on whether the material is 
transparent, whether the material is opaque, whether their surface is rough or it is having any 
kind of interacti on with the light it is,  penetrating at the surface or not. So, so many parameter  it 
depends on the  substrate that is what we are taking . And finally, the distance from the light 
source. So, the distance from the light  source is again important. So that it can have its energy 
and its effect on the surface to a higher extent or lower extent .  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:55)   
So, we have some , application related to pulse light  in the food industry.  So, it kills the b acteria 
and spore , as we have mentioned initially that the type of microorganism is ve ry important. So, 
now, we will  see that what type of microorganism , on which the pulse l ight is very effective, so, 
it kills the bacteria  and spore s. While UV,  causes dam age to the nucleic acid and other 
components of the cell, the instantaneous heating of the cell results in the rupture of the cell wall 
or lysing.  
So, we have mentioned initially that , whether the effect of  the microbial destruction is because of 
UV only or any other mechanism that is not very clearly understood, but this  has been , assume 
that the initial effect that causes damage to the nucleic acid and , in the , in the cell  wall 
destruction that causes because of the UV spectrum, and this ca uses damage to  the nucleic acid.  
But because of this energy absorption , there will be high amount of heat generation as well. So, 
that heat causes the results in the , results in the rupture of the cell  wall and eventually UV attack 
the nucleic acid and the destruction h appens.  
So, this is a combined effect of the UV and the heat and maybe some other parameter which is 
not very clearly known as of now, because there are effect of other spectrum as well.  Now, for 
material is concerned, we can see that transparent and colo red food material , if it is transparent 
material and colored food material s o, refraction is particularly  relevant because we have the , 
incident and then transmittance and then reflection.  So, if for the transparent and colored material, re fraction is rel evant, opaque food  material 
reflection will be the concern. So, we need to see that how much will be actually transmitted , for 
smooth surface specular reflection will be there , for rough surfaces, diffuse reflectance, diffuse 
reflection will be there, when  the surface is rough and for translucent material scattering will be 
there.  
So, therefore, from this we can see that , all such cases transmittance will be varied and based on 
transmittance and absorption, the destruction of the cell will be there. So, we  need to analyze 
properly that what is the interaction of the light pulse light and the surface.  
(Refer Slide Time:  22:00)  
 
So, therefore, this pulsed light  can be used in disinfection  of air and water for aseptic  application, 
the thing we previously used , previously done by some chemical disinfectant. So, that is now 
used by pulsed light treatment . Inactivation of spoilage and pathogenic microorganism in sweet 
food, this is being done . Fluid food, because, in that case, we can destroy the surface 
microorg anism , for a solid we have to penetrate deep and that may not be done by the pulsed 
light treatment.  
That is  why we consider on the microorganism , pathogenic microorganism of the fluid food, then 
surface microbial control. So, disinfection of the utensils  and surface as we mentioned, 
disinfection of packaging and closure,  surface decontamination of the fruit and vegetable . So, suppose we want to convey , this from one location to the other and while conveying it is exposed 
to the pulse light treatment so, t hat the surface decontamination can be taken  place.  
Those things can be done and a lso pulse light is using the hurdle treatment. So , hurdle t reatment , 
and at the end of this non  therm al we will discuss in , in a small way. So , there, we will  elaborate 
what  is hur dle treatment is so this is the use of the pulse light in food industry.  