Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Professor Dr. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Khargagpur  
Lecture 59 
 Non-Thermal Processing  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:18)  
 
Hello, everyone, welcome to the N PTEL online certification course on Fundamentals of Food 
Process Engineering. W e are in  the last chapter of our course that is N on-Thermal Preservation 
for F ood.  (Refer Slide Time: 00:38)  
 
And in that , we have already discussed few techniques , in non -thermal processing , such as high 
pressure processing  we have discussed , pulsed electric field technology and pulsed light also we 
have discussed . We need to discuss now irradiation, then ozone and cold p lasma technology and 
finally, the  hurdle technology.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:01)  
 
So, in today ’s class , we wi ll discuss the f ood irradiation. So, food irradiatio n is one of the very 
important non -thermal processing and this has been becoming very popular methods day by day 
because of its highly effective way f or inactivating the microorganism.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:26 ) 
 
So, we will see that , irradiation is the process by which an object is exposed to radiation. So, you 
have to have the clarity here , radiation means the intensity of the light that comes , inten sity of 
the radiation that comes from any light source, but irradiation is the process by which the obje ct 
is exposed to radiation .  
So, the exposure can originate from various sources like alpha particle, beta particle, high energy 
electron, gamma rays, x  rays, etc . And what happen  that when this rays , X ray , gamma ray and 
this, these are  having  capability o f the ionizing the material, ionizing the gas. S o, when they 
ionize that means  they remove the ele ctron  from the atom. So, then what happen  that the y 
produced the charged ions .  
So, this , the charged ion the y form and that charged ion and eventually they formed the free 
radicals because this charged ion can stay for a very short period of time . So, eventually t hey 
produce the free radi cal. So, that means  due to the effect of this f ree radical and the charge iron  
they will  destroy the microorganisms .  So, this is basically how they work. So, gamma ray, x  ray 
and beta particle, so, these are having very small wavelengths.  
So, therefore, these are having ve ry high penetration capabili ty as well. And for food system  
there are certain specified source which are used for this kind of irradiation treatment such as 
cobalt 60 , then cesium 137 , machine generated beta or X ray. So , when this rays fall on  any food 
surface so, they beca use of their effect of ionizing radiation effect  they kill the bacteria .  (Refer Slide Time:  03:48 ) 
 
So, food irradiation is the process of exposing food stuff to io nizing radiation as I mentioned  and 
this treatment is used to preserve the food , reduce the risk of food  borne illness, delay or 
sproutin g or ripening. So, what happen that , for food irradiation, these create the ionizing 
radiation and because of creating those ionizing ra diation, they form the charge i on and then 
eventually the free radical.  
So, the obvious question may be that , this free radical will not damage the food itself, so the 
thing is their intensity of this radiation that means, how much food can be irradiated  those are 
fixed. So, it has been designed in such a wa y or it has b een quantified in such a way so  that the 
microbes will be affected, but not the food will  be destroyed or degraded .  
So therefore, the mentioned  limit of this irradi ation  we had to obey clearly . So here food 
irradiation is the process of expos ing foodstuff to ionizing radiation and this treatment is used to 
preserve food to reduce the risk of food  borne illness , delay or sprouting or ripening. So  these are 
the effects that it can cause . If it is not  irradiated spr outing may be there, if it is i rradiated  then 
because of this irradiation sprouting will not be there.  
Then s o after harvesting, if untreated food is there, there may be some microbial decay , if these 
are treated  there will be no such microbial decay . It will cause delay in the ripenin g as well a nd 
this ionizing radiation that can penetrate through food to kill or prevent the reproduction of the 
microorganism ; insect and pest.  So, what will happen that , when the gas  become ioniz ed, so, the effect of the ionized radical f or 
example, thi s is O 3 plus i on or  hydroxyl ion or, the H 2O2 all such can generate this free radical 
and the ionizing  effect on the microorganisms.  
(Refer Slide Time:  06:25 ) 
 
So, we can see that , food irradiation has several advantages in industry, we can use it. So, t his 
one process that is food irradiation can cause sprout inhibition. So  onion , potato, g inger , garlic 
that we need to store for longe r days in warehouses or  for some industr ial preparation of the 
product , before p reparing the product actually we need  to store it. So  if these are irradiated  then 
no sprout formation will be there.  
So, it is  very beneficial . Other thing is so insect  infestation is very common in cereal , pulses and 
dry fruits. So, we cannot  keep it for a longer time , the fungus attack , mold  attack will be ver y 
frequent. So, therefore  irradiation treatment can be followed. So thus  we can sav e a large amount 
of the product, so  very cost effective thing .  
Then shelf life extension , since we can kill the microbes by this food irradiation method , we can 
store the product even if it is the fleshy food , we can store it for a longer time . Then,  pathogen 
reduction on the spices, fresh food etc. So, pathogen and even  the some toxic substance reduction 
that can be done, fungal attack everything can be pr evented.  So, quarantine of the fruit, so even on the fruit  surfaces also we can apply this food irra diation 
treatment to quarantine  them. So, that means spro ut inhibition , insect disinfest ations, shelf life 
extension, pathogen reduction and quarantined al l this we can get by only one method that is 
food irradiation. So, it is a non -thermal method and very effective method.  
(Refer Slide Time:  08:34 ) 
 
Now, next is a source  of radiation used in food irradiation. So, we have mentioned that gamma 
ray, x ray a nd electron beam these are the source  from where we can get the  source of radiation 
and from that we use , for example the gamma ray , these are emitted from  radioactive forms of 
the element cobalt.  So, the radioactive form is cobalt 60 , or of the elements cesium, that is CS 
137.  
So, these two are radioactive forms of this element and these can emit the gamma rays. So, 
gamma radiation is used routinely to sterilize the medical, dental and household products and is 
also used for the treatment of cancer. So, these are commonly used for w hich other than the food 
this has already in practice. X -ray these are produced by reflecting a high energy stream of 
electron off a target substance  usually one of the heavy metal into food.  
So X-ray ar e always widely used in  medicine and  industry to produce the images of internal 
structures.  Electron beam or E -beam, this is similar to x -ray and is a stream of high energy 
electron propelled from an electron accelerator into food. So, now what is all three are used on 
food, to have the irradiation effect.  (Refer Slide Time:  10:19)  
 
So, how the irradiation works? S o food is exposed to a carefully measured intense amount of 
ionizing radiation. So, this is very important, carefully measured intense amount of ionizing 
radiation a nd this has been given by , there are authorities on specifically working on this 
standard measurement I mean, how much ra diation dose can be given to a food  material so  that 
its constituent will not be , degraded because of the action of the ion izing radiat ion or free radical . 
But because the finally  the radiologic action will cause destruction to the constituent as well, if it 
applies beyond a certain limit and the food will lose its food value or nutritional value. So, that is  
why this is very important. N ow, when food is irradiated, that is exposed to the radia tive source 
of either X -ray or E -beam source or gamma ray, the radiation energy breaks the bonds in the 
DNA mo lecule of the microorganism .  
So, this breaks the bond  in the DNA mole cule of the microor ganism and thus  the organism dies 
or become unable to reproduce . And frozen food takes larger radiation dose to kill the microbes . 
And the effectiveness of the process depends on the microorganism ’s sensitivity to irradiation. 
So again, it depends on becau se the same dose may not be applicable for all the micro organisms. 
So, we have to decide  the dose requirement for the different microorganism.  
(Refer Slide Time:  12:08 )  
So, this is how it is being done , the food when entered into  the chamber, where they  are, they 
come in contact with the source of irradiation, and then while they exceed the microbes has been 
fully damaged. Similarly, the irr adiation process we can apply  on a large scale unit where the  
there is a loading area and after loading of all the food material  into crates or proper sections  
those are inserted into the radiation room . 
And after radiation there is f or example, here we are applying the cobalt 60 that generate the 
gamma rays an d then it has been unloaded . So, this is how the irradiatio n process , they are,  the 
food are exposed to the irradiation  processed.  (Refer Slide Time:13:05 ) 
 
So dose and d ose rate . Ionizing energy processes create enough of an absorbed dose to destro y 
microbes and unit of absorbed d ose in food that is kilograys and can be divided into 3  categories . 
Radicida tion that is low dose  that is less than 1  kilogray, this controls the insect in grain . So, 
doses as low as less than 1  kilogray, it can control s the insects in grain  and fruit , inhibit the 
sprouting in tubers,  delay the ripening of some fruits and vegetables , and reduce the problems of 
parasite in products of animal origin .  
For example, Trichinella s piralis in pork, so, we can see that  a very low dose is required for all 
such activities. And these are very comm on problems of the industry a nd in some cases the small  
businessmen or the small farmers wh o need to store this product  for some time , so they can apply 
these techniques .  
Then, ra durization  that is the medium dose , 1 to 10 kilogray. So this control  Salmon ella, 
Shigella, Campylobacter, Yesinia, L isteria , E.coli. S o basically we can see all the bacteria to 
control them  we need this range  that is 1  to 10 kilo gray that ca n control the bacteria that is 
Salmonella Shigella, Campylobacter, Yersinia, L isteria , E.c oli in meat, poultry and f ish and 
delays the mole  growth  on strawberry and other food.  
That means , we can see then how mild radiation treatment to moderately high radiation treatment 
can cause the different functions in the preservation of the food. So, th e next thing is little bit 
higher than this , radapperization that is high dose greater than 10 kilo gray that killed a microorganism and insect in spices , commercially sterilized food destroying all microorgani sm 
of public health concern t hat is special  diets for people with weaken  immune system. So, for 
them this is to be used and after that the irradiated food can be consumed. So, this is how we  can 
define that what kind of dose or what is the d ose rate required for different functions, whether it 
is prese rving the produce for a longer time , whether it is decaying the ripening, whether  it is 
killing the bacteria.  So, this is how we apply the irradiation.  
(Refer Slide Time:  16:28 ) 
 
Now, effects of irradiation on microorganism w hich is an indirect effect, l ater on  we will  come to 
the direct effect. So, indirect effect is that due to formation of the free r adicals during the 
radio lysis of the molecule. S o, what happened that when the ionizing radiation or this x ray , 
gamma ray fall on a food product, so, ther e are the particle of  water and oxygen those particles 
are there.  
So, rad iolysis of that water molecules will generate some free radicals , that free radicals are 
highly reactive , they produce the hydroxyl ion, or O 3 plus ion etc. So, they  are highly react ive 
and they form eve ntually the stable products . So,  that combined with one another be cause they 
are highly reactive so  they have to  make other products to be a stable form.  
So, combined with one another or oxygen molecules and whic h works as oxidizing a gents . So, 
this oxidizing effect can damage th e bacterial cell components . And then unstable free radicals 
react with the bacterial cell membrane , damage the ir structure and the bacteria dies . So, from this as we have seen that , water molecule when they io nize,  they will form hydroxyl ion , OH- and 
hydrogen  ion H+. Further t wo of  this will add and then form again more ions. So, this process 
will continue.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:26 ) 
 
Now, the direct effect is what ? The ionizing radiation kills microbes by da maging the bio 
molecules of their cell. So, incoming photons hit the electrons in the atom of microbes or food 
molecules and during the collision , photons energy is transferred to the electron changing the 
photons direction . Electron free to collide with t he neighboring electrons and this causes 
chemical bond breakage.  
So, it has seen that most of the organic bonds are getting affected by this and interrupts normal 
cell m etabolism and cell division . So, directly the cell division is getting affected and in directly 
the free radicals will form the destruction of the cell wall. So, these two will combiningly  define 
the total effect of the irradiation on the microbes.   (Refer Slide Time:  19:32 ) 
 
Factors affect ing the efficiency of radiation, so  the factors ar e temperature of food, then moisture 
content and presence of oxy gen. So  temperature of the food , this will have some effect because 
the along with the ionizing effect , if the te mperature of the food is also vary s o, that will  cause 
some additional effect i n destruction.  
Moistu re content because if the moisture  will be because of the ionizing radiation that will form 
the free radical and hydroxyl ion or hydro perorxyl ions etc  those are detrimental to the 
microorganism. So, this will  help, also the presence of oxygen because then highe r amount of  
oxygen will cause the oxygenation in higher amou nt and that will kill the micro organism. So, the 
amount of oxidation or the quantity of the oxidation will increase.  (Refer Slide Time:  20:32 ) 
 
So, the food molecule s are made of water , lipid, protein carbohyd rate and vitamins. These are , 
main constituents . Radiation energy generates a deg radative reaction with , when it interact w ith 
food called as radio lysis. So, what happen  as the microorganisms are getting a ffected  when this 
radiation energy comes in contact with food , all these constituents also ex posed to the effect of 
radio lysis.  
So products of radiolysis is known as radiolytic product. Irradia tion causes changes to food 
molecules , particularly at higher doses, t hat is  why we have to be very cautious so that we 
strictl y follow the dose requirement. S terilization levels causes nutrient loss and desirable 
nutrient loss and some effects also.   (Refer Slide Time:  21:37 ) 
 
So this is about the irradiation. And we will  stop here and we will  move on to the next topic. 
Thank you . 
 
 
 