Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Professor Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture - 51 
Leaching and Extraction  
Hello everyone , welcome to the online certification course Fun damentals of Food Process and 
Engineering. Leaching  has a huge application in food processing industries;  many processes are 
there that we use extraction . It basically again divided into many different categories i n which 
the two phase that we mix for extr action of one particular solute or one particular component that 
may vary from different combination for example liquid and vapor, liquid and gas, or maybe 
solid and liquid, liquid and liquid so many combinations are there.  
 But since this NPTEL course des igned on fundamentals aspect of food processing , many mass 
transfer processes for example distillation, absorption are not actually included. And therefore,  in 
the leaching and extraction we will give you an idea that superficially what are  the different 
kinds of methods, application and different kind of equipment .  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:36)  
 
Leaching & Extraction  
It is separation of one or more component from a mixture by contacting it that is the mixture with 
another phase, that may be solid or liquid. So, extraction process both encompasses liquid -liquid extraction that is called solvent extraction and solid liquid extraction that is called leaching . Also , 
there are one more separation method that is special case which is crystallization  and another is 
the super critical fluid extraction.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:52)  
 
So, the specific difference between the leaching and solvent extraction is that in the leaching 
solid and liquid are coming into intimate contact so that some solute component from the solid 
will dissolve  into the liquid component and will be getting separated whereas in the extraction or 
specifically solvent extraction two liquid phase are coming into contact.  
And then solute from one liquid will go to the other liquid providing that the oth er second liquid 
has higher affinity towards the particular solid component that has to be  separate d. So, in case of 
leaching it is define as the extraction of soluble constituent from solid material using a selective 
liquid solvent.  
So, in an extraction chamber where we put the solid which is having the solute and also have the 
inert solid. The solute which we want to separate so that has to be dissolve in the particular 
solvent. And there will be the inert solid where the solute is now mixed and that we want to 
separate. So , after this mixing the concentrate solution is  having the solvent and solute. Why it is 
concentrate because initially the solvent will not have any solute component so ideally this is 0 in 
the initial case or may be very low amount of that component if it all exist and when all the 
solute will come into the solvent. So , solution becomes  concentrated with that particular solute.  So, solute plus solvent will be going out and the extracted solid that means solute has been taken 
out so tha t solid will be there and some portion of the solvent will be getting mix with the 
extracted solid so that will also be there. So , this is how the leaching process takes place.   
So, in this particular case , we can specifically name these two streams  one th at is the 
concentrated solution which is a combination of solute plus solvent and another is the extracted 
solid that is solid plus little amount of solvent  is term ed as respectively overflow phase and under 
flow phase.  Overflow which is the solute +solven t and under flow that is the solid extracted solid 
+ solvent.  
(Refer Slide Time:  6:54)  
 
Major steps in extraction process:   
 Bringing the feed and the solvent into intimate contact by dispersing one phase into the 
other as droplets.  
 The Separation of the extract and  the raffinate phases that have different densities.  
 Removal and recovery of the solute from the extract phase in a relatively pure form (by 
distillation, evaporation, crystallization, etc).   
 Removal and recovery of the solvent from each  phase,  usually by distillation . So, this particular thing is applicable when it is about the liquid -liquid separation because in that 
case like for leaching we are mentioning as the overflow and the under flow. In case of liquid -
liquid extraction we name them e xtract and raffinate, extract that contains the solvent + dissolve 
solute or the dissolve component that we want to separate. And raffinate is after extraction of the 
solute what liquid will remain the initial feed slurry  or feed liquid will remain so that  is call ed the 
raffinate phase and they have different density.  
So, removal and the recovery of the solute from the extract phase now when we have extracted 
so the extract has now come from one phase to the other liquid phase. And relatively pure form 
because initially it was in a mixture with some other liquid and now since the second liquid 
which is our solvent has higher affinity that has taken all the solute concentration which now in a 
pure form. So, that we need to separate from the liquid by distilla tion, evaporation, or 
crystallization. Then comes the removal and recovery of the solvent from each phase, usually by 
distillation. Each phase in the sense when we perform liquid -liquid extraction then the liquid  
which is use as a solvent and which is havi ng higher affinity to a particular solid component will 
extract that particular component into it an d that will be coming out as an extract.  
And in the raffinate also some amount of the solvent will get mixed as it was happen in case of 
the leaching proce ss. So , from both the case , solvent has to be evaporated from the first phase 
solvent or from the extract solvent needs to be evaporated because we want to have pure form of 
the solute. So , we apply distillation , or evapor ation,  crystallization and also th at solvent has to be 
separated from the feed solution  because we also want there also the initial material in a pure 
form  of we want extract the solvent out of that . (Refer Slide Time:  10:07 )  
 
Conditions where extraction preferred over distillation:   
 Dissolved inorganic substances in organic or aqueous solutions .  
 Removal of a contaminant present in small concentration. It will unnecessary increase 
your energy consumption, so then extraction is preferred  
 A high -boiling component present in relatively sma ll quantities in an aqueous waste 
steam.  
 Recovery of heat -sensitive materials, where extraction may be less expensive than 
vacuum distillation.  And because of extraction is less expensive compare to the vacuum 
distillation, if you want to have distillation  at lower temperature so what we can do we 
can lower the vacuum level in the chamber and then we can have distillation at lower 
temperature. But compare to that extraction will be less expensive and beneficial in such 
cases for heat sensitive material sepa ration.  
 Separation of close -melting or close -boiling liquids, where solubility differences can be 
exploited and separation of mixtures from aziotropes.  For this case  we definitely have to 
use the extraction process because if they are close melting or clo se boiling liquid 
distillation cannot be use to sepa rate them their  always  will be some mixture of the vapor 
because they cannot be separated will by distillation so all such cases we need to use the extraction method.  So, maybe it is as depending on the c ase may be it is the liquid -liquid 
extraction or sometime we have to use the solid liquid extraction that is called leaching.  
(Refer Slide Time:  13:08 )  
 
Application of leaching & Extraction in food industry:  
 the separation of sugar from sugar beets with hot water.  This is very common operation 
of extraction not very expensive method hot water can easily dissolve the sugar from the 
sugar beet if the cells are disrupted and it is getting mix with the water in a proper form it 
is very easily can be extracted . 
 The extraction of o ils from peanuts, soybeans, sunflower seeds, cotton seeds, and halibut  
    livers.  
 The supercritical extraction of caffeine from coffee.  
 Fish oil from waste fish using organic solvent.   
 
 
 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 14:24 )  
 
So, everyday l ife you use one of very common application of this leaching which is when you 
use any tea whether it is black tea or green tea bag in your morning tea. So , what we do we take a 
bag and there is granulated green tea leaf is there we dip it into the hot wate r and then we get the 
tea. So , this is actually leaching of the polyphenols  into the hot water. So , this is mechanism of 
leaching very simple and easy experiment of leaching process.   (Refer Slide Time:  15:06 )  
 
So, if we specifically see leaching metho ds so in that these  are the steps that we normally 
observe. Once we make the once we bring the product being the solid material from which we 
want to extract a particular compound or particular solute. So , when that comes into contact with 
the solvent, sol vent has to mix with that material very well and has to penetrate or percolate 
through it properly through the solid  materials solid phase properly, s o that the dissolution of the 
solute in the selective solvent will be there. We use the selective solvent because not all the 
solute will have affinity in all the material. So , for that we have to select the solvent efficiently. 
So that it will have higher affinity towards that particular solute.  
Now , once the dissolution occurs once the dissolution of solute  in the solve nt has been occurred 
after that the next step will be diffusion of solute through pores of the particle. Because there will 
be the particle and the liquid has to enter into the pores of the solid miscella  or the solid particles. 
So, that the i n the solute which is in the very inner core of the material will come out and will 
dissolve into the solvent and they will diffuse through the, those pores and come out to the 
surface.  Now , once they come out to the surface the next this transfer of the solute into bulk solvent.  
So, liquid has to first enter into the pores then the solute which are in contact have  some pockets 
of the mater ial. They will first dissolute and will t hen diffuse to the surface and will then get mix 
with the bulk liquid. Once they get mix with the bulk liquid so the concentration is higher in the 
affinity of the solid particle whereas as the  liquid is flowing, so it has to then diffuse to the bulk 
liquid. It will transfer to the bulk solvent, so this is the whole process how th e leaching takes 
place in a n actual condition.   
(Refer Slide Time: 18:17 )  
 
Factor influences rate of leaching:  
You have to bring the material to  the solvent that you are using. So , if the surface area of the 
material is increase d so then only it happen that the product will come in very good contact of 
the solvent. So therefore,  we have to have very fine particles, so that the surface to volume ratio 
is enhanced.   So, many times what the granulated material  is used  to increase the extraction efficiency.  So, for 
that particle size will be the first parameter or important parameter. So , based on the particle size 
your extraction rate may vary because the solvent has to reach in at the very inner core of the 
material. Or it has to be in contact with the all  solute component so that it can be extracted.  
 Next is the solvent selection of the solvent is very important because if you have choice 
of two three solvents and they are in the relative order of affinity towards a particular 
solute. So you have to select  the higher affinity solvent. The solvent which is having 
higher affinity towards the particular solute component that you want to extract from the 
mixture. So , selection of the solvent even you have to see the nature of the solvent that 
based on your mate rial that you want to extract if it is a flavor compound you have to 
select the solvent accordingly.  If it is water solvent,  you have to select the water so all 
these factors  depend on selection of the solvent.  
 Temperature - if we increase the temperature  in case of the extraction process so the 
temperature of the solvent is increased and its mobility increases and its viscosity 
decreases. So , if because we know for the liquid when you increase the temperature so its 
viscosity decreases and then it will ha ve more mobility and it will have more extraction 
rate. 
 Agitation - suppose there are the miscella  in which the solvent is coming into contact 
with them and extraction is taking place. Now all the process of diffusion and dissolution 
and then bulk transfer  is very slow. So if agitation is being given in a system so definitely 
extraction will be very fast . So all the area which were not intimate with the solvent will 
also come within the reach of  the solvent and the extraction will be better.     (Refer Slid e Time:  21:33 )  
 
 Smaller particle size having greater specific surface results higher extraction rate.  
 Higher the concentration of the solute              higher viscosity          lower extraction 
rate. 
 Diffusivity increases with temperature as viscosi ty decreases.  
 Agitation increases mass transfer rate from the particle surface into the bulk solution and 
also prevents sedimentation of the fine solids.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:00 )  
 Classification of leaching  
Leaching can be broadly categorize as either  fixed bed leaching, moving bed leaching, or 
agitated.  
 So, fixed bed leaching that means the bed of the particle is fixed through which the solvent is 
passing and within this pass one, pass or two pass like that the material the solute will be 
extracted. Now , the moving bed is that t he material that has to be leached the component has to 
be leached  from our solid.  
So, that material is moving in many sections  through which the solvent flow is occurring. And 
during this process the leaching or extraction of  a part icular solute component is taken  place. 
And the third one is agitated one in which we provide some kind of mechanical agitation for 
better separation.   
(Refer Slide Time:  22:58 )  
 
Leaching equipments:  
It is classification by contacting method that provides three principal categories into which 
leaching equipment is divided:  
 that in which the leaching is accomplished by Rotation (Batch process).  
  that in which the leaching is accomplished by percolation.   That in which particulate solids are disperse d into a liquid and subsequently separated 
from it.  
Percolation and dispersed solid leaching  includes batch and continuous units. Materials which 
disintegrate during leaching are treated in equipment of the second class . 
So both the units  batch and contin uous can be observe for either percolation dominated leaching 
or dispersed solid leaching. Material which disintegrate during leaching are treated in equipment 
of the second class that is of the percolation leaching.    
(Refer Slide Time: 24:06 )  
 
 Rotating  extractor (Batch process)  
Rotating extractor is actually is a horizontally revolving cylindrical vessel. It is provided with a 
large hatch for loading and unloading the solids to be extracted and a drain line for loading the 
extractant and draining off th e extract. The vessel is provided with baffle plates perpendicular on 
the internal surface.  
 
 
 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 25:31 )  
 
Based on the percolation  again we can divide them into continuous percolator, batch percolator. 
And continuous can be also divided  into single and multi -deck rack classifiers, bucket elevator 
contractors that is call the bollman extractor, horizontal basket percolator that is call rotocel 
extractor, and belt percolator that is call ed the kennedy extractor.  
So, percolator and dispers ion actually in the percolation what we do is the solvent is percolated 
through the material solid material and eventually comes to the next section and if there are more 
number of stages. If they will go through all the stages and finally we are getting t he extracted 
product. Whereas in the dispersion the solid particles and the solvent they are in the proper 
dispersed form.  (Refer Slide Time:  26:35 )  
 
Batch percolator  There is a loading port and an unloading port. So , material is loaded from one 
side an d unloaded from other . We have a percolation extraction system where the spray of the 
solvent is from the top and while percolating through the bed of the particle the extraction is 
being done and then it is extracted at the bottom.  
So, it may be recircula ted sometime as with the requirement because if we feel that with one pass 
all the solid extraction has not completed so it may be again rerun. And in that process we need 
to increase the temperature also by heat exchanger utilizing steam. Because we know that if the 
viscosity decreases or the temperature increases for the solvent it can extract more. So this is the 
mechanism of the batch percolator.   (Refer Slide Time: 27:41 )  
 
Bollman extractor  
Solid inlet is from this section so all the solid is coming  into the bucket and there is a close 
chamber of air tight chamber of all the buckets . The solid is coming in the bucket in th e major 
quantity of the solid. And the 50 percent extract that we are  collecting from this left arm, is being 
spread on the top of  the solids that is coming into the fresh solid where the solid component is 
there in full concentration. So , as these buckets  are coming down the solvent will percolate 
through them and the extract will collect at the bottom. Similarly,  this buckets are e ventually 
comes from left to right following the path  of this bucket elevator.  
And as it again moves upward the fresh extract in our fresh solvent are spread on them so the 50 
percent extract is collected from the residual, and then again it is circulated.  So this process is 
continuous an d all the buckets are entighted at the top of this system in a bollman extractor and 
by a screw mechanism that are taken away. This is actually the whole systems and all this 
vertical chambers they have a  series of perforat ed basket.  These are all series of perforated 
basket in a chain conveyer so that all the liquid all the solvent w ill be percolated through them.  (Refer Slide Time: 29:36 )  
 
So, there are different geometry this is the side view of ballman extractor.  
(Refer Slide Time:  29:43 ) 
  
 
And simultaneously the fine solid are filtered out of the solvent so that the clean full miscella can 
be pumped from the outlet provided that the right hand bottom. And then as this partially 
extracted solid rise through the l eft hand side.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:30 )  
 
Rotocel extractor ,  
a horizontal basket and that is di vided into walled compartments with a floor that is permeable to 
the liquid rotates slowly about a vertical axis. So this is rotating about slowly about a v ertical 
axis and that is permeable to the liquids that rotates slowly about a vertical axis.  
So, the liquid is coming on this small compartment  and the solid are admitted to each 
compartment at the feed point. So there is a feed point where all the liquid s all the solids are 
entered.  (Refer Slide Time: 31:16 )  
 
So this is again the schematic view of rotocel extractor we can see there is 7 component and the 
solvent feed is entering into every top section and there are pump to flow the material from 1 
stage to other after 1 stage of extraction , it is being through to the next one. So , like that at the 
end of the process from the bottom the leached solid is being collected.  
So, the leach solid is collected from the bottom and solvent is enter ing into this s ection and this 
the solvent plus all that is coming that again put into one chamber again  and what is coming from 
the percolation that is again sent to the other. And this process going on continuously and while 
this liquid is coming over the compartment t he spray of the solvent is being done. So that it can 
percolate and going to the bottom and finally the leach ed solid will be collected.  (Refer Slide Time: 32:16 )  
 
Kennedy extractor , 
This is originally for leaching tannins from tanbark and it is now use d for the oilseed extraction. 
The solid are leached in a series of tubs and these are push ed from one to the other next in a 
cascade by paddles. So , there are paddles so that miscella discharge it by this paddles to the next 
to next tubs consecutively . 
And while the solvent flows in the counter current fashion, so the solvent is coming from the 
other side so as the slurry is moving from the left to right. The solvent is coming from the right 
to left.  
Perforation in the paddles permit drainage of the solid between stages.  (Refer Slide Time:  33:19 )  
 
Based on the dispersion of solid - continuous dispersed leaching and batch stirred tanks. 
Continuous dispersed leaching again can be classified as vertical plate extractor that is call 
Bonotto extractor, gravi ty sedimentation tank that is call Dorr thickener or agitator, and the last 
one is the screw conveyer extractor that is call Hildebrandt extractor.   
(Refer Slide Time:  33:46 )  
 
 Bonotto extractor  
What happens here is that the solid comes in from the top a nd there is an extract level is there up 
to that it will be filled. So , there is some agitator  will constantly agitate  and make the flow of the solid from the upper section to the lower section. This bottom section is call the extraction 
section and the to p section that is call the stationary plates that then there is agitated.  
And the solid materials flow that is constantly from the top to the bottom extraction section is 
also given. The solvent which is in from the bottom will be sprayed to the through th e material 
and will going from the top section. So , extract will be out from this section where another 
solvent in from this section. So , while the solvent will take away all the solute from the 
component the leached out solid that will come in this sectio n and drain in the draining section.  
And there is a screw that will take out all the solid and will discharge all the solid to the outer 
section. And this is rotational movement will be given that there is a shaft by which it is if the 
whole assembly is ro tated. So that the proper agitation can be given for better extraction 
efficiency.  
(Refer Slide Time: 35:14 )  
  Hildebrandt extractor,  here also the flow is almost counter current flow take place. So solid in 
from the left hopper and then the solid is t aken away by the screw conveyer to the other section 
to the right section. And the solvent comes in here and this solvent is getting mixed while it is 
moving towards the left. So , the liquid is moving towards the left and then at the end the extract 
is tak en away.  
And movement of the solid will goes on like this and spent solid out from the top spent solid that 
means all the solute has been  extracted from that. And the spent solid come out from the top 
section.  
(Refer Slide Time:  35:57 )  
 
Operating modes of extraction:  
Extraction of either batch or in continuous mode. In batch that is single stage multistage and 
counter current stage.  (Refer Slide Time: 36:10 )  
 
Single stage batch  
when the feed end solvent comes into a chamber comes into at the mixture of chamber. There is 
proper mixing by paddles or agitators and then settling and separation will be occur in it and 
their section with the extract that have the solvent and solute component will go away.  
And this is also called the overflow in case of leac hing process and there will be one that is 
having the slurry from which the solute has been extracted. So in the terms of that solute you can 
call it dilute one this is raffinate this is call raffinate for you know liquid - liquid extraction and 
the this is  called the under flow where the solid and little bit of solvent is present. So that is 
called the under flow in case of the leaching process.  
Multistage batch extraction  
In this  there are many stages, and in every stage solvent freshly entered however  the feed is 
moving from stage one to stage two stage three and so on. So , in every stage some amount of 
liquid component some amount of the solute component will be separated by this solvent and 
they will go to the extract.  So, eventually all the extract h ave some amount of the solute and at the last when the all solute 
component will be extracted then the feed will converted to the raffinate. So this is the multistage 
batch extraction we again call it multistage but batch because this solvent is not recirc ulated the 
solvent is entered freshly at each chamber.  
(Refer Slide Time:  38:05 )  
 
Continuous counter current extraction  
in that there are many stages suppose up to stage one to stage n is there. And flow is taking place 
in a counter current fashion. So feed is entered from one side and going as a raffinate and solvent 
is enter ed from the other side and going as the final extract. So , this is continuous and counter 
current system.  
So, stage one to stage n -1 to stage two and one as we move, solute is ext racted from the feed and 
getting added to the extract or the getting added to the solvent. So the extract of the first stage is 
entered into t he stage two and this continues .  
 
 
 
                
        