Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Professor . Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture No.  57 
Non Thermal Processing (continued)  
 
Hello, everyone, welcome to the NPTEL  online cert ification course on Fundamentals of Food 
Process E ngineering, we are continuing today with the topic of non thermal processing. In the 
last class, we have discussed about the high pressure processing technique that is a very 
upcoming and novel technology f or non thermal prese rvation of food. And today we will  go into 
the next one.  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:48) 
 
So, high pressure processing we have covered , we discussed today pulsed electric field 
technology, t hen eventually pulse light, irradia tion, ozone and c old plasma we will discuss , and 
at the last we will  discuss about the hur dle technology , which is a combination of all this 
technique.    
(Refer Slide Time:  1:12) 
 
So, first is the pulsed electric field, how the pulsed electric field will inactivate the m icro 
organism , that is the main purpose of  this discussion.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:25)  
 
So, pulse electric field is a non thermal method of physical food preservation  that uses short 
pulses of electricity for microbial inactivation. S o, this is a non therm al method and a physical 
method , for preservation of the food by the pulses of electricity , for microbial inactivation. So, very short pulse is transferred across the food, so, that it will act on the microbe , microbes and 
they will have a detrimental effe ct on that .  
High intensity of pulsed electric field  processing involves the application of pulses of high 
voltage between 20 to 80  kV/cm . And food placed between the two electrodes , treatment is done 
at the ambient slightly above ambient temperature for a  few micro  second to millisecond. So, 
that means, we take two electrodes across which we want to create a very high voltage or mean 
electric field and then we connect them with a non conductive material, we keep the foo d 
between the two electrodes and then  we send a pulse of high voltage between this 20 to 80 k V.  
And this can be done in ambient or  slightly above ambient temperature and the time record is 
also very short microsecond to millisecond.  So, energy loss due to heating in food is minimized. 
So, th at is one advantage as most of the non thermal method has this , that the energy loss 
because of the heating is minimized and also the effect , on the food because of that heat 
treatment , that is a nutrition al loss, fla vor loss, color loss, so  all these appe arance and sensory 
and nutritional losses is minimized because of this technique.  
(Refer Slide Time:  3:41) 
 
So, application of pulsed electric field processing generally have been seen on the , mostly the , 
the liquid pr oduct for example, the fruit juices,  apple  sauce , milk then liquid egg products , 
yogurt, yogurt  drinks then tomato juice , liquid whole egg. So, basically the pulsed electric field 
has been applied on this kind of liquid products mostly .  (Refer Slide Time:  4:13)  
 
It consists of a high voltag e power source , which is a DC generator , and converters , which  
convert  the voltage , convert the low voltage from utility line into a high voltage AC line , then 
rectifies  to a high voltage DC . There is a capacitor bank , that stores the energy  and there is a  
treatment chamber , which hold the food during the processing  and house the discharging  
electrodes to generate an electric field  in the food material .  
So, the treatment chamber has two things , they have the food , food during the processing and 
also house the discharging electrodes  that generates  the electric field in the food material . Then 
there is a switch so, that to discharge the energy from the capacitor that we have already stored 
the energy , to the chamber , so that it can go across the food . There i s an oscilloscope , that is used 
to observe the pulse waveform , that is in what form , the pulse is heating the food and so, that , 
that can help to assess the , the detrimental effect on the microorganism.  
 
 
 
 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 5:49)  
 
So, this is the com ponent of pulsed electric field , where food enters from this section , as we can 
see, and then our electrode , as we have seen that the  chamber has housed the electrodes , and the 
food is entered through this and across this , we send the pulse  of the high vol tage electric field , 
there are insulators also. So, that it will not be, conducted through these materials .  
So, therefore, the non conductive materials are adde d so that the pulse will only go throu gh the 
food material and have the  desired effect on the m icro organism and eventually this is released 
from the other end.  So, what happened that each time the , the food is exposed to this electrode , 
the pulse is generated and the pulse is going through the food material. So, this , the oscillator that 
we have , there in the system that will  show  what kind of cu rve is generated , what kind of pulse is 
generated .  
So, the figure a,  which is showing the chamber and figure b,  which shows the electric field 
versus time plot . And this is the system , where we have a h igh voltage DC power supply,  there is 
a charging resistor here . We have a capacitor th at stores the energy and there is  a switch. So, it , 
after storing when we joined the switch , when we hit the switch, it will send the electric field , 
pulsed electric field a small  time duration of the field , which is of v ery high voltage through the 
or across the food . 
So, one pulse is generally given and then it generally decays with time. So, this is how the plot 
will look like.   (Refer Slide Time: 8:08 ) 
 
So, basically,  if we see the schematic diagram of a pulsed electric field operation, we have a raw 
product tank , generally because we have observed this technology , pulsed electric field  on the 
liquid food products mostly. So, we are showing a case of that , where the raw li quid product is 
there in a tank and through a pump it is going to the , treatment chamber . And there is a 
temperature chamber as well before going to the treatment chamber , because if we need to 
increase the temperature a bit for the proper functioning of t his method, we can do that before 
entering it into the chamber .  
And the high voltage pulse generator is attached to the chamber , through the electrodes we send 
that high voltage pulse of short duration , and then the temperature chamber is there  again, so,  
that if we want to have change of temperature there, then there is a cooling coil , which can 
reduce the temperature and we have a treated product holding section or collection , collection 
section at the other end . 
So, th e main function by which this PE F treatment works on the micro organism that is called 
electroporation . So, this explains induced pulses from temporary or permanent pores , on the cell 
membrane.  So, because of this electroporation, because of t his electroporation a ctually, only 
determines th e increase of the cell membrane permeability .  
So, this determine the increase  of the cell  membrane permeability and if the permeability 
increases, then the disruption of the ce ll and the inter cellular  material will come out from those pores and the cell destruction or lysis will be there.  So, Zimmerman proposed this dielectric 
breakdown theory. So, when we send the high voltage pulse across the food , for a short duration 
period, it will make the pores in the  cell membrane,  and because of that, this destru ction of the 
cell will be occurring.  
(Refer Slide Time:  10:37)  
 
So, the main thing is keeping the food below the temperature normally used i n thermal 
processing. So, that is  one advantage, and then  the processing time is calculated by multiplying 
the numb er of pulses . Suppose, we are sending many pulses, so, all pulses h ave some short 
duration of time, s o, number of pulses times with the effective pulse duration.  So, therefore, we 
can calculate the total process time .  
Now, the process is based on pulse el ectrical currents , delivered to a product placed between a 
set of electrodes and the distance between the electrodes  is terme d as the treatment gap of the 
PEF chamber. So, we have seen that there are many electrodes in the chamber and the two 
electrodes ar e kept at a certain distance and that is cons tant for all the electrodes . So, that gap is 
called the treatment gap. Now, imposed electric field , leads to dielectric breakdown of the 
microbial cell membrane , and to the interaction with the charged molecules  of the food.   
(Refer Slide Time:  11:54)  
 
So, the processing time or the total duration of the treatment is defined as  
 
where τp is the puls e duration and n is  the number of the pulse applied to the food. So, t  is the 
total time , then we have the average electric field strength E is as followed ,  
 
So, V is the voltage across the food , that we have sent  and d is the gap which  is the  distance 
between the two electrodes.   
(Refer Slide Time:  12:32)  
 
The ene rgy stored in the capacitor bank  Wc, depends on the capacitance C0 and the charge 
voltage U.  So, the energy stored in the capacitor because when we have  generated that energy , 
that has been stored in the capacitor and when we put on the switch , then only it is going through  
the electrode and ac ross the food it is applied . So, this stored energy ,  
 
In a mono polar exponential dec aying pulse , the voltage across the treatment chamber rises 
rapidly  to set point V0 and then decay slowly with time t , according to the following equation. 
So, we have seen that those are the exponential d ecaying curves.  
 
 
 
 
 
 (Refer Slide Time:  13:41)  
 
So, this is the DC supply and this is a resistor , there is a capacitance where we have stored this , 
energy . And then there is  a switch when , when it  occurs when we , when we put on the switch 
then it is going to the treatment cha mber , the high voltage is passing through the food . So, and 
this is the V 0, where initial high p ass and then it decays exponentially.  So, where V0 is the initial 
charging voltage of the capacitor bank , and τ is the time constant defined as   
 
So, R and C is the load resistance  and C is the total circuit capacitance respectively.  
(Refer Slide Time:  14:43)  
 
So, factor affecting the outcome of the pulse electric field  that basically depends on the 
biological factor, technological f actor and media factor.  So, in the biological factor in the sense,  
what kind of microorganism we are using , because not all micro organisms , going to affect in the 
same way . For example,  as in the previous class , we have discussed the high pressure process ing. 
So, in a high pressure processing we have seen that gram positive bacteria are easily inactivated 
than the gram negative bacteria.  
Similarly, we have seen that the spore formers and enzymes they took more  intense pressure . 
Similarly, here also for  the pulse electric field  treatment , we have seen that the gram positive has 
higher  assistance over the gram negative one . And also i t has effect on the virus, mold, fungus 
etcetera . So, it has an effect on all but , at what rate the effect will be , at wh at intensity will be 
applicable, so  that depends on species to species , or what kind of microbe we are using , because 
for everyone their growth rate and these parameters may change and inactivation rate and growth 
rate these may change. So, it depends on specif ically what kind of microorganism we are  using . 
Then technological factor  is related to the , material , the technical parameter that we include in 
our treatment for example, the intensity of the voltage pulse and the time that we are sending , 
what is th e gap between these two,  the two electrodes that we are giving , how much pulses  in 
each process we are giving to the material , giving to the food, so all these are technological 
parameters .  
And lastly the media factor.  So, media factor is , that means we are d ealing with many kinds of 
food. Normally , by pulsed electric field as we are treating the liquid food so, that may be acidic 
food, that may  be water , that may  be different , the property  of that food may also vary . So, on the 
end, what kind of effect it wil l be, that depends on,  case to case it may vary. So, therefore, these 
3 are the controlling factors .  
So, that , we cannot say that if suppose a pulse of a certain intensit y, let us say  a pulse of a 40 
kilovolt per cm will be effected on  a milk sample that may not be effected in a same ra te on a 
fruit juice sample . So, the media factor is also very imp ortant. So, biological,  technological and 
media factor we have to look for experimentally , when we want to implement any pulsed electric 
field plant or treatme nt in either in lab skill  or for industry purpose .  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:57)   
And function of pulse electric field. So, the function is inactivation of microorganism , then 
inactivation of enzymes and inactivation of spores and vegetative cell. So, it wor ks on all of 
them , it inactivate the microorganism as well as enzymes and also the spores and vegetative cell. 
Now, we will see that how this effect  will occur.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:25)  
 
Firstly, what happened that , when the electroporation mechanism wil l work that means, the , pore  
formation in the cell membrane of the microbes will be there on , in that cells. So, the pore  
initiation will be there , in the electric field because of that high voltage electric pulse  and the water influx , to the material , to the cell will be there . So, when this  pore initiation has been 
formed the next step is the swelling will start occurring from the onset of the electroporation.  
So, the water influx will be there , to the cell of the microbe, and the cell lysis  will start.  So, the  
swelling will be there , after that cell lysis  will be ther e. So, then the intercellular  material will 
also come out from the cell . So, when this will happen, so, inactivation of the cell will be there. 
And most of the cases , this inactivation is , permanent, because, we have seen in some cases of 
the gram negative bacteria they can generate  their cell membrane after this, i f it has been a  very 
little damage, they can regain that .  
But in this particular case , the inactivation mechanism of the microor ganism by electroporation 
takes place in this method. So, first swelling , then cell lysis,  then inactivation of the cell.   
(Refer Slide Time:  20:16)  
 
So, difference between the pulse electric field and the thermal. So, first is the color , flavor , 
aroma, a ll this will be intact compared t o the thermal effect, PEF  is able to kill all th e microbes 
in the food and spore s also. So, that way it  is very much effective , because the, the spores destroy 
or the destruction of the spores is ve ry tough in the thermal process, so  they mostly remain in the 
food but in pulse electric field they can also be destroyed.  In the initial cost is more , but running 
cost is less , in case of pulsed electric field and thermal processing initial cost is less b ut running 
cost is more.   (Refer Slide Time:  20:59)  
 
So, that is  the end of the pulse electric field processing technology. So, thank you . 