Fundamentals  of Food  Process  Engineering  
Professor  Jayeeta  Mitra  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  54 
Leaching  and Extraction  (Contd.)  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:21)  
 
Hello  everyone.  Welcome  to the NPTEL  online  certification  course  on Fundamentals  of Food 
Process  Engineering  and we are discussing  now leaching  and extraction  and we have  already  
discussed  some  part of leaching  and extraction , the basic  fundamental  principle  of leaching  and 
extraction , the equilibrium  of leaching , single  state and multistage  leaching operation.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:47)    
So, after discussing  the different  stages and different  operation  of leaching  and also, discuss  the 
equilibrium  conditions  and the rate of mass  transfer , the next important  thing  in leaching  is that 
washing  of the slurry  material .  
Washing:  
What happened,  we are till now concerned  about  what  the solute  component  we are extracting . 
So, we have  taken  the material , the solvent , in such a way that the solvent  had a proper  affinity  
toward s the particular  solute that we try to extract  from  the solid  crush material  or slurry  
material . So, that was our main  aim.Washing is similar to extraction.  
So, that is why we try to evaluate  the overflow  where  the solute  and solvent  is there  and then to 
separate  the solute  and solvent , we apply  either  distillation  or crystallizatio n, etc. But in some  
cases,  the solid  material  is of important  and in that case, we actually  try to separate  one or more  
component  from  the solid  material  and then the pure material  is of our requirement.   
For example , sometime  during  the cheese  preparation , we want  to remove  the traces  of the 
lactose , and that is being  done  by repeated  washing  treatment . So,  in that washing , actually  
normally  we try to take water  because  it is freely  available  and inexpensive . So,  if the washing  
can be done  by water , it is very good  and if it is not, then we have  to look for some  other  solvent  
that is specifically  used for this kind of material.   So, physically  if you want  to think  the case is that till now when  we perform  leaching , the 
solvent  was coming  and there  was some  solid  material , may be crushed  material  mostly  because  
we want  to increase  the surface  to volume  ratio for all the cases . So,  that all the particle will 
come  in intimate  contact  with the solvent  and then we are getting  here as an underflow , the solid  
plus solvent  plus solute component , some  fraction  of that and in the overflow  we have  the 
solvent  plus solute .  
Now, if the pure solid  is our require ment  what  we need  to do? We wash  it with some  solvent , 
mostly  we use water . So,  then we want  at the end that the we will get solid  in the pure form  or 
then may dry it to remove  that water  and all the solute  will come  out of the solid  material.   
So, then for washing  this solute  that is mixed  with the solid  is considered  as an impurity  and that 
impu rity is taken  out by water  and here the solid  will be recovered . So,  this way we actually  
move . So, therefore  washing  is important  when  the solid  is of important  and the solid  we want  to 
extract  in pure form . So,  all the solute  and solvent  what  is mixed  with that we want  to wash  it 
and we get the pure solid  material.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  05:54)  
 
So, let us see, now in the washing  how we approach.  It is similar  to extraction . Similar  in the 
sense , in the extraction  the solvent  is used to take the solute out of the solid  matrix and in the 
washing , the whatever  impurities  of the solute residue  remain  in the solid  that is extracted  by 
some  washing  liquid  that is normally  water.   In washing  the inert material  is our required  product . That means  the solid  that we want  to 
separate  and the solvent  here is water . In multiple  washing  the water  content  of the material  is 
xw. So,  what  happened  that in one washing  we may not fully , take out the impurities  that is 
mixed  with the solid.   
So, in multiple  washing  we wash  repeatedly  and the water  content  of the material , let us say xw 
that is the weight  fraction  and a fraction  of this x which  is the impurity  that is the solute  or 
impuri ty that we want  to separate . And to do this what  solvent  we add? We add water  of yxw 
amount.   
So, the impurity  formerly  contained  in xw amount  of water  because  initially  the water  content  of 
the material  was xw. The impurity ,formerly contained in x w of wa ter is now in a mass(x w+ yx w); 
its  concentration x has fallen by the ratio of these volumes, that is to x [x/(x w+ yx w)] 
So, xw was already  there  in the sample  or the solid  material  and yxw that we have  used for 
washing . So,  its concentration  x has fallen  by the ratio of these  volumes  that is now x [x/(x w+ 
yxw)]because  initially  the fraction  we have  considered  for xw.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  08:30)  
 
So, now, after one washing  so what  will remain  that x1, the fraction  that remain  x1  
                                  xl = x[x w/xw(l + y)] = x[l/(l + y)]  So, x was the fraction  of impurity . So, after one washing , the level  of impurity  remain  as this x1 
that is x[l/(l + y)] .  
Now  after two washing,  this will become  x2  
x2 = x l[l/(l + y)] = x[l/(l + y)]2 
Similarly  for the 3 stage , we are getting   
X3 = x[l/(l + y)]3 
for n stage,  in the similar  way,  we are getting   
xn= x[l/(l + y)]n 
So, this is how after each washing  treatment  the impurity  that remains  so after one washing,  two 
washing,  nth washing  is the impurity  remai ns or we can say the impurity  concentration  in the 
solution  because  that is what  that we are calculating  here.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:16)  
 
So, based  on that, we will solve  a problem  now and, so the problem  is that after precipitation  and 
draining  procedur e, it is found  that 100 kg of fresh  casein  curd has a liquid  content  of 66 percent  
and this liquid  contain  4.5 percent  of lactose.  Now  the curd is washed  three  times  with 194 kg of 
fresh  water  each time.  Calculate  the residual  lactose  in the casein  after drying.   So, we want  to actually  remove  lactose  from  the casein  miscella . So,  4.5 percent  was initially . 
We try to wash  it 3 times  with 194 kg of fresh  water . So,  calculate  the quantity  of water  that 
would  have  to be used in a single  wash  to attain  the same  lactose  content . Now there  is a method  
that if suppose  n times we are washing , so we can replace  this with n times  more  water  in one 
stage . So,  that can also be done . So,  assume  the perfect  washing  and draining  of curd to 66 
percent  of moisture  each time.  This was the condition  given.  Now,  let us see how we can solve 
this one.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:12)  
 
100kg of curd contain 66kg solution. The 66kg of solution contain 4.5% that is 3 kg of lactose.  
In the first wash (194 + 66) = 260kg of solution contain 3kg lactose.  
In 66 kg of solution lactose remaining there will be (66/260) x 3=.76 kg.  
After the second wash the lactose remaining will be (66/260) x 0.76=.19 kg.  
After the third wash the lactose remaining will be (66/260) x 0.19=0.048 kg.  
 
 
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:52)  
 
Or, after three washings lactose remaining will be 3 x (66/260)3 =0.048 kg.  
So, after washing and ding 0.048kg of lactose will remain with 34kg dry casein so that lactose 
content of the product = 0.048/34.05 = 0.14%  
and total wash water = 3  x 194 = 582kg  
To reduce the impurity content to 0.048 kg in one wash would require x kg of water, where  
(3 x 66)/(x + 66) = 0.048kg; x = 4060 kg. so the total wash water = 4060kg.  
So, this we will require  if we want  to achieve  this much  impurity  level  in one stage  washing . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:53)  
 Liquid -liquid  extraction  
So, far, we have  mostly  discussed  the leaching  that is the solid -liquid  extraction  process  and we 
have  discussed  its equilibrium  multistage  process , operation , mass transfer  rate, and few 
questions  and finally  the washing  method  for extracting  the solid  component  when  the solid  
component  in pure form  is required . That is coming  from  the underflow .  
Now , next we will discuss  the liquid -liquid  extraction . So,  in the liquid -liquid  extracti on the 
main  use of this is there  in some  bio separation  process , then some  flavour  extraction  and oil 
extraction  or when  we want  to separate  the antibiotics , all these  things  from  one solution  to the 
other.   
So, in that case we use this one liquid -liquid  extraction  and here like in the solid -liquid  extraction  
the solid  and liquid  though  both came  into very intimate  contact . Here 2 liquid  phases  are 
coming  into contact  and a third  component  that has affinity  higher  than the second  liquid  from  
the first, so it will going  to the second  one.  
For example,  if we try to visualize  this, suppose  one fluids  stream  is coming  which  is having  
some  solid  particle,  and then the other  stream  is getting  mixed  with it, which  is having  the pure 
solvent  may be. There may be no traces  of, there  may some  traces  of the solute  or may not be.  
So, then what  will happen  that this the first solvent  or liquid  that has, that had that solute  earlier  
will come  out from  the system  and all the solute  will now come  to the second  liquid  or the 
second  solvent  because  this solute  has higher  affinity  to the second  liquid  or the second  solvent  
that we have  used to extract  that from  the first phase  or the first liquid  phase . So, phase 1 and 2, 
these  2 liquid  phase  are come  into direct  contact  and the solute component  has been  taken  by the 
solvent , second  solvent  and the first solvent  will go out.  
So, the concentration  of the solute  will increase  in the second  solvent  and while  it is decrease  in 
the first one and the equilibrium  in these  2 when  it will reach  so that time the process  will be 
stopped  because  of achieving  the equilibrium  condition .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:31)   
So, liquid -liquid  extraction  again,  the transfer  is based  on the molecular  transfer . So,  in liquid -
liquid  extraction , the extrac tion takes  place  from  one liquid  medium  to the other  as we have  
mentioned . So,  we have  a feed,  solvent , extractor . Now the raffinate  we call when  the solute  
come  out from  the feed solvent  and extract  we call when  the solute  is coming  with the solvent  
and the solvent  is going  out, so the extract  is this one and the raffinate  is this one. So, this term is 
practically  used for liquid -liquid  extraction  only.  
Here the feed contains  the desired  solute , mass transfer  takes  place  because  of these  two having  
the chemical  potential  difference  for that particular  solute . So,  through  their interface  layer  or 
contact  layer , the transfer  of mass  will takes  place.  The raffinate  is the residual  feed solution , 
may contain  the little solute also.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  20:37)  
 
So, as we reach  the equilibrium  condition  in leaching,  we need  it, we have  to observe  that 
equilibrium  condition  in the solvent  extraction  or liquid -liquid  extraction  also. So, equilibrium  is 
reached  when  the chemical  potential  of the extractable  solute  is the same  in the 2 phases . 
Practically  this rule leads  to the definition  of a distribution  coefficient   
 
 
So, distribution  coefficient  is expressed  as this and c1 and c2 are the equilibrium  concentration  of 
the solute  in the 2 phases  because  2 liquid  phases are coming  into contact  so the extract  and 
raffinate  these  2 are going  out. So,  actually  these  are the concentration  of this extract  and 
raffinate  phase.  The distribution  coefficient  is an expression  of the relative  preference  of the 
solute  for the solvent.   
So, ideally  this will be uniform  when  the equilibrium  condition  is arrived,  but because  we need  
to know  the relative  preference  because  if solute  is having  in 1 solvent  and the affinity  to that 
solve nt is higher  than the other  solvent , then the extraction  would  not be possible . So,  that we 
have  to see. Now, the efficiency  of a liquid -liquid  extraction  process  can be strong ly improved  
by k. So,  if the distribution  coefficient  increase  so that liquid -liquid  extraction  efficiency  will 
also increase .  
𝐊=𝐂𝟏
𝐂𝟐 (Refer  Slide  Time:  22:27)  
 
Equilateral triangular/ternary phase diagram:  
Now , as we have  shown  you how to plot the equilibrium  conditions  in case of the leaching  
operation  there we have  taken  a rectangular  plot and in the y axis we plotted  N and that is the 
inert material  / the kg of the solute  + kg of the solvent,  with that we have  plotted  ya and xa, that is 
the solute  fraction  in the slurry  stream  and in the extract  or in those  cases  for the leaching .  
Similarly , for the liquid -liquid  extraction  also we can develop  the equilibrium  plots and these  
equilibrium  plots  are of many  types . So,  sometime  we may refer  the equilateral  triangular  plots  
or rectangular  plots  are also there , even  these  liquids  that the two phase  liquid  that we are using  
to separate  some  compound , some  solute  or some  oil, some  flavour  compounds . etc. So,  
sometimes  those  two liquid  that we are using  those  are partially  miscible  also.  
So, there  are many  cases . Here, we will discuss  one or two of them . So, equilateral  triangular  or 
ternary  phase  diagram . So,  we need  to have  three  component  because  we have  two solvent  and 
one is the component  that we want  to separate . So,  you can see in this equilateral  triangular  or 
ternary  phase  diagram  for leaching  where  you can consider  A that is the solute that we want  to 
extract  and B that is the solvent , and C is the other  one. So, scale  of C moving  from  this side to 
this side from  0 percent  to 100 percent  and scale  of A varies  from  here to here 0 to 100 percent  
and scale  of B varies  from  here to here.   So, this is one approach . There are many  approach  of solving  this. So,  let us say one case we 
want  to have . So, how these three  can be separated . Initially , we will get a mixture.  Suppose , we 
are having  2 stream . So,  when  they will get mix so they will reach eventually  on equilibrium  
stage , that even  equilibrium  stage , let us say signifies  by m, and when  this equilibrium  stage  is 
coming  so we will get phase  1 and phase  2 separated  so the solute component  of the phase  1 has 
now reached  to phase  2. 
But this point  when  we say that this is equilibrium  that means  that equilibrium  should  be visible  
by measuring  the concentration  of that solute  in both the stream  and that should  come  equal  or in 
the ideal  case, it is coming  equal.  We may not get equal  but we can calculate  that from  those  
charts.   
So, then the main  thing  is we need  to achieve  some  equilibrium  position . So, in this example,  let 
us say we have  a point.  We have  a ternary  phase  diagram  and here we have  a point.  Now , in this 
point  what  will be the concen tration  that we want  to measure ? Now, the concentration , suppose  
we define  A as the one solute  component  that we want  to separate  and B or C as one solvent . So, 
in one stream  the concentration  of A is if it is fixed,  so the other  concentration  we can fix. So, we 
can see that if we consider  this point , we can see that solute  varies  from  0 to 1 in this direction . 
Solvent  mass fraction  varies  from  this left to right  in this fashion  and the solute  solvent  fraction , 
so this is, first one is the carrier.   
So, this is one solvent  that is the carrier  one that is carrying  the solute . This is the solvent  and this 
is the solute  mass  fraction . So,  at this point  we can have  the lines  just parallel  to this already  
having  this ternary  lines  so we are getting  a little highe r than 0.5. So,  let us say 0.52 that is the 
mass  fraction  of the carrier  and now if we draw  this line on the solvent  side, so we are getting  
that around  0.25 that will be the concentration  of the solvent  and similarly  if we move  towards  
the solute  side, we are getting  also around  0.23. So, this is how all the 3 fraction  can be find out 
at a particular  condition .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  27:58)  
 
So, in the solvent  extraction  or liquid -liquid  extraction  process , we need  to remember  a few 
things . First is each vertices  of the triangle  represent  the pure component  and each base line 
indicate  the composition  of a binary  mixture , each baseline  having  the composition  of the binary  
mixture.   
So, in each baseline , the composition  of a pure component  located  opposite  to that vertex  is 0 
and in liquid -liquid  extraction  process  the three  vertices  indicate  the solute  carrier  and solvent . 
That we have  seen just now in the three , plot and in liquid -liquid  extraction  the ternary  diagram  
has 2 region.  One is the single  liquid  region and the two liquid  phase  region . So, this we actually  
get when  we have  some  partially  miscible  solvent.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  29:19)  
 
So, here we can see in this diagram  that we have  extract  that we want  to separate , we have  
raffinate  and we have  solvent. So, this is the solvent , this is raffinate  that is after taking  out that 
solute the stream  is called  the raffinate  and here it is the extract . So, a single  liquid  region  where  
all 3 components  are dissolved  in a single  liquid  phase  that we can have  from here. 
And the two liquid  phase  region . So,  this is the single  phase  region  where  only the extra  
component  will be there  and there  is the 2 phase  region  where  the solvent  and raffinate  will be 
getting  partially  mixed . The two liquid  phase  region  where  mixture  composition  split into 2 
immiscible  liquid .  
For liquid -liquid  extraction  the mixture  needs  to be in 2 phase  region . So,  here it is 2 phase  
region  and these lines  are called  the tie line and there  will be one point  that is called  the plate  
point  that actually  having  a concentration  of both the solvent  similar  or both are coexist  at that 
condition . So, the 2 regions  are divided  by miscibility  boundary  or liquid -liquid  equilibrium  line. 
So, this is the miscibility  boundary  or liquid -liquid  equilibrium  line. (Refer  Slide  Time:  30:59)  
 
So, now this is again  one example  that we will solve  in this across  that miscibility  boundary  is 
given  and the mass  fraction  of furfural  is here. Ethylene  glycol  that we want  to separate  from  
water  using  this. So,  there  is a water  and ethylene  glycol  and furfural  ethylene  glycol  are 
completely  miscible  pair. So, water  and furfural  is partially  miscible  and there  is a miscibility  
boundary . So,  this is called  the plait point. At plait point p, the 2 liquid  phase  have  identica l 
composition . So, miscibility  limit  for the furfural  water  binary  systems  are D and G.  
So, here it is D and G. So,  that is from  this composition  to this composition , it can be mixed  
among  them  selves  and we can observe  these  are the tie line and in the tie line, so after if this 
combination  that means  the water  ethylene  glycol  is mixed  with the furfural . So,  one point  will 
be there  that is the mixing  point  and from  that point , we need  to find out what  is the 
concentration  of all other  raffinate  and extrac t sections.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  32:40)   
 
So, in this particular  diagram , what  we can see that we denoted  this point  M that is the mixture  
point. So, in this point  mixture,  we need  to find the percentage  of ethylene  glycol , then water  and 
then the furfural . So, we will have  a line straight  from  this point  M and that will touch  this line of 
the mass  fraction  of water  at some  point  here,  which  is around  19 percent  because  it is moving  
from  this direction  0 to this so we are getting  at 19 percent .  
Then we will look for the mass  fraction  of ethylene  glycol . So,  this is the ethylene  glycol  mass 
fraction . So, we will go in this left side and find that what  is the fraction  of the point  so we are 
getting  that 20 percent  ethylene  glycol , 19 percent  water  and the percentage  of the furfural  now 
we need  to find. So, for the furfural  will just straight  away  come  in this side.  
So, around  61 percent  of that we will get. So,  we get furfural  here, we get mass fraction  of the 
ethylene  glycol  here and we will get here the water. Now , what  we need  to do is from  the 
mixture  we need  to find what  is the composition  of the raffinate  and what  is the composition  of 
the extract .  
So for raffinate  and extract  this passing  through  M, we will need  to have  the tie line. So, here is 
the tie line is there , this is E and this is the R. So,  this is raffinate  and this is the extract . So,  
initially  ethylene  glycol  was mixed  with the water , now it will come  to the furfural . So,  that is 
why it is extract .  So, then what  we will get that if at this extract  one, we want  to find out what  is the percentage  of 
the ethylene  glycol . So,  we can get here that is 10 percent.  10 percent  ethylene  glycol  we are 
getting  and now what  is the water  in this because  some  we cannot  completely  separate .  
So from  here,  we will look for that how much  percentage . So, if we will get somewhere  here we 
will end up so that is around  4 percent  water we will get and from  this line, extract  line if we 
come  here, so somewhere  here we are reach ing. So,  80 percent  furfural  will be there.  Now , 
coming  to the raffinate  part. So, for the raffinate  part, if you try to read the equilibrium  diagram,  
so for the raffinate  we will have  the tie line from  the mixture  to the raffinate  side and at this 
point , so we will have  straight  away  ethylene  glycol  that is 40 percent  and we have  water  as 
around  48 or 49 percent  and similarly , we have  from  this point  we have  around , this is our so are 
somewhere  here, we will have , so around  11 percent  of the furfural .  
So, this is how the equilibrium  diagram  in case of the liquid -liquid  extraction  can be read.  We 
are not going  to give you any equations  there  because  these  equations  are almost  similar  that we 
have  developed  in the leaching.  We have  2 streams  that is coming  into. There are different  
fraction  of that particular  solute  component  and then those  two are getting  mixed  and extract  and 
raffinate  are coming.   
So they are all almost  similar  to that, but we want  to give you an idea of how to read these  
equilibrium  charts  if it is a miscible,  2 solvents  are partially  miscible  or if they are not then we 
can have  simply  equilateral  triangular  diagram  or ternary  phase  diagram , and we are not going  to 
very detailed  discussion  of this but this will give you an idea that how the separation  is taking  
place  and what  is the fraction  of the component  that is going  into each phase s. So, we will stop 
here and we will discuss  the rest of the thing  in the next class.  Thank  you. 