Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Professor . Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture No. 55 
Leaching and Extraction (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone, welcome to the NPTEL  online certifi cation course on Fundamentals of Food 
Process Engineering . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:09)  
 
So, extraction basically when we call extraction, we , we may define  2 cases either solid , solid 
liquid extraction that is leaching and the equipment's specific to leachi ng we have already 
discussed in our first  2 classes . Today, the equipment s that we will di scuss those are used for 
liquid -liquid extraction or basically the solvent extraction. And before going into that, I once 
again try to just recapitulate that what hap pened in case of these extraction phenomena.  
So, we have to if any  one of you need to design or need  to assess any process which involves 
extraction or leaching operatio n, so, you have to first move with this to have the diagram of what 
is the solvent ? What is the solvent coming in ? And what is the  other solvent ? Because in case of 
this liquid -liquid extraction, you have both the stream solvent both the streams are liquid . So, 
here also you mentioned that this is solvent and this is carrier.  So, then you have the extract a nd ra ffina te those  two stream and you have to find first that 
equilibrium diagram that you can read from those equilateral triangle diagram and if those  2 
solvents are partially miscible you can have this . So, this will be your component C or A 
whatever . And from that you need to find a fraction of all then you have to see the material 
balance . Then you have to see the component balance.  
And always remember, whether it is in you know the leaching operation or extraction operation 
ideal ca ses that you will get  one plot where your operation where  your xA by y A. If you plot 
where your x A is defining the concentration of the solute in the overflow or in the extract and yA 
defining your concentration in the raffinate or in the underflow. So, yo u will have a 45 ° line if 
the process is exactly our ideal equilibrium condition.  But generally it is not that, so, what the 
condition will get in each operating , step. So, that is called the operating line.  
So, whatever the component balance will get fr om that we can define that if the process is 
actually deviating let us actually deviating from the ideal case. So, if it is a single stage, so, you 
just get  one such deviation block a nd it is a multi stage problem for different stages, what will be 
the fra ction ? And how much in from the initial fraction to the final section you can separate by 
this method?   
Similarly, for the lea ching if you remember, we have t his kind of  plot like these are the ideal plot 
for the x A versus y A, and then we have some variati on from the ideal situation. So, all those 
things are there. And finally, we will  come to the equipment section. (Refer Slide Time: 05:21)  
 So, extraction equipment, there are many kind of equipments and some of the things we will  
discuss here only just t o give you an brief idea of the ir types. So , the extraction equipment, we 
have vessel in which the mixing is done by mechanical agitation.  We have seen initially that for 
extraction, the agitation that mechanical agitation and temperature these are having a positive 
role because this increases the rate of mass transfer. So, for that we need to have vessels in which 
the mixing is done and some agitation we need to provide there.  
So, agitation may be of different mechanical arrangement we need to provide, bu t some agitation 
is required because it will help in the proper extraction. So, we have agitated  columns . Mixer 
settler we are ha ving and centrifugal extractor; t his is also we are having . So, in both cases we 
use some motion or some agitation mechanically  or then we can design those vessel for 
extraction . And mechanical agitation these  3; whereas, we can also have this mixing done by 
flow of the fluid.  
So, these are spray extraction tower and packed  extraction tower. So, extraction should be done 
with pro per mixing of the  2 phases are there and the  2 phases come in proper mixing or in a 
properly dispersed condition if you provide some mechanical agitation to that . Apart from 
mechanical agitation we can also give the flow of the fluid that is in the form of  spray or the 
packed extraction tower.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:30)  
 So, 2 most important types of agitated  columns that is us ed for liquid -liquid extraction. One  is 
the Scheib le Tower , the agitators are mounted at a fixed interval on a central vertical sha ft. So, 
this is kind of a mechanical agitation that we mount agitators  at the fixed interval on a central 
vertical shaft.  
So, there will be  one central vertica l shaft and in that we will fix  some agitator that will rotate 
and this thing will be kept in a tower. So, wire mesh picking are installed to improve the 
coalescence and separation of the phases.  
And another is the Karr Reciprocating Plate Tower. So, here the perforated trays moves up and 
down. So, the tray itself are perforated, so that the proper mixing will take place and they move 
up and down. So, some shaker kind of arrangement or the vertical shaking arrangements are 
given to this reciprocating plate towers. So, more uniform drop size distribution we can f ind 
here. So , more uniform drop size d istribution indicates that proper mixing will be there and the 
extraction efficiency will be very high.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:31 ) 
 
So, these are the  2 diagram that showing the Scheible tower and Karr column. So , in the Scheible 
tower you can see that ther e is a variable speed drive. So , this variable speed drive is responsible 
for rotating the central vertical shaft at the required  speed. And there are agitators  mounted at a 
fixed interval and we can provide  different kinds  of baffles  there too, to have th e proper mixing.  So, in this the heavy phase is coming in from the top and that heavy phase will come down 
eventually while coming down that will have the effect of this agitators , there will be some 
proper mixing and the light phase is entering into the system from the bottom. So, the heavy 
phase will eventually come down and exit from the bottom and the light phase will eventually go 
into the upper right section and exit the light phase exit from the upper rights section .  
There are  2 interface control i s given and if you see that, there is the , turbine blades are there in  
one section if you magnify  one section in the Scheible tower and see. S o, there are horizontal 
outer baffles  and there are horizontal inner baffles . So,  2 outer baffles  are there and  2 inner 
baffles  are there . Inside the inner baffles , the turbine impellers are there and outside there is a 
vessel  wall from there is a rotating shaft. So, this is how this kind of tower operates and help in 
proper mixing .  
The Karr column is that here also the driver assembly is given . This drive assembly operates this 
in a reciprocating motion  Up and down  reciprocating motions are there and these are the 
perforated trays. So, again the heavy phase is enter ing in from the top. So, the simple thing is 
heavy p hase always comes from the top because otherwise we need to use a pump to just throw it 
from the bottom to the upside . This design is pretty common in most of the cases and then this 
heavy phase will come down eventually mixed with the light phase that is entered from the 
bottom there is a sparger given and these are the perforated plates, these are the baffle plate and 
tie rods and spacious are also given and then this liquid phase will go out.  
So, because of this perforation and the reciprocating motion very well mixing we can observe in  
Karr columns. So , this is very effective. And there are some other kind of unit extraction towers 
also available.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:31)   
Mixer settlers  
 A mixer settler device ordinarily consisted of  2 parts ; one is a mixer  for contacting the  2 liquid 
phases and a settler for their mechanical separation, it provides efficient mass transfer. So , what 
we can see here is that the solvent and the feed enter  into a mixing chamber. So, proper mixing 
will take place and the n it is settled in another chamber which is called the settling chamber. So, 
in the settling chamber raffinate which is supposed to be the heavier  one will come down and the 
extract the lighter  one will flow.  
Now, there are certain system where the mixer and settler are separate , separate chambers are 
there in  one chamber there will be mixer and then it is moved on to a cylindrical kind of chamber 
which is used for the settling but in this mixer settler , it is combined system both the operation 
mixing and settling or separation is taking place . So, mixer for contacting the 2 liquid phase and 
settler for their mechanical separation, it provides efficient mass transfer .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:53)   
There are other spray extraction towers . The heavy liquid ent ers at the top and in the spray tower 
and fills the tower as the continuous phase the light liquid enters through a nozzle distributor at 
the bottom and which disperses or spray the droplet upward. So, because of this drop form, they 
have very high efficie ncy to mix with the heavy liquid that is coming and the light liquid 
coalesces at the top and flows out .  
So, all the spray that is the rising droplet form it is coming and it coalesces and then it going out 
from the top section and the heavy liquid that i s coming from the bottom and extracted . So, while 
this light liquid is coming in contact with the heavy liquid and coming towards the top, the solid 
component or flavor component that is intended to take from the from the heavy liquid to the 
light liquid t hat transfer is taking place. So, this is how the spray extraction towers work.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:08)  
 
So, parameters of liquid -liquid extraction . So, first is the solvent selection , solvent selection as 
we have seen that these are v ery important be cause in liquid -liquid extraction the 2 liquid phase 
are there . So, one is having the solvent generate the pure solvent and the other is having the some 
solute  + carrier. So, since this solute  has to come from this phase to this  1 and this only come if 
the chemical potential  is higher here or if it is having  the affinity towards this solvent.  
So, we have to carefully select this solvent  so that the solid can come out from this phase. So, 
solvent selection is very important whether we want to separate some organic material , some 
flavor compound. So, based on that w e can select the solvent . Or if it is water soluble simply s o, 
we can use that . Then second is the operating condition. So, operating condition also in that we 
can consider temperature as  one becau se it helps in extraction when it makes the sample in a low 
viscous sample. So, it helps in extraction and mobility is increased and mode of operation.  
So, there will be mode of operation in the sense the batch operation or continuous operation then 
the co-current or counter current operation. So, those will affe ct the efficiency of the liquid -
liquid extraction process . Then extract or type that we have seen many kind of extractor are there , 
spray type extractor or it is a like we have seen the mechanical agitated  type is there and what is 
the design criteria . So, design criteria that does the full design starting from all the ports , all the inlet and the flow 
line and the mechanical agitation part. So, all those things are important . So, these are  about the  
parameters of liquid -liquid extraction system.  
Now, we will move on to  one more extraction method that is becoming very common nowadays, 
especially in some industry people are going to use that  one in a huge scale because they have 
some advantage althoug h the cost may be a little high, but they have some advantage. So, let us 
see one such very important extraction technique.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:03 ) 
 
So, this technique is called supercritical fluid extraction, and when that some other special 
extraction  technique, we will  also see for example, the separation of protein to aqua phase when 
80 to 90  percent  water  is there like polyethylene glycol then dextran or phosphate salts are there 
and so, these are the sensitive biological products and re covery of th is we use only the a queous  
phase.  (Refer Slide Time: 18:47)  
 
So, these are some special extraction methods . supercritical fluid extraction, which is very 
important technique nowadays. Now, here what happens is that extraction with a solvent held at 
a pre ssure and temperature above the critical point of the solvent and the critical temperature T C 
is the temperature above which a gas cannot be liquefied at any pressure.  
So, look into the phase diagram , what happens is that , the pressure and temperature if we try to 
increase, so, eventually from the solid phase , liquid phase and gaseous phase after that  one 
condition will come that is beyond the critical point that means  the corresponding critical 
temperature and critical pressure when we exceed , then some g ases are there that will become in 
a supercritical fluid condition .  
For example, carbon dioxide is  one such gas that achieves its supercritical fluid condition very 
easily and it is having very low critical temperature around 31.8 ° C this much is the cri tical 
temperature and the critical pressure is higher than 10.5 mega Pascal, it is higher than that. So, if 
if we have that much, so, then we can have the supercritical conditio ns. So, what is this condition 
actually?   
This condition the supercriti cal flui d achieve some property w hich are specific to this condition 
and that is neither belong to the gaseous phase nor belong to the total liquid phase, but in this 
situation in th e supercritical condition, the few parameters of the fluid is increased so much th at 
they enhance in extraction for example, the solubility of a component because we know that the gases are of low density at low pressure. So, the density of the gas increased when we increase 
the pressure .  
However, the liquids are not changing, their density over the pressure. So, almost in a moderate 
pressure range or in that atmospheric range, those are independent of pressure. So, when the gas 
are exposed to higher pressure and beyond a certain limit when its pressure increases, and its 
density become s higher. So, density reaches almost towards the density of liquid material . 
Although it will not become liquid, but its density will approach to that of the liquid and that in a 
way increase the abil ity to solubilize the component.  So, solubility of that fluid is increase d.  
So, that is  why it is helping in extraction. And the effect of pressure is very much observed in 
this particular case.  However, the effect of temperature in the supercritical extraction is not that 
much pronounced . Because supercritica l fluid extraction has been developed on this principle, 
basically focusing on this principle, that above the critical po int, if we increase the pressure , then 
the solubility of the component in that su percritical fluid will increase.  But if you look for 
temperature change.   
So, around 10 MPa  pressure temperature will not positively affect the extraction rate , rather it 
will degrade that and even if the temperature increases, when the pressure is very, very high 
around 30  MPascal or so, then again the tempe rature will cause the positive effect, but the 
intermediate phase it wil l not have that much effect or till not known that much that what is the 
mechanism exactly for that the temperature will help.  (Refer Slide Time: 23:34)  
 
So, so supercritical fluid as solvent, So, because of this property that at the higher pressure, this 
supercritical fluid will behave in such kind of a liquid which has higher solubility and therefore, 
it acts as a solvent. So, the power of a supercritical fluid or actually a compre ssed gas to dissolve 
a certain substance is approximately represented by a value called the solubility parameter .  
So, this is the solubility pa rameter, solubility parameter δ.  
 
 
So, density of gas and density of liquid these  2 ratio. Pc, that is the cr itical pressure. Now, we can 
see that when the gas is compressed, so, the solubility is very highly increase d. And this is the 
benefit that we try to ta ke out . So, this is why because of this solubility, increase of this 
supercritical fluid under high press ure, we try to use this as a potential solvent for solvent 
extraction methods.  
And temperature as I have already mentioned that effect of temperature is not that much for 
pronounce however, s ometime what we do that as a co -solvent, we add some other solve nt to this 
supercritical fluid and that in a way increase the dissolution capacity of this supercritical fluid. 
So, normally carbon dioxide is very common supercritical fluid and in many food processing 
sections now, they have started using this supercriti cal extraction technique.  
𝛅=𝟏.𝟐𝟓𝐏𝐜𝟎.𝟓 𝛒𝐠
𝛒𝐥  (Refer Slide Time: 25:3 5) 
 
So, this is useful solvent for supercritical extraction and generally carbon dioxide as I mentioned, 
this is very common and its temperature is 304 .1 Kelvin. So, as I mentioned that 273 is our 
startin g point. So, from that we can consider that if it is  0 then what will be t he temperature in 
Celsius and P c is only 7.4 mega Pascal. So, in supercritical region, no distinction between the 
liquid and gas can be done , as I mentioned that those are gas but th eir density will approach to 
the liquid .  
No phase transition will be observed and the supercritical fluid acts like a very dense gas or light 
mobile liquid .  
Solubility and selectivity. So, as I mentioned that the solubility and selectivity t his is a stro ng 
function of temperature and pressure. So, not only supercritical gas will increase the selectivity 
they can be used for many number of soluble or m any number of components. So, because of 
their broad selectivity, that is  one advantage.   
Second advantage  is higher solubility, and we have seen that it is a strong function of pressure 
and temperature when the pressure is at some higher range. So, total extraction of the solute is 
possible when the pressure is highest and selective removal of odor producing volatile 
components close to the critical point. So, close to the critical point we can separate the odor 
producing volatile components also. So, in this particular case the solubility may be smaller, but 
the selectivity is much higher.  (Refer Slide Time : 27:40)  
 
Now, we will have a quick look on how the operation of supercritical fluid extraction takes 
place. So, there are some part that we need for supercritical fluid extraction. So, let us  see that 
this is the phase diagram of supercritical carbon dio xide. So, we have in this zone initially where 
the extraction takes place. So, extraction takes place in the supercritical region that is beyond the 
gas and liquid region when you have the critical temperature you have exceeded and the critical 
press ure th at also you have exceeded.  
So, you have exceeded the critical pressure and temperature. So, we then have a n extraction 
vessel where the extraction actually happens.  After extraction, we need to separate that because 
extraction means we have the supercritic al fluid and we have the solid or the component that we 
have extracted from the other solv ent. So, then or from the feed  solution, so, then we need to 
decrease the pressure .  
When we decrease the pressure , then no longer the solubility is higher. So, all t he components 
will be separated and this carbon dioxide in a gas form we will get . Now then we will  get the 
carbon dioxide in a gas form and we will  separate in a separator and after separation the product 
will come out from the bottom because that will be  deposited and the gas will take it out to a 
cooler.  
So, what we do now further the temperature is lowered in that cooler . The temperature is 
lower ed, the gas is become eventually the liquid. So, there is a heat exchanger here that helps in that liquifica tion of that carbon dioxide and after that , that will be taken in a tank . All the liquid 
carbon dioxide is take n in a tank and again since we n eed to increase it from the lower pressure 
to the higher pressure side. So, we increase the pressure by compresso r. 
That compressor increase the pressure of that liquid carbon dioxide farther, we increase its 
temperature by again passing through a heat exchanger and then it is entered to the extraction 
vessel and the same process will be repeated. So, supercritical r egion is there, then there is a 
lower pressure region, then lower temperature then again increased pressure and increased 
temperature and basically we can categorize this to higher pressure side and the lower pressure 
side.  
So, in the higher pressure side  the compressor, the heat exchanger or heater and the extraction 
part is there in the lower pressure side we have this expansion valve, the air separator and this 
heat exchanger for cooling of the supercritical fluid. So, here we can see that the solvent 
recycling when we are using the pump and then by using that we are sending it to the high 
pressure section, then the CO 2 and the solute is the pressure reduction will be there.  
So, we can see that without applying any extra energy, we can just by lowering the pressure we 
can separate the solid and the supercritical fluid. So, like in other extraction, we have seen that 
we need to apply the distillation or crystallization to separate the solute and the solvent. But here 
the extracted material is very well ca n be separated by just pressure reduction. So, this is very 
efficient method in that way.  
Now, commercial proc esses decaffeination of coffee t his is done by supercritical fluid extraction. 
So, commercial process is decaffeination of coffee from the caffei ne, which is having 0.7 to 3 
percent caffeine that we can extract up to 0.02  percent  by using the supercritical fluid extraction. 
So, this is how this method is very beneficial. So, this has some advantage and disadvantage, we 
will quickly look into them.  (Refer Slide Time: 32: 22) 
 
Advantages of supercritical fluid e xtraction using carbon dioxide  
So, here we can operate it at moderate temperature of operation, we have seen that the 
temperature is around  3 to 4 Kelvin or 31.8 around degrees Celsius, so, it is very helpful to 
operate there is no high temperature needed. So, the heat sensitive material will also can be very 
well preserved.  Carbon dioxide is considered to be non toxic, non flammable and nature friendly.  
So, using this liquid supercritical, ca rbon dioxide does not  have any ill effect on the product or 
that and it does not  have any residue also on the product.  
It is very volatile solvent. So, when we try to separate this at the low pressure, it completely gets 
separated from the solid or from t he component that you want to separate no residue is found on 
the product and good mas s transfer due to low viscosity.   
So, although it is in a supercritical state, it s density increases towards liquid, but its viscosity 
remains low. So, because of this pr operty, low viscosity and high d ensity the solubility increases . 
So, that is  helping in mass transfer . And selective dis solution, t his is another that is  the selective 
dissolution happens in case of liquid carbon dioxide for most of the material, so, that it is any 
advantages.  (Refer Slide Time: 33:58)   
 
Now, what are the maybe the negative points of supercritical fluid extraction?  So, limited 
solvation power and this can be overcome by adding some co-solvent  as I was mentioning that, 
sometime what happe ned that with this supercritical CO 2 some other solvent is added and that in 
a way helping you know that will mix properly with that and they will increase the solubility 
/solvation power of this supercritical fluid and higher operation pressure.  
So, pres sure is definitely  one thing that we need to design proper system for them and for that, 
the mechanical arrangements of the equipment thing will increase and the cost will also increase, 
because initially you have to have a very huge setup for all this pr essure increase thing. So, the 
initial cost will be very high. So , there is a difficulty to run this as a continuous process.   
And although s ee, we need to look for more advancement in that, but still in a batch process also 
this is an efficient  one. If initial cost is more, but if we can, run it on the continuous basis and for 
a long run, we can get very good advantage of supercritical fluid extraction, because eventually 
the running energy that requires in case of separation, because, maybe we have not  mentioned 
that.  
But ideal cases, when we go for extraction or leaching process, the energy needed in the 
extraction is very less, but energy needed in separating the solute from the solvent or the solvent 
from the product of the solid slurry that takes a hug e energy because there we need to apply the 
evaporation or distillation or those kind of techniques, which are very energy intensive technique. So, the re are actually 85  percent  of the energy of the whole process is getting wasted 
or not waste we can think  of utilizing there  itself for separation, but for extraction, we only use 
15 to 20  percent .  
So, if we use the supercritical fluid extraction, maybe that separation thing is no cost 
involvement required, because it can very easily by lowering the pressure  we can separate it. So, 
maybe that extra costs that we can reduce there can be utilized for the initial setup preparation. 
So, that is  that, that way, it is very beneficial. So, this is all about the thing tha t will cover in , 
extraction and leaching, and we have come to t he end of this particular topic.   