Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Professor Dr. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 60  
Non-Thermal Processing  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:19)  
 
Hello everyone, welcome to the NPT EL online certification course on Fundamentals of Food 
Process engineering. So, this is our last class on Non-Thermal  Processing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37) 
 
We have by now discuss ed many non -thermal processing methods, which are helpful in 
preserving the f ruits and vegetable without the thermal effect of conventional treatment. So, we have discussed the high -pressure processing pulse, electric field , and irradiation. Now, we 
will discuss the ozone and cold plasma technology followed by hu rdle technology.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:01 ) 
 
So ozone in food processing , by now ozone technique  is very much familiar with  most of the 
people as it is used  to disinfect the water treatment plant or po table water or for the  surface 
cleaning of the  vegetables because we when the surface are contaminated by some 
insecticides or pesticides or some microbes. So, we normally use the exposure to ozone.  
And the n the main advantage of ozone is that ozone does not  give any, adverse effect or some 
residue that  to be removed from the  surface s. So, it is totally free because when it get 
dissociated it produce oxygen and that is not harmful. So,  this is very effective.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:59 ) 
 
In June 1997, an expert panel of food scientist convened by the Electric P ower Research 
Institute declared ozone to be Generally Recognised as Safe, GRAS . So, that people related 
to food industry or food processing know that before using any kind of chemical we need to 
have this GRAS  tag or this certification so  that we can safely use for the foo d.  
Ozone is useful in deodori zing air and water. So, this is already in practice and is in almost 
every country use ozone as disinfectant while replacing its old sterili zing method like 
chlorination  because when we use this kind of chemical methods like c hlorination, they have 
some ill effect because they leave some residue.  
So, either we have to remove t hat residue or we have to bear the ill  effect of those in food or 
in the surface of the food contact materials. So, this is one thing and not only that,  it reduce  
the use  of water also because when  we use ozone, and that can be retreated or re -utilized for 
the next batch because that does not  have any ill effect on the food or any residue that is 
harmful to the food. So, that is  why these are now becoming p opular.  
Ozone is a potent antimicrobial agent. I t can effectively kill virus, bacteria, fungi  and 
parasites  including those causing the food spoilage or human disease that is the pathogenic . 
So, ozone can effectively kill we can see that the broad spectru m of microbes are there it can 
kill virus , bacteria , fungi and parasite . (Refer Slide Time: 04:10 ) 
 
The concept of generating ozone. So, basically,  we develop ozone from oxygen by corona 
discharge method by applying the short UV and then we can reframe i t from the ozone to 
oxygen also this is also possible and there are more than one method there are many method 
by now for this  generating ozone . The primary process used commercially today to make 
ozone is called the electrical discharge or corona discharg e method.  
So, in  fact, the machine a high voltage electri cal spark fires across a gap. L ike there is a gap 
across which the electrical spark fires to turn the oxygen into ozone. So, while going through 
this high spark the O2 converts to O 3. So, these are the electrode, the upper one is high 
tension electrode and the low er one is low tension electrode  there is  a dielectric material there 
and O 2 is transferred  across the gap. So, th is is how we generate the ozone, so  this is one  
method , very common method.  (Refer Slide Time: 05:37)  
 
Now, ozone because of this so much beneficial effect that it can act on microorganism, it has 
a very broad spectrum effect because it can kill starting from the virus , bacteria, a mold  and 
pathogenic organism then spoilage organ ism, it can have a varied effect  the microorganism . It 
can have the surface disinfestation effect and also see there are some process where we want 
the sterilisation effect and for that we normally conventionally implement the sterili zer or 
pasteur izer whe re we need high  heat treatment hot water or steam we utili ze for that.  
Now, if we use ozone, so  we reduce the energy intake to a higher amount because we do not  
want them like the plate heat exchangers or different kind of heat exchangers that part we can 
omit and the effect of that sterili zation, we can get only by applying the ozone. So, we are 
reducing some machinery, we are reducing some utili zation of steam or energy or water that 
we can reduce. So, by use of ozone , we can significantly reduce the cost  of production as 
well.   
Thereby it is very beneficial in sauce production,  dairy producers and milking system it can 
be used , juice processing. So, everywhere for that heat transfer part for that sterili zation part, 
pasteuri zation part we can replace by t his ozone technique . Handling of fresh produce like 
foods and  spices, this can also be done by applying ozone treatment so that no contamination 
will come . Water bottling plant here also the sterili zation, we can perform by ozone. 
Breweries  is also here  the destruction of the microorganism  this part can be done by the 
ozone treatment.  (Refer Slide Time: 07:48 ) 
 
So, different studies has been conducted to have or to see the effect of this ozone treatment on 
the food products. So, one such study we h ave rep orted here, it says that  Hampson and Fiori  
in 1997 has studied the germicidal effect of ozone on tomatoes. And what they found there 
are certain sample if you see in the x -direction and y -direction, we have raw tomatoes, then 
the N3 which is washed for 3 minutes in water with no ozone.  
So, this is N3 then we have 1M, 3M and 10 M these are time of exposure to wash water 
containing the ozone that means  1 minute , 3 minute and 10 minute we have exposed the 
tomatoes to wash water which is having ozone at a co ncentration of approximately 1  parts per 
million.  So, ozone has excellent germicidal effect that means the log cycle reduction because 
log cycle here we have plotted in y-axis and we can see t hat how much reduction it  has 
occurred.  
Although we have, we can s ee here one outlier, but that may be be cause of the experimental 
error, so  because other two are having  some reducing effects so  we can co nsider that it has 
some effect on the germs.  (Refer Slide Time: 09:27 ) 
 
So bactericidal effect of ozone , we have see n the germicidal effect, now there is a bactericidal 
effect.  Ozone is introduced to bacteria. So, what will form the free radical or the atomic 
oxygen that will work on bacteria and eventuall y kill the bacteria that is,  that attached to the 
bacteria leavin g the diatomic oxygen behind and oxidative burst will hap pen that puncture the 
cell wall  because a tomic oxygen is highly reactive  so it will  break it.  
And finally, the diatomic oxygen will be there  bacteria will destroy and this is not harmful for 
body. S o that is  why treatment of ozone is very beneficial because it does not  leave any 
residue behind. So, it is very effective . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:21 ) 
 There are certain equipment because ozone treatment by now is commercially available and 
this is very po pular nowadays. So, some systems are there you can see , you can search in net 
also these are market available systems, OSU ozone -based shell egg sanitizer, then there is 
ozone -based produce sanitizer. So, whatever the fresh produce we can saniti ze while  passing 
through this channel and then  at the end we can collect them. T here i s a hopper for sending 
that. So there is a n ozone generating system. So these  kind of systems are available.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:02 ) 
 
So, ozone as a novel technology for CIP system for closed  process  equipment , for example, 
there are some pipe , some vessels , some portions of the equipment  these are  close d chambers 
and not very easy to clean them. So, for closed process equipment in the food and beverage 
industry  ozone completely eliminate the need for traditional organic and chlorine -based 
disinfectant.  
So, this eliminate the need for final disinfection as  oxygen being the only bi -product, because 
if we use this chlorine and other organic disinfectants , there are some time some f ouling of 
the organic material deposited on the inner side of those closed equipment s or closed parts of 
the food processing equipment.  
So, that has to be cleaned nicely, but it is very tough to disinfect those surfaces efficiently. 
So, if we use ozone , that is very beneficial because the ozone -treated water that we use 
instead of that disinfectant plus water that can be reutilize, because this does not  give any 
kind of,  the contamination or any residue it only gives the oxygen as a bi-product so that 
water  can be reused.  So, that is  why for the CIP system  this has become very efficient the ozone treatment has 
becoming very efficient day by day . Total disinfection time is reduced due to the high 
disinfection potential of ozone and high oxidation potential o f ozone, lower the application of 
temperature or the amount of chemicals used.   
So, high oxidation potential of ozone , lower the application of temperature because otherwise 
we need to use the hot water or warm water to completely have the disinfection . Disinfection 
volumes can be reused as I said that the  water that we are using for this can be reused.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:13 ) 
 
So, previously the typical C IP system was like that. F irst there is pre-rinse  and each step that 
water is discarded then there i s cleaning , then there is rinse t horoughly chemical disinfection  
so again this water should be thrown out or discarded and again rinse. So, pre -rinse, rinse and 
rinse these three we have purely involving the water then cleaning and chemical disinfection, 
here also water have been wasted. Now, ozone takes CIP system.  
So, the ozone pre-rinse,  cleaning , rinse,  and ozone disinfection. So, all this water can be 
reused for cleaning. So, more efficient cleaning for this is used, so cut to the total CIP  cycle 
time and resources as well.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:12 )  
So, we have reached the conclusion part of ozone treatment. Widespread acce ptability of 
ozone has made it very popular in food processing  today. So the properties of ozone has 
allowed it s unrestricted and  any food processing application so it can be used for any food 
processing application. Ozone has been demonstrated as the most effective biocide with 
significantly increased lethality .  
And we have checked that with many research -oriented papers and works . Ozone requires 
very low contact time compared to chlorine and requires much lower concentration for 
effective killing compared to the conventional  biocide s. So, very low dose it is effective.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:05 ) 
 
Now, next is called  cold plasma . Cold plasma is an upcoming technology that is nowadays 
used for basically surface sterilization . (Refer Slide Time: 15:17 ) 
 
So, what is that ? Plasma is a mixture of positive and negative charges as well as some neutral 
ions, neutral particle and photon . Plasma exists over a massive range in temperature and 
density. So, it is actually have some mixed property of gas and the liquid and so, from the 
solid if you provide energy to it we are getting the liquid, if further  we provide energy we are 
getting gas and  again from the gas further with energy so we get the plasma state.  
So, from the plasma state as from the gas , we ionize  it and we get the plasma and from the 
plasma to deioni ze it. So, we are getting the gas back and then from the gas condensation 
liquid  and from the freezing we are getting the solid . So, this cycle  is go on continuously and 
this transition of energy from the lower to higher then because of that the sublimation of ice 
to gas bypassing the liquid phase and from the gas to depositio n to sol id. So, all such exist, so 
this basically the states of the matter and how it can be transferred from one phase to the 
other.  
Now, cold plasma technology is a novel non -thermal food processing technology that uses 
energetic and reactive gases to inactivate  contaminating microbes, so energi ze gas, so when 
gas to plasma it has become an energi zed gas. So, that can be used to inactivate 
contaminating microbes in food product s as for example meat, poultry etcetera  there we can 
use it.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:26)  
So, generation of plasma. So, basically, the principle is further the radical ions generated 
there is a nitrogen gas which is an in ert gas from then we are (because)  by applying the high 
energy we are getting the ions and electrons and photons, so, plasm a state having all them all 
of them that is positive  ion then negative ion then electrons then photons ev erything and that 
ions into nitrogen an electron came from the neutron by plasma .  
They formed a Radical , Photon , Thermion,  and Neutron. Now, we apply very high voltage to 
the gas this breakdown will form.  So, here the formation of plasma we can see when the gas 
comes in contact with a plasma source antenna, and when  we give power to it in generate 
cold plasma from the gas.  
Now, this plasma again throug h superconducting magnets, this plasma move on to the radio 
frequency booster antenna when this plasma is energi zed, and then it is released, so  it, we are 
getting then the accelerated plasma. So, it is first ioni zed, so, gas to plasma then energi ze to 
this RF booster antenna and then accelerate and then detach . So, now the plasma has been 
detached. So, these are now ready for application.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:25 )  
So, next is classification of plasma -based on the following aspect. So, plasma can be 
class ified based on temperature variation or based on the mod e variation , or because of the 
pressure variation. So, for temperat ure variation thermal plasma or  hot plasma and cold or 
non-thermal plasma , these two separations can be made,  hot plasma and cold pla sma, t hen if 
we use the mode that means  how we are generating the plasma .  
So, based on that we can have the microwave plasma or gliding arc method or corona 
discharge method, dielectric barrier discharge metho d, so these are all c orona is a very basic 
one and common one, but these are the methods by which we can generate the plasma . And 
pressure will also initiate that amount of formation of the plasma.  So, because of that the low 
pressure, atmospheric pressure , and high pressure these are the  pressure med iated chain that 
causing the plasma.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:41 ) 
 
So, the cold plasma that is mostly used for the food process application is one in which the 
thermal motion of the ions this can be ignored or thermal motion is neglected. Consequently, 
there is no pressure force and the magnetic force can be ignored only the electric force is 
considered to act on the p article. So, the electric force is actually functioning for  decreasing 
the microbes or for death of the microbes .  
This plasma is said as cold because the temperature in the plasma reactor stays near the room 
temperature that is  why the thermal motion those  we can ignore. So  this particular setup 
where the cold plasma generation takes place.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 21:42 ) 
 
Now, areas of cold plasm a technology used in food where so far cold plasma technology has 
been used. So, cold plasma can be used for decontamination of products where 
microorganisms are externally located that means, the surface basically , again the surface can 
be exposed in surf ace disinfection , or the decontamination can be achieved . For products 
such as cut vegetable and fresh meat  there is no mild  surface decontamination technology 
available currently.  
So, cold plasma can be used for this purpose. So, for the cut vegetable be cause normally , we 
have seen  when  the cut vegetables are there generally , we are reluctant to take that.  So, if we 
use this technique, so  the surface microorganism or the surface contamination can be 
prevented, then it can also be used to disinfect the sur face before packaging or included as 
packaging process. So, during the packaging process if we include this one, so no 
contamination will be there, not the surface of  the package and neither  on the food products. 
So, this is how we can use this.  (Refer Sl ide Time: 23:02 ) 
 
So, a case study has been done on the chicken where c ampylobacter and salmonella, these 
two bacteria contaminate over 70 percent of raw chicken meat. So raw chicken meat , this was 
70 percent  contaminated by these two and Dricks et al . in 2012 applied a cold plasma to 
uncooked chicken for different time period . 3.5 log cycle reduction of bacteria from both the 
skinless chicken and the chicken skin itself it has been found 3.5 log cycle reduction,  so these 
are effective.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:45) 
 
Another study has been seen where deactivation of salmonella from the surface of almond 
has been seen were 1.5 to 2.5 log cycle reduc tion has been observed. So with  time when this treatment has been given,  so log of population reduction here has b een plotted so we can get 
this much reduction.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:14 ) 
 
There is  another case study on egg to to have the surface sterili zation So, maximum reduction 
of 2.2 to 2.5 times log cycle and 4.5 log C FU per eggshell in salmonella enteritidis le vel 
showing a 90 mi nute of treatment at 35 and 65 percent RH respectively. So, when the high -
quality eggs are packe d, in the industry or the  small entrepreneurship  when people use this 
high quality of the eggs.  
So, the most common occurrence is salmonella,  on the surface of th e egg and that can be 
prevented i f the R H of the environment as we can see 35 percent and 65 percent . So, almost 
90 minute treatment time is required to reduce the microorganism load from 2.2 to 2.5 times 
and 4.5 times. So, if you know  this much reduction we want on the eggshell. So, this is the 
method that we can apply and this is very efficient with Salmonella typhimurium with an 
overall reduction of 3.5 log CFU  per eggshell  after 90 minute treatment is observed.  (Refer Slide Time: 25:41) 
 
Then sterili zation of packaging material, this has also been tried that the plasma has been 
exposed to the material  in the packaging surface material, cold plasma sterili zation allows 
fast and safe sterili zation of packaging material such as plasti c bottle , lids and films without 
adversely affecting the properties of the material or leaving any residue. So, that is  why these 
methods are very helpful . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:13 ) 
 
And there are certain limitations of this technique , cold plasma techniq ue. So, the limitations 
are first is the important aspect of this technology are still immature,  we have not gone too 
much deeper inside of this technique a nd by now only the surface sterilization  of few cases we use. So, the full potential of this techniq ue is still to be exposed, explored and what is the 
exact mechanism how  it destroys , so that has to be defined properly .  
Optimization and scale -up of commercial treatment level require a more complete 
understanding of this chemical process. So, that has n ot been done. This involves the high 
cost of production and installing the machines initially , variety and complexity of the 
necessary equipment.  So, we have to work on this because there are a variety of the machines 
required for different cases. So, to m ake it uniform  we have to work .  
Now antimicrobial modes of action for various cold plasma systems vary depending on the 
type of cold plasma generated. So, because the cold plasma also vary based on different 
parameter , for example;  the temperature, the pr essure. So, therefore, what kind of mode of 
action will be there that also depends on the type by which we prepare the cold plasma.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:50 ) 
 
Now, the last is hu rdle technology. So, hu rdle technology it means that there is not one 
method by which we can inactivate all the type of microorganism. So, we have seen by now 
that some methods are there that are effe ctive only for the surface sterilization , some are 
effective only for the gram -positive microorganism, some may be effective for the yeast and  
mold. So, there are different ways.  
So, and  some methods are there, if we apply them, maybe all microorganism s will be killed, 
but they will induce some undesirable changes in the sensory terms or other nutritional terms 
of the food material. So , hurdle technology is a combination of many technologies together that will have the complete destruction of the microbial contamination, as well as it will 
preserve the desired quality of the food.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:56 ) 
 
So, hu rdle technology is a m ethod of ensuring that pathogens in food products can be 
eliminated or controlled. Hurdle technology usually works by c ombining more than one 
approach. M icroorganism has to face several hurdles to survive in the product . So, finally, 
what will be the hurdl e will be taken in such a way so  that it will be even become tougher 
gradually and so finally, they cannot survive.  
For example, we have seen here the pH is one trigger . The pH is one method by which we 
can give some obstacle to growth of the microorganis m because, if we control the pH, then 
some microorganism are there  that can grow in the normal pH range, some can enter basic 
pH and some in the  acidic . So, if we control the pH so some microorganism  we can omit .   
Coming to the water activity again  we kno w that the different water activity is required for 
survival of the microorganism . If we lower the water activity so  many of the microorganism 
will not survive . And finally, we can i mpose the temperature effect so that the lethal  effect of 
the temperat ure or it can kill the any remaining  microbes. I f it present, we can give this 
temperature for  a very short period of time so  that no loss in the nutrition can takes place.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 30:25 ) 
 
So, these are some common,  hurdles that we normally apply . One is the high temperature 
then low temperature also becaus e if we reduce  the temperature to very low degree frozen 
condition. So,  in that way also we can reduce  the activity of the microbes . Acidity that is  one 
then water activity , one hurdle , redox po tential that we can control , we can add some 
preservative if required and that is fully regarded as GRAS .  
Then aseptic  packaging that is while pack aging no contamination will arise, so  that we can 
give some cold plasma treatment or irradiation  or pulsed l ight treatment li ke that. So, we can 
perform the  aseptic  packaging. So, together we can design that which one in what 
combination if we can put . For example, i n the second one we have  given that the 
temperature effect , low-temperature effect then  water act ivity then pH then redox potential 
preservative like that .  
Some microbes are there that can go up to  the maximum extent of the combination . Some 
arrangement s can be done where it cannot  reach,  cannot  cover one hu rdle, it can also be made 
in such a way so,  that with one or two hu rdles only it can stop. So, there are many methods 
and by we have to design based on the type of the product that we are dealing.  (Refer Slide Time: 32:15 ) 
 
So, principle of hurdle technology , hurdle disturbs  the homeostasis of th e microorganism, 
microorganism should not be able to jump over all the hur dle present in the product. H urdles  
prevent microorganism from multiplying and causing them to remain inactive or die . Hurdles  
illustrate the complex interaction between acidity,  water activity , temperature etcetera  with 
which are significant in microbial stability.  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:49 ) 
 
Finally, since in the non -thermal processing we have  many method s like HPP , PEF, pulsed 
light irradiation  then ozone. So, I would like to give you a comparative table so, that you can 
understand and you can clearly remind that which methods are helpful in inactivating in what case or what are the parameters related to them. So, this is the last part that I would like to 
cover in this particular c hapter.  
Here we have one table. So, we have comparison of different novel technologies or non -
thermal  technologies. O ne is HPP, then pulse electric field , pulsed light.  
Nature of treatment ; effective against th e organism or the microorganism,  then proces s 
parameter and the treatment range.   So, high pressure processing the nature of treatment 
actually  by application of high pressure, and it is most effective on gram -negative bacteria.  
So effective against this that means the gram -positive is a bit resist ant here, process 
parameter, we can change the pressure holding time, treatment time, that we can control 100 
to 900 or 1000 Mega Pascal  is the range of applying pressure here. We have pulse d electric 
field which is actually the high voltage electric field  that we are putting across the food 
sample. This is effective against gram -negative bacteria. And the gra m positives are a bit 
resistant here.  So that means it does not  mean that we cannot  use the use this method for 
inactivation of gram -positive . Actuall y, in that case, we need to increase the intensity to a 
higher extent, the voltage , and the duration to a higher extent or we can combine this with 
some other hu rdle to control this . The process parameter that we can change here is the 
applied voltage , treatment time , number of pulses , distance between the electrodes.  
So, generally 20 to 80  kv/cm we use normally . Third method is intense and short durat ion 
pulses that is pulse light. W e have seen that basically pulse light is active or effective for the 
surface sterilization . This effective on both that is gram -positive as well as gram -negative 
bacteria. So, it works on all and process parameter we can change the pulse timing, pulse 
width, fluence rate, pulse shape that can be changed .  
Pulse du ration ranges  generally from 1  microsecond to 0.1 second and we have mentioned 
already the broad spectrum like that is around 200 nanometre , 200 nanometre s to 1250 
nanometre this is the range in the electromagnetic spectrum.  (Refer Slide Time: 36:13 ) 
 
Next we have ir radiation and ozone. So, the irradiation the nature of treatment is actually the 
ionizing radiation that is the x -ray, gamma -ray, and electron,  radiation from the electron 
beam that we are using. So, these are the resistance if we see, it is high from gram -negative to 
gram -positive or mold  and then to gram then to spore, yeast and virus. So that means the 
resistance of gram -negative is very low, t hen the gram -positive, then this. So, it has action on 
all of them.   
And the process parameter that is  dose and time that can vary.  So low -dose 1  kilogray, we 
have seen this we apply generally for reducing the sprouting or ripening, degradation or 
disinfection of the pulses, or storing of the decontamination of the spices etcetera , medium -
dose 1 to 10 kilogray , gene rally we use for inactivation from the bacteria and high doses 
normal use for all the microorganism when we want to kill . Ozone, this is the nature of 
treatment is electrical discharge or corona discharge method.  
Ozone is triatomic gas that we developed fr om the corona discharge  method by using the 
oxygen when we pass it to the high voltage discharge , electrical discharge. And ozone has a 
broad -spectrum biocide against the virus bacteria fungi , protozoa etcetera  both the  spoilage 
and disease -causing bacteri a, disease -causing organism on which the ozone can act. Here also 
the dose and time that we can change 0.5 to 1 ppm, this is required  for the surface treatment.  (Refer Slide Time: 38:20)  
 
And finally, we have cold plasma treatment.  So, this is the mixtu re of the nature of treatment 
actually is done by mixture of positive -negative charges or usage of reactive gases. This is 
effective against a wide range of pathogenic microorganism basically used for a surface 
treatment and process parameter is treatment time only in this case when the cold plasma 
generated and treatment range.  
So, there is not any specific range has been identified. So now by now, so, co ld plasma is one 
type of plasma. T here are many kinds of plasma can be generated based on the differen ce in 
the parameter of the  mode or of the type by which it is  generated or application of 
temperature or not. And based on all this, the effectiveness depends.  
So that is  why we cannot  mention any we use only cold plasma for the treatment of the food 
inact ivation surface microbial inactivation of the food. So, this is all about the non -thermal 
processing of the food .  Through this course to this particular chapter of fundamen tal of food 
process engineering w e tried to expose you people to this technique, al l these techniques can 
be dealt with in a broader way having lot many practical applications equations and the 
problems.  
But since in our 12 -week course actually the non -thermal was  not part of all such unit 
operation that we discuss initially . This we ha ve intentiona lly kept because these are all 
upcoming techniques that has very beneficial effect on the food and many of you may  in 
futur e want to work with them for  as an entrepreneur  or as a farmer or as a business person. 
So, these are the efficient tech niques, you can explore this. So, that is  why we wan ted to give 
a glimpse of all  this technique  in a brief  way. So, Thank You. 