Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 06 
Measurements of Rheological Properties  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the online certification  course Fundamentals of Food 
Process Engineering . Now, in today ’s class we will see that how we can measure those 
Rheological Properties . 
(Refer Slide Time:  01:08)  
 
Viscosity measurement  
 Viscosity is the most important rheological property of fluid food  and if it is Newtonian 
fluid , it is known as  viscosity and for non-Newtonian fluid , it is apparent viscosity . To 
get a relation between shear stress and shear rate, by plotting both a straight line will 
form for a Newtonian fluid with and that straight lin e will pass from the origin . And if it 
is a power law model , by considering a factor  n in both the side  to get a straight line from 
that, it will give  apparent viscosity . 
Different methods to measure the rheological properties (viscosity ) 
 Capillary Flow Viscometer    Orifice type viscometer ,  
 Falling ball viscometer ,  
 Rotational  Viscometer . 
Under the rotational viscometer , there are different kind s of geometry which are in use 
and all the methods under the rotational viscometer work s based on the similar prin ciple ; 
however, there are certain difference s in the geometries . So, to meas ure the viscosity by 
all the methods  mentioned  over here , there are certain general criteria that are  taken . So, 
those are basically  defining the condition of the fluid  for which w e are measuring the 
viscosi ty.  
There are  certain  parameters which can affect the viscosity . So, while measuring 
viscosity  the aim is  to nullify the effect of those variation s; so that the exact behavior  of 
the fluid can be understood . So, flow should be s teady  so; that means, the velocity must 
be constant . Flow should be lamina r as in laminar flow, the flow velocity is l ess and each 
fluid layer is slide  by one another . In turbulent flow , the lateral mixing of the  liquid 
layers will be there which can  hinde r the p roper viscosity measurement . 
Fully developed flow  is considered to analyze  the velocity profile in a proper way  or to 
relate  the viscosity , shear rate , velocity , and shear  stress  properly . Also constant 
temperature  is taken into consideration as  temperature has  significant effect on viscosity . 
With increase in temp erature viscosity increases  in case of  gases . However, in case of the 
liquid sample , with increase in temperature  viscosity decreases . This phenomena is valid 
for normal pressure ; all thoug h there are some effect of pressure as well . That is why it 
need s to follow these general criteria  for measuring the viscosity . (Refer Slide Time: 06:10)  
 
Capillary flow viscometer  
 Simple, inexpensive, and suitable for low -viscosity fluids (Newtonian)  
 Gravity-operated -suitable only for Newtonian fluids having viscosities in the 
range of 0.4 to 20,000 mPa·s  
 For viscous fluid s - external pressure required ( may be compressed air or by 
some mechanical means ) 
 For non -Newtonian fluids -- less suitable  
 Suits only  if the applied external pressure is more significant than static pressure.  
The working principle is as follows:  
Let us say A and B are two point in the capillary tube  and we want to measure that how 
much time it will take for a known volume of sample to pass from one point to the other . 
And also we want to know the volumetric flow that can happen under certain driving 
force . In capillary flow viscometer , constant shear rate is maintain ed. So, as in non-
Newtonian fluid shear rate  is changi ng; so it is very  difficult to measure by capillary flow 
viscometer . However, it has to  measure the non -Newtonian fluid  viscosity by capillary 
flow viscometer , so then some external pressure  is to be  applied  and consider  that this 
external pressure is more significant comp ared to the static pressure . (Refer Slide Time: 09:42)  
 
Principle behind the viscosity measurement by capillary flow viscometer  
 To measure the volumet ric flow rate , which  can happen under a certain  pressure 
gradient or a certain  driving force , we need to  know the diameter of this capillary and the 
diameter is generally kept very sma ll to cause the laminar flow only  and that can be 
determined  by calibrating this capillary viscometer by a liquid, generally Newtonian oil 
of which  the viscosity is known . 
So, then we can determine the  diameter and radius , from that the  volumetric flow rate  
can be calculated and during the calibration , the time taken by the liquid with known 
viscosity to pass through is measured which will be a bench mark for  any un known 
liquid  through this . 
So, in this method we get an idea of kinematic  viscosity because it give s us some 
indication of the  dynamic viscosity as well as the effect of den sity. Kinematic viscosity  
(ν) is equal to dynamic viscosity  divided by the density and it also called the momentum 
diffusivity . So, the kinematic viscosity can be represent ed as   
ν  = c×t, where c=calibration constant and t = time  
 Now let us imagine a  fluid element here in the capi llary tube which is consider ed as 
incompressible laminar flow , tempe rature over the whole region is constant , then in the 
fluid element  the Δp pressure that is acting  because of the gravitational pressure will be 
balance d by the shear force τ and also we consider this as a fully developed flow . So, the 
parabolic velocity p rofile will be there . 
So, in this case if we try to balance the force ; that means, the force that is causing the 
flow that is the pressure and the shear force that is opposing the flow  that is τ. So, 
making a force  balance w e can write  considering the leng th L 
 
So, 
  
In case of a p ipe flow , we consider  that at the centre , shear stress and shear rat e will be 
equal to 0 when r  = 0 at the centre and s hear stress will be equal to τw or maximum when 
r = outer radius R. So, therefore, we can write th e shear stress at the wall   
 
Also we can write  that in case of laminar flow , inside a pipe ΔP and the velocity , 
viscosity of the liquid c an be related by Hagen Poiseuille ’s equation .  
So, that is equal to    
  
By replacing  this ΔP in the  equation ,  
  
 is shear  rate and μ  is the dynamic viscosity of the liquid in Pa  s. Therefore, 
  
where v  is the velocity of the  liquid  inside the capillary tube and  
So, now, we can express the  shear stress and she ar rate by this equation that  
 
velocity v  can be related with  the volumetric flow rate as Q/π R2 square . So, now  we are able to make a relation with  shear stress with respect to volum etric flow 
rate Q or shear stress with respect to velocity and from th at slope we can get the dynamic 
viscosity μ. So, therefore, we have established this relation for the Newtonian fluid     
  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:23)  
 
Now, for the Non-Newtonian  fluid , similarly  we can find that the shear rate 
 
And we can also consider h ere,  
 
So, that we can conve rt this equation to   
 
Taking 
  common , we can find      
  
 from he re we can get this expression ,  
 
where n’ is the point slope of the ln (τ w ) versus ln(γ˙ app) 
 
The relation is for the  Non-Newtonian  fluid. So, that is how we can measure the 
viscosity by plotting the shear stress and shear rate in case of the  Newtonian and Non -
Newtonian fluid using the capillary flow viscometer.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:33)  
 
Orifice type viscometer  
This is used onl y for th e low viscous fluid .  
 The time for a standard volume of fluid to flow through an orifice is measured.  
 Used for Newtonian or near -Newtonian.   The cup is filled by dipping it into the fluid and withdrawing it. The time from 
the start of withdrawing to the fi rst break occurring in the issuing stream is 
recorded.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 27:04)  
 
Falling ball viscometer  
 In this, we take a cylinder and fill it with the fluid for which we want to  measure the 
viscosity and here  the criteria is that , we should take at least the particle  ten times smaller 
than the diameter of the  tube to get the wall effe ct neglected . So, when we drop a ball of 
let us say a radius  R in the tube , this will fall down because of gravity  and other than 
gravity , there will be a buoyancy force  that will try to take the ball up  and also a drag 
force which is act ing in the upward direction . Now if we  try to do the force balance , this 
ball will try to come to an  accelerating  conditio n to the bottom of the tube ; however, if 
we think of the equilibr ium condition , what will happen that the force will be in the 
balance d condition an d the ball will come to the bottom  with a constant velocity ; it will  
not accelerate , but it will come to a constant velocity to the ground ; that velocity is 
considered the t erminal velocity . So, if we can measure the terminal velocity , from there 
we can get the  idea of the dynamic viscosity of the liquid . 
 very simple, inexpensive, and suitable for low -viscosity fluids.   Principle - measuring the time for a ball to fall through  a liquid under the 
influence of gravity.  
 Force applied - gravitational force, drag force, and buoyancy force  
 Force balance: Net force (F Net) = Gravitational force (F G)− Buoyancy force (F B)− 
Drag force (F D) 
Equilibrium - falling ball reaches a terminal velocity ( vt) 
 (Refer Slide Time:  30:40)  
 
So, let us see first that  ok; so we will see that how in the equilibrium condition, when the 
ball will attain the terminal velo city,  
So, the net force is   
 
In the right side part, 1st one is for gravitational force w hich is acting downward , 2nd and 
3rd one is for  the buoyancy force  and drag force  respectively.  So, in the case of 
equilibrium dv / dt tends to 0, since it is  coming with a constant velocity . So, v will be V 
terminal  and then , we can write  
  
In the laminar  condi tion we can consider , 
  
 N Re which is Reynolds n umber and that is equal to   
  . 
We can calculate the dynamic  viscosity by taking  common π 
 /6  
 
 
where v t is the terminal velocity  of the particle or  the ball that is coming , DP is the 
diameter of that , ρp is the density of the particle in kg/m3, ρf is the fluid density kg/m3 
and g is ac celeration du e to gravity . So, here we can get the idea of dynamic viscosity . 
So, that is how viscosity by the falling ball viscometer can be calculate d. 
Thank you . 