Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 07 
Measurem ents of Rheological Properties (Contd.)  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the  NPTEL  onlin e certification course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process E ngineering . Today we will move on to the measurement using the 
rotational viscometers . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:49)  
 
Rotational viscometer   
This can handle very well  the Newtonian as well as the non -New tonian fluids . The fluid 
is generally getting sh eared  between  2 component s of the measuring system . And if the 
agitation is being done in the rota tional system  so, the shear  rate will be actually depend 
or will be proportional to the rotational speed of th e system . So,  using this we can 
measure the shear stress for different changing shear rates and also the shear rate  can also 
be measured by varying length of time.  
So, the effect of time wil l also be observed on the fluid ; that is why we can h andle the 
different kind of non -Newtonian fluid  which can behave differently over a range of shear  
rate or  maybe constant shear  rate for the prolong time . So, that is why this is very useful ; and the rotational viscometer s are of different kind of geometries , but the two most 
common ly used are Searle type and couette type.  So, in Searle type sy stems two 
concent ric cylinders are there , the inner  cylinder rotates  is rotated and the outer is fixed . 
In couette type system the inner  cylinder is fixed and the outer is being  rotated . In any 
kind of rotational system used for measurement , the basic principle will remain same . 
The torque  required moving  the inner cylinder at a constant speed and the shear stress 
that the fluid will exert on the rotating element will be balanced  and that will be similar 
for both kind of  system . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:12)  
 
Rotational viscometer  
Concentric cylinder viscometer  
 assumptions for mathematical model development  
1. Flow is laminar and steady.  
2. Radial and axial velocity components are zer o. 
3. The test fluid is incompressible.  
4. The temperature is constant.  5. End effects are negligible.  
6. There is no slip at the wall of the instrument.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:29)  
 
So, the principle is that there is  a cup which is still l that is being fi xed with some  
arrangements , but the inner cylinder or the bob , that is rotating with the constant angular 
velocity  and inner radius of bob is  R i , inner radius of the outside  cup that is Ro. As the 
bob will rotate , fluid will be in between  R i to R o and is getting sheared in between these  
2 concentric cylinders . 
So, continuous shearing or the change of the shear rate can be provided on the fluid kept 
in between and also for different time it ca n be applied . Now the torque required to rotate 
this inner cylinder  at a constant angular  velocity will be  M. The force that will oppose  
that torque will be the shear  force , which will be provide d by the liquid held .  
From force balance we can write that  
 
 is the area where the shear stress τ is being applied  and it is acting at a distance  r 
from the centre . So, we can write that  
 Now since the inner cylinder  is rotating and the outer is fixed , then t he shear stress  or the 
shear rate will not be similar  in all the annular spaces.  So, it will  be higher  at the inner 
radius because there  the inner  cylinder is rotating with a constant  angular speed ; 
however, the stress at the outer wall will be  or the outside of that  liquid level , which is in 
contact with the fix cylinder that will be less .  
So, the stress that is coming on the  inner cylinder  is  
 
where  h is the height of the liquid film . 
To get the ex pression of shear  rate 
  , because as we move on to  radial direction 
the velocity will be decreasing , because the outer  cylinder is sti ll and the i nner is 
rotating . 
Now  this velocity v can be replaced to tangential  velocity with the angular speed .  
So, we can write this  
  
Now we also know that 
  will be a function of τ  that is shear stress .  
So, we can write the differential angular speed 
  
now we need to find the expression of dr from  the relation 
  
 
 So, taking dr as constant, and derivative with respect to τ  
 
So,  
 So, finally, this will be getting cancelled and we can get  and here also was
 .  
So, we are getting finally, 
  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:47)  
 
So, let us now  write it clearly that  
  
 Now since ω which is angular velocity of the  inner cylinder , that may vary  from  Ω that 
constant at R i to 0 at the R o. So, similar things will happen with the stress  as well . So, 
stress will be max at  R i and it will be minimum at Ro. So, we can integrate this as .  
 
 Now solution of this kind  of a proble m will depend on 
 , which  will again  vary with 
different kind of solution . This if it is  Newtonian then there will be  shear  rate that is  
shear stress by dynamic viscosity ; if it is  power law fluid then the relation will be  
different  from shear stress that is divided by k1/n. So, as 
  will vary for diffe rent kind 
of fluid  food sample , then solve of this equation the final result of this equation will be 
varying . (Refer Slide Time: 19:01)  
 
So, now,  we will see  the cases  ok. So, this we have we have already solve d this doing the 
force balance  so we have come to this stage now.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:08 ) 
 
And if it is  Newtonian  it will be 
 .  
So, that is such that 
  
Integrating  this over Ω to 0 for τ i at Ri and τ o at Ro.  So, here it will be  
  
 Again this τ is related with the torque . So, the expression will be  
 
So, finally, we are getting this equation that angular speed  
 
So, from this we can get the i dea of the dynamic viscosity μ. 
Now let us see if it is non -Newtonian then considering power law fluid , we will get this 
kind of expression  by taking 
  
 So, then putting t his into this equation function and in a similar way integrating  putting 
the values from thi s equation τ, and the torque required we are getting this equation that 
is 
  
k = the flow behavior  index of the power law, n= the consistency index .  
So, in this way we can  now plot the shear stress and shear rate and the  relation between 
them  can be found  out and then  calculate the dynamic viscosity . (Refer Slide Time: 24:11)  
 
 Simple Shear Approximation :  
 small gap between the cylinders compared to the radius  
 shear stress can be taken as constant  
we can measure the  shear  rate 
  
that is if we are measurin g at a distance R i and the angular  speed is constant that is Ω. 
R o - R i = the radial distance were  the li quid is .   And 
  
And here we can  take the shear stress as  
  (Refer Slide Time: 26:04)  
 
 Newtonian Approximation :  
 Shear stress at the inner cylinder  
      
  
 
 rearrangement gives Margules equation  
 
 Power La w Approximation : 
 Shear stress at the inner cylinder  
 rearrangement gives Margules equation   
 (Refer Slide Time: 27:24)  
 
So, like this way  we can  get the shear rate versus shear stress  data in case of the 
rotational viscometer and can measure the viscosity .  
Cone and plate viscometer  
So, from the diagram  it can be observed that a cone is there  on a circular  flat plate ; in a 
way that apex  will be perpendicular on the plate . The  cone is moving with the angular 
velocity and the gap between the cone and plate w ill be filled by the liquid . 
So, this kind of arrangement is  very much suitable for the  shear thinning behavior  and 
the plastic fluid behavior . The gap  is usually very  less the angle w hich it makes the cone 
make the  angle with the parallel plate  and that a ngle is generally very small θ generally 
kept lower than 5 °. So, if it is lower than 5 ° then it is considered  that the shear stress 
and shear  rate in the gap or  the angular space or the space for the fluid will be exposed to 
the constant shear rate and constant shear stress . 
So, we can handle the shear thinning fluid and  plastic  fluid here , but then also carefully 
we have to do this because there is a chance that the shear thinning fluid will come out 
when we  operate at a higher  shear stress or  shear  rate. So, constant temperature maintenance here is  another problem , because of the plate  geometry and material 
containing the large  particle cannot be used here , because the  place  available  to put the 
liquid is very small . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:21)  
 
Principle of  determining the  viscosity  
The cone is rotating with the constant angular velocity  and we measure the shear rate 
  
by the amount it moves in the angular  direction that is  if we measure  at a distance  at a 
radial distance r .  
So, 
  
θ is the angle between the co ne and the plate and if the theta  is very small instead of tan 
θ, we can take only θ here.   
Since, here also the torque will not be same in all the places , it will vary from centre 
where R = 0 to the  R = R the outside  radius or the  whole radius of the  cone ; so 0 to M 
dM if we indicate the torque . 
 So, dr a small flui d element here we are considering and the τ which is the shear stress 
that is being  applied by the fluid to oppose the rotational movement , and it is acting at a 
distance r .  
So, then from here we can fin d this expression  for stress   
 
So, then the rheological properties can be determined after selection of the  specific 
model . So, from the specific model , if we pl ot the shear stress versus shear  rate 
 we can 
get a curve from which the viscosit y can be calculated . So, for the  Newtonian fluid  we 
can get the relation  for shear stress  
  
here we can we have put directly the sh ear rate 
 , tan θ has been reduced  to θ as the angle 
is very small and if it is for the for the non  Newtonian fluid that is a power law fluid . 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 34:46)  
 
 Parallel Plate Viscometers  
So, another similar kind of measurement method is the parallel plate vi scometer , here the  
2 parallel plates are there ; one is a rotating plate which is having a constant rotational 
movement and the lower plate which is fixed , in between there is  liquid of height  h is 
kept and the radius is r . So, as the upper  plate is  circula r plate that is rotating , the stress is  
offered by the liquid whi ch is kept in between . So, here the shear rate is not constant in 
the fluid  during the  deformation , but changes as a function of distance from the centre . 
So, again 
  
So, again we will integr ate 
 
 
. So, τ R that is the shear stress at the  extreme outer radius and this 
 R is the shear rate 
there . M is the torque th at is equal  to move the  upper circular plate at to rotate it  at a 
constant angular speed Ω. 
(Refer Slide Time: 36:59)  
 So, this is called the Rabinowitsh Mooney equation . 
And for a  Newtonian fluid we will just apply the  linear relation between shear stress and 
shear  rate put it in that equation .  
 
 
In non Newtonian field, 
  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 37:45)  
 
 
 
  Single -Spindl e Viscometers (Brookfield Viscometer) : 
In this spindle is rotating continuously in the li quid; spindle size and the speed  can be 
varied here to  measure it s effect and the spindle selection is done by trial and error  by 
doing some initial measurement . And v iscosity o f the  Newtonian fluids is used  to 
calibrate this generall y where  the Newtonian oil is used , and the viscosity of  Newtonian 
fluid can be measure d very well by this Brookfield  viscometer . The steady state 
deflection is noted and a conversion chart is provided to est imate the apparent viscosity 
under  the test condition . So, the determination of the appa rent viscosity at different speed 
that is different shear  rate can be done , but the shear stress shear rate  data cannot be 
presented ; so only apparent  viscosity that can be  calculated . 
(Refer Slide Time: 39:29)  
 
Thank you . 