Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 08 
Measurements of Rheological Properties (Contd.)  
  
Hello everyone , welcome to another class of Fundamentals of Food Process 
Engineering ., we are in the first chapter that is food Rheology and we will continue today 
with the problem , that we should do on measurement of Rheology . So, regarding 
measurement what are the different methods and what are  the principle behind that , we 
have learned it in our last class . Today,  we will continue . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:51 ) 
 
Rheological behaviour of semisolid foods  
Semisolid food is also called the viscoelastic food . So, we will see first the viscoelastic 
beha vior and then  we will see that what are the different kinds of model that can well 
explain the viscoelastic behavior  and the main characteristics , features of viscoelastic 
behavior ; so, first we will see that why it is different from  the solid and viscous behavior , 
we have learnt  so, far. So, as the name suggests that viscoelastic material , they must have 
viscous property that is the flo w property and the elastic property  which is the 
characteristics of solid material . That means they show both the elastic as well as viscous property , at the same time , they 
possess some degree  of elasticity and also they flow  by some degree . So, the full 
recovery of the initial condition may no t be possible in this case .  
When a con stant stress applies on a visco elastic mate rial which can be shown as  a plot 
where a constant stress τ has been given , according to the vertical  line and it is 
maintain ed at that condition at a particular  shear stress for certain time an d then  it has 
been withdrawn . 
So let us say if  t = t 1, we are  giving this constant stress and then  at t = t 2, it has been 
withdrawn . Now,  what happened to the elastic material that since , stress is proportional 
to strain in pure elastic material ; it directly  come back to the initial condition ; if it is 
purely ela stic material . However , if it is pure ly viscous material ; so as the s tress comes 
on the material ; so, at a constant stress  it will start flowing continuously . But for a 
viscoelastic material , it starts increa sing the strain  and may not be reaching to the exa ctly 
similar  degree of the applied stress  and then, when we withdraw the stress  it will try to 
come to its initial condition exponentially , not instantly . And because it has some viscous 
property as well ; that means,  it has  some , flow properties  that is wh y it cannot fully 
regain  the initial condition . Because of this elastic nature it regain ed some  of it is nature , 
but not fully . So, this is the nature of strain that will be observed as a result of a fix pulse 
of stress , which is applied on a viscoelastic material . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:32)  
 If the material is having  a higher degree of viscous nature compared to the elastic nature , 
then its relaxation time will be very short . And if it is having , more elasticity , more 
elastic nature  compared to the viscous  nature , and then  it will show a longer relaxation 
time. So, one important characteristic  is Deborah’s number , represented as D e  
 
Now, if the characteristic time  period  of the material  that means, the time to  have the full 
relaxation , will be very low , as in the visco elastic material , where component of viscous 
material will be higher . So, they will have very low Deborah  number  and the reverse will 
happen in case of the material , which is having higher degree of elastic property . 
So, Deborah  number can g ive us some indica tion of the nature of the viscoelastic 
material, which  is very important parameter and it also depends on the time of 
observation . So, if the material i s having a really longer period  of the relaxa tion time  we 
shoul d take the time of obse rvation , accordingly . So, relaxation time constant for a 
viscoelastic material , can be used fo r the characteristic time period  analysis of the 
material . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:21)  
 
  Example:  
 wheat flour dough,  
 Dairy cream,  
 ice cream mix,   
 marshmallow cr eam,   
 cheese, and  
 most gelled products are also viscoelastic foods.  
These  are visco elastic food ; that means, they possess both the viscous that is flow 
behavior  and, elastic  behavior , but the degree of elasticity or degree of the viscous nature 
may vary depending on the different , molecul ar construction of the material . 
There is no simple constant for viscoelastic materials such as modulus because most of 
the viscoelastic material shows significant deformation behavior with respect to time.  
 (Refer Slide  Time: 09:48)  
 
Weissenberg effect  
It is a special property  in viscoelastic material than the viscous material . So, if we dip 
one rod into a viscous material  and give a rotational movement to it then we will ob serve a clearly visible vertex in the liquid.  Now, if we take a similar rod and try to agitate  the 
viscoelastic material  then we will find that the material will try to stick to the inner rod 
and try to come up with the rod . So, this effect is called  Weissenberg  effect . So, example 
is, this kind of behavior  in cake batter or bread dough . 
Reason:  
 production of a normal force acting at right angles to the rotational forces, which 
in turn acts in a horizontal plane.  
 The rotation tends to straighten out the polymer molecules in the direction of 
rotation  but the molecules attempt to return to their original position  
They  try to spring back  and put a normal force , because of that , because they want to 
come to the initial condition and therefore, this kind of effect i s Weissenberg  effect 
which is seen in many viscoelastic  material . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:07 ) 
 
 Contraction and expansion  
So, another , phenomenon  that we can see in case of viscoelastic material that if , let us 
say some viscous fluid , if it comes , through a long tube and  when it comes out 
contract ion happens. S o, if the diameter  is D; the material which comes out from the long 
tube, if it is a viscous material ; so, its diameter will be reduced or the material will be contract ed a bit . Now,  in case of a low viscous  material  that means,  Reynolds numb er is 
low then expand to a diameter of 10% to 15% larger than the tube diameter may observe  
when it comes  out from the very long tube .. 
Normal stress differences present in a viscoelastic fluid, however, may cause jet 
expansion (called die swell) which are  two or more times the diameter of the tube.  
In addition, highly elastic fluids may exhibit a tubeless siphon effect (Steffe, 1996).  
So, this kind of phenomena , you can get it from the , the books as well you can refer the , 
M A Anand  Rao or Steffe  book for  getting the visco elastic  nature of the  material . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:29)  
 
Recoil Phenomena  
Let us see , we have viscous fluid flowing inside a pipe as well as , we have a viscoelastic 
fluid . So, when we start the fl ow, gradually the flow will start build ing up in the pipe and 
eventually  fully developed flow , having a parabolic nature will be observed  and at that 
time if we stop the flow  it will remain in the same condition .  However, if we start the 
flow in case of viscoelastic material , so it will come u p to the parabol ic condition , but 
when we stop it , it will again spring back to  a stage , which is a previous condition ; that 
means, it is not coming to fully straight , but not retaining that parabolic behavior  that it 
was during flowing , during the fully d eveloped flow . So, this phenomenon is called the 
recoil. T his is happened , because of the elastic nature of the  viscoelastic material . So, some flow will be  observed , because of  the viscous nature and some  recovery will be 
there , because of the elastic nat ure this phenomenon  is called the rec oil phenomenon . 
 Now, the main characteristics of viscoelastic material are  stress relaxation . There  are 
method of stress relaxation , test creep test , which is another important phenomenon and 
lastly the dynamic test . So, this all three test we perform to analyze the viscoelastic  
nature of food or for that matter any viscoelastic material and this test can very well , give 
us an indication of the degree of elasticity and degree of viscous behavior of the material . 
Thank y ou. 