Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering  
Prof. Jayeeta Mitra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 09 
Rheological Properties of Viscoelastic Food  
 
Hello everyone , welcome to the  NPTEL online ce rtification course on Fundamentals of 
Food Process E ngineering . We will continue with the viscoelastic properties of food 
today . So, Rheological Properties of Viscoelastic F ood that we have started in the last 
class will continue with that. As I said that  visco elastic food can be characterized by the 
stress relaxation behavior , creep behavior . So, the test of stress relaxation and creep can 
be performed to understand the behavior  of viscoelastic food . And along with that 
another  study is the  oscillatory  study, so that we will also see in this class .  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:16)  
 
Stress relaxation test  
In viscoelastic material , if we apply constant strain on it fo r a long time , then with time 
the stress require to maintain that strain  will die down gradually o r that will decrease 
gradually . So that means,  the stress required maintaining  the strain initially will be 
reduced as the time  will pass , so some  deformation or some flow will be there . So the 
time required to  get the full relaxation behavior  is called th e relaxation time and that time 
varies from different food products . So, let us see this figure first , what we are doing is initia lly from the  0 condition , we are  
moving onto in t he time scale in the x direction . At t = 0 we are a pplying a constant 
strain  γ0 and we are maintaining that strain through out. So, an idea l elastic material will 
require  the constant stress to maintain the strength because in  case of ideal elastic 
material stress is proportional to strain , so the stress will be constant as long as the strain 
is maintained as γ0. 
Now  in the ideal viscous material , it will start flowing instant ly and if it is viscoelastic 
material with elastic property in higher degree , so initially when the strain is applied to 
γ0, stress is been reached to  the maxim um value and then gradually this stress will 
decrease . So, this stress will decrease to some extent not fully and then it will maintain or 
try to come to a constant level after that . How ever if it is  visco elastic liquid  then the 
curve  will exponentially de cay to a high er degree compared to the visco elastic  solid and 
eventually come to  0 condition of the stress . 
Since the viscous material which is  ideal viscous or pure viscous material , respond 
immediately with applied stress and start flowing . So, when the material flows it tries to 
dissipate that energy that comes into it a nd it flows completely it does  not come back to  
its initia l situation ; that means, it does  not have the property of storing that energy . 
So, it will try to dissipate that and eventually c ome to the  0 stress condition whereas, the 
material which has a high solid content compared to the viscous material  in that case  
some amount of  decay  we will observe ; however, it will retain some amount of energy  
and it will recover to some degree with res pect to the elastic property in it  and σe that is 
the residual stress will remain there . 
So, stress in case of visco elastic material , will follow this pattern  
 
σ0 = initial stress , where  t R is the stress relaxation time .  
So, if t = t R , 
  
                  
  
So, relaxation time will be obser ved when the material  when the stress in case of a 
viscoel astic material has reached to 36.8 percent of  it is initial  stress . 
So, time constant mathematically is the reciprocal of the first order rate constant in a  
simple first order exponential decay reaction . So, elastic and viscous effect on material  
we can  perceive that in such a manner like; in elastic material the molecules that  are 
combined to form that elastic material , are having a strong attraction force a nd when we  
strain them or we apply a constant stress,  they try to  oppos e it by having strain ed in the 
materi al. But if we apply the stress  within the elastic limit ; that means,  no rupture or  
break will be observed , this energy is stored in the material  and when we  remove  that 
stress , it is come to  it is initial condition that  is the elasticity . 
Now,  when we consider the  viscoelastic material  or in that the viscous effect will be 
visible along  with the elastic property . So, in case of viscous material , the m olecules in 
the viscous material are  connected by the non-covalent  forces , Vander Waal forces  and 
when some constant stress we apply on them  these  bond energy will try to  reorient and 
they form some  different kind of  Vander Waal forces , non covalen t forces  again , but  
they also release some amount of energy . So, that energy dissipates  in the form o f heat ; 
which is  not recoverable . While try to  regain the initial condition or the stress is 
removed , we cannot  get back to the initial situ ation because the lost energy is not 
recoverable ; however, to some extent the  bonds will have certain amount of energy  so, 
that it can get back in case of the viscoelastic material .  (Refer Slide Time: 11:14)  
 
Mechanial model to represent viscoelastic material  
In viscoelastic m aterial it will have both the properties of  elastic  nature and viscous 
nature .  
So, elastic model that is spring model , it has been considered that spring can express the 
ideal elastic nature . So, spring when  applied by a constant force F, it expands  and the 
deformation x can be related with the applied force in this manner ;  
F = K x where K is the spring constant that is almost equivalent to  elasticity.  
On removal of  the force F, the spring tries to come to  its initial condition . So, an ideal 
solid elemen t obeys Hooke’s  law that is shear stress proportional to strain γ and there is a 
proportionality constant G that is called the elasticity  or elastic modulus .  
τ =Gγ 
Viscous property  
Viscous p roperty is explain ed by dashpot and in case of a dashpot  when the force is 
being applied on , it tries to move  or flow and dissipa te that energy . So, the behavior  that 
we can  get here that is the force will be proportional to constan t C into dx / dt.  
 So, the flow  is being express ed by dx / dt, the rate of extension varies linearly with force  
F acting on the system  . 
So, this will follow  the Newton’s  law of viscosity   
 
 
μ is the dynami c viscosity .  
So, combined ly spring and the dashpot  may be used to describe different kind of 
visco elastic behavior . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:40)  
 
Maxwell mode l  Spring and dashpot are connected linear ly in a series . So,  here stress relaxation  of 
viscoelastic liquid e specially polymeric liquid can be express  as; initially when the stress 
is applied  so it will come to the spring , so, spring will expand following the elasticity . 
So, it is dir ectly proportional to the applied stress , so, stress  will be fe lt when the force is 
applied  on it. Now as this  force will be transferred to the dashpot , it will try  to flow and 
dissipate that energy  so, and gradually  it will come to a constant state . Asymptotically 
exponential ly decay will be observed over tim e.  
So, this is a  Maxwell model that can express the stress relaxation behavior  of viscoelastic 
liquids  in which , first because of this elastic property an d then viscoelastic liquids. So, 
almost  complete dissipation is there , but the stress is not coming to 0 because some 
elastic behavior  will be there . 
So, in the series arrangement when any stress  is applied, stress is  equally transmitted to 
the dashpot as well as the spring , but the strain will be different for  spring and the 
dashpot . So, in the series ar rangement , total she ar strain can be expressed as the 
summation of the strain  in the spring and the dashpot .  
γ = γ spring + γdashpot  
So, differentiat ing this to get the rate  
  
because it will have both elastic and viscous property . 
So, we know that for th e elastic material τ = Gγ and for the  viscous material we had  
 
So, if in this equation differ entiating  with respect to time  
we, we wi ll get we will get this   
Now, consider ing this equation ,  
 
λrel= relaxation time  
 
μ is the  viscosity  of the material , and G will be the  elastic modulus of the spring . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:25)  
 
So, again  we have got this expression  
 
 For a constant strain γ, shear rate, γ˙ becomes zero ,  integrating with respect to 
time,   
t = stress relaxation time  
 Describes the gradu al relaxation of stress (from τ 0 to zero) after the application of 
a sudden strain. This relationship helps determining the relaxation time (λ rel), 
which is the time it takes for the stress to decay to 1/e (36.8%) of its initial value.  
 (Refer Slide Time:  22:12)  
 
Maxwell model has been modified by adding another spring in parallel to analyze  the 
behavior  of equilibrium stress . 
 Not suitable for many viscoelastic materials since it does not include an 
equilibrium stress ( τe).  
 A parallel spring connected to  the Maxwell element.  
 The stress relaxation equation  
 
  
  
G0 = elastic modulus or spring consta nt here and γ0 is the strain ,  
 
In many viscoelastic materials , it has been found that the full  dissipation of energy may 
not happen;  some may be retained insi de the material because of the  elastic behavior . So, 
if we take that  τ will not become completely τ 0. So, therefore, this equilibrium stress 
conce pt has been introduced here.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:13)  
 
Combined mechanical Models  
a seven -element Maxwell m odel (three Maxwell elements and a free spring) used to 
model cooked potatoes.  
The stress relaxation data of osmotically dehydrated apples and bananas were modeled 
using two terms Maxwell model.  
Osmotic pretreatment decreased relaxation time of dehydrated  samples, showing that 
sugar gain increases viscous nature but decreases elastic nature of fruits.  So, relaxation time decrease showing that the sugar gain increases the viscous nature, but 
decreases the elastic nature of the fruits, that is why relaxation  time decreases.  
 
So, this different kind of complexities in a model  is useful for  different kind of  food 
material  and their behavior , their cooking  behavior , their swelling behavior , gelling 
behavior . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 27:28)  
 
 Creep test : 
 The corollar y to stress relaxation is strain retardation or creep i.e., how strain 
responds over time to a constant applied stress.  
 Creep test can be performed in uniaxial tension or compression.   
So, here we maintain a certain strain or deformation for longer period of time, and the 
amount of stress needed to maintain that strain  is measure d over the time period . Here a 
constant stress  is applied  and with time , strain  in the material  is observed .  
Now  for the el astic material elastic material, stress is proporti onal t o strain and when we 
withdraw that stress , we can gain the  initial nature of the material . So, for ideal elastic 
material strain will be constant till the stress disappears . So, then it will recover  its initial 
condition instantly . In ideal viscous materia l, they will show steady flow behavior  when t he stress is constant 
strain will increase over time . And when we remove the stress , the flow  which already 
has happened , will be there and it will maintain that  one. So, initial condition will not g et 
that is it will maintain the deformation when we take out the stress by maintaing  that 
flow. 
Now, if it is a viscoelastic material , it will have certain property for which the flow  will 
takes place and also it has certain properties for which the elastic behavior  will be 
visible . So, it will f low, but when we remove the stress , it will try to regain  its initial 
condition . So, partial recovery will be possib le following the exponential decay curve 
and some amount of permanent deformation will be there because of  it is viscous nature , 
with amount of  recovery.  
So, how the material the strain response over time because of applied stresses  that is the 
creep behavior . So, we can see that for the visco elastic material under the same stress for 
a long time , the material will deform permanently or show a creep behavior .  
Thank you . 