Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 17
Introduction to Pest and Disease Management
So, I welcome you all for this lecture 7, Introduction to Pest and Disease Management.
So, you know in organic farming pests and disease management is one of the great
challenges, because the increase in concentration of the pesticides, increasing use of the
fertilizers. So, many of the pests and disease they have become, resistant. So, how we
can tackle the issue in organic farming? We can manage the pest and diseases because
they cause a huge damage to agricultural productions.
So, in this lecture, we will be discussing about the different type pests and the diseases,
their behavior and what is the status of the pesticides use and the bio pesticides in the
market?
(Refer Slide Time: 01:12)
So, coming first the typical sign of pest and disease in incidence, we can see that this for
the common pests in crop plants and the common diseases in crop plants. As you see the
pests usually insects, mites, nematodes; they are very common and they do make a
severe  damage  to  crop  plants  and  the  mammals  like  where  the  elephants  and  the
monkeys; so many the animals, then say birds and the others.So, they do make damage in the crop plants and the disease, see the there is a 3 main
diseases. This is due to fungal disease or the bacterial disease or the viral disease. 
So, we will see what are the major insects; specially the insects, mites and nematodes for
the agricultural products or they do affect the crop production and also we will discuss
about the diseases mainly fungal disease, bacteria and virus, they do have they do impact
or they do affect the crop productions.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:28)
If you see the Insects; so, insect damage mainly we have the on the basis of the feeding
mechanisms  insects  are  classified  as  the  biting  or  chewing  insects;  those  are  the
caterpillars and the weevils and piercing and the sucking insects; they are the aphids and
psyllids.
The boring insects, they do make the bore in the leaf or in the stems in the leaves, seeds
they are the withered plants are by borer. So, what you see the biting and chewing? So,
these are the caterpillar you can see, so they do damage the leaves by making the holes in
the leaves they do and also the weevils, they do make they will chew the cell sap present
in the leaves; so, it  sucks cell saps. So, this  type  damage  we can see many crops
especially, the cereal crops, pulses, oilseeds, vegetables in the orchard crops; where, we
can find the caterpillars or the weevils, they do make serious damage in the production. The piercing and the sucking insects, they are mainly you can see the aphids or the
psyllids. So, the symptoms we can see these are the aphids and the psyllids, they suck the
cell sap, and the leaf may become whitish color, they devoid the chlorophyll and they
can become the and the other type of insect say boring as per they do make the bores or
the holes they. So, this you can see the rice, this is a rice stables that is a rice stem
portion and you can see this is the caterpillar; that is a borers say stem borer, we can say
stem borer this one and this stem borer.
So, that the (Refer Time: 04:34) stems and make the hole in the stems. So, this happens
usually in the rice when the tillering stage at the maximum tillering stage; at that stage
this say the stem borer say stem borer they do attack the tillers and they make holes in
the tillers on the tillers. So, as a result of which the whole plant dies.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:02)
So, these are the insects as per the feeding mechanisms and also we have the insects that
these are the some of the symptoms, we can see as a leaves with the holes are the by
caterpillar or the it is a fruit the gram the gram pod borer
So, these caterpillars they make bores in the pods. So, they damage this one. Similarly,
also bores they have the sugarcane the early stage, make this type of symptoms is there.
So, they do pods the stem portions and they do damage the so that they, once they make
a damage. So, the movement of the transport of the water and nutrients from the soil tothe plant system gets affected or they blocked. So, as a result of which the whole plant
soothers and dies because of the stem borer.
 So, some may have the curled leaves say in case of the aphids because aphids, they
remain inside the leaf and they make the curling of the leaves, they remain there and they
suck the cell saps and there is a damaged or rotten fruits in case of fruit flies, like the
Mango we have shown here. So, the fruit flies; so they doing the make the damage in the
fruit flies the mango, as you see this one. So, with fruit flies also they can cause damage.
Then, withered plants by larvae of noctuids are the in the stem borers as a discussed the
stem borers like in the either sugarcanes or the pod borers or the rice stem borers, they
damage the stem portions. So, the once the stem is to the whole plant withers and the
whole in the trunks and stem of the lignovorous insects like the mango trunks. So, mango
stem borers; so they also may cause the damage to the stem portions or the orchard
crops. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:49)
So, there are some insects damage on the basis of movement of insect as classified as
slowing as a caterpillar, there is very slow movement or the fast moving the fruit flies.
As we discussed fruit flies, they cause damage in the fruits. So, they may puncture the
fruits and make the fruits ruts and the caterpillar, there is very slow movements and on
the basis of ease of observance insects are classified as hidden. Hidden means like stem
borer; stem borer in rice stem borer that remains that makes holes in the rice plants or thestem portions and remain inside, suck the cell sap and remain inside for a longer periods
as long as food is available there.
So, in this process the whole plant withers and dies and some are the easy to observe like
the caterpillar. As you as you have seen the earlier caterpillars or the weevils. So, we can
see they remain on the leaf portions and they do suck the cell saps, they do chew the cell
saps cell saps. So, these are the insects are they make damage either by the biting or
chewing or the sucking or the piercing or by making bores in the stems.
 Damage by mites, mites are very tiny and the microscopic organisms. In naked eye, we
cannot visualize those things. So, leaves and fruits become yellowish. We can see the
mites, these are mites. They can attack the leaf portion and they become the brownish
color brownish; they become the yellowish colors due to mite attack and the another
insects damage  is due to nematode.  Nematode also very small tiny and mostly the
microscopic organisms so, they remains in the soil. So, insects all they mainly attack the
roots. So, they attack plant roots, plant becomes yellow; the plants withers and dies.
So, here you can see the nematode attack the root portions. So, these are the see the see
the shape due to nematode attack; sometimes you know rice, if there is a nematode, the
roots become very strong also. The growth of the nematode would there. So, in this case
also the plant  wither,  wilts  and also the  plant dies. So, these are the  some  of the
symptoms as we have seen due to the insect and most of the damage severe damage is
caused due to due to insect pests.(Refer Slide Time: 09:17)
And if see the disease incidence, disease we will discuss about the bacteria, disease due
to fungus and also viral disease. If you see bacteria, they cause the following problems.
First of all, some produce enzymes that breakdowns the cell wall of the plants; this
causes rotting. So, some bacteria, they do produce some enzymes. So, so they cause
damage in the cell walls and the whole plants and dies like say moko wilt in banana. So,
they the bacteria, they involved the cause the damage the cells and the whole plant dies.
And some bacteria, they do produce toxins which cause early death of plants. So, and
also some produce sticky sugar substances that travel through the plant and block narrow
channels  preventing  uptake  of water  and  nutrients.  So, this  bacteria  they the  sugar
substances, they the produced inside the plant cells and they; so, in the stem portions so,
they production of sugar substance, they block the soft cell saps and the movement of the
water and nutrients from the soils to the plant systems or the leper system gets blocked
that to the whole plants dies.
 And some  produce proteins  and mimic  that mimic  the plant hormones, leading to
overgrowth and set doing tumors also; that is due to bacterial disease like know the extra
growth. Extra growth in the potato, you can see that is due to the production of the
proteins. So, that enhances the growth plant hormones so, that causes a tumor. And also
this  scab  disease,  in  potato  this  scab  disease  means  there  is  a  brownish  smithyappearance say in the over the potato tough skins. So, brownish colors and this also
damage the whole product of fruit.
So, these are the symptoms due to bacteria. So, when they produce either the enzymes;
they produce the toxin materials or they produce the sticky sugars. They block cells saps,
cells saps; they damage the cell and they block the movement of water and nutrients in
the through the plant system and some may produce the proteins or that causes the
growth that is a leading to overgrowth of the crops and that is a tumor formation. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:40)
Coming to fungal disease so this is because most of the fungal disease is very prevalent.
So, it causes great loss that around two-thirds of the infectious plant disease due to
fungal  disease.  It  includes  all  white  and  true  rusts,  smuts,  needle  casts,  leaf  curls,
mildew, sooty moulds and anthracnose. So, these are the some spots, we can see here,
these are the leaf spots or the powdery mildew.
And the fungal disease also in case of rice, there is a blast disease also very common;
very prevalent say oval shaped spots is a brown colors oval shaped and that is a very
common in rice crops and this bacteria, this blast disease in rice cause that can happen in
the leaflets, leaves, seeds and the panicle also are in the stem portion also. So, that causes
severe damage to crops. So, there will be so if there is a disease so, the it may not yield
any grain in case of blast.And also they are responsible for most leaf fruit and flowers spots canker blights, wilt,
scabs and root wood rots. So, in some cases the plant fungal wilts, the plant withers and
also wilts. So, mostly they among disease, the fungal disease very serious and about two-
third of the disease is due to fungus. If you see the virus, it mostly causes the systemic
disease. It shows chlorosis or change in color of leaves and other green parts. Light green
or yellow patches of various shades, shapes and sizes appear in affected leaves.
So, this is we are showing some symptoms of viral disease like the mosaic virus in chili.
So, here the leaf color changes and the most of the cases in viral disease the top leaves
becomes very small in size. And as compared to the bottom leaves or the middle leaves,
the top leaves is very small and that also withers and after sometime color also changes
from the green color to yellow colors appearance; as you can see here also, this is a
curling of the leaves and this the top leafs becomes very smalls and thick also. So, that is
due to virus.
And some cases the yellow mosaic virus in case of okra also is very common, where the
leaves becomes yellowish colors and also the top leaves becomes very small. And the
viral diseases spread from one  plant is infected with the virus, that can be spread to other
plants and the carriers are the insects. Insects are present, they can carry this disease and
this is also the mosaic virus in case of the tomato, the discoloration or the changes from
the fruit to fruits.
So, these are the viral disease also very difficult to control viral disease. So, in this case
usually when you go for the chemical insecticide pesticide, you apply the (Refer Time:
14:51) the medicine that can control the fungus at the same time to control the carrier
insect also we apply the insecticides along with the fungicides. (Refer Slide Time: 15:01)
So, crop losses due to pest and diseases, you can see the 33 percent due to rodents and
the other mammals, there is a loss higher loss 33 percent. And insects and the diseases,
they have the loss around 26 percent followed by weeds around 15 percent and if you see
the use of the pesticides or the insecticides, those are synthetic insecticides pesticides are
the bio pesticides in the Indian market; mostly the maximum use the insecticide. This is
also we have discussed in the first class, the insecticides use the maximum and followed
by this is the herbicides.
So, around say the total insecticide pesticides 72 the chemical synthetic chemicals, we
are using 72 percent is for the insect controls. Insecticides and 19 percent or close to 20
percent for controlling the weeds followed by fungicides that is around 4 percents and
the others around 3 percent and 2 percent is for the biopesticides. That means, the
biopesticides the market is very mega, in significant we can say now because mostly the
farmers are using the insecticides the synthetic pesticides to control the insect and the
most of the say the chemicals are used for the controlling insects followed by the weeds
and fungus, fungal disease.
 So, now, there is a to minimize there is a so there is a need to minimize the use of
chemical or synthetic pesticides and to have the more and more biopesticide so that we
can have to improve the food quality and to maintain with maintaining similar level of
productions.(Refer Slide Time: 17:10)
And if you see the effect of this a synthetic pesticides on the as a social basis, we have a
study. The pesticide dependence of smallholder vegetable farmers in Southeast Asia; so
here, we have we have collected some information from Indian study and also from the
Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam.
So, many farmers are interviewed in this case because the farmers those have applied
pesticides, after application what type of symptoms they do observe; they do complain.
So, those study were there and also this is a basic informations we have collected also;
how the use of pesticides among the farming community; that is associated with the
other farmers, neighbors or the so the dealers or the shopkeepers.
So, if you see the left hand, the farmers association and the chemical pesticide used. So,
around 900 farmers were interviewed for this exercise. So, we can see the; if the farmers
take  advice  from  friends  and  the  neighbors,  the  use  of  pesticides  or  the  synthetic
pesticides we are talking that is lower by 45 percent.
So, taking advice from the neighboring farmers or the friends, the farmer uses less and
less pesticide. This is around less decreased by 45 percent; whereas, if the farmer take
advice  from the  shopkeepers  or the dealers  in  the specially,  the synthetic  pesticide
dealers, the use of pesticides increases by 251 percentage. So, it is a very alarming see
how the dealers usually what they do?They do they do try to sell or the shopkeeper sells the pesticides specially and they do
advice farmers without having proper knowledge which type of pesticides is used for
specific insects. So, the farmers keep on buying the pesticides from the shopkeepers or
the dealers and dealers to use to get the benefit out of this. So, that way there is a huge
use of the pesticides, if the farmers use to contact or take advice from the shopkeepers.
If you see if the pesticide use is in charge of the woman, if woman is involved in the use
of pesticides; so, there is less use of pesticides around 42 percents less use of synthetic
pesticides if woman was in the charge of the pest control. And if the farmer has some
knowledge of biopesticides, then also then there is also reduction in use of pesticides
around  30  percents  less  use  of  pesticides,  if  farmers  has  some  knowledge  on
biopesticides. So, they it try to minimize the use synthetic pesticides.
And  this  right  hand  side,  you  can  see  is  a  research  information  also  generated  as
collected because if the farmers around 300 to 900 farmers they are interviewed. So,
after applications of the pesticides, what type of symptoms are complaint they do they do
have? So, these are the signs and symptoms and pesticide application in percentage that
is in Indian story that is in Assam. You can see the chest pain and burning feeling around
38 percent farmers do complain. So, there is a chest pain and burning after immediately
after application of the pesticides, probably they do not use the precaution measures and
they have this problem.
Similarly, the burning or the stinking or the itching of eyes around 37 percent farmers to
complain and excessive Sweating also complained by 37 percent farmers skin redness or
white  patches.  So,  around  35  percent  farmers  excessive  salivation  also  35  percent
farmers. So, these are the farmers their feelings about the problems after they do have the
symptoms or the after applications of the synthetic pesticides.
And this is from the other same type of study from the Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam,
you can see the percentage of pesticide applicator, they have complaints of the headache
or the fatigue or the dizziness or the excessive sweating and salivation around 40 percent
farmers, they do complaint such symptoms.
Similarly, the blurred visions and the muscle twitching and the loss of appetite with
nausea or the chest discomfort and the tightness or the vomiting also as controlled by
more than 20 percent farmers, they do complaint such symptoms. And also there aresome complaints  those are less there is a stomach cramps  and the slow heartbeats,
diarrhea, unconsciousness and unable walk also there are complaints though there are
less among the farmers.
That means,  it indicates  so there is a serious concern because use of the synthetic
pesticides or the in the crop field which affect the farmers and also of course, there is
your  there  is  as  we  discussed  there  is  a  effect  on  the  food  quality  and  also  the
environment gets contaminated pollute polluted.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:33)
So, if you see the growth of the global pesticides or the synthetic pesticides, after 2003.
So, there is a decreasing in the growth of the synthetic pesticides from the so, million
dollars on 3000 million dollars. It is a slow decrease in the use of synthetic pesticides up
to 2010. At the same time, we can see so there is a somehow increase in the biopesticides
from 2003 to 2010 you can see, so there is there is a increasing use of biopesticides. That
means the biopesticides is also gaining market there is a huge potential will be there. So,
it is gaining it is, but it needs to increase, we have to we have to replace this the synthetic
pesticides with the biopesticides.
In the present scenario of the use of biopesticides and synthetic pesticides in India if you
see the usually the synthetic insecticides use the maximum as you see is around the 60
percent is the insect controls and similarly for the fungicides around 20 percent andherbicides 16 percent, biopesticides the maximum 4 percent so though it is a very less
use of biopesticides.
So, we need to increase these because this has to be very effective in controlling pest and
diseases. Because in the farmers they do not want to see that crops dying. So, in this we
have  to  take  proper  management  practices,  proper  maintenance  practice  and  crop
management technology. So, that so there will be less incidence of pest and diseases and
which we can manage by using biopesticides.
Because in a biopesticides are the pesticide what are using usually they are unable to kill
the the insects. Only thing what they can do? They can make the insects or the pest they
can make the as a unconscious or they can make can paralyze only the insect pests and
they may not be able to kill insect pest. 
So, to have a control, so there we will discuss in the crop management, crop management
classes when you go for the management for the different crops, when you go for the
pesticide applications or the take the a management control. So, what you should do and
how frequently you should use the biopesticides and what are the other options are there
so that you can have a effective control or the control of the insect pest and disease for
the crops.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:13)
 And if you see the biopesticide market size, so as you see it is also growing as a US
billion  dollar.  So,  you  see  from  2014  and  the  forecast  up  to  2024.  So,  there  is  a
compound annual growth rate around 8.8 percent. So, they it is it indicates that the
forecast there. So, there is a market. So, biopestcides market is as a as a market.
So, this is growing on there is a scope opportunity so that means, as we are moving
towards  organic  farming,  as  we are becoming  more  and more  health  concerns  and
environmental awareness to have a quality food and to have a good quality water to drink
and also to have a good quality air to breathe, live a the better environment, the green
environment in that case the organic farming or the less use of pesticides insecticides that
is that is a must.
So, we need to move forwards, we need to eradicate use of the synthetic pesticides and
we want to at the same time, we want to increase the productions of the crops; we want
to maintain the production on increase the production of the crops. So, biopesticides has
a market that is a as around 2024, it is experience 4 billion US dollar to the forecast of
the biopesticide.
So, that means So, there is a opportunity biopesticide market is growing. So, there is a
So, organic organic farming and the of the biopesticide or the cultural practices how can
minimize the pest and disease pressure on the crop.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:57)
So,  finally,  I  will  say  a  story  here  there  is  a  Silent  Spring.  Silent  Spring  is  an
environmental  science  book by Rachel  Carson. So, this  book was  published on 27
September  1962  and  it  documented  the  adverse  effect  of  the  indiscriminate  use of
pesticides  on  the  environment.  Carson  accused  the  chemical  industry  of  spreading
disinformations and public official also of accepting industry claims unquestioningly.
So, this is a silent spring that book that published by this scientist Rachel Carson from
US and as you say this came in 1962. This came because prior to that in the late 1950,
the Carson turned her attentions to conservations especially environmental problems that
she believed were caused by synthetic pesticides.
So, she did use lot of research started from 1940 and by the time in 1950’s she was must
arrived  there,  this  say  there  is  a  decreasing  the  there  is  a  environmental  quality
deteriorating and that is due to the indiscriminate or the intensive use of the chemical or
the synthetic pesticides. The result was this Silent Spring that came in 1962, you can see
that that same lady the scientist, she also got because he got cancer in 1960 as a breast
cancer and she took some time to improve health conditions..
By 1960 and the book was released which brought the environmental concerns to the
American  public.  And  Silent  Spring  was  met  with  fierce  oppositions  by  chemical
components. But it spurred a reversal in national pesticide policy that led to nationwide
ban on DDT for agricultural uses.
An inspired an environmental movement that led to the creation of US environmental
protections. So, that is a this ladies scientist Rachel Carson, who did the work started
from  1940  and  they  realized  that  this  use  of  synthetic  pesticides  is  the  cause  of
deteriorating environmental quality and also there is a human health.
So, due to that  there  is  a ban of DDT that  is  a chlorinated  hydrocarbon  group of
insecticides is a highly persistence. So, that was banned from the US and also due to the
because of this is her effort. So, that is a creation of us environmental protection. And in
1996, a follow-up book, Beyond Silent Spring that is co-written by H.F. van Emden and
David Peakall, was published and in 2006, Silent Spring was named one of the 25
greatest science books of all times by the editors of Discover Magazine.So, with this I can say that is this is a use of the synthetic insecticides and pesticides
should be put as minimum as possible and there should be more and more use of the
biopesticides and other methods of controlling the pest and diseases so that we can have
a better quality food while maintaining and improving production in a sustainable as a
good environments. So, with this, I thank you all.