Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 19
Level “C” Pest and Disease Management
So, welcome to the lecture 19, let us say level C Pest and disease management. So,
earlier lectures we have discussed about the pest and disease management using the level
A and level B. Level A was the preventive measures are is in the cultural practices in
organic farming, how we can manage the pest and diseases and level B was the physical
and mechanical methods in during the cultural practices, by using the physical methods,
as a light traps or the yellow stick traps and the mechanical methods like the, summer
ploughing, solarization, mulching. So, those methods were discussed for the pest and
disease management in organic forming using the preventive as well as the physical and
mechanical methods.
This lecture we will be discussing about the level C; that means, use of biological control
measures the biopesticides or the botanical pesticides for controlling pest and diseases in
organic farming.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:16)
So, what is the Biological control? If you see the Biological control or the biocontrol you
can say this is the use of natural enemies to manage a population of pests and thediseases. So, it relies  on predation, there is a parasitism, herbivory or other natural
mechanisms that is a, but typically that depends also the human beings the managements,
usually they depend upon the human beings how they manage, the pest and diseases
using the natural enemies or the natural predators.
For  example,  so  the  natural  predators  are  the  ladybird  beetles  or  the  predatory
gallmidges, the hoverfly larvae against many aphids or the psyllids. You can see the
photo as you can see here there is a Syrphus hoverfly larvae, feed on aphids and making
them natural biological control. So, they can control the aphids say by using the either
the ladybird beetles, the predatory gallmidges or the hoverfly as a natural organisms the
biocontrols.  So, those  insects  those organisms  can be applied  can  be reared  in the
laboratory can be released in a field for controlling the harmful insect pest for attacking
or for killing, for the reducing the population of harmful insect pest and diseases.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:45)
So, what is biological control? So one is the types we can see one is the “introduction”.
So, introduction means it involves introduction of the pests of natural enemies to a new
locale, where they do not occur naturally; that means, so you are introducing those pest’s
natural  enemies.  So,  as  they  do  not  habitated  in  that  location  so  we  are  newly
introducing. Second is “Augmentation”, Augmentation means those the natural agents
they are present, but we need to supplement  them to increase their populations  for
effective  control  of  the  pest  and  diseases;  that  means,  augmentation  involves  thesupplemental release of natural enemies, that occur in particular area boosting the natural
occurring populations.
So, because  those  natural  enemies,  natural  organisms,  the  bioagents,  the  biocontrol
agents. So, those are present, but we want to release them time to time, so that increase
their populations and to become the more effective of the pest and disease control. For
example, Trichogramma so that you see the cards with the Trichogramma against the
corn fruit borer; so, this is a egg parasites. So, that can that is a inoculated with the card
and  that  can  control  the  fruit  borer  of  the  corn  crop  can  be  controlled  using  the
Trichogramma as fungus.
 There is a beneficial fungus Trichogramma that is use the controlling many insect pest
and diseases.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:16)
And they the next one is the conservations, conservation means; the natural enemies are
already adapted to the habitat and to the target pests. And their conservation can be
simple and cost effective; that means, to manage the natural to provide them proper food
materials. So, that these the natural enemies or the biocontrol agents, their growth can be
maintained and though the growth can be supported by providing them proper habitat;
that means, for example, nectar producing crop plants. So, they are grown around the
rice field so provide nectar to support parasitoids and a predators of Planthopper pests.Specially, the Brown Planthopper is a very common, the insect in rice crops. So, the
infestation of a Brown plant Planthopper they cause serious damage. So, this is happened
in Odisha also, last year you can see there is a severe loss of the rice production in
eastern part of Odisha due to large massive infestation of the Brown Planthopper. And if
we can grow some of the nectar producing plants around the rice field. So, they can
provide the habitat or support for this predatory bug that is a Cyrtorhinus libidipennis.
So, that bugs usually used to feed on the eggs of the Brown Planthopper.
So, by releasing these bugs these predatory bugs that is a Cyrtorhinus lividipennis it can
feed on the eggs of the Brown Planthopper. So, thus population of Brown Planthopper
can be controlled and the crop can be protected from the infestation of the BPH that is a
Brown Planthopper.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:02)
So, in a research study it can we can find that; using different nectar plants that is E
sonchifolia, T. procumbens, T. erecta, S. indicum and control means. So, there is no
introduction of any nectar producing plant around, around the rice crop. So, these are the
nectar producing plants are grown around the rice crop. And the effect of the nectar
producing plant is observed on this predatory bug that is, Cyrtorhinus lividipennis.
So, how they consume on the BPH eggs that is a Brown Planthopper eggs? So, these are
the  female  predatory  bugs  and  the  effect  of  the  male  predatory  bugs;  and  the
consumption of the eggs of the Brown Planthopper. From this figure you can see amongthe nectar producing plants S indicum, that is a Sesamum indicum that is the very, very
effective because the having the Sesamum indicum around the rice fields the border of
the rice field. So, this predatory bug is used to consume more number of eggs.
So, I see the Sesamum indicum either in the female or the male females are effective as
compare to male. So, they do consume is number of eggs consumed by the bugs or the
predatory bugs as higher having the nectar producing plant around. And the nectar
producing plant Sesamum is highly effective because it is a control plant in control field.
So, there is no introduction of the nectar producing plants. So, this is the this is the
consumption of the BPH by these predatory bugs Cyrtorhinus lividipennis having the
nectar producing plant like Sesamum indicum. So, there is more number of the BPH
eggs is consumed by this predatory bugs. So, that can protect the crop from the pest and
that is BPH attack can be controlled by introducing this natural enemies that is the
predatory bugs Cyrtorhinus lividipennis.
So, Sesamum indicum just that is the best one seems to be so this is a published research
from  the  so  this  author  in  2014  selection  of  natural  plants  for  use  in  ecological
engineering to promote biological control of rice pests by the predatory bug Cyrtorhinus
lividipennis.  So, this  is  published  in plos  one  in 2014.  So, as  you  see  so  for this
biological control, so, we have to introduce the national enemies to the field, where they
are not habited earlier or we have to augment their populations by introducing there by
introducing  them  releasing  them.  And  second  thing  we  have  to  conserve  their
populations by providing the suitable habitat like nectar producing plant on the plants.
So, that they can get the food materials they can have their more population, activity of
this natural enemies can be increased, so that they can protect the crop from the harmful
insect pest and diseases.(Refer Slide Time: 09:01)
The population dynamics of pests and the predators, if population of natural enemies
present in the field are too small to sufficiently control pests they can be reared in
laboratory or the rearing units and the reared natural enemies are released into the crop to
boost the field population and keep the pest populations under control. So, there are 2
approaches, to biological control through a release of national enemies.
So, number one is a preventive release of natural enemies at the beginning of each
season. So, this happens so because sometimes it so happen that the climate changes, the
host plant change, the plant changes. So, this is used to a when the natural enemies
would not could not persist from cropping season to another cropping season due to
unfavourable climatic conditions or the absence of the pest.
So, population of the natural enemies they then establish grow out in the seasons by
releasing at the beginning of the season. The other way when the there is a need then we
can  release  the  national  enemies;  that  means,  releasing  natural  enemies  when  pest
population start to cause damage to crops. So, in that case; so usually this is the very
common when the pathogens are populations are above the threshold level. So, we can
see that then you have to release the natural enemies to control the pests. So, pathogens
are  usually  used  in  that  way  because  they  cannot  persist  and  spread  in  the  crop
environment without absence of the host.So, then further food materials, if you see this is the pest populations we can figure pest
population the population. And this is the figure for the predators or the natural enemies.
So, as we go on releasing the natural enemies to the field, as the population of the natural
enemies or you can say the predators increases the pest population decreases. As you go
on again increasing releasing the natural enemy’s predator either population goes on
increasing then slowly the population of the pest that goes on also decreasing. So, we do
a release this natural enemies or the biocontrol agents like Trichogramma. Similarly, we
will discuss many other the microbial insecticides or pesticides that can be used in the
field to control several pest and diseases.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:20)
So that is a so these are the microbial insecticides, as we say so they can be rear they can
be released in the field for controlling many pest and diseases. There can be bacterial,
they can be fungal and also virus. So, we will discuss about the microbial insecticides
there is a bacterials say, Bacillus thuringiensis that is a Bt, name is Bt the short form Bt
Bacillus thuringiensis is a bacteria that is, used to control many insect pest and diseases
as a bioagent or microlets, say as a microbial insecticides. They control caterpillars and
they control the beetles in vegetables and other agricultural crops, mosquito and black fly
control.
So Bacillus thuringiensis, the variety Kurstaki and Bacillus thuringiensis variety Aizawai
that  against  diverse  lepidopteran  pests.  So,  that  is  a  African  armyworm,  Africanbollworm, bean armyworm,  beet armyworm,  cabbage webworm, green looper spiny
bollworm pod borers tomato loopers. So, these are the some of the pest can be controlled
by releasing the microbial insecticides that is, bacteria Bacillus Thuringiensis. So, this
can be used to control many type of the pest in the field.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:42)
 and also some fungi they also they also act as a microbial insecticides they, they control
many insects using a fungi Trichoderma. So, the fungi that were Trichoderma that is a
that is a extensively used in Asia for prevention of soil borne diseases such as the; the
damping off and root rots in vegetables. So, damping off means the root rot as you see
the figure in this slides. So, there is a root rotting of the roots, then the plant slowly
collapses. So, the plants wilts and also plant dies due to damping off this a fungal
disease. And this causal organizing the fungus is Rhizoctonia solani this is the fungus
that cause the disease damping off.
To  control  this  Rhizoctonia  solani  that  is  causing  the  damping  off  disease.  So,
Trichoderma harzianum, the Trichoderma fungus that is effective for controlling this
Rhizoctonia solani. So, that is the Trichoderma species against African bollworm. So,
Trichoderma harzianum it known as the parasite important plant disease like a damping
off. Trichoderma species can affect the plant disease by antibiosis and competition. So,
they can suppress the growth of the Rhizoctonia solani the Trichoderma species.So, it works as a in addition to that, it works as a growth stimulant and improve the yield
and  product  quality.  So,  using  the  Trichoderma  sspecies  or  releasing  Trichoderma
species in the field not only controls the pest and diseases like, like your damping off
diseases are also that that work as a stimulant growth stimulants, that can improves the
growth and of course, that improve  the quality of the crops, crops in terms  of the
nutritional quality.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:27)
And  there  are  some  fungi  that  work  against  insects  like  a  Beauveria  bassiana,  an
entomopathogenic fungi. So, that cases a white Muscadine disease in a range of insects.
So, that is used for controlling many insects. And some the strains of fungi that is a strain
Bb 147; that used to control the corn borers in maize, and also strain GHA that is, used
against whitefly thrips aphids and the mealybugs in vegetables and ornamental. So, these
are the fungi that can be released they can be reared they cultured they can be release in
the field as a bioagent natural enemies. So, they can kill they can they can reduce the
population of the harmful pathogens in the field.
So, the viruses and that is a nuclearpolyhedrosis virus NPV. So, those are effective for
control of several caterpillar pest species. So, because every insects species require a
specific nuclearpolyhedrosis virus so like the; armyworm let us say Spodoptera exigua.
So, this is a major problem Indonesia, but that is controlled by specific polyhedronsis
nuclearpolyhedrosis virus that is SeNPV for against the armyworm Apodoptera exigua.So, these are the virus are very specific, like you can use the bacteria or the fungal and
the virus, virus are the natural enemies. As you can rear in laboratory they can release in
the field. So, they can control many of many pests and the diseases in the field, so that
the plant can be protected, the crop can be protected from the pest and disease and the
illness can be minimized.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:14)
So, there are also Bio pesticides, as you see the some plants they contain the components
like the toxic to insects. So, this is a the Bio pesticides when this plants extracts applied
on infested crops they are called the botanical pesticides; that means, there are some
plants they are the extracts of the plants, they contains the toxics that is a toxic to the
some compounds chemical compounds. So, those are toxic to insect and the extracts
when applied to the plants. So, they can protect crops from many insect pest and disease
and they are called as a botanical pesticides as they are extracted from this the plant
species.
So, for some example let us see Azadirachtin that is from Neem, Neem is a beautiful
products it is a good products for this agricultural purpose, it can we can yield as a
fertilizers, it is used as a pesticides. In addition, Neem has other uses of course, it has a
uses of pharmaceutical industry and it has a cosmetic industry also use the Neems. So the
Azadirachtin that is a compounds in Neem; that is used for controlling many pests and
disease. Similarly, Pyrethrins that is from the chrysanthemum flower species. So, that isproduced from the Chrysanthemum that is also used for the controlling insect pest and
disease.
See other Rotenone; they derived from the derris species that is a roots from the derris
species, then Nicotine that is from the Tobacco, Limonene that is from the Citrus plants.
So, those have been used as botanical pesticides to control the many several pest and
diseases. Most botanical pesticides are contact, they are respiratory or stomach poisons.
Therefore, they are not very selective but target to a broad range of that is range of
insects, so as because the not botanical pesticides they do not kill the insect, rather they
do paralyze the insects and they make the inactive of this inactive in the insects the down
effect paralysis of insects.
So, there I contact the respiratory or the stomach poisons. So, there is a temporarily
(Refer Time: 18:32) or the paralysis. So, that way they are effective against the broad
range of insects. Botanical pesticides are generally highly bio degradable, so that they
become inactive within hours or the few days. This reduces again the negative impacts of
beneficial organisms and they are environmentally safe and compared to chemical. So,
that is why; so using the botanical pesticides because they become inactive within a few
hours or within a few days. So, this they do not harm this beneficial insects or beneficial
organisms.
So, if you are using the chemical pesticides, they do affect of course, they do kill the
harmful  insects  at  the  same  time,  use of chemical  insecticides,  they do reduce  the
population of the beneficial organisms which are real required for agricultural point of
view for crop production point of view. They, do influence they do improve the soil
fertility by having some beneficial microbes. 
Using the synthetic pesticides, they do kill the harmful insects pests as well as the
beneficial organisms or population of the beneficial organisms are reduced by using the
synthetic pesticides. So, that is why the botanical the botanical pesticide they are safe.
So, they may have effect, but that is only few hours, few days again they can recover
from this from that effect.(Refer Slide Time: 19:58)
 So, we will give the bio pesticide; one is the commonly used botanical pesticide Neem.
So, this Neem this the active ingredient that is Azadirachtin. So, both this deters and kills
many species of caterpillars thrips and whitefly. So, Neem seeds contain as a higher
amount of the Neem oil. A Neem solution looses it is effectiveness within about 8 hours
after preparation and when exposed to direct sunlight.
So, the Neem solution either the Neem oil or the Neem based solutions used for this
pests and diseases. So, if they are exposed to sunlight so the effectiveness is reduced. So,
that is why when you go for the Neem based pesticide we do apply during evening hours.
So, to so that it can be effective, it can it can control the pest and diseases and also this
remains the effectiveness within to 8 hours so that you should be immediately applied
after the preparation. 
Though most effective to apply Neem is the in the evening directly after preparations
under humidity condition you should not store it for longer periods. So, once the solution
is prepared so it can be applied immediately and also in the evening hours.(Refer Slide Time: 21:14)
So, these are the Neem products as for the pest control. So, Neem we can get the
produced from the fruits, we can get from the bark of the Neem, flower and the leaf. So,
it is a Neem tree. So, you can have the like the fruit we can have the pulp then give the
seed from the seed we can get Neem oil and Neem Cake, Neem cake is used as the
biofertilizers.
So, this contains  many nutrients  of macro and micronutrients  and also this has the
insecticidal properties it can control the insect pest and repel the insect pest and diseases.
At the same time, it supplies nutrients for the crop growth and development. And from
the bark there is a phytochemicals. So, that can used as a pesticides and also the Neem
Cake as you can use it as a biofertilizer. From the flowers we get the Neem oil, Neem oil
is  used  as  a  pesticides  also  or  many  other  industry  as  the  phytochemicals  also,  is
produced from the flower. And leaf also that give the Phytochemicals the compound the
active ingredient Azadirachtin for the control of the insect pest and disease and also
Neem oil is also produced from leafs.
So, these are the Neem trees for all the parts so leaf, fruit, bark and flower. So, entire part
is used as a product as a useful products, either the controlling the pest and diseases or
having the biofertilizer making biofertilizer. So, supplies nutrients for the requirement of
the crop growth and development. And also Neem has the several other uses.(Refer Slide Time: 22:45)
You can see the Neem, the uses of the Neem, the Neem has been used the medicine for
the treatment of treatment, treatment of conditions such as malaria, ulcers, cardiovascular
disease and the skin problems. And in the cosmetic and the hygiene sector Neem is used
in the composition of the face masks, lotions sunscreens, soaps and a toothpaste use the
Neem.
So, it has a powerful insect growth regulators, that also affect many other organisms such
as the nematodes and fungi. And can act as a plant fertilizers or the biofertilizer as we
discussed. So, this has insecticidal properties, it can kill the insect, repel the insect, make
paralysis of the insect and also it can act as a biofertilizer, they supply nutrients for the
growth and development of the crop. Then Neem seed cake can be used as a biofertilizer
providing the macronutrients essential for plant growth and improvement plant growth
and improve the soil quality and enhance the quality of the crops.
So, having Neem, using Neem that soil quality in terms of soil fertility or the soil
productivity soil biological populations soil because you have this this kills the many
harmful  insect  pest and diseases. And also that increases  the population  of the  the
beneficial  organisms, and also supply nutrients to the nutrients  in the soil. So, that
improves the soil fertility and also the growth and development of the crop is improved
by supplying by having the Neem Cake as a biofertilizer.Due to their compositional complexity this act as a anti feedants, growth regulators,
sterilants, anti ovipositions agents and repellents. So, as I discussed repellents are the anti
so that; anti oviposition agents so that they can so egg population they beneficial the
harmful microorganisms can be population can be maintained by applying this Neem
based products.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:41)
And the Neem application and commercial products available worldwide you can say.
So, there has a application of fertilizers, the product and the manufacturer in India and
manufacturer in world. You can see the fertilizers. So, the Neem Neem based products,
Ozoneem cake that is from Ozone Biotech and also Ozoneem coat; that is from the ozone
biotech that can be used as fertilizers then parker Neem coat parker Neem Neem Urea
Guard, Neemax.
So, these are the manufacturer in India they produce the Neem based biofertilizers that is
for the used for the crop growth and development. And for Agrochemicals that is for
controlling the pest and diseases. That is a Subhdeep Neem oil and Ozoneem oil. So,
these are the agrochemicals the Subhdeep Neem oil the manufacturer in India as the king
agro  food  and  ozoneem  oil  the  ozone  biotech,  ozone  biotech.  So,  these  are  the
agrochemicals from the Neem based products. And if you see the worldwide the Neem
products so the fertilizer the fortune Neem Cake, there is a fortune biotech USA, fortune
Neem coat the fortune biotech USA, then Neem cake Uniball Corporations Russia.So, they are the producers of the some, there are also other producers we have we have
listed few. So, those have the Neem based products that can be used for in case of in
organic farming. And the agrochemicals that is a fortune Aza 3 percent EC, that is from
the Fortune biotech. Azamax, that is from UPL limited Brazil and the safer brand 3 in
one  that  is  a  Woodstream  corporation  Canada.  So,  they  these  are  the  from  the
agrochemicals that used for controlling the pest and diseases in the crop field.
So, as you can see the so if summarize this you can say; so, as a level C pest and disease
management. So, this lecture we have discussed about the use of the bioagents natural
enemies. So, there are many natural enemies, natural agents present in the can be reared
in the laboratory. And they can be released in the field for controlling the harmful insect
pest and diseases. So, those are we discussed mainly the predatory bugs that can kill, kill
that can consume the eggs of the Brown Planthopper, and they protect the rice crop from
the attack of the Brown Planthopper.
And you can have the Trichoderma species, Trichoderma they can control many fungal
disease. And also insect pest disease and also moreover the Trichoderma can be very
effective in as a growth regulator and promote the growth of the crops in addition to the
having action on the harmful insect pest and diseases. So, those are called the microbial
insecticides and virus also nuclearpolyhedrosis virus they can be used; that the microbial
insecticides they can be reared in the laboratory, and used in the field for control and
regular application of fields. So, that it can control the pest and diseases in organic
farming.
 In addition to this we discuss the botanical pesticides right, so that means, we can have
products from the plant extracts, like the Neem or the Tobacco or this Chrysanthemum
flowers and the Cypress; through the plant extracts so those extracts can be used. So, we
discussed Neem based products, so how the Neem based product can be useful we
discuss in the next classes, at the mode of action of the Neem based products 
and what are the Neem based products available in India and the world specially US and
the  some  of  the  European  countries  and  how  the  agrochemicals  and  they  are  also
produced from India that can be used for controlling the pest and diseases in crops. In
next class in the coming next class we will be discussing about the more details ofbiopesticide, Neem based products and other products and their formulations and their
application procedures in the farming in the farming systems ok.
Thank you very much.