Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 18
Pest and Disease Management in Organic Farming
So, welcome to the lecture 18. It is a Pest and Disease Management in Organic Farming.
So, we discussed about the introduction for the pest and disease management; what type
of pest and disease. So, this lecture, we will be discussing about the managing the pest
and disease or controlling the pest and disease through organic way or through many, or
without using any synthetic pesticides or the insecticides as you say. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:48)
So, far this so, if you go for the level of pest and disease management in organic farming,
you go for organic farming and you have to brand a product as a organic food, that in
that case, so, there should not be use of any synthetic pesticides and also synthetic
chemicals. So, there are 3 levels of management in case of the organic farming. Level A,
Level B and Level C. Level A is a Preventing method and Level B is a Physical and
Mechanical method of pests and disease control and Level C with the where we can use
the pesticides, there only bio pesticides. Those are allowed bio pesticides can be used.
So, what you do for the organic farming usually go for the Level A, first Preventive
followed by Level B. If Level A and Level B of management, they fail; then, you can gofor the Level C. So, what is Level A? Level A is the first line of defense in managing
insects and disease is a system-based approach that means, a well designed say well
designed and the healthy organic systems will naturally have fewer pest problem. So,
that is known as a is a Level A, preventive means we are growing the organic way or
organic systems. 
So, it is of course, it is obvious; it should have the less pest and disease problem. As we
discussed of earlier classes also; by using organic farming or by doing organic farming
or using the organic inputs, the organic nutrients  like the vermicompost or the any
vermicompost or the biofertilizers. So, there is a it is a slow release pattern unlike
chemical  fertilizers  and  also  it  is  provides  the  holistic  nutrients  both  macro  and
micronutrients  as  and  release  slow,  there  is  a  secretion  of  many  phytohormones;
phytohormones in the plant body and they act as a resistance, the plant becomes highly
resistance the insect pest and disease. But they are less affected by the insect pest and
disease.
Due to the secretion or the formation of the plant the phytohormones in plant body by
using the organic fertilizer or doing the organic way of farming. So, there are secondary
metabolites; secondary metabolites or the phytohormones, they are secreted in the plant
body and by which the it is less attacked by pest and disease. Thus, what the preventive
method? The Level A, where you must follow all organic way. By doing so organic the
system is less healthy systems and has a fewer or the minimum pest problems. The
system is designed to prevent pest and disease because by growing organic way, by
doing the organic farming; so that is less prone less infected by pest and disease.
And Level B, once the Level A definitely we are following and Level B, we can take in
addition to that we will take the physical and mechanical method of weeds, pest and
disease control. The second line of defense is defense is utilized if the practices of Level
A are not sufficient to control the weed insects or the disease problem. So, that is what
Level B generally includes the mechanical and physical practice, that are tradition in
organic farming. 
So, after that we can if Level C, it is a third line of defense is used if the level of pest
control required is not achieved after A and B. Then, Level C practice that includes the
use of inputs such as biological, natural predators or the botanical pesticides to controlthe pest and disease; so, we will discuss the all this Level A, Level B and Level C of pest
management in a organic farming. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:04)
So, coming to Level A so, the first one Selection of adapted and resistant variety. In case
of  organic  farming  usually,  we  choose  a  variety  which  are  well  adapted  to  local
environments and this allows them to grow healthy and makes them stronger against any
pest and diseases. So, if the if the (Refer Time: 05:25) is a particular pest and disease. So,
usually in case of organic farming, we have we have to choose a resistant variety to a
particular pests and diseases like tomato there is a VFN, there is resistant to Verticillium,
Fusarium and nematodes. So, this varieties like for example is given, so said varieties
which has resistant to many pests and diseases, those varieties should be used in organic
farming if the area is prevalent for a particular pests and diseases.
Then, selection seeds and planting materials, we guess as a organic rule also. So, this is
should be free from weeds and pathogens and. So, that it can so, it will be less attacked
infected by the pest and diseases and this planting materials safe source from safe source
and if the materials collected from the origin of the seeds, seed source should not be
contaminated with disease or the pathogens or the weeds free from weeds and seeds. (Refer Slide Time: 06:33)
Number 3, then there is a cultural practices that is a as a preventive you know, we by
doing of organic farming the principles or the concepts, by way of doing we keep the
crop free from many pest and diseases. So, this as a principle has come as a crop
rotation, we discussed earlier because as it is organic farming is a ecological production
management  ok; that  aims  at crop biodiversity,  biological  cycle  and soil biological
activity. 
As we discussed earlier, so there is a crop rotation. So, in crop rotation means, crop of
different families are taken up in rotations. We do not grow same crops year after years
or season after season in the same field. We grow similar crops, then the host and the
pathogens they have a relation. So, they do build up. So, the so, similar pests can attack
the same crops if are growing repeatedly in the same field. So, there is a change of crops
one after another and these minimize the risk of incidents of a family specific disease.
Cereal crops like wheat, barley are taken up in rotations with other crops like legumes or
pulses or oil seeds and in organic farming, there is a rule that at least one legume should
be there in the cropping systems. 
So, that it can build the soil fertility and there is and the production level also can be
maintained by including the legume crops, they help in fixing the atmospheric nitrogen,
they it is a biological nitrogen fixation. And this breaks by doing so, by growing the rice
and the cereals and legumes that is a cycles of the Fusarium blight also that breaks. So,many type of disease which comes on a particular group of crops can be eliminated by
rotating the crops with the different groups and, intercropping also growing two or more
crops simultaneously in the same field that is called Intercropping. Thus, this practice as
a biodiversity and decreases the pest outbreaks.
So, that you can see, here is a Maize and Soybeans and the Oats or the Maize, Soybean,
Oat. So, these are the intercropping systems we can take 2 or 3 crops together in the
same field in different rows and in that way, we can maintain the biodiversity. We can
minimize the pests and disease pressure in the field. As we are using one leguminous
crop in the intercropping systems so, that is helpful in fixing the atmospheric nitrogen or
the biological  nitrogen  fixations.  And that  way,  we can  minimize  the  specially the
nitrogen  fertilizer  requirements  and  we  can  of  course,  we  can  maintain  the  crop
productions and the soil health also can be maintained by having so one leguminous
crop.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:29)
And number 4, that is a Use of balanced nutrients management. So, balanced nutrition is
really is very essentials because now steady growth makes a plant less vulnerable to
insect pest and diseases. So, plants should be a healthy and also that comes up a defense
mechanism. Too much fertilizations if a excessive fertilizations that result in salt damage
to a to roots and paving the way for secondary infections. So, like excess nitrogen
fertilizer make the plant succulents. And hence, most susceptible to attack of disease andpests; so if you in as you can seen many crops, if have the heavy dose heavy dose of urea
specially, the nitrogen fertilizers; see the plant becomes very succulents and the loses it is
strength actually and there is a lodging the crop falls down.
And so among the crop lodges in the soil; so, there is a this it cause a sites for the
infection of the pest and diseases. Moreover, the economic parts, it comes in contact with
soils and there will be a loss in leaves. So, that is why you should not use a excessive
fertilizer, balanced fertilization, optimum fertilizations as much required for the crop,
only those depending upon the soil type and the crop needs that will be discussing in the
later  section  later  sections;  how  to  calculate  the  fertilizer  requirement  and  how  to
recommend fertilizers best on the need of the crop. And balanced potassium supply
makes the plant because that is a creates the this is a defense mechanism in the (Refer
Time: 11:03) in the plant parts. 
So, next, Supply of organic matter number 5. So, increase the having organic matter that
increases the density and activity of microbes in soil, thus decreasing the density activity
of micro pathogens. So, if you are adding the organic manures in the soil. The soil is rich
in organic carbon; that means, there is a more of more the beneficial microbes, micro
organisms. If their population increases, so the population of the pathogens is reduced
automatically. So, that way you can prevent the pathogens in the soils by having more
and more organic manures.
And this or course organic manures that is other advantages that stabilizes soil structure,
you know it is rich in humus that that increases the buffering capacity of the soils, that
increases water holding capacity of soils and also that strengthen the plants defense
mechanism by secretion of the certain substances, as you as you. So, organic compounds
or the increasing the phytohormones creation in the plants body that causes the defense
mechanism.
So, having organic matter in the in the soil that improves the soil physical properties,
chemical properties, biological properties are there is a more microbial population. So,
there is automatically it is a less number of the pathogens in the soil.(Refer Slide Time: 12:23)
The number 6, the Application of suitable soil cultivation methods; usually that the
cultivation technique the facilities the (Refer Time: 12:35) operations. So, that helps in
decomposition of infected plant parts and regular weeds which serves as the host for the
pests and diseases  and protects  the beneficial  soil micro  flora.  So, there should be
properties. So, that the weed growth is checked and it also supports the growth of the
beneficial microorganisms.
Proper water management; in fact, I can say the as the soil the suitable soil cultivation,
also the nursery bed. As you discussed earlier class, nursery bed if nursery bed create
such a way that is that that also helpful for the growth of the beneficial microbes; if once
population of beneficial microbes increases. So, we can minimize that can minimize the
population  of  the  harmful  microbes.  Proper  water  management  means  avoid  water
logging except rice; rice crops does not requires standing water saturation enough other
crop they do not require the heavy water.
So, water logging should be avoided. So, that causes ambient condition for different pest
and diseases. Avoid water on the foliage also lifts because water bond is just spread with
the droplets and fungal diseases germinate in water. So, the foliage droplets should be
avoid the water in the foliage should be avoided and also water logging the field should
be avoided, you can fill the keep the field airy.Then, conservation and promotion of natural enemies is because providing an ideal
habitat for the growth and reproduction of natural enemies by doing organic farming and
avoiding the products that may harm the natural enemies. So, that means, the growing of
some plants that attract Ladybugs. Ladybugs is a beneficial insects and other natural
predators that will help in reduce population of plant pests. So, by doing so, by doing so
by increasing the population of the natural predators or the releasing the natural predators
in the field, they can kill the harmful micro organisms likewise Trichoderma viride. Also
that also release in the field. So, they can they can destroy or the they can kill many
harmful pathogens.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:52)
Then, Selection of optimum planting time and spacing so, see the for a better yield, it is a
better productions and good quality productions, planting time and the spacing; spacing’s
crop geometry is very important. The crop should be planted at the optimum periods. So,
that it can avoid may pest disease attack at certain growth stages that is called Critical
growth stages. So, this vulnerable stage could be should not coincide with the period of
highest pest density. Thus optimal planting time should be chosen. So, having optimum
planting time, the crop growth is better and finally, you can get a good productions; good
harvest with less insect pest and disease.
And optimum spacing reduces, the spacing means the plant to plant spacing or the row to
row spacing in a crop geometry and that provides a good variations for the foliage andthat that reduces the pathogen development as you say usually, when you go for the other
field planting operations we must leave some space at least after one, one and half
meters, 50 centimeter space should be left vacant. So, this space having the vacant row
or the empty row that because farmers usually do not like do not spare want to spare
lands to make the lands empty land the empty.
Because now there is a advantage if you make the land empty, so the crop gets proper
aerations. When there is a proper aerations, it helps in increasing the yield. So, the land
where there is no crop, the yield loss from that land is compensated, the yield gain from
the crop land because of the better aerations; less insect pest and disease attack and also
there have a good effect as a that favorably increase the yield of the crops.
So, having the proper spacing and maintenance of air space and the buffer rows after
may be 1.5 meter that helps in the protecting the crop from many pest and disease and
also yield improvement. Then, use of proper sanitation measures that means, the remove
infected plant parts; the parts which are infected immediately should be removed either
the leaves and fruits. So, otherwise it spreads from one, one part to another part; from
one plant to another plant and also from one field to another field too.
And the second they are describe the infected plants residues after harvest like the
example you can say Apple and the pear growers remove branches infected with the fire
blight. So, this strike are removed from the orchard and burned to kill the bacteria that
cause the fire blight. So, this infected plant part should be noticed and immediately they
should be removed and they burnt to avoid the spread of this insect pest or disease.
Similarly, Mushroom grows they pasteurize the bedding materials so that to kill the fungi
that would compete with mushroom crop. So, these type of the sanitations that should be
maintained while going for the organic farming.(Refer Slide Time: 18:05)
Then comes the Cover crops, 11. Cover crops, means some cover crops like Sudangrass,
Rapeseed mustard are effective at suppressing nematodes. If you go for the cover crops
not  only  suppressing  nematodes,  those  also  closed  growing  cover  crops  like  your
chickpea you can say or the peanuts. So, they can they can control the weeds also; they
do not allow the weed growth. And same for the trap crops also, there are certain trap
crops, they do attract insects towards themselves. So, they keep the main crop free from
insect pest and disease.
So, these are the small planting some planting have crop variety intend to draw particular
pest away from the main crop. For example, alfalfa planted in strips the between the
cotton that attract lygus bugs away from the cotton crop. So, also the trap crop must be
destroyed to kill the pest that have been attracted to them. So, trap crops either in a in a
sequence after few after a particular rows, you can use trap crop or the boundary area
also that can be used to have a trap crop so that they can attract the harmful insect pest or
the pathogens towards the trap crop. So, main crop is protected.
Marigold is also used as a trap crop, they can they also attract for many insects from the
main crop and the main. So, and these trap crops after can be destroyed so that the insect
pest should not spread to other area. So, these are the Level B of Level B management
practices. So, if you go for the Level A, then Level B has a physical methods or the
chemical method.Level A Level A is a preventive because by doing organic farming, we do follow the
Level  A  methods.  If for really for the  following  the organic  farming,  the  standard
practices  of organic farming;  so, Level  A is automatically followed either  the  crop
rotations inter croppings having different crops legume crops in the systems. So,. So,
these are these are the things or use of organic manures.
So, they are usually cover in the level A. So, Level A so, Level B, that is say physical
methods  or  you  can  say  mechanical  methods  that  is  followed  for  the  management
Mulching. Mulching either you can go for the organic Mulching or plastic Mulching. So,
by mulching doing so, mulching also that minimizes weed growth that suppresses the
weed growth and also that does not bring the direct the crops in direct contact with the
soil contact. So, that also minimizes the pest and disease problem. Mulching can be
either can for the organic Mulch and plastic Mulch. So, organic Mulch also that say
advantage having they are the nutrients that make the soil more fertile.
Then Canopy management. Canopy management means by trimming and the pruning
trees. So, are is a specially for the orchard crops, it does a dense canopy. So, those crops
those orchard trees, they are mainly affected by the infected by pest and disease because,
they having the dense trees dense canopy. So, it does not allow the sun lights to enter
into the ground and also there is a poor airy to have a airflow better airflow and better
solar radiations, in that case the regular trimming or the pruning of the tree or trimming
required. So, that increases the air flow and that can minimize the outbreak of any
diseases.
So, there is a viticulturists practice a leaf removals to control botrytis bunch of root rot of
grapes. So, is by doing so trimming and the pruning of the trees, we can we can make a
sanitation also. As we discussed sanitation that is required; one part of the organic farm,
we can say we can do that on regularly; so, that the outbreak of the pest and disease can
be minimized. Solarisation, this is also by the mulching the covering soil with the plastic
during summer, allow this soil to get hard enough to kill many pathogens. 
In that process also some of the beneficial pathogens may be killed, but if there is this
soil has irrigates as a poor in terms of the pathogens. So, we can have the plastic, we can
usually use the black plastic. While cropping also black plastic that does not allow the
weed growth and also it can kill many pathogenic organism.(Refer Slide Time: 22:34)
 Then, Mass Trapping so; that means, mass trapping of insects can use of light trap. Light
trap used to catch moths like armyworm, cutworms, stem borers and other night flying
insects. So, these are the physical methods they see the light traps. So, light traps can be
installed in the field so that it can attract the insect pest, those are the night flying insects
it can fall under this and it can be controlled.
And the yellow sticky trap that means, in yellow sticky trap; so, on a board yellow
boards we can use the that can control this like whiteflies aphids and leaf mining flies
those can be attracted to the yellow sticky traps. See yellow color as also many insects
even beneficial ones. So, it is should be used only one needed. We avoid the yellow stick
trap, we are using the motor oils or the transparent a car grease. Car grease also that can
be used for the as a stick for the stick in yellow, yellow card and this is placed around 10
centimeter above the crop foliage and the number of sticky traps can be 2 to 5 sticky
traps for 500 meter square field area.
So, these are used especially by the organic farmers you can use this once. So, that the.
So, there is different methods. So, you do parallelly either you can you are going for the
cultural practices the preventing method anyway you are following growing organic
farming. And the physical and mechanical method should be followed parallelly so that
because whatever is not controlled by the preventive methods Level A, those can be
controlled by the Level B.So, like using this different plastic mulching as discussed plastic mulching or by the
organic mulching and using the traps this light traps or the yellow sticky traps. So, they
can attract insects and insects can be kill either the light insect can be stick there. So,
those crops can be protected from the insect pests. The other trap is Pheromone trap also
pheromone trap because this is also used extensively where the sex  pheromone because,
from the male the male insects comes attracted to the this compounds that is a powder,
the powder they kept inside this pheromone trap, the came attracted. Sometimes what
happens? This powder becomes because they sticks to the male insects and also other
male insects they also can become attracted. In that way, male insect use to follow the
male insects.
So, it makes that instead of the following the female insect that attracted towards also
male insect that way it can minimize the mating also. Mating disruption occurs it can
minimize insect pest and diseases pests. So, this type of either the light trap, yellow
sticky trap or the pheromone trap this can be used because these are not very expensive
also is not expensive the farmers can afford this one. They can be used in the field so that
we can control the insect pest.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:49)
The other one that is the Fruit bagging; so, Fruit bagging that is prevents the fruit flies
from laying eggs on the fruits like the fruit flies as seen the mango that is also infected
by the fruit flies and they make damage. So, by putting the aerated is a perforated bagsare there bags are there; so, of course, a tedious job. So, we have to do that one specially
orchard crops. So, this can be bagging should done. So, it can avoid the direct attack
from the fruits and this can also in case of the many crops like your melon or the bitter
gourds mango or the guava or the star fruit. 
And of course, this fruit bagging that can be used for the, this banana. Banana bunch also
that is also attack by many pest and diseases; so, this fruit bagging can be used for
banana crop. So, these are the Level A and the Level B management practices. So, are as
we discussed for this (Refer Time: 26:50) organic farming by doing and the way of
organic, we want to minimize or no use of pesticides synthetic pesticides or synthetic
fertilizers in the field by following the Level A; that means, by going the organic way of
management as we discuss the principles and practices of organic farming. By doing that
one, we are minimizing the many pest and disease populations. 
So, if you follow the organic cultural methods, crop rotations, crop cycles and use of
legume crops and having the proper bed as we discussing the broad bed and (Refer Time:
27:25) making the broad bed, once you enhance the growth because the crop growth is a
robust increase enhance the crop growth that increase defense mechanism and having the
organic manures in the field that increases the population of the beneficial organisms and
so that the food materials for the pathogens becomes limited and there is a automatic less
population of the pathogens in the field.
And by doing the organic way of management so there is phytohormones. It is very
important phytohormones or secondary metabolites that, is formation in the plant body
that protect the plant from attack of many from the many pest and diseases. And in
addition to that water management also we are discussing water management; do not
make over plodding economy because water is going to limited in future.
So, minimum water more crop per drop. So, on the during different techniques are used
now the minimum water as the as the ecology water management using drip irrigation,
sprinkler irrigations or the alternate furrow irrigations so that water use can be minimize
at the same time crop does not, except rice even if rice does not require standing water.
Rice only the saturation conditions can be maintained rice crop.
But in case if you go for rice for the direct seeding. So, there is a problem direct seeding
of the rice where water sink from our experimental observations. Direct seeding rice alsothat is severely grown to many pest and diseases as compared to the transplanted rice
because the transplanted rice become very healthy. They get the nutrient availability is
higher in case of transplanting with the puddle conditions and the either soil is a puddle
and  is  a  anaerobic  conditions,  most  of  the  nutrients  availables  in  case  of  puddle
conditions and ill is also higher. Rice shield in case of transplanted paddy it is around 15
to 20 percent higher as compared to direct seeding.
And the direct seeding is a as a the growth is a poorer as compare to transplanted
conditions and they dry in that case also the crop is a highly vulnerable to some pest and
diseases and this is a water management as you discussing. So, similarly if you follow
the that is I mean to say with organic management practices, following exactly the lowest
null input technology as we have discussed the previous classes; starting from the land
preparations and the nutrient management that means, you are using only on-farm inputs
avoid using any farm inputs or synthetic materials in the in the in the field. 
In that way, doing so organics is a by the natural way of doing the organic farming that
way the crop becomes less influenced; there is less insect pest and disease populations.
We have seen from the continuous organic farming, long term organic farming the crop
we crop is not infected by any pest and diseases; only we are we can spray regularly the
biopesticides like your Neem oils or the mixture of the vermicompost with the water,
they can take care of the pest and diseases. So, that they say by following organic
practice, we can minimize many pest and diseases populations.
So, in addition to that we can follow the Level B that is the physical or the mechanical
methods. So, so whatever the pest and disease are there so many can be controlled by
doing. So, either you can have the traps; different traps are there light traps or the sticky
traps  or  pheromone  traps;  this  can  be  used  for  collecting  for  sometimes  we  use
pheromone traps also monitoring the population of the insects in the crop field. And this
physical method, chemical and mechanical method they can control also many insect,
pest and diseases.
So, this is how we have to manage the pest and diseases in farming so that we do not
want to sacrifice the yield of the crop; you do not want to lose the yield of the crops. So,
this is about the Level A and Level B management; will continue Level C, that means,
how can use the natural predators or the bio-agents or the biopesticides can be usedregularly in the crop field so that we can have a complete control of the pest and diseases
in organic farming. We should not depend on the synthetic pesticides for protecting our
crops.
By doing so, we can by doing organic way, we can also protect the crops; we can have
the similar levels and by you can have a better fruit or the healthy fruits with this I thank.
Thank you all. 