Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 12
Vermicompost Production Technology
So  welcome  to  the  next  lecture  12  Vermicompost  Production  Technology,  so  as
discussing last lecture. So, vermicompost one of the efficient composting process where
we enrich the quality of the compost by using earthworm.
The earthworms are used for the decomposition process and also the earth worm they
can add many enzymes  hormones to the composts beds during decomposition. That
increases the quality of the compost for used for the or some supplementing the nutrient
requirements of the crops.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:51)
So, so first of all what is vermicomposting if you see, so vermicomposting is a simple
biotechnological process of composting in which certain species of earthworms are used
to enhance the process of waste conversion and produce a better end product. So, the
waste that means, the waste is converted to wealth through vermicomposting that means
so organic waste is converted to a suitable fertilizers or the organic fertilizers are used in
crop productions.Next the vermicompositing is the process of recycling organic matter into nutrient rich
composed using earthworms it is carried out generally under aerobic condition. That
means, as we discussed that this is aerobic composting process and where this waste
materials  are  suitably  or  the  organic  materials  are  suitably  converted  into  organic
fertilizers using earthworms. Vermicompost is a sweet stable organic manure produced
to  as  vermicast  by  earthworm  feeding  an  biological  waste  materials  earthworm  on
feeding on biological waste materials they are the vermicasts.
So,  this  is  a  stable  organic  manures  and  its  efficient  recycling  process  of  animal
agriculture and industrial wastes, vermi compost is a mixture of worm cast, humus, live
earthworms  and  their  cocoons.  The  major  constituents  are  essential  macro  and
micronutrients, enzymes, vitamins, antibiotics, humic acids and growth hormones that
means, the use of earthworm in composting process. So, the earthworm body parts or the
that contains enzymes the vermicast vitamins antibiotics and also the exit of the earth
worms rich in humus.
So, that is used as a good as a organic fertilizers and that can be applied to the crops and
its contains less pathogenic or free of free of pathogen you can say. So, that can help in
growth and development of crops without use of any chemical fertilizer.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:12)
So, the earthworm are the workforce in the vermicomposting process, so this was the
earth worm ecological groups there are three groups of earthworm. So, one is called theepigeic the other one is endogeic and third one is anecic. The epigeic earthworm this
type of earthworm they usually feed on litters they do not feed on soil they feed on
litters. And they live on the liters and their pigmented reddish and brown pigmented and
they only consume the leaf materials or you can see liters. So, this epigeic earth worm
that is mostly suitable for vermicomposting process.
The second one that is endogeic this is the endogeic earthworm this is endogeic one. So,
this is a soil feeder they live in top soil top soil and there is no pigmentations in this
earthworm they usually feed on soil and those type of earthworm is not suitable for
vermicomposting process and the third one that is anecic earthworm.
So, the they live in the sub soil layers deeper soils and their make the in soils they make
the boil that the holes and tunnels they can leave. And they usually leave at the they can
feed the liters also they can feed on soil that the dual they liter and soils. So, this
earthworm also can be used for composting process.
So, main mainly the epigeic type of earthworm is used for the composting or you can
was also anecic, but not the endogeic endogeic earthworm.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:57)
To see the earth worm ecological group as you see, so epigeic endogeic and the anecic
this three groups the epigeic means the war the epigeic can from epi; epi means top and
geic means earth. So, they are living on the top soils or they live on mainly they live onthe leaf litter with the leaf litter they live in the leaf litter and they degrade they consume
they feed on the leaf litters.
And their sizes are very small size that is 1 to 7 centimeter and uniformly pigmented as a
red and brown and lives in litter and consumes decomposable organic matter. These
examples are epigeic eisenia foetida this is the earthworm the eisenia foetida that mainly
used  for  the  for  composting  process  in  tropical  and  subtropical  latitudes  for  the
temperature goes may be around 40 degree Celsius or more sometimes more than 40
degree Celsius.
The other earth worms they are also used for the composting that’s a Eudrillus this one
and also peronyx spices that is also used for the composting process. And the other group
of earthworm endogeic this is not suitable for composting they are the top soil dwellor
the endo means in and geic means earth.
So, they live in the soils and they feed on the soils only they do not feed on the leaf litters
this endogeic type of earthworm. Their sizes small to large that is it 2 to 12 centimeter
and this is a weakly pigment and are no pigmentation in this type of earthworm they live
in burrows in organic mineral complex of soils and they consume and the soil they feed
on the soil only. So, these are the few examples of the endogeic earthworm and the last
one that is anecic spices the anecic earthworm.
So, there is nothing known about the name of this earthworm, but these are very large in
size its around 8 to 15 centimeter and they are also brown pigments in this earthworm.
They live in the vertical burrow in soil, but they feed in litters they can carry litters from
the top soil to the bottom soil they feed on the litters and the casting any surface and. So,
this type of earthworm are also can be used for the composting process.
But  predominantly  the  epigeic  spices  of  earthworm  either  eisenia  foetida  and  this
arduous and the perionyx spices they are used for the composting process vermi vermi
composting process.(Refer Slide Time: 07:24)
And why go for vermi composting because it is an important sort of source of organic
manures helps in recycling any organic waste into useful bio fertilizers and leaves no
chance of environmental pollution there is least pollutions in vermicomposting. An eco-
friendly non-toxic product consumes low energy input while processing that improves
physical chemical and biological properties of soils without any residual toxicity and
also that reduces the incidence of pest and disease in crop production.
And improves the quality of the agricultural produce are the contents many type of the
bio compounds like the enzymes hormones polyphenol growth growth hormones. That
helps that supports in the growth of the crops and increase in the content of secondary
metabolites using the vermicompost that helps in improving and having the better quality
of the produce.(Refer Slide Time: 08:22)
So, if you see the process of composting these are the steps. So, as we discussed you
should know the, for the composting process what type of waste materials should be
taken and the mixing of the waste materials with the cow dung the phase cow dung they
make a slurry with waste material cow dung.
So, type of waste materials available in the locality and also the ratio of the waste
materials and the cow dung can be mixed together. So, after proper mixing of this so
where we can be mix the waste materials with the cow dung after proper mixing they can
be loaded on the beds.
So, on the vermi compost bed this can be loaded after loading then we have to relay the
earthworm based on the moisture and temperature content or the earth the vermicompost
bed. Then say the next step is maintenance of moisture and temperature in bed and the
release and earthworm release.
So, there after there is a turning up the waste material, so that the temperature can be can
be maintained can be judged and then the matured finally, it takes around two months or
60 days for maturity of the compost. Then you have to judge the maturity of the com
compost based on the color of the compost granules size and the C N ratio of the
compost and we will go up next to go for the harvesting that is you have separate the
earthworm then you go for the processing means you are drawing and the packaging
operations.(Refer Slide Time: 09:51)
So, if you go to the first one the waste the waste type of waste the waste characteristic.
That means, the waste can be used the animal manures or the oil seed residuals fish
manure industrial waste fish manures or the industrial wastes like potato industry waste
bag. So, those waste materials having low C:N ratio less than 19.
So, the either the industry where the potato industry any food industry waste materials or
the animal manures oil seed residuals having C:N ratio less than 19. That means, they
have the higher N content that the most suitable for the vermicomposting process and
that can give the vermicompost with high N content.
The other waste material is a vegetable waste or the food processing waste including
pulses oil seeds tea or kitchen waste green and succulent crop waste and weed biomass
and green manures having same ratio higher than 19, but 19 to 30 within that range they
are also moderately suitable for the composting process. And even the waste materials
like water hyacinths stubbles and the crop wastes twigs and crop foliage the same ratio
around 30 to 85 they are also moderately suitable for composting.
And the waste material like saw dust and the coir waste (Refer Time: 11:11) the they
having the very high C:N ratio and that is more than 90 or 2.5 and 50. So, they are less
suitable for composition process, but however, these waste materials can be used for
composting provided we can suitably use the fungus that select the fungus can be used.So, that they can decompose its cellules and reduce the composting period periods for the
specially for the saw dust and the coir wastes.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:42)
And mixing up a waste materials so yeah in this case, so a when you either tank where
you can put the waste materials the waste mixture animal and the plant based organic
waste are generally mixed together. So, while mixing which we should see the type of
waste materials and the C:N ratio of the waste materials. So, we should make the mix of
waste materials, so that C:N ratio should be in the range 30 to 40 is to 1.
Before mixing the plant waste generally under goes such because as we discussed size
reductions by cutting or the crushing machines we are studying. So, we can keep the size
around 3 to 5 centimeters, so after size reduction the plant based organic waste are mixed
with animal waste was like cow dung. So, there is a mix of the waste materials or that the
plant or the crop residues or the plant residues with the cow dung.
And for increasing or the rate of the compositions  for hastening the decomposition
process. So, we can you can use the composed oscillators, so those are the cellulolytic
and lignolitiic microorganisms they can be added to the waste mixtures. So, that they can
increase the rate of decompositions and reduce the composting periods. The proportion
of the cow dung in waste mixture should be 30 percent that means, the minimum 30
percent cow dung is used while mixing the waste materials.If there is unlimited supply of cow dung the maximum proportion of cow dung can go up
to 70 percent, but not beyond that. That means so, it should be 30 percent minimum and
70 percent maximum cow dung should be mixed with the waste materials when you go
for the vermi composting.
And now we will show you a video of showing the how the waste materials are mixed
and their also loaded in the compost beds. And the when you mixed waste materials in
prepare a phrase cow dungs slurry and the cow dungs slurry is mixed with the waste
materials and after that they are loaded in the compost bed.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:51)
So, these are the qualities of good compost, so if you not prepare if you are the waste
materials and the conditions inside the compost bed we can get a quality which can meet
the requirement for this organic farming. And we will discuss now the finally, so what is
the benefits of compost application.(Refer Slide Time: 14:11)
If it is the benefits compost is a storehouse of energy for growth and multiplication of
microbes and their activity in soil, which is whittle for plant nutrient cycling.
It  supplies  both  macro  and  micronutrients  then  it  provides  the  growth  promoting
substances which stimulates only plant growth. And it act as a soil conditioners as it
improves the physical condition of soil such as soil tilth soil tilth means it is equal
proportion of macro and the micro pores then that influence the water holding capacity
of soils of course, catenation capacity.
So, that is there those are regulated with having the higher adding the compost. The
compost it is a pathogen free as all the pathogens are killed at high temperature then
increases the biological activity of soils and produce crops growth with the less disease
because addition of compost is a pathogen free it can give a disease free or the pest free
environments.
So, these are the some of the benefits of composed applications, so while making the
compost and the applying. So, you should be very careful and the meeting the principles
of the compost preparation ok.
Thank you.