Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 15
Enriched Vermicompost Production Technology
So,  I  welcome  you  all  for  the  lecture  15,  Enriched  Vermicompost  Production
Technology. So, last lecture we have discussed about the conventional vermicompost
production technology; that means, the use of the waste materials, structure of the beds,
mixing of the waste materials and this is a process of maintenance and harvesting of
vermicompost for the conventional vermicompost production.
 So,  today  we  will  be  discussing  about  the  enriched  vermicompost  production
technology; that means, when there is a need to increase food and production to meet the
demand of the growing populations, how we can enhance for improve the quality of the
organic manures, so that they can meet the nutrient requirement of the crop.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:05)
So, as you know we discussed also earlier classes. So, the number of peoples they are
going to be increasing with the hungers, adding the hunger populations in the 21st
century,  if  you  see  the  sub  Saharan  Africa,  so,  currently  around  20-50  million
populations at the risk of hunger, this is going to increase by up to 350 million. Similarly,in Asia, currently 200 million populations at the risk of hunger are as you say food
insecurity and this population is going to increase up to 250 million by 2025.
So, there is a need to increase the food infections. The options for the chemical farming
as you see. So, there is increase in the use of the nitrogen and prophetic fertilizers, also
there is increase in the exploitation of the groundwater that irrigations and also increase
in use of the chemical pesticides. However, the food productions has at a recent years is
either constants or in somehow are decreasing trend; this is due to the soil erosions and
the salinity and frequent use of the fertilizers and the pesticides and increasing cost of the
productions and the environmental pollutions increasing the global warming.
So, to about this  as you  discussing, organic farming  is  one of the options  the key
candidate, how to maintain the food and productions or the improve the food grain
productions in a sustainable environment. So, for this organic farming we need to make
the value additions;  that means, we have increased the contents  of the nutrients  in
organic manures  by adding the nutrients  or the by the natural  sources  or from the
biological sources.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:01)
 So, if you see the sources of why whether enriched vermicompost is required, why do
you need for the enriched the vermicompost? Because know in general, the organic
manures like the farmers manures or the compost for the vermicompost, they contains an
average 0.5 to 1.5 percent nitrogen 0.2 to 0.8 percent P 2 O 5 and 0.5 to 1.2 percent K 2O. And this so, small amount of nutrient contents in the organic manures and if you very
less amount of the low dose, so, they may not meet the nutrient demand of the crop. So,
that is why so we are not able to meet the production levels with such organic manures or
the conventional manures which contains less amount of N P K and other nutrients.
 For example, you can see if a for a particular crop, at if supply 100 kg nitrogen per
hectare, to get the maximum productions from that suppose example rice crop for a
medium  fertile  soil, usually recommend  around 100 kg nitrogen  per hectare  that is
through chemical  fertilizers.  And if the  same  100 kg nitrogen,  if you  want supply
through organic manures, which contains very less nitrogen around 0.5 to 1.5 percent
nitrogen, you need around huge quantity of organic manure that is 7 to 20 tons per
hectare.
So, the availability is make the question because whether you can supply huge amount of
organic fertilizers to meet the new trend demand of the crop. So, you need to seven term
per hectare if the nutrient content, the N content is 1.5 percent. So, in this case if you
enrich the compost with nitrogen, if somehow we can increase the nitrogen content up to
3 percent, then we can minimize, we can reduce the compost requirement up to 3 to 3.5
tons per hectare. So, that is the purpose why go for the enrichment of the vermicompost
by the way you can minimize requirement, at the same time we should maintain the
production level, so that we cannot sacrifice the loss of production.
 So, this demerits  of manures  can be overcome to certain extent, to preparation of
enriched  vermicompost  as  you  say,  by  adding  natural  or  the  biological  sources  of
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium for improving the quality of the vermicompost or
moreover, the waste with the different nutrient rich substance opening a new direction of
the  technological  upgradations  for  improving  the  quality  of  the  vermicompost,  the
nutrient status of the vermocompost.
 In  modification  of  vermicompost  is  done,  either  by  microbial  enrichment  or  by
fortifying with the natural rock minerals and the agricultural waste, they are rich with
specific nutrients. So, those materials can be added the vermicomposting process, so that
we can increase the value or the nutrient content of the vermicompost, to meet the
demand of the crops and to attain a particular production level.So, these are the as the figures we are saying this is how the advantage of having the
enriched  vermicompost,  because  we  having  the  enrich  new  compost  or  enriched
vermicompost we can have a more productions, more fruits and more plants. So, we can
have a better disease control and this is a this contains the enzymes and the plant growth
regulators and hormones also there, because the as we are work with the working with
worms, earth worms are the present in the earth worm body secretions, they contains
many enzyme vitamins and the hormones.
And also the quality of the product that is a better with enrich composed and the largest
size  of  the  fruits,  or  vegetables  that  increases  size  with  the  better  quality  of  the
vermicompost. And, there is a increasing and the population of the microbes and the we
can have the faster growth rates and the higher concentration like, the microorganism
present soil, they can make the soil fertility they can keep the soil fertile for long run.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:19)
You  see  the  nutrients  natural  sources  of  the  natural  sources  contains  the  nutrient
enrichments. So, those are some other examples of the either nitrogen enrichment or the
phosphorus enrichment or the potassium enrichment or the calcium, magnesium. What
are the natural sources available, which can be mixed with organic waste for increasing
the nutrient contents? 
So, for nitrogen, the natural sources are the oil cakes like, your mustard cakes which
contains around 5.3 percent nitrogen and the groundnut cake around 7.3 percent nitrogen,neem cake 5.2 percent nitrogen, Karanja cake 3.9 percent nitrogen, sesame cake 6.2
percent nitrogen and castor cakes 4.3 percent nitrogen. So, this oil seed cakes those after
the extraction of oils these oil cakes can be used in the vermicompost bed for increasing
the nitrogen contents of the vermicompost, to have a enriched vermicompost. 
So, in addition to this also you can used other sources like poultry manure and the Azolla
the aquatic form, the green manure crops or the waste forms the leguminous crops. So,
those are the high N content, those materials can be added in vermicompost bed to have a
higher N content.
So, similarly the sources of phosphorus, we can have the rock phosphate that contains
around 20 to 40 percent P 2 O 5, bone meal that 20 to 25 percent P 2 O 5 or the basic
slag, that is 17 to 20 percent P 2 O 5 or the horn and hoof meals and waste from the fish
and the animal processing industry. So, those waste are also can be added being the
composting process for phosphorus enrichment.
 For enrichment a potash we can use the Sylvite that contains a high concentration of K 2
O that is 63 percent of K 2 O, wood ash, that is the eucalyptus that contains 5.9 percent
K 2 O, casuarinas woods 1.5 percent K 2 O, tobacco stems and also Babool wood those
can be added during the composting  process, so that  we can have a higher  potash
content. For the calcium and the magnesium enrichment, so, natural minerals like lime
stone,  gypsum  and  dolomite,  those  materials  can  be  added  for  the  calcium  and
magnesium enrichment and this enrichment vermicompost can be done either addition of
rock minerals during the composting process or we have the addition of the this minerals
with the readymade compost.(Refer Slide Time: 09:54)
So, if you see the preparation of this enriched compost, as we discussed the last class the
preparation of the general normal composed, we use the agricultural waste that is a
aquatic weeds or the agricultural waste means the rice straw, or the wheat straw the top
residues can be mixed together with the cow dung. Cow dung is the slurry we can mixing
as a 30 to 70 percent, 30 percent minimum and as per the availability we can go up to 70
percent, the share of cow dung. This cow dung and this and the wastes slurry can be
prepared and those slurry is loaded in the vermicompost weed as we discussed last class. 
And for the prepare a some a vermicompost, after addition of this waste and the cow
dung mix in the vermicompost bed, then either we can add the rock phosphate as a
natural rock minerals, or we can add the microbes in the compost bed or both can we
added together the microbes and the rock minerals that that can be those, materials can
be  added  in the  compost  bed,  then  the  normal  compost  processing  goes  on  as  we
discussed last class as remain same.
Only thing this process after the mixing of the waste materials, with the cow dung slurry
and adding in the vermicompost bed. After that step, if you are going for the enriched
compost production, then at this  stage we can add either  the rock minerals, or the
microbial inoculants, this natural sources, or the biological sources which are used for
the  enriched  vermicompost  production,  those  materials  can  be  added  at  this  stageimmediately after loading of this the waste and the cow dung mix in the vermicompost
bed.
So, the microbes which are used for the enrichment of the compost. So, these are the
microbes I can say the left hand side for these are the microbial inoculants. So, the one is
trichoderma viridae, trichoderma viridae just cellulolytic fungus. So, that is used for the
early decomposition, or the quick decompositions of the cellulose present in the organic
waste. 
And the second one is azotobacter chroococcum this is nitrogen fixing bacteria by adding
this  azotobacter  chroococcum,  it  can  enhance  in  nitrogen  mineralizations  and  the
nitrogen  contents  of  the  vermicompost.  Third  one  the  bacillus  polymixa  this  is  a
phosphate solubilizing bacteria so, by adding this microbes in the composed bed, it can I
can  make  the  better  solublizations  and  better  availability  of  phosphorus  from  the
compost.
And fourth one bacillus firmus, this is a potash releasing bacteria by having this bacteria
at the microbes in the compost N the compost preparations so, this can have the better
mineralizations and the better availability of the potash during application to the field.
And the other case we can add all the trichoderma, viridae, azotobacter, chroococcum,
bacillus,  polymixa  and  bacillus  firmus,  these  the  cellulytic  nitrogen  fixing  the
phosphorus solubilizing and the potash releasing bacteria all can be added together in the
composting beds. So, this is of the microbial inoculation and the amount is 50 ml growth
per kg of organic wastes.
Similarly, we can add also the rock minerals in the compost bed the rock minerals, we
can  for  the  phosphorus  enrichment  or  the  calcium  magnesium  enrichment  or  the
potassium enrichment. For phosphorus enrichment the rock minerals used that the rock
phosphate the phosphate the total P content around 8.5 percent, for the calcium and
magnesium enrichment we use the dolomite contents total calcium 19.25 percent and the
total  magnesium  12.8 percent. For the potash enrichment  we do add the mica  that
contains 10.12 percent of the potash.And these are the available phosphorus from this rock phosphate around 35.2 ppm and
available potash from the mica that is 140 ppm. And the nitrogen where is ND that is non
not detectables.
So, these are the enrichment materials the natural minerals that is either rock phosphates,
for the phosphorous enrichment for the dolomite, for the calcium and magnesium or the
mica for the potash enrichment those minerals can be added during the after loading of
the organic waste and the cow dung mix in the vermicompost bed. And we have tried
different doses of this rock minerals starting from the 5 percent to 30 percent and we will
discuss for the effect of this rock minerals adding some different doses on the quality of
the final vermicompost.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:51)
So, if you see the quality in term of the organic carbon and nitrogen contents of the final
vermicompost that we make ready, so, after 2 months or the 60 days of the composting
process, we see the effect of different organic wastes and microbial inoculants on organic
carbon and nitrogen contents of the vermicompost. 
So, here we have taken three organic wastes. So, number 1 is where the water hyacinth
this is WH and the second one is the paddy straw that is a PS and the third one is the saw
dust that is SD. And we have used all the nitro you know plants as we discussed previous
slides.  So,  these  are  the  Trichoderma  viridae  as  given  TV  and  this  Azotobactor
chrooococcum AZC, phosphate solubilizing bacteria that is a bacillus polymixa PSB andpottash releasing bacteria there is bacillus firmus as KSB and mix means there is a mix
of all the four microbes TV, AZC, PSB, KSB there is a mix where all the for microbes
are mixed together. And CL is the control is the normal vermicompost, convention
vermicompost without inoculation of any microbes.
 So, see the effect of this waste materials and the microbial inoculants on the organic
carbon content, we can see here, that as we go on is a control means there is no addition
of the microbes the organic carbon content is around 406 milligram per kg that means
40.6 percent. As you go on adding the microbes, the organic carbon content of the
vermicompost that goes on decreasing. So, when you go for the lowest organic carbon
content is noted as a 313 milligram per kg that is 31.3 percent when all the microbes they
are mix together. So, that it indicates that so, addition of microbes that facilitate better
decomposition of the crop residue and that so that so, the organic carbon content is
reduced that mean the compost, when there is a decompositions that need the compost is
ready for application to a soil for better availability of nutrients.
If the organic carbon content does not decrease, it indicates that so, there is very poor
decomposition; that means there is not well decomposed manure and once if you apply
the old undecomposed manures or not well decomposed manure to the field. So, it may
not supply the nutrients at the required amount for the crops and it meet the requirement
of the crop, hence have the lower productions. To have a high production then we should
used well decomposed compost in the field. 
So, in this case we can see by adding microbes, it can decreases the organic carbon
content that it indicates that the waste materials which well decomposed by inoculation
of the microbes.  And similarly if you  see between among  the waste materials, the
organic carbon content is the lowest in case of water hyacinth and among the all three
and the highest in case of the saw dust; that means, the saw dust contains the high
cellulose high carbon content and the decomposition, because of low nitrogen content in
the saw dust the decomposition process is very slow.
Here, the carbon content is around 52.7 percent is saw dust, whereas, the water hyacinth
is around 24.3 percent. So, this indicates that the saw dust is not well decomposed within
2 months, it may take more time for decompositions or we have to add more and moremicrobes for the better decompositions. Whereas, this the water hyacinth organic waste.
So, that is well decomposed the carbon content is around 24 percent.
Similarly, if you see the nitrogen contents as influenced by the different waste materials
and  the  microbial  inoculations.  The  organic  carbon  content  decreases  the  nitrogen
content increases with microbial inoculation; that means, with inoculation microbes that
is a better mineralizations and the N contents of the vermicompost is increasing with
addition of the microbes. And if you see if you are adding the azotobacter chroococcum,
this  is  a nitrogen  fixing bacteria  by adding AZC, the N content  of the compost  is
increased by 58 percent; that means, from 10 milligram per gram to a to 15.8 milligram
per gram or from 1 percent it has increase to 1.6 percent in case of the azotobacter
chrococcums, the increase over the control is around 58 percent.
Similarly, if there is addition of all the microbes the nitrogen content is 1.7 percent or 17
milligram for the gram of the compost and the enhancement is around 70 percent as
compare  to  without  microbial  inoculations.  And  if  you  see  the  among  the  waste
materials, water hyacinth has highest N content that is 1.9 percent or 19.4 milligram per
gram and lowest is in saw dust.
And as we have discussed in the previous classes for a good vermicompost, this CN ratio
should be within 10 to 20 raise to 1. If you think of the organic waste water hyacinth,
here the carbon content is around 24 percent and the nitrogen contents is around 1.9 or 2
percent, if the CN ratio of the organic waste vermicompost this is around 12 is to 1.
So, this indicates  that  so this  is  a waste have the waste resources waste materials,
influence has a impact on the quality of the vermicompost. And the saw dust if you the
CN ratio of the saw dust waste vermicompost is 52 percent, or the 53 percent of carbon
and 3 percent 0.3 percent of the nitrogen. So, this CN ration may be more than 100; so,
this is not like; that means, it has no it is not well decomposed it may take more and
more time for decompositions to make it ready for the field level applications. 
So, this is how the microbial inoculations or the inoculants, they can increase the value,
they can increase the nutrient content of the vermicompost by adding in the compost in
the composting bed. (Refer Slide Time: 20:56)
Similarly, if you see the effect of the different those organic waste and the microbial
inoculations on the phosphorus and potassium content of vermicompost, we can see that
when we are mixing all the microbes together the phosphorous content is increasing by
43 percent over the control where no microbial inoculation was done. 
Similarly,  for the  potash by the potash content  is  increased  by 45 percent  over no
microbial inoculations in the control as now controls so, there is around 45. So, almost
more than 40 percent increase in the phosphorus and potash content with microbial
inoculation as compare to without microbial inoculation.(Refer Slide Time: 21:39)
And this is happened because of the earthworm growth rate. So, by addition of the rock
minerals it change, the earthworm growth rate also changes. So, you can see here the
effect of rock mineral doses and microbial inoculations on earthworm growth rate. And,
here 3 rock minerals one is rock phosphate dolomite and mica; so, the x axis shows the
increasing doses from 0, 0 means there is no addition 0 percent. So, is a conventional
comma composed 5 percent of rock minerals 10 percent, 15, 20, 25 and 30 percent rock
minerals added based on the dry wet of the organic waste.
And this is the y axis shows earthworm growth rate and you  can see for the rock
phosphate, the no addition and with a addidtion of rock phosphate up to 20 percent
addition RP 20, there is somehow increase in the earthworm growth rate that is milligram
of increase in biomass bar 1 per day. If you go on increasing the rock phosphate dose
beyond 20 percent, the earthworm growth rate is significantly decreasing. And, if you
see for dolomite also, dolomite the earthworm growth rate increases, with increasing
addition up to 15 percent. And beyond 15 percent any further increase in the addition
there is a significant decrease in the earthworm growth rate. 
And if you see the mica, the mica waste, so, mica waste see that from the very beginning
or the from 0, if in you add you on adding mica waste it does not increase the earthworm
growth rate, rather there is a decrease if you increase the mica beyond 10 percent up to
10 percent it remains almost constants. After 10 percent, if there is any further increasein the mica doses 15 percent 15 percent so, there is significant decrease in the earthworm
growth rate.
 So that means, shows the rock minerals either the 10 or the 20 percent mica the DM is
20, so there is a earthworm growth rate increases. So, after that there is a significant
decline so, earthworm the workforce. So, more earthworm population that causes that
mineralization process and the decomposition of the waste materials. So, earthworm
growth rate should be well maintained for better quality of the vermicompost.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:47)
And if see the effect of this rock minerals and total phosphorus content, the vernicompost
during composting process, as you see the rock phosphate as is used as a source of
phosphorus, if you go on adding highest dose of rock phosphates, so, there is a higher
content of the phosphorus in the vermicompost total phosphorus, so, 3.5 percent with the
RP  30.  If  you  add  30  percent  rock  phosphate,  if  you  do  not  add  conventional
vermicompost total phosphorus is 0.9 percent. However, it is the picture is not same for
the Olsen phosphorus or the total phosphorus.(Refer Slide Time: 24:26)
If you see the picture for the Olsen phosphorus, RP 30 does not give the highest the
available phosphorous the during the composting process, we have seen the different
days of composting as the days passes. So, there is a increasing phosphorus availability
in the composting process. And the maximum availability is noted in RP 20 that 20
percent 20 percent dose of rock phosphate not the 30 percent. If you go if you increase
the RP doses a rock phosphate doses beyond 20 percent, so, there is a decline phosphorus
availability in the composting process and this can be attributed to the earthworm growth
rate earth. As there is a decrease in a earthworm growth rate with higher dose of rock
phosphates that that causes the less decomposition, or the of the waste materials with
increasing dose of RP and RP dose RP 20 percent is comes to the best the optimum dose
for this N vermicompost any further additions that may cause, the decreasing phosphors
availability during the composting process.(Refer Slide Time: 25:28)
And similarly, if you go see for the total potash; total potash content, if you see the mica
dose, mica is response for potash increasing dose of mica that the increase total potash
content. So, as we go for the highest mica dose 30 percent mica 30, that gives the highest
potash content of 3.46 percent at the end of the composting periods and 1.67 percent
where without any addition of the potash. But if you see the picture for this available
potash or you can say the ammonium acetate potash contents.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:01)
So, here the mica 10 the mica dose 10 percent mica that gives the better result best result
as compare to other doses. Because if you see the mica addition of mica more than 10
percent, that decreases the earthworm growth rate at the same time the release of potash
in the composting bed, or available potash that also decreases during the process of
composting which addition of mica higher than 10 doses.
So, from this we can see that so, mica 10 percent doses and the rock phosphate 20
percent  and dolomite  give the  15 percent,  that  seems  we give  the better  results  in
enhancing  the  phosphorous,  potash  and  of  course,  the  nitrogen  content  of  the
vermicompost. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:46)
And of course, you see the other contents like the microbial activity, this also we can see
with increasing dose of the rock minerals. These are the dose of rock minerals, either the
0 means no additions 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30 percent of the organic waste the rock
minerals are added. So, this first bar diagram show the rock phosphate, the second ones
for this dolomite and the third one is for the mica. 
So, in this case also, this is the, we are seeing the effect of this rock mineral doses, on
urease activity and the acid phosphatase activity in the vermicompost. As you see the
final vermicompost this is analyze for the final vermicompost you can see, if we go on
increasing the RP doses up to 10 percent of 15, 10 15 that gives the maximum after that
there is a decline in urease activity and same also for this acid phosphatase activity.Whereas, the dolomite doses it can go up 15 percent, that is shows up to the better results
after that there is a decline in the urease and also acid phosphatase activity whereas, mica
I beneath the addition of the mica within 5 percent or the 10 percent that causes, the
decrease in the microbial activity in the vermicompost. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:03)
And if you see the keeping quality of this vermicompost the storage so, as you go on
storing vermicompost, what is the change in available nitrogen phosphorus and potash
content of vermicompost during storage, as you go storing? You can see the available
nitrogen the first figure, the middle one is the available phosphorus, that is the Olsen
phosphorus and the third one is the available potash content. So, we analyze the available
N contents so, this figure shows every 15 days the samples were taken from the back
from the storage back and the analyze for the available on nutrients during the storage of
the normal room temperature.
 So, you can see for this available nitrogen. So, dolomite 15 gives the best result, where
the nitrogen for all the vermicompost that increases after 90 and 105 days, then decreases
thereafter. And dolomite dose of 15 percent and 5 percent, they give the best results of
the higher available nitrogen with the higher doses of the dolomite, or other dose RP, or
the mica there is a less nitrogen content.
And if a Olsen phosphorous increasing the as RP 15 rock phosphate 15 that gives the
best results, because Olsen phosphorous that goes on increasing up to 90 days  andthereafter it remains almost constants. Unlike nitrogen that decreases, nitrogen after 90 to
105 days the available N decreases, in the compost during the storage whereas, the
phosphorous  and  the  potash  both  they  remains  almost  constant  after  90 days,  they
increases up to 90 days thereafter value remains constant, but nitrogen there is a loss
either through volatizations; so, the loss of nitrogen the available nitrogen loss during the
storage.
The in case of the Olsen P or the available phosphorous RP 15 that gives the maximum
available phosphorous content during the process of composting, followed by the RP 5,
the 55 the 5 percent rock dose that gives the maximum available and where there is no
application control gives the lowest one. 
Similarly, in the mica doses you can see the mica 15 that gives the best results followed
by mica 5 percent, and the mica 30 percent for increase in the potash content during the
storage. It increases and up to 90 days and thereafter it remains almost constant. So, this
is how this storage live we can see here, that if you if you want for storing of this a
compost how long you can store without detorating the quality of the produce, can see up
to 90 and 105 depth it can be safety store in a normal room temperature and within that
period it must be applied in field for their better use.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:50)
So, with this we can see the take home message, you can see the waste resources water
hyacinth, and paddy straw having low CN ratio that is around 48 to 67 is to 1, enhancethe  growth  rate  and  population  of  earthworm,  thereby  resulted  better  of  quality  of
vermicompost with respect to chemical and biochemical properties as compared to the
waste resource saw dust.
The  saw  dust  has  higher  CN  ration  366  is  to  1  which  is  quite  unsuitable  for  the
vermicomposting, it takes a long time for the compost and if you can add the in the
specific the cellulolytic fungus, they can cause a quicker decomposition and, they can
decrease they can have a composting period can be reduced 2 to 3 months. Whatever, the
as compare to saw dust the water hyacinth and then paddy straw seems to be a and a
better materials, the best materials for the composting process and those materials can be
used for the vermicompost or in it vermicompost production.
Then as per the microbes, yeah the combined application of microbial inoculants that
your  Trichoderma  Viride,  Azotobater  chroococcum,  Bacillus  polymixa  and  Bacillus
firmusas as a the nitrogen fixing phosphate solubilizing and the potash releasing bacteria
and cellulolytic fungus. so, those can be added together, so, in the composting process by
that they improve the chemical and biochemical properties like, increasing the microbial
count of VC as compared to the conventional VC means without application of any
microbes.
The other one in the vermicmpostion process, use of rock minerals that is the rock
phosphate at 20 percent and dolomite at 15 percent and mica at 10 percent with microbial
inoculants the inorganic waste, enhance the earthworm growth rate and improved the
quality of vermicompost with respect to higher availability of micro nutrients as we
discussed. So, as using those rock minerals in mix and along with microbial inoculation,
they  can  increase  nitrogen  availability  by  26  percent  in  the  final  vermicompost,
phosphorous  availability  by  19  percent  and  potash  availability  by  10  percent  as
compared to the conventional vermicompost, without application of any natural minerals
or microbial inoculants.
And the application of rock minerals like a RP or dolomite or the mica at 15 percent
along with microbial inoculants in the vermicomposting process, increase significantly
the biochemical properties like your acid phosphatase activity, and urease activity as
compare to the conventional vermocompost. And with the respect to the shelf life you
see the shelf life of vermicompost in storage, it can be stored for 90 to 105 days in ashelf. So, for storage for longer periods reduce the microbial activity and the nutrient
availability of the vermicompost. 
So, here we can say that by adding the different natural rock minerals, and the microbial
inoculants to the vermicomposting process; that means, during the composting process, it
can enhance, it can increase the nutrient content of the vermicompost as we discussed
nutrient content can be increased by 26 percent and the phosphorus by 19 percent, potash
by 10 percent in the vermicompost; that means, a availability and also total NPK content
also increased with the addition of a rock minerals.
 So, by this as we see so, enrich there is a scope so, we can make the vermicompost
enrichment  using  either  natural  minerals,  or  the  microbial  inoculants  and  you  can
improve the quality of vermicompost, which can be best suited for the suited for the crop
production also. We can make the crop specific vermicompost, so, that it can be stored
we can supply the markets it can be reach the formers it is comfortable for the farmers,
they can use for specific crop, specific type of vermicompost enriched with specific
nutrients. So, that we can minimize the need of the chemical fertilizers and we can attain
the desirable productions without affecting, or without harming the environment.
Thank you very much.