Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 13
Vermicompost Production Technology (Contd.)
So, welcome for the lecture 13. So, last lecture we discussed about the waste materials,
what type of waste materials should be used for the composting process and the mixing
of the waste materials and the loading and the compost bed.
So, this lecture discussing about the structure of the compost bed, how we can the length,
width, thickness and the materials used for composting and the type of different either
the plastic sheets or the cement structures. So, looking at the structure of the compost
beds.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:47)
 
So, these are the schematic diagrams showing the how the compost bed can be prepared.
The compost bed the size should be the see the length width and depth, each bed should
have the 10 to 15 feet of length, 3.5 to 4 feet of width and depth 1 to 1.5 feet.
So, these are the individual beds you can see here the left hand sides showing. So, each
bed has 10 feet length and 3.5 to 4 feet of width and the depth is around 1 to 1.5 feet andfurther slope is made around 2 to 4 percent slope. So, the beds can be prepared in a row
and the both the sides.
So, with a slanted slope with the rooftops can we have the asbestos sheet or it can be also
thatched with a straw with the straw. And the purpose of the keeping this slope on the
both sides, so, that the water can be drain in the both the directions. And the slope can be
made each bed can have a slope in this direction, the arrow show this slope so, that here
is a hole opening holes for each beds. So, the  leachates from the beds can be collected
and there is a tank that is for the collection of the leachates in the tank that is say as the
vermiwash or the vermibed wash. This is also used for the first spraying in the crop
canopy, it act as a insecticides or the pesticides and also it is adds some of the nutrient to
the crops.
So, this structures are can be prepared the floor can be cemented. Or you can have a
plastics sheets also using plastic sheets. Or we can have the plaster the slope with the
muds and over that we can use the plastic coverings. So, the purpose is that the floor
should be such that there should not be any leaching of the nutrients or the liquids to the
ground.
So, because everything is useful for the compost productions or the in the compost as a
leachates or the materials that can be used as a vermi bed wash, used as a spraying as
insecticide  and  pesticides  also. So, that  has  many micronutrients  also enzymes  and
hormones as a growth regulators.
So, we can have the depending upon the type the number of beds you can make you can
have the now the this figure shows up 100 beds on the both the sides. So, 50 at one side
and 50 on the others other sides and the tank is in the centers and the slope is made such
a way that the leachates are collected and that leachates are collected in this tank.
And this is so, this type of structure there are many structure the length we can vary from
as we discussed here. So, the different type of structures is available.(Refer Slide Time: 03:39)
 
This is the bamboo, made of bamboo. So, these structure can be made bamboo from the
both sides. And the hole is given at the slope end so that the leachates can be collected.
And the whole entire structure is raised with the bamboo or we can have a this one is a
cement bed. Cement beds where the with the bricks and the cements. And there will be
no leaking to the bottom the bottom. And is the top portion is with the asbestos sheet or
we can have a thatched roof.
And this one is made with a plastic beds, similar size plastic beds are available. So, that
can be kept on the raised platform and the composting can be at the compost materials
can be loaded there. This is only thing this has cheap initially cheap, but thing is that in
the it may last for the 5 to 6 years.
And more over this is the growth of the earthworms, that usually better in case of the
either the bamboo or the cement structure as compared to the plastic beds.
But this is a economically initially for starting with, it is a less expensive as compared to
the cement. But later on somebody goes for the commercial scale it has to be converted
permanent structure like a cement bed.(Refer Slide Time: 04:59)
Then the different types of structures also available. So, that is a multi-tier structure, so,
where we can have the beds as just taken one over other. So, these are the bamboo, but
they have made the 2 beds, in one place with the bottom one with the top one.
Similarly, this is also a bottom and these are top one. And the covering can be made as a
plastic sheets or we can have a straw this type of a straw thatching or you can have a
asbestos sheets to cover is protect the because to do not have because the earthworms,
they do not love lights.
There should not any a solar radiations also temperature, this is not be very and moisture
to protect from the compost from the high temperature, moisture and radiations. We
should have a protections, either you can have asbestos sheets, or the as a permanent
once or you can have a thatched roof with the straws or in temporarily there is a plastic
sheet covering also is done. And here also one of the model of the multi tier compost
beds.(Refer Slide Time: 06:07)
Loading  of  wastes  mixture  and  earthworm  in  the  beds;  so,  the  waste  materials
immediately after mixing or after the pre-decompositions are loaded in the bed in a heap
with a maximum height of 1.5 feet. So, I have the compost the pit depth is 1.5 to 2 feet
depth is there.
So, we can load up to 1.5 feet; so, increasing height what happens the it may the
compost, because the layer below, that may not be decomposed well because of the less
areas that may have the anaerobic condition to have a better aerations insides though 1.5
feet is convenient one.
So, there after thin layer of cow dung is placed on the surface of the waste materials. So,
that this is as starter food for earthworm, once you load the compost materials with the
mixing with the fresh cow dung as a 30 percent minimum or maximum can be 70 percent
depending upon the waste the cow dung availability.
So, after loading, so, there will be a thin layer of fresh cow dung. So, that act as a starter
food for the microorganisms soils and also for the earth worms. So, this will be you
might have seen in the video as we have shown earlier.
So, in the bed after checking the inside temperature, the temperature should not exceed
35 degree Celsius of the bed, then earthworms are released on the surface of the bed.And the amount is minimum 2 k g per bed or 2000 to 2500 numbers for bed; however, if
available in the maximum quantity can be up to 10 k g.
So, this also we can have shown you in the video that after loading the compost materials
or the waste materials organic waste mixed with the cow dung, on the compost pit, how
the earthworms are released on the surface of the beds. And immediately after release of
earthworm the earthworms enter inside, because they do not like the sun, they love the
sets they enter insides and they do start on doing their job as a degradations of the waste
materials.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:17)
Of course, we can have a worm as a mother bed so that we can grow the we can
multiplication of the worms, we have to separate mother beds and with a utmost cares
the very precise maintenance required for the mother bed for rearing the earthworm and
for their multiplications.
For multiplications, so, healthy earthworm see there is a mother beds is must. The size of
the mother beds are the is may be box size of 2 feet length, 1.5 feet width and 0.75 depth
or it can be a bed also, the bed size is around 12 feet length, 4 feet width and the one feet
depth are considered for this multiplications of the earth worms.
And for this the waste material should be green biomass, you do not use a dry one the
green biomass. And usually the C N ratio can see that around 30 to 40 is to 1 that will thebest materials, but should be green. And this will mix the cow dung 50-50 ratio mixed
with the cow dung and this waste.
Then earthworm around 500, is a box size or 4 kg is a bed size are released to the bed or
the box depend on the box size and the bed size. For bed size of 12 feet length, 4 feet
width and 1 feet depth around 4 kg earthworms are released and the box around 500
number of earthworm they released.
Then a cover placed on the box or the bed with the either gunny bag or insulating sheets;
so that it can maintain the moisture and temperature inside the mother beds. So, that is
very, very important to see the moisture and temperature in case of the winter season,
you want to maintain the temperature either straw bedding is also is given as insulating
materials so that temperature can be maintain insides.
And in case of the summer season also, we make the gunny bags or the straw then we
can regular watering so that the moisture and temperature can be maintained inside the
mother bed.
Then the cover provides a dark conditions for encouraging the worms to come to the
surface for mating besides maintaining ideal and the moisture levels, ideal conditions and
moisture levels in the box. The production cycle in the box or the bed will vary from 50
to 60 days  depending on the species  season environmental  conditions  and the feed
materials.
Say provide the feed materials a green materials and the proper environmental conditions
that is a moisture temperature inside the mother beds. And we can make the earthworm
multiplications maybe 2 or 3 times a multiply with in the span of the 2 months.(Refer Slide Time: 11:03)
Well, so, then in the bed also when you go on adding this waste materials for increasing
the rate of decompositions. For fastening the process of decompositions or to have a
quicker vermicompost in the certain the vermicomposting time periods, we can inoculate
with as a microbial innoplants, that is a vermicompost accelerators.
So, this microorganism multiplied in the laboratory and they mixed with the organic
waste thoroughly before putting them in the vermi bed. Some important fungus, these are
the P fusisporus species, or the P crysosporium species, Trichoderma viride and the
Bacillus polymixa.
So, these are the microorganisms they are inoculated in the compost bed. So, that the you
can you can have a better decompositions, early decomposition quicker decompositions
and the composting periods can be reduced.
And also this micro organism Trichoderma viride act as a also be spread in the crop field.
So, that is the predator they can as a bio agent taken control many pathogenic pest and
diseases and also besides they enrich the value of compost.(Refer Slide Time: 12:18)
And after that we need the maintenance of moisture in the compost bed, usually for
mating moisture is the sprinkler systems in the compost beds. So, the moisture is around
60 to 80 percents because the vermicompost the earthworms body is contains around
more than 90 percent moistures.
So, to have the comfortable growth of the earthworm the moisture content should be
around 60 to 80 percent and temperature in the range of 20 to 35 degree Celsius for the
better growth. Regular supply water in bed; watering can be done by manually or by
installation of the automated sprinkler systems, as and when the temperature maintain the
temperature and moisture on the beds.
However, the tolerance limit of temperature differs with the type of earthworm species.
For stability of the optimum temperature and moisture in the bed both on extreme or a
and  temperate  climate,  the  bed  can  be  covered  with  an  insulating  materials  as  we
discussed in the mother bed; like, gunny bag, coconut coir mat, with the moistening at
regular intervals.
So, this can be spread on the compost beds. So, as you can put moistures. So, they can
keep  moisture  for  longer  periods  so  that  can  facilitated  that  can  provide  a  better
environments  for  the  growth  and  multiplication  of  the  earthworm,  activity  of  a
earthworm and also other microbial organisms like a mesophylic bacteria, they are usedfor  the  decomposition  of  the  cellulose  or  insulate  materials  present  in  the  organic
materials.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:44)
So, after that we can we will also we have shown a video how the watering is done in the
vermicomposting in the beds. And you can be also automations, when the temperature or
the moisture goes certain levels. So, there is a auto regulations, so the sprinkler system
can operate off automatically.
So, after the specific periods, when the compost comes ready to mature with the span of
around 50 to 60 days, then we can judge the maturity of the compost. For judging
maturity,  so,  there  are  the  we  have  to  study  the  physical  characteristic  of  the
vermicompost  and  we  have  to  study  the  chemical  characteristic  and  the  biological
properties which are vermicompost.
So, vermicompost sample can be brought to laboratory. So, there you can have the color
or the particle size, you can see and also you can see the pH, C N ratio of the materials
and the nutrient contents as a macro and micro nutrients and the humus content present
in the vermicompost.
And the biological characteristic like the enzyme activity and the microbial community
also, that can be analyzed in the laboratory accordingly the quality can be judged, as a aswe discussed the quality of the compost and the quality of the vermicompost can be seen
after the lab analysis.
So, let us discuss about the vermicompost production technology. So, here we will be
explaining about the waste material, size of the waste materials and mixing of the waste
materials with the cow dung slurry, loading of the waste materials in the vermicompost
bed followed by release of earthworms. So, regarding the waste materials so, you can see
here we have different type of waste materials.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:21)
So, this is the fresh say grasses or the weeds and we have also, this is a straw, dried straw
materials, this cereal straw rice straw and these are the weeds
So, the straw materials can be cut into small pieces around 3 to 5 centimeters. And this is
also same we have of cut on smaller pieces by increase by decreasing the size. So, it
helps  in  the  better  decompositions  and  it  can  also  minimize  the  period  of  the
vermicomposting you can have the vermicompost in the quicker shorter times. So, it
facilitate the better decompositions by the earthworm by increasing the surface area of
the waste materials by making the size reductions.
So now, you can see we have a 50 vermicompost beds. So, this side you have the 25 beds
and the other sides we have 25 beds.(Refer Slide Time: 16:01)
And the channel in betweens; the channel is located to collect the vermiwash from the
beds from the opposite directions. The bed is of the this side you can see 10 feet length,
this is around 4 feet width.
And the depth is around 1.5 feet and also we have given a slit here; at the bottom of the
beds so that it helps for collection of the liquid wash a vermiwash and the vermiwash can
be collected and as we discussed the vermiwash also useful for the application spray on
the crops as a insecticides, I can say bio insecticides a bio pesticides.
And also it also supplies many nutrients, macro-micron nutrients for the growth of the
crop. So now, we will be explaining how we will be showing the demonstrations, how
the waste materials can be mixed with the cow dung slurry and that can be loaded in the
vermicompost bed.
So now, I will show you the how the waste materials can be mixed with the cow dung
slurries. And the loading of the waste materials in the vermicompost bed and if you want
to have a enriched vermicompost, we need to add the natural minerals  like a rock
phosphate, dolomites or the basic slag that can be added during the composting process.(Refer Slide Time: 17:10)
So, during the mixing of the waste materials with the cow dung slurry, so, those waste
materials can be added. After the loading the whole waste materials in the beds, then we
can have a thin layer of the fresh cow dung on the bed. So, this was this supplies the food
materials for this earth worm.
So, after loading the beds we can leave the beds for at most 1 weeks; so that it can go for
decomposition. Or if you have the pre decomposition waste material that can be added,
that can be the material can be kept in a separate tank for the pre-decompositions; after
decomposition those materials can be filled in the vermicompost bed.
And after loading in the bed earthworm should be released, you have to say check the
temperature  in  the  bed,  the  temperature  should  be  below  35  degree  Celsius.  If
temperature is above 35 degree Celsius, it should not release the earthworm in the bed
because earthworm cannot survive with the high temperature.
So, now we will show you the loading of the waste materials in the bed and mixing of
the natural rock minerals in the waste materials. And then they have final layer of the
thin layer of the fresh cow dung followed by release of earthworm, we have a specialty
earthworm say (Refer Time: 18:22) will show you how we are releasing.(Refer Slide Time: 18:27)
So, this is the mixing of the waste materials with the cow dung slurry and loading in the
bed. So, this cow dung slurry is mixed the waste material because if you make it very
succulent  and  the  moist.  So,  it  will  be  helpful  for  the  better  consumptions  by  the
earthworms. Earthworm do not love, like the dry conditions. So, by making it a wet and
also the made the slurry cow dung that provides the food materials for the earthworm.
So, the amount of the cow dung slurry could be minimum 30 percent and maximum 70
percent of this weight of the waste material. So now, you are observing that how they are
mixing these this, just should be well mix the slurries should be well mixed with the
waste material. Thin layer of phase cow dung can be spread over this bed. So, this is the
phase cow dung that is spread over the bed, because this cow dung will supply the food
materials for the earthworm.
So, this cow dung is with the initial food materials even (Refer Time: 22:02) earthworm
get the food materials for it is wor k from this fresh cow dung and it is a high it contains
a most of the macro and micro nutrients too. So, this should be spread over this bed and
uniformly this should be spread so that the earthworm get the food materials and can do
a earthworm they can do their activity. After spreading the vermi the cow dung, we can
leave the bed for 1 week so that the waste material can decompose.
If we have the pre-decompose waste materials, then we can immediate, we can release
the earthworm. For releasing the earthworm the temperature should be 35 degree Celsiusor lowers. So, depending upon the temperature of this inside the materials so, we can
decide whether to release the earthworm or not. The temperature is less than 35 degree
Celsius, so, we can go on releasing the earthworm.
So, now we will be showing you how to release the earth worm, because earthworm they
do not like the light conditions. The moment you release the earthworm on the beds, they
the earth worms go inside and they can do their job they can decompose the waste
materials in the as you have loaded in the bed. So now, we will show you the loading of
the or the release of the earth worms into the vermicompost bed.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:30)
Here see the earthworm Eisenia foetida and this will be releasing into the bed. So, the
moment you release the earthworm usually they go inside the bed. They love the dark;
they do not love the light conditions. So now, we will show you how they releasing the
earthworm in the beds. Now, you can see that how the earthworm are moving into the
bed. Within a few minutes you would not see any earthworm on the bed, they can go
inside. We can see their movement; so, they are trying to enter into the bed and they can
go out of the light. As you can see their in lumps and they are moving into the bed. So,
they needs a proper atmosphere, proper temperature, proper moisture for their proper
growth and development and for their activity for decomposition of this waste materials.
So, usually the bed there should be at least 60 percent moisture should be maintained,
temperatures less than 35 degree Celsius and for then they can leave better, they canmultiply in the bed and they can decompose the waste material faster. As you can see so
they are going they are entering into the bed. Slowly, slowly they will go inside the bed.
The proper moisture in the vermicompost bed as we discussed there should be around 60
percent moisture. So, we have the micro sprinkler system.
So now we can see, so, we can use this sprinklers to regulate the moisture content in the
vermicompost bed.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:41)
So, as for the need of the very dryness conditions we can use the sprinklers, the moisture
content can be maintained as per our requirement. And because you are maintaining
moisture good moisture, so, the leachates as the vermiwash so, those are collected. So,
you can as discussing about this a vermi wash. (Refer Slide Time: 26:03)
See this is the vermiwash  that is collected from this bed; nutrients, vitamins, hormones
and enzymes. This can be spread on the crop canopy by mixing with water by 1 is to 5
times; that means, 1 part of the vermiwash and 5 parts of water; 1 liter of vermi wash, 5
liter of water that can be mixed. And that can be spread above the crop canopy. Also this
can be applied in the crop field in the soil itself. So, that can supply nutrients also
increase the quality of the health of this soil. They require the enrichment of specific type
of nutrients like can say the prosperous for this leguminous crops or the potash for this
say potato need higher amount of potash also. For those crops we can add the specific
natural minerals.
So, they can increase the value and it can have a better impact higher impact on the
growth and yield and quality of this crops. So, after loading it almost takes 2 months for
maturity of the compost. Now I can show you a mature compost you see the initial
loading, when the compost becomes ready this looks this is the bed you can see is a
matured compost.(Refer Slide Time: 27:10)
And if the this is just like a granule you can see the compost. This has a granular shapes
and it takes almost 60 days to get to come to this positions. And here this consistency
more or less, there is no smells and in the moisture contents around 25 percent.
So, after this they can you can go for the processing and then packaging. So, we will
discuss the next class how the separations of the earthworms from this vermicompost and
then the drying and the packaging the ready vermicompost.
Thank you.