  Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 10
Organic Farming and Climate Change (Contd.)
So, Lecture 10; so Organic Farming and Climate Change as a continuing. So, here we
will discussing the organic farming as a key role in climate change mitigations or how
we can mitigate the climate change through organic farming. So, we will first we will
learn about the adaptations and mitigations in agricultural productions, then we will
move smoothly to organic farming as climate change mitigations.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:47)
If you talk about the adaptations and mitigations as you say the climate change that has
impact; that means, if the climate change this including the climate variability. So, so this
has a exposure then initial impacts or the facts when we see the agricultural productions.
So, there is impact of climate change then every crops it has a autonomous adaptations.
So, the crops also try to adapt to the rising temperatures. And sometimes the farmers
during the practice agricultural practice; so, they also be become adaptive to the usual
clime climate change; that is a autonomous adaptations then there is a residual or the net
impact of climate change. So, one is the other side the impacts then there is a vulnerability; vulnerability if you go
for the economic assessment; that means, so if there is a impact is a adverse effect on the
agricultural productions. Then how vulnerable is your the food production to climate
change.
So, it depends upon like examples of a in a particular locations. So, the farmers are
growing mainly rice crops. So, more area under rice and also the for some farmers grow
wheat crops and wheat is very less. Suppose 90 percent area is a diverted for rice crops
and 10 percent for wheat crops. The effect is much more on wheat as compared to rice; if
you talk then you talk of vulnerability, then that area maybe even though the impact is
less and rice. But there is a impact adverse effect, but the high area under rice a rice acre
is higher as compared to wheat.
So, the farmers  will be highly vulnerable  to climate  change. So, their vulnerability
assessments  to  climate  change;  once  we  have  then  policy  makers  make  the  plant
adaptations to through plant adaptations the impact can be nullified can be reduced by
the adverse impact of climate change on the rice production or the food and production
can be reduced through the plant adaptations.
So, in addition to the adaptations, so there is mitigations; mitigation means so, our
activity the management practices should be such that so, there should be less emission
of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. So, that is known as the mitigations. So, the
adaptations and mitigations; they should go hand on hand. There should be adopting
mechanisms so that it should minimize the impact of climate change.
At the same time there should be mitigation strategy. So, that the so, that we do not allow
the climate to change at a faster rate. So that means we concerns about the issues of
climate change result a in highlighting the two fundamental response strategies that is
mitigations  and  adaptations  by  the  UNFCC;  Unit  Nations  Framework  Convention
Climate  Change.  So,  the  adaptation  responses  aim  to  alleviate  the  adverse  impact
through a wide range of system specific actions and the mitigation process seeks to limit
the emission of greenhouse gases and enhance sink opportunities, so that the climate
does not change fast.(Refer Slide Time: 04:29)
So, looking at this adaptations and mitigations, if you see organic farming, the role of
organic farming and the potential of organic farming as a climate change mitigations. So,
in general sequestering carbon in the soil or the a croplands, grazing lands, graze lands
and other agriculture’s are the highest potential for the climate change mitigations. So, if
you want if you can increase the carbon sequestration soil; soil can be sink of the carbon
dioxide.
So, we can minimize the emission of greenhouse gases atmosphere and so the climate
change.  That  means  a  carbon  sequestration  lower input of a fossil  fuels  dependent
resources and use of renewable energy; all present opportunities for organic agriculture
to lead the way in reducing energy consumption and mitigating the negative effects of
energy emission.
Second organic agriculture provides management practices that can help farmers adapt to
climate  change  through  strengthening  agro-ecosystems,  diversity  of  crops  and
diversifying crops and livestock productions and building farmers knowledge base to
best  improvement-  prevent  and  confront  changes  in  climate  change.  So,  we  have
discussed this also in detail in previous  classes as organic farming is an integrated
farming system concepts where we have the more number of crops crop diversifications
and the livestock is an integral part of organic farming.So in these integrated farming systems, so the output or the byproduct of one component
that becomes the input of other components that is a zero emission concept or we can say
no emissions. So, there is no waste, all the onfarm biological resources are utilized and it
needs less ah off farm resources or a less energy for this products organic productions
that way it can have a less emissions or for the greenhouse gases to the atmosphere and
that can that can we can say organic farming as a key for the mini for mitigating the
climate change by reducing the a greenhouse gas emission to the atmosphere.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:14)
 If you see the soil organic matter the sequestration of the soil organic matter, the climate
change and this soil organic matter; if you see there is a two schools of thoughts whether
with the changing temperature and the variable in precipitations what will happen to soil
organic matter it may decrease or increase. One school of thought that says argues that
climate  change  will  cause  soil  erosion  and  degradations  especially  in  developing
countries of tropics and subtropics.
That means, so as we are discussing now with climate change so there is increasing
number of high precipitation events. So, because of a high intensity precipitation events
increasing so that causes splitting of soil particles and erosion of the top soil layers; that
means, degradation of the soil because top soils are a fertile and top soils are rich in
carbon. If there is a loss of top soil layers erosion of soil through the water because ofhigh intensity precipitation events, so that causes loss of soil quality and loss of soil
organic matter.
So, the soil erosion rate is a controlled by erosive power of a rainfall because of a more
ah extreme precipitation events under climate change scenarios. So, 1 percent increase in
precipitation is a expected to lead to 1.5 to 2 percent increase in erosion rates. So, that is
why the accelerated erosions will cause depletion of soil organic matter, further increase
temperature and precipitation will accelerate this loss of soil organic matter which is a
great concern for low input agricultural systems.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:04)
So, this is a one school of thought. The other school of thought this says that the second
school of thought we can say that argues that CO2 fertilization effect with increased
atmospheric CO2 concentration would increase biomass productivity with more litter
and the crop residues  returned  into  the soil  and  higher  root  mass  and greater  root
exudations.  So,  because  of  the  increasing  root  biomass  and  increasing  the  soil
rhizosphere activity, so this should result in gradual increase in soil organic matter.
So, this is a contradictory. One says there will be a decrease in soil organic matter and
the other school of thought there maybe increase in soil organic matter in future climate.
So, however the net effect of climate change would depend on adaptive options or use of
the recommended management practices.(Refer Slide Time: 10:01)
So, if you see the greenhouse gas emission from by different sectors maximum being in
energy supply sector  that  is  a 25.9 percent.  So, this  includes  your  carbon dioxide,
methane  and  nitrous  oxide  and  agricultural  sector  also  we  discussed  last  class  it
contributes around 13.5 percent of the total greenhouse gas emissions.
So, if you see the among the agricultural sector, the greenhouse gas emission maximum
is  from  soil  that  is  around  38  percent  followed  by  enteric  fermentations  from  the
livestocks, the ruminants say a 32 percent, followed by biomass burning is around 12
percent,  rice  production  contributes  around  11  percent  of  the  total  greenhouse  gas
emission from the agricultural sector and finally, the manures handling around 7 percent.
So, these are the scenario of the greenhouse gas emissions from different sectors and in
the agricultural sector from different components the greenhouse gas emission.(Refer Slide Time: 11:22)
So, if you see the agricultural practice or the greenhouse gas emissions, so nitrous oxide
emission that is a high soluble nitrogen level in soil from synthetic nitrogen fertilizers.
So, use of the through chemical fertilizers and as we discussed the earlier class because
the yield management improper management unscientific management of this chemical a
fertilizers specially nitrogenous fertilizers that lead to emission of greenhouse gas nitrous
oxide.
And we can see from the figure the red line shows nitrous oxide emissions in million
tons of carbon dioxide equivalent after application of the fertilizers. So, that is increasing
over the years as we progress because there is a increasing use of chemical fertilizers
with increasing use. So, there is increasing emission of nitrous oxides to atmosphere
from  these  fertilizer  applications.  Moreover,  when  you  are  using  fertilizer  because
production of the fertilizer black line shows energy used for fertilizer productions this
much of CO2 equivalent energy used for the fertilizer production; that means, that is
increasing use of energy for the production of fertilizer  that also causes the global
warming emission of the greenhouse gas gases to atmosphere.
So, this is the ah nitrous oxide emissions. Similarly, you can see the methane emissions.
So, either the entering fermentations from a ruminants like cow, ships and goats, then
anaerobic turn over in rice pad is because rice is grown under the flooded conditions
standing a water. So, form the from this standing a water rice field so there is a emissionof the methane emission methane emission is a higher as compared to the saturated
conditions  and the  manure  handling  that  also  causes  some  methane  emissions  in  a
manure productions and the management and biomass burning that is a slash and burn
agriculture we have the jhum agriculture in that case that emits both methane and nitrous
oxides to the atmosphere.
And if you see the carbon dioxide emissions, vegetations and together with the soil eco
systems  as  a  place  for  decomposition  so  generate  large  fluxes  of  carbon  dioxide.
According to IPCC, that is intergovernmental panel on climate change this flux is nearly
balanced agriculture because know the crop or the perennial trees they also absorb
carbon dioxide for a photosynthesis though there is a release they also absorb. So, in that
case  this  is  the  balanced  the  flux  the  of CO2  from the  vegetations  is  balanced  in
agriculture  by  moreover  by  a  sequestering  carbon  dioxide  in  soil  agriculture  may
contribute to the carbon cycle in a positive way.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:15)
And the potential agricultural options you can see for minimizing the greenhouse gas
options green greenhouse gas emissions those are the improved crop land management.
You have this as scientific nutrient management that can minimize the greenhouse gas
emission. These we have discussed in previous classes tillage and residue management
conservation tillage minimum tillage and the incorporation of crop residue and the soil
that  can  minimize  the  emission  of  greenhouse  gas  of  the  atmosphere  then  watermanagement as we discussing. So, if you maintain the minimum water or the economic
use of water efficient use of water that can minimize the emission of greenhouse gases if
you go for a flooding like rice field if you go for the flooded rice that causes anaerobic
decompositions and more release of methane from the rice field.
Rice does not require a standing water for a higher productions, only saturation is enough
to maintain a good level of productions and under a saturate conditions there will be less
emission of methane as compared to flooded rice. So, that is a new rice production
technology that is a system of rice intensifications where no standing water is maintained
only saturations or field capacity saturation is maintained to have a better productions
with a less  emission  of greenhouse gases  to the  atmosphere.  Then  restoration  of a
degraded soils then agriculture can help to mitigate the climate change by reducing
emission of greenhouse gases.
And at the same time by a sequestering carbon dioxide from the atmosphere in soil and
for  this  the  potential  of  a  organic  farming  for  both  means  reducing  emission  of
greenhouse gases and for sequestering carbon dioxide and soil is very high. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:04)
See organic farming as climate change mitigations because reducing the emission of
nitrous oxide inclusion of a leguminous crops. By adding leguminous crops or by putting
crops  in  a  crop  rotations,  we  can  minimize  we  can  reduce  the  use  of  synthetic
nitrogenous fertilizers. So, up to this the information a potential nitrogen production by aleguminous plant by a intercropping and half season cropping to be 154 million tons a
potential which exceeds the nitrogen production from fossil fuel by far and we and which
is not fully exploited by a conventional farming technique. So, there is a great scope
great opportunity we can include leguminous crops in the crop rotations are the cropping
system, so that we can minimize the use of a synthetic nitrogenous fertilizers.
Then diversified crop rotations with a green manure crops, then organic manure soils are
the aerated high aerated as compared to the conventional fertilizer managements or the
chemical fertilizer and the because of the more erosions they have the significantly lower
mobile  nitrogen.  Then  after  So,  I  reducing  methane  emissions  we  discussed  avoid
continuous flooding there should be only saturation in the rice field, we do not need to
flooding water to have a higher productions saturations well managed water can give a
good  production,  high  productions  with  less  emission  of  greenhouse  gases  to  the
atmosphere. And also the variety also there is some varieties we can have a less emitting
of the greenhouse gases.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:35)
So, reducing carbon dioxide emission, so different options we can use for how we can
minimize the emission of carbon dioxide, organic farming as we have discussed the way
of reducing the CO2 emissions and conservation tillage agroforestry. So, this we the
table shows how the tillage practices that can minimize the emission of greenhouse gasesif you see the compare the conventional tillage versus conservation tillage kg carbon
equivalent per hectare per years and these are the global warming potential components.
So, a soil carbon sequestration for the conventional tillage if you reference has a 0, in
conservation that is a minus 337 kg carbon per hectare, per year means this much carbon
is a lost to atmosphere through conventional tillage. And if you go for the conservations
this carbon is a protected in the soil that is restored in the soil that is sequestration soils if
you go for the conservation tillage; that is for the soil carbon sequestration say and if you
go for the CO2 emissions through a agricultural inputs. So, this is the carbon emission is
a higher in case of the conservation tillage as compared to conventional tillage.
In conservation is to around 202 kg per hectare per year, in conventional 156 kg carbon
per hectare per year this is because in agricultural inputs application in conservation
tillage are specially for the fertilizers that is not well managed mainly spread on the
surface  soil that causes  more  emission of nitrous  oxide and also if you  go for the
conservation tillage as a less tillage we go for the more application of the herbicides to
control the wheat in conservation tillage, so in that way there is a more emission of the
greenhouse gases to atmosphere. And if you if you have to look at the machinery in case
of  the  higher  emissions  only  conventional  tillage  because  more  use  of  the  farm
machinery in conventional tillage.
So, if you see the net flux, in case of the conventional tillage plus 228 kg carbon per
hectare per year, if you go for the conservation tillage it is a minus 112 and if you see the
relative carbon flux looking at the 228 plus 112; that means, 340 kg carbon equivalent
per hectare per year that is sequestered in the soil in conservation tillage as compared to
the conventional tillage.
So, that is what the tillage practices also one of the options and organic farming the we
are discuss also we go for the conservation tillage or the stubble mulch tillage, so that it
can minimize the emission of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.(Refer Slide Time: 20:16)
And if we give example how organic farming as a global warming reducing global
warming  potential  the  relative  global  warming  potential  of  a  organic  agriculture
compared to conventional agriculture. So, one levels in European country, they have
studied at the farm levels, at the experimental levels and also product levels.
If you see the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, so, that is most of the cases. So,
there is a decreasing greenhouse gas emission or there is a reduction greenhouse gas
emission in a organic farming as compared to conventional farming. So, if you see here
for the farm levels to the two farms there is 18 percent reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions, similar ah there is experimental levels in farm levels here the two farm shows
there is a increasing emission of a greenhouse gases.
One farm shows  plus 2 percent the other  farm shows plus  53 percent  emission  of
greenhouse gases at atmosphere, but in the in crop level you can see the many crops that
shows that is a decreasing emission of greenhouse gases to atmosphere in a organic
farming as compared to conventional farming. If you take the example of those farms
where  there  is  a higher  emission  of greenhouse  gases  the  atmosphere  in a  organic
farming.
Suppose these two farms you will take example in one case 2 2 percent the other case 53
percent. So, this is without considering carbon sequestration; that means, the amount oforganic matter are added to soil that is not considered. All the cases it is not considered,
the carbon sequestration.
For those farms if you see the carbon sequestration in the soil in this case again the
emission becomes negative. If you see the right hand side this graph, for those farms the
suppose 53 percent higher emission of greenhouse gas at atmosphere in organic farming
as compared to chemical farming carbon sequestration is not considered; that means,
amount  of organic matter added to the soil in organic farming  that is not taken to
account.
If you take those into account, then it becomes negative minus 80 percent; that means,
while considering carbon sequestration the organics ah farming system that makes a
huge reduction greenhouse gas emission of the atmosphere as compared to chemical
farming. Same in case of the other farm; in this case if there is 2 percent increase in
greenhouse gas emissions if you don’t consider the carbon sequestration, but if you
consider  the  carbon  sequestration,  there  is  26  percent  reduction  in  emission  of
greenhouse gases.
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:52)
So, we have got from our Indian experiment, from our group also we have seen the
global warning potential of organic nutrient management in rice. We have seen here we
have different nutrient management treatments; we have been control means no fertilizer
is used and CF 100 where using chemical fertilizer at the 100 percent recommendation,VC 100 means we are using vermicompost, at a 100 percent n recommendation and CF
50 VC 50 means the chemical fertilizer are 50 percent and vermicompost are 50 percent,
VC b 100 is the vermicompost 100 percent, but the whole vermicompost applied at the
time of showing of the crop and this VC is the vermicompost whole is splitted in two
bases; one at the time of showing the other time a other a time of panicle initiations and
the  other  treatments  the  crop  residue,  now  things  added  at  the  crop residue  at  the
previous crop and this treatment is chemical fertilizer 50 percent with crop residue, here
vermicompost 50 percent crop residue, here vermicompost and also vermibed wash. So,
with this treatments we wanted to know what is the carbon dioxide emission from this
soil? That is kg carbon dioxide equivalent per hectare per a crop cycle of around 5
months. So, if you see the different treatments here chemical fertilizer shows the huge
emission  as  compared  to  other  organic  fertilizers.  So,  the  emission  from  chemical
fertilizer in around 5 to 6 months, around 3500 kg carbon dioxide equivalent per hectare.
If you see the vermicompost the emission is around 2000 kg carbon dioxide equivalent
per hectare and also we calculated the kg carbon dioxide released per kg of rice grain.
The bottom figure if you see this one the kg CO 2 release per kg of rice grain. In this
case also chemical fertilizer shows higher that is 0.8 kg around 0.8 kg carbon dioxide
released per 1 kg of rice production. But if you see the vermicompost at the same time it
shows 0.4 or maximum  of 0.4 to 0.5 kg carbon dioxide  released per 1 kg of rice
production in case of the organic treated plots.
And at the same time we are using 0.8 kg of carbon dioxide per 1 kg of rice production
in case of the chemical fertilizer plot. And also we compare this one assessment of
nutrient management as compared to chemical fertilizer for a different treatments we in
comparison  with  the  chemical  fertilizer  as  a  normal  usually  farmers  use  chemical
fertilizer. If you compare different organic treatments, so, there is a yield loss if you see
if you apply vermicompost at 100 percent n equivalent bases the yield loss is 9 percent as
compared to chemical fertilizer.
However, the global warming potential reduction is around 41 percent. Though there is a
9 percent yield loss, so we reduce the greenhouse gas emission. So, we reduce the global
warming potential 41 percent using organic nutrients and if you go for the integrations
organic and chemical together, in this case the yield loss is a 4 percent and the global
warming potential reduction is around 30 percent.So, either when you go for the management practices, especially for rice crop, either you
have to advice for the full vermicompost or a integrated nutrient managements. So, that
the yield loss is 4 to 9 percent and there is a substantial reduction. In the global warming
potential in case of the other treatments, so there is a huge yield loss a 15 percent or a
higher; we do not want to go for the other treatments there is yield loss is more than 15
percent.
And when between the VC or the vermicompost 100 percent or the integrations, so for
my advice we can go for the integrations because it will be to meet the vermicompost
100 percent you required around 6 tons of vermicompost per hectare. In this case we
need 3 tons. So, depending upon the resource if the resource is limited we can go for the
integrated nutrient management. So, that we can have the same yield as of the chemical
fertilizers and there is a around 30 percent reduction in global warming potential.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:59)
So, other way organic farming as climate change mitigation; so, changing consumer
behavior and diet production of meat require inputs that are 7 times as high as the inputs
needed to produce same quantity of non meat calories. That means, the greenhouse gas
emission is a highest in bit production that is a around 10 kg per kg of the bit; 10 ten
thousand gram of greenhouse gas is emitted per 1 kg of beef production followed by
pork, poultry and egg that is a around 2 to 3 kg of CO 2 equivalent per kg and followed
by a milk exactly 1 kg carbon dioxide per 1 kg of milk productions.But if for the vegetables emission from the plant foods generally below 500 gram carbon
dioxide equivalent per kg of the plant based products; so, in this case you can see, so
plant based products they do a emit less carbon dioxides and whereas, the beefs or this
the meat the meat based products they do produce the huge amount of greenhouse gas
emissions to the atmosphere. 
So, the other one the organic agriculture aims at precisely this goal consumption of less
processed products and increased consumption of products like cereals potatoes pulses
and oils. That means, if you are consuming more of the processed products in that case,
there is a more we are contributing the emission of greenhouse gases face products are
better from the organic point of view; then the finally, stop deforestations, so that you
can minimize greenhouse gas emissions.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:42)
So, in the final slide the performance of organic farming as compared to conventional
farming in context of a climate change; so, wherever there is a negative one negative
sign that is a slightly inferior. So, that is a yield level or the productivity as we consider
the production or the productivity the organic farming slightly infer the slightly inferiors.
So, there are the two sign two positive they are the a single positive they slightly better;
that means, global warming potential of productions organic farming is better and further
potential for improving the systems to climate change organic farming is better.So, the plus or to a plus the signal and the symbol of plus and plus two plus they clearly
better; that means, the adaptiveness to climate change, organic farming is clearly betters
and also carbon sequestration in the soil carbon in the increasing the soil carbon stock
organic  farming  is  a  better  options  and  definitely  better  that  is  a  soil  erosion  and
degradation.  So,  through  organic  farming  we  can  minimize  soil  erosions  and
degradations  ah.  So,  various  ecological  impact  ecological  diversity  in  nature
conservations water use efficiency and environments.
So, that can be protected through a through organic farming is a definitely better; that
means, in brief focus a organic farming as there is a climate change is certain. There is a
rise in temperature, there is a decreasing water availability for agricultural productions
and that increasing carbon dioxide concentration and in view of that we have in this
environments in this adverse conditions, we have to go on increasing productions at the
same time we have to see a better quality productions at the same time we have to see a
better environment.
For this organic farming is as a key role is a key candidate we can say for mitigating the
climate change or for a better adopting to climate change because organic farming that
can minimize the water consumptions at this is same time, it can adapt well to climate
change conditions  and through organic forming we can minimize  a greenhouse gas
emission to atmospheres, we can maintain a better environments, we can make a we can
have a good food productions with a better quality ok.
Thank you. 