Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 11
Principles of Compost Production
So, I welcome you all, for the, lecture number 11, Principles of Compost Production. So,
earlier lectures, we have, discussed about the Sustainability Agricultural Productions and
the Role of Organic Farmer, farming for Sustainable Agricultural Productions and the
key indicators of Sustainable Agriculture.
So, this lecture will be going to the main topic a compost production. As one of the
inputs of organic farming; so, we will discuss this one the principals involved in compost
production.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:57)
So,; so, first of all, what is compost? The compost is a organic matter, that has been
decomposed and recycled as a fertilizer and as a used, as a soil amendment. Compost is a
key ingredient of organic farming and the end products of the decomposition of organic
matter that is compost.
Compost is rich in nutrients. It acts as a soil conditioner, a fertilizer, addition of humus,
as one of the most important constituents, in agricultural productions for, maintainingsoil for fertility and the soil health on long term basis. So, Humic acids and as a natural
pesticide for soil.
In  ecosystem,  compost  is  useful  for  erosion  control,  land  reclamations,  wetland
constructions and as a landfill, cover. Compost, is called the gardeners gold, because it is
an invaluable partner in keeping the soil healthy.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:19)
So,, as you know, that humus is one of the important constituents, that is used for
maintaining and improving soil health for long basis. So, by using compost, it enriches
the soil with humus. So, what is humus; humus is a complex mixture of dark brown
amorphous  and  colloidal  substance,  modified  from  the  original  plant  tissue  or
synthesized by various soil organism and resistant to microbial decomposition.
So, the humus, that is responsible for building soil physical properties. It improves the
soil physical properties. If you see, the properties of soil humus, humus particles become
one day to clay and other selected surface leading to formation of soil humus complex
and the humus stores and a releases soil nitrogen. So, being a, soil humus complex, by
adding organic manures or the organic matter, that increases the humus content of the
soils and that helps in increasing the, say cation exchange capacity or the anion exchange
capacity, in the soils by having higher humus content.And humus, also processes buffering capacity;  that means, the suffer soil buffering
capacity, means the soil has high buffering capacity, is soil is a robust soil; that means, a
good soil good fertile soil healthy soils has high buffering capacity. So, it resists to any
type of changes in the properties or pH changes is, it is not so easy. The soil as a high
buffering capacity; that means, soil has high (Refer Time: 04:13) and anion exchange
capacity.
So, having humus or having more amount of humus, in soil that, causes, that increases
the buffering capacity of soil, and this soil having higher amount of humus, that are
judged pesticides and other agricultural chemicals; that means, a soil has higher humus,
as a humus, soil humus complex. So, the, if there is a pesticide or the agricultural
chemicals applications, soil having higher amount of humus.
So, those pesticide  is not allowed to (Refer Time:  04:45) the, below  the soils  and
containing the groundwater; that means, the soil having higher amount of humus content,
that  can  protect  the  environments  from  the  contamination  of  the  pesticides  or  the
leaching of the nutrients to down ward groundwater.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:03)
And, then what is composting; the composting is a natural, biological process, carried
out  under  controlled  aerobic  conditions.  In  this  process,  various  microorganisms
including bacteria and fungi breakdown, and the organic, organic matters into, simpler orthe, substances by presence of the bacteria and the fungi. Their job is to decompose or
the breakdown the organic resides into, simpler substances. That is a composting.
The other one, composting  is  a nature's  way of recycling.  Composting  biodegrades
organic waste that is your food waste, manure leaves, grasses wood feathers crop residue
and turn it into a valuable organic fertilizer. The effectiveness of composting process is
dependent upon the environmental conditions. That is a, air contents temperature and the
moistures of the composting beds and the materials the, composting materials organic
materials and the activity of the microbial populations or the microorganisms present
during the composting process.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:28)
 So, there are different type of composting. One is called, the Aerobic Composting,
Anaerobic Composting and Vermi Composting. Aerobic composting, where we have the,
the composting process takes place in presence of oxygens that is a quick breakdown of
organic waste, during the aerobic composting. So, that needs a maintenance, due to the
by the turning in the organic materials regularly in the composting beds.
So, that you  can maintain  the moisture, you  can maintain  the temperatures, of the,
composting systems and this aerobic composting that needs to maintain the favorable
moisture and temperature. That is a proper decompositions and the early decomposition
of the organic residues, and the other one, it is a anaerobic composting.So, this compositing takes place in absence of oxygens under reduced conditions. That,
that  takes  long  time  for  the  breakdown  of  the  organic  waste,  and  that  needs  less
maintenance, because this is done in a close feet, and in this composting, there is a
release of many toxic compounds and release of ammonia and Methanes during the
composting  process  and  the  other  one  which  will  discuss  in  detail  that  is
vermicomposting.
So, this is a most effective composting. Here, the maintenance of oxygen moisture for a
healthy compost, we do maintain in a vermicomposting bed. So, the favorable or the
requirement mount of oxygens and also this, the temperatures and the moistures for the
growth  of  the,  the  workers,  who  are  involved  in  composting  process  they  are  the
earthworms. So, the earthworms are added here in vermicomposting process.
So, their job is to degrade and decompose this organic waste to minute particles and
during, during this composting process. Also they secrete, they are body parts, they are
the, they also secrete many hormones antibiotic, that helps in enriching, the value of the
compost.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:34)
So, now we will discuss. So, what are the, the main principles, in vermicomposting
process, when you go for composting what are the principles. Are there, there main
seven principles; one is CN ratio of organic residue. C N means the carbon and nitrogenratio of the organic residues, because the quality, this indicates the quality of the organic
residue.
The residues, having higher nitrogen content, they are suitable for early decompositions
or degradations the residue having the, sorry the sorry the residue having the yes higher
Nitrogen content they have the low C:N ratio. So, they are most suitable for quick
decompositions and the residue having, low C:N ratio; that means, they have the high
nitrogen content.
So, they are the easily degradables, quick degrade degradable and the residue having,
higher more N content. They have the, low C:N ratio and the residue having low n.
content, they are the higher C:N ratio those residues are less suitable for the microbial
degradations, because that residue takes longer times having the low nitrogen and high
C:N ratio.
So, in those cases, the this depends the quality of the organic residue suppose those,
legume residues have the high n content they have the very low C:N ratio. So, they can
be easily degraded by the, microorganisms, but if you see the rice straws or the wheat
straws cereal crop residue or the saw dust, they have very lower low N content. So, that
very high C:N ratio. So, they take a long time for the decompositions.
Then, the mixing of organic materials they depends upon the residue or type the C:N
ratio of the residue depends C:N ratio we can we can think which organic material
should be mixed together. So, that we can be, bring the C:N ratio the comfortable range
for the better decompositions by the microbes.
Then, size of the residue, because so, now, if we can have the larger size residue it takes
longer time for the microbial decompositions. So, size has to be reduced to a comfortable
range. So, that it increases a surface area and the decomposition becomes faster.
Then, as we will discussing moisture and temperature in the compost beds, the what type
what are the content, quantity of moisture range of moisture and temperature should be
there in compost beds so, that the earth worm can, work better than they get a better
environments for the degradation or the decomposition of the waste material.Then pH in the compost bed and then, microorganisms and the microbial inoculants, they
are, applied to the compost bed. They are released in the compost beds for the better
decompositions or the quick decompositions and also the enriching the quality of the
compost,  and  finally,  the  amendment  with  rock  minerals,  this  is  also  one  type  of
enriching in the compost with the natural minerals.
So, depending upon the compost, type of compost, you are making. So, in that case, if
you can add different rock minerals, the compost can be enriched with specific elements.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:46)
 So, coming to the first one C: N ratio. So, usually the preferred the C:N ratio is 30:40, is
to one. So, C:N means the carbon the, the micro organic requires carbon for their growth
and nitrogen for their protein synthesis. So, C:N ratio of the waste materials should be
30-40 is to one that is optimal for composting.
So, if suppose in case the materials the waste materials having higher C:N ratio; that
means, the greater than 40; that means, it takes a longer time for composting.  For
examples- the materials having higher C N ratio may be serial, straws like a rice straws
or wheat straws or the saw dust also. So, they have the very high C:N ratio and the
materials has low C:N ratio supposing less than 30. In that case, the N, the N content the
materials are very high in that C:N ratio is low.So, if there is a higher N content; that means, N is excess or the requirement of the
microbes. So, there is a loss of nitrogen through ammonia volatilizations. So, this has
been observed that  about  40-50 is  the  lost through ammonia,  if you  are  the waste
materials are water hyacinth animal or the cow dung and the immature green organic
materials those are having higher nitrogen contents and very low C:N ratio less than 30.
In that case, there is loss of nitrogen through ammonia volatilization.
If, this is the case, if C:N ratio beyond the range either less than 30 or greater than 40,
then we go for the mixing of organic materials. So, is the C:N ratio is greater than 40;
that means the materials contents very low or the low lower nitrogen content. In that
case, these organic materials can be mixed the materials having higher nitrogen contents.
So, those materials having higher N content are sewage sludge. Legume residues aquatic
weeds slaughterhouse wastes can be mixed with those materials having high C:N ratio.
So, that C:N ratio can be brought to the comfortable range for proper activity of the
microbes.
The materials having very low C:N ratio, suppose less than 30, in that case, that has a
high N content. Then, for those cases, we can add dry soil around 5 to 10 percent. So,
that; so, can absorb the moisture from the materials and they can minimize the release of
a ammonia  to the  atmosphere.  They can  absorb the ammonia  present in the  waste
materials.
So, depending upon the waste materials or the C:N ratio, we can, we can decide what
type of organic materials should be used or the mixing of the organic materials. So, that
the  C:N  ratio,  as  the  quality  of  the  organic  material  that  can  be,  maintained  in  a
comfortable range in an optimum range.(Refer Slide Time: 14:45)
Then, size of residue, the, most desirable particle size is around 3 to 5 centimeters. So, if
there is a, larger size of the residue so, it, it will go for composting only thing that it will
take more time. So, you have to reduce the time for the composting. You have to make
the compost quickly. Then we have to; reduce the size of the waste materials, using the
like shredder is shown here.
So, using this shredder shredder so, that you can put the waste materials of different sizes
and we can, we can have the waste the, the final, size of around, less than 5 centimeters,
which is very optimum size, for preparing a good compost. Compost means, the compost
can be, made very quickly.
Then moisture and temperature, usually the moisture content say, varies from 50-60 or it
can go to for the 80 percent for the aerobic composting and the temperature usually the
temperature, when you go for the, loading of the waste materials in the compost bed. So,
there is a raise in temperature, temperature may go up to 55 to 70 degree Celsius.
When the temperature rises above 40 degree Celsius, the mesophilic microorganisms,
they are replaced by thermophilic microorganisms. so, they do not survive, they do not
survive,  above  40  degree  Celsius.,  when  the  thermophilic  condition  appears  that
conditions within 2-7 days of the start of composting process with thermophilic bacteria.They become very active and they do give up the temperatures. The temperature goes
maybe around 55 to 70 degree Celsius and the presence of the thermophilic bacteria and,
because of high temperature the de, decomposition starts in a faster rate.
So,  this  55-70  degree  Celsius  or  above  I  can  say 50-degree,  55  degree  Celsius  is
required, during composting process, at least for three days. What will happen, if there is
a high temperature? There are some pathogens; they are get killed temperature, beyond
55 degree Celsius or 60 degree Celsius, like a shigella species. That causes dysentery and
equally common in C S sewage they are killed at 60 degree Celsius.
Similarly, tape worm and hookworm, they are killed at 55 degree Celsius; that means,
most of the common pathogens. So, they are killed at 60 degree Celsius and for that, so,
maintenance of temperatures at least 50 degree and higher 50 degree is required for, at
least 3 days in the composting process. So, that the compost can be free from many
pathogens and usually when you go on, loading the compost the past 2-7 days.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:45)
So, the thermophilic bacteria they become active, because of raise in temperatures and
they start on degradations and during that periods many of the pathogenic organism,
organism  they  are  get  killed.  And  next  is  pH,  if  you  see  the,  the  pH  usually  the
earthworms or any microbe.They do a, live comfortably pH neutral range around 6 to each, 8 and most of the macro
organ they grow under the neutral pH range 6-8 and there will be a drop in pH due to
acid forming bacteria during the composting process at the same time the pH, may
increase due to formation of ammonia during the decomposition process.
So, there is an auto regulation in the pH in the composting process this maintained
around 6.5 to 7.5, range and then you go for the, microorganism and the microbial
inoculants, because when you go for, increasing the enhancing the quality of the compost
with some specific nutrients or, or to have an only decomposition process, when you go
for  the  inoculation  of  the,  microbial,  organisms  say  mesophilic  bacteria,  they  are
involved in consuming the readily degradable carbohydrates and proteins.
The thermophilic bacteria, they attack only lipid and hemicellulose. The carbohydrates
and the proteins they degrade very fast. Lipid, it takes a long time and this they the
decompositions, also that leads to the formation of a humus in the, the compost, that
comes from the slow decompositions.
That are those lipids and the hemicellulose they are very hard to a very very resistant to
breakdown and after that the materials remain that they do not break down or variation
breakdown, that comes as a humus and that leads to the physical property. That leads to
improving the physical properties of the soil.
So, those thermophilic bacteria, so, they are active, they are active and their, their under
high temperature and the decomposition becomes the faster rate, and during that process
many of the pathogens are made killed. Then actinomycetes are such the thermonospora
curvata and many fungi involved in cellulose decompositions.
Then preparation a sawdust compost, that comes of the industry with inoculation of
cellulolytic fungi. That is coprinus phemerus hasten, the composting from 1-2 years 2-3
months; that means, if the materials having high cellulose contents like the saw dust has
very high C N ratio that is very, very low N content. In that case, you have to inoculate
the waste materials with cellulolytic fungus.(Refer Slide Time: 20:24)
So, that the degradation of this materials become faster and the composting can be ready,
in a short time and a coming to, next one that is a, are the amendment with the rock
minerals; that means, the application of the natural minerals the rock phosphate at 5
percent  resides  improving  the  phosphorous  and  N  content  also  improves  the
micronutrient contents in the vermicompost.
So, this a rock minerals can be added, during composting process at different doses also.
That is in the 5 percent gives one of the better results and I, there are phosphate with
addition of the paddy straw along with inoculation of Aspergillus niger.
And  Azotobacter chroococum  accelerates the process of composting and improves the
nitrogen  and  phosphorus  content  of  the  compost;  that  means,  by  adding  this,  rock
minerals  along  with  the  microorganisms  like  the  Aspergillus  niger and  the  other
Azotobacter chroococum . So, they do accelerate the composting process, at the same
time they do improve the quality of, compost by enriching nitrogen and phosphorus.
That means. So, these are the sum of the principals involved in a composting process. So,
we need to, see the what, because you have the different type of waste materials for
waste material, what type of waste material is there, depending upon the C N ratio the
waste materials are very high in C N ratio. Then we have arced the waste materials have
having the higher N content so, that this C N ratio can be lower.Similarly, other cases you have the lower C N ratio. We add with the soil, other material
for that is the, nitrogen loss through ammonia volatilizations can be checked and the size
of the materials, the what size of the materials can have moisture and the temperature
should  be  maintained  around  60  maximum,  80  percent  moisture  content  should  be
maintained, because the earth worm the inside the microorganism.
They leave a comfortable  environment  and 50-60 percent moisture  content and the
temperature, because temperature is a, because initially temperature goes up, initial grade
of composting where the thermophilic bacteria, they become active and this is required
in a composting process as it kills many of the pathogens.
So, that com, the compost can be pathogen free and using microbes and the amendment
with rock minerals they can they can enrich the compost quality.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:39)
And, if you see, the factors, that is controlling composting. So, as you discussed one is
your C N ratio. That means, the C N ratio that should be maintained 30-40 is to one the
carbon  and  nitrogen  ratio.  So,,  as  you  discussed  depending  upon  the  type  of  the
materials.
So, C N ratio the (Refer Time: 23:00), because materials vary and the locations. In the
farm, waste has many types of waste; we have these straws rice straw, wheat straw or thelegume straws. So, if they can I can mix together. We will try to see how we can we can
maintain this C:N ratio around 30-40.
So, that the, this is required for the proper growth of the microbes, because microbes
they need nitrogen for the for their own growth and multiplications and to have their own
growth  and  multiplications.  We  need  to  maintain  at  least  the  required  amount  of
nitrogen. So, that in a the there is a comfortable environment for the microbial organism
for their growth.
Then,  particle  size  that,  we  discussed particle  size  is  3-5  centimeters,  because  this
particle size, if you have this small particle that increases this surface area of the particles
and. So, that the microbial activity will be faster the decomposition will become, become
the faster with the smaller particle size.
Then moisture content. So, 50-60 percent moisture content that should be maintained,
during the process of composting, because, high moisture content there will be less of if
increase the moisture content.
So, the devoid of oxygens. So, microorganism has a minerals survive in the less oxygens.
The oxygen requirement around 10-18 percent oxygens to maintain the oxygens and the
moisture content should be 50-60 percent throughout the composting process for the,
better  growth,  because  we  need  to,  maintain  the  population  of  microbes  microbial
growth. So, that they can work faster they can degrade the organ organic waste for the
decomposition process temperature.
So, that we are discussing that should be 55-60 degrees Celsius for at least 3 days. This is
very, very important in the composting process, because and to make the compost free of
pathogens. There should not be any Shigella species or equally species or the tape worm
hookworm.
So, many pathogens they are get they get killed the temperature above 50 or 55 degree
Celsius. So, maintenance of temperature at least 55 degree Celsius and the higher for at
least 3 days it is really essential, essential in the composting process and its very natural
when you go for the, compost and the mixing with the, cow dung phase cow dung and
loaded in the beds.So, initial period of composting the temperature increases and it may go up to 70 degree
Celsius. So, that is helpful for killing many of the pathogens pH control pH control, as
we discussing this not necessary, because this is auto regulated because pH comes down,
because permission of the acid forming bacteria also pH goes up when, there is a release
of breakdown of the organic compounds and release of ammonia then pH goes up.
So,, pH is regulated auto generated in the compost, compost feet around 7, 6.5 to 7.5
heap size heap size can be any length because length is not an issue. So, it should be 2.5
meter wide and 1.5 meter high height, because the 2.5 meter wide we make, because for
proper uniformity in the compost making.
And we can, we can draw the compost quality with the wide of 2.5 meter and height
should be, not more than 1.5 meter. If you increase the height even 1 meter height also
convenient,  if  you  increase  the  height  of  the,  heaps  then  it  becomes  an  anaerobic
decompositions. So, because many of the organism and the aerobic organism they may
not survive the anaerobic conditions to have a proper aeration. So, heap size should be
less than 1.5 meter.
And, the activators used efficient cellulolytic fungi, because for this accelerating the
process  of  composting  for  the  or  enriching  the  compost  with  specific  nutrients  or,
nutrients, we can go for the use efficient cellulolytic fungi that as we discussed earlier
that can be inoculated during composting process so, that the compost can be made
bigger.(Refer Slide Time: 26:57)
So,, if you see the, quality the properties of good quality compost. These are the, the of
compost  depending  upon  the  type  of  organic  materials  and  depending  upon  the
microorganisms present and the depending upon the environments, that depend time
taken  for  the  compositing  process  in  general  the  compost  is  judged  based  on  this
parameter color smell pH, C N ratio temperature moisture humus content and nitrogen
contents.
The color, that is a good quality compost. So, brown to black and the poor quality it may
have the different colors and is a compost is ready and mature is pleasant the smell is,
there is no smell you can no smell or at this smell in case of the poor quality, is gives a
bad odor because of the poor decomposition; that means, the compost is not the materials
not decomposed, in that case, you can have the odor of the smell if the material is fully
de compost. That is a no smell or at the smell or a very pleasant smell you can get from
the final compost.
So, pH for the good quality within 6.5-8 and for the poor quality it may be less than 6 or
may be higher than 8; that means, the compost is not well de compost the compost not
well matured in that case the pH may be vary from less than 6 to may be higher than 8
and the C N ratio of the good quality may be 10 to 20:1.
And, case of the poor quality C:N ratio may be less than 10 or higher than 20 the
temperature of the final compost may be 30-45 degree Celsius and for the poor qualitymay be high temperature; that means, this, this compost is not the the compost, the
compost is not well the compost the temperature maybe 45-40 or may be higher than 45
degree Celsius.
Moisture content around 25-30 percent, for the good quality compost and the humus
should be more than 4 percent and the nitrogen, at least the main nutrient as you say
nitrogen that should be more than, higher than 1.5 percent. So, these are the, qualities,
when you go for the lab analysis.
We can check the quality of the compost and this quality can be maintained depending
upon the, the input materials. What type of materials are used on the depending up on the
input materials; we can think of what type of materials can be mixed together so, that we
can maintain one optimum C:N ratio. You can maintain the input to the optimum C N
ratio and the proper environment during the composting process as we discussed the
moisture temperatures and addition of the microbial inoculants as per the need of the
organic waste.
So, we can get a good quality compost and that can that can feed as your requirement
and that can feed the, several in general for a many crop and then you can I, go on adding
enriching for specific crops ok. So, these are the qualities of good compost. So, if you
prepare you are the waste materials and the conditions inside the compost bed. We can
get a quality which can meet the requirement, for this organic farming and, we will
discuss now the finally..(Refer Slide Time: 30:02)
So, what is the benefits of the compost application? If it is the benefits of compost.
Compost is a store house of energy for growth and multiplication of microbes and their
activity in soil, which is vital for plant nutrient cycling it supplies  both macro and
micronutrients then, it provides the growth promoting substances which stimulates only
plant growth and it act as a soil conditioner as it improves the physical condition of soils
such as soil tilth.
Soil tilth, means, it is an equal proportion of macro and the micronutrient parts then that
influence the water holding capacity of soils of course, cation exchange capacity. So, that
is there those are regulated with having the higher the adding the compost.
The compost it is a pathogen free as all the pathogens are killed at high temperature, then
increases the biological activity of soils and produce crops, growth with the less disease,
because addition of compost is a pathogen free it can give a disease free or the pest free
environments. So, these are the, some of the benefits of compost applications. So, while
making the compost and the applying. So, we should be very careful and the meeting the
principles of the compost preparation ok.
Thank you.