Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 14
Vermicompost Production Technology (Contd.)
 
So,  welcome  to  the  lecture  14  that  is  a  vermi  that  is  a  same  continuing  as  a
Vermicompost  Production  Technology.  So,  we  will  here  we  will  discuss  about  the
harvesting  of  Vermicompost  after  judging  the  maturity.  Then  how  can  harvest
vermicompost and separate the earthworms from the vermicompost and followed by the
drying to have a proper moisture content in the vermicompost and finally, packaging and
storing. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46)
For the harvesting and earth  and the earthworms  separations;  for the  harvesting, is
generally  done  manually  by  using  a  shovels  and  loaded  on  the  hand  trolley.  The
separation of earthworm’s vermicompost is generally done manually or by mechanical
process. So, now you have the harvesting also you can go for the mechanical processes
so that the there are different type of vermicompost beds.
So, after the maturity so it can be beds we can (Refer Time: 01:17) beds also. This can be
unloaded and after that it can move for the separations of the earthworms either the
manually mechanical process, then you go for the drying. So, whole process so now weare coming up the automations in the vermicomposting process. So, that how using the
high tech technological approach we can monitor the quality parameters in composting
process. And this every all the process can be automated as a mechanical means as a
mechanical process. So, that there will be less inventions of the human power or man
power.
You can say the manual process by the separation of the earthworm. So, the heap method
by this a vermicompost after harvest is heaped is a gather heaped in a dome shape in a
open space or on cement floors under the bright sun lights, at the height at about 2 to 3
feet’s. So, what happens if you say make a heap them or the in a open space or the over
the sun, under the sun? The worms  move  to a lower layer  or the worms  are light
sensitive. Thus first letting harvest of compost from the upper surface this process is
repeated may be 3 or 4 times and all the adult worms migrate to the base of the heap and
can be separated, but this process is time consuming. 
As we low put the vermicompost then a under the sun and heap it as a dome shape as a
dome shapes and as the earthworms moves to the bottom layers, then we can take away
the you can take out the upper layers of the vermicompost by step by step and finally, the
as the earthworm migrates to the bottom layers those earthworms can be separated by
manually sieving operations. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:17)
Mechanical process for this earthworm separations; so, this earthworm separated by a
sieving, using a wire net of 2 to 3 millimeter size. In separation process the earthworms
remains  above  the  net  and  the  vermicompost  falls  below  the  floors  and  these  are
collected. The sieving unit may vary in size and it is operational. The sieving frame
including the stand and net can be placed either on the simple platform or the spring load
platform or rum by motorized shaker.
So, there are different type, either you come for the manual sieving that is as the labors
can do by size of the 2 to 3 millimeters heap size or mechanically also will be showing in
video as you are seeing. So, how this sieving operation can be done by the mechanical
vibration of the sieving machines where the earthworm’s is separated on one location
one points and the vermicompost are collected in another points? 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:18)
And these are the harvesting of heap method. So, as we make a dome shapes of the heaps
and under the suns, so, they with the lights the earthworms they migrate to the deeper
layers. So, by making the heap we can collect the vermicompost by step by step from the
upper layers and the bottom layers can be used for the manual sieving or the sieving
process.
And this also drying will discuss what you can make the you can put the vermicompost
is a plastic sheets. The plastic sheets make a entire maintains of temperatures and can bevermicompost can be spreads, for drying I can go for the sun drying usually for the air
drying. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:59)
So, this separation process, either you can have the sieving methods. By sieve you can
separate the earthworms or this is a mechanical shaker. So, you put the vermicompost
here,  load  here  and  by  the  motorized  shakers  by  shaking  we  can  collect  the
vermicompost at one points and the earthworms at the other point. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:23)
And this is the drying cum sieving machine, so, here we have the dryers, where here the
hot air blower is there and the top there is a sieving machine; this vermicompost loaded
on the top. So, this can be conveyor belt it attach to the systems and the vermi compost is
loaded on the through the conveyor belt, it come to the top loadings. So, after that there
is a shaker is there say mechanical vibrations. 
So, through this shakers as a sheet sieving machine and here the vermicompost falls
downs and this the earthworms they are collected in the on the other ends, while the
vermicompost are collected at the bottom of this machines. Here, there is hot air blowers
and we provide the hot airs. So, that the at the same times the sieving separation from the
earthworms and also drying operation can be performed at one go.
And finally, the vermicompost is collected and that this send for the bagging and this is
also another dryers. So, here the dry the sieving followed by the drying. So, you have the
hot air blower gives the drying also the sieving machine is there where the earthworm is
separated one points and the vermicompost dryers and also collected. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:42)
Drying and packaging, so for marketing it is packaged at a moisture container label
ranging from 25 to 30 percents. Usually go for the sun drying or may be the solar drying
systems. So, you do not go for less than 25 percent, 25 to 30 percent moisture content
should  maintained  for  the  final  compost.  If  you  decrease  the  moisture  content  invermicompost, a live materials, so, many microbes are presents in this a vermicompost
unit the small earthworm also maybe there may present.
So, to make them live so the moisture content around 25 percent should be maintained
and also higher moisture content is not required because this is the moisture content
convenient for the live of the vermicompost because many micro organs are there many
growth hormones and many the growth regulators are there in the. And also the body
parts of the earthworms they are present in the vermi cocoons also may be there. So, they
are all the live things, need some moisture content around 25-30 percent is preferable for
this a final vermicompost. 
Conventionally after separation earthworms vermicompost dried in a natural process
under this sun lights. Under cloudy weathers, particularly during the rainy seasons, open
house drying becomes as a difficult. So, mechanical drying I was discussing mechanical
drying, so, here has a spinning machines that is a 3 meter in length and 1.5 meter in the
width.
So, spinning machine is there where the earthworms and the vermicompost they are
separated. So drying chamber then consisting of thermostat, a blower and baffle plate on
furnace plate, that provide the hot airs. So, which can make the at the on go one go that is
a drying of the compost. 
So, we says there is a solar dries, drying systems can be used under the sunny weathers.
So,  after  drying  the  vermicompost  is  bagged  immediately  by  manually  or  by  the
mechanical device. And the bag should be stored under cool conditions in shades for the
transportation and the used in the field.
So, these were the some of the drying process, in the video also next we have showing
the video how the separations can be done from earthworm from the vermicompost
either using the manual sieving or using the mechanical say process by the same process
by this mechanical vibrator and this spring sieving machines.
And followed by the dryings, how it can be dried in the over the by making the dome
shape. So, that the it can be piled together and the earthworms migrate from the to the
bottom layers from the top layer to bottom layers and the vermicompost can be separatedfrom the top by step by step. So, these are process will be showing in the video and in
few slides. 
(Refer Time: 09:30) 
So now, we will discuss about the harvesting of the matured compost. So, in harvesting
means initially you have to separate the earthworms, so, from this compost, then the put
the compost for the drying because we will dry. So, that the moisture content should be
maintained around 25 to 30 percent because the earthworm contains many of the live
organisms, microbes are there. So, minimum moisture content 25 percent has to be
maintained. Then go for the packaging of this vermicompost.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:05)
So, as you see here this is the matured vermi compost and you can see the earthworms
are there in this vermicompost. So, you have some sieving technology by which we can
separate the earthworm from the vermicompost. Of course, we can so the other methods
you can make a heap. So, if you make a heap’s the earthworms are discard, they do not
like the light conditions they can go insides. So, you can collect the earthworm from the
upper layer slowly and slowly.
And the leftover the vermicompost can be screened using the sieving methods. So, now,
they will be loading this earthworm in the sweep. And will put will run the sweep by
sieving  method  we  can  separate  the  earthworm  from  this  vermicompost  So,  forseparation of the earthworm from the vermicompost we are using the mechanical sieving
methods. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:50)
So, you can see this is the sieve, so by vibrations, so, we can the earth the vermicompost
can be collected in one direction. But this is the way of collecting vermicompost and the
earthworms can be collected in the other directions. So, now we will show you the load
vermicompost and run the machines. So, you can see the how the vermicompost in
earthworms are separated.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:13)
So, you are now you are loading the vermicompost on this sieve. So, by this vibration
you can see here. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:29)
So, here we are collecting the vermicompost. This is a good quality fine compost by the
sieving methods. So, here you can getting the vermicompost like a granular shapes and if
you can see here, the here you are collecting the waste materials the larger size particles
and also earthworms. These earthworms are also (Refer Time: 11:52) you can see this is
the earth worms are getting collected (Refer Time: 11:58). So, these are the earthworms.
So, earth worms are collected in one end and the vermicompost at the other end. 
So, these are the waste material also we can again sieving the earthworm and the later
materials can be used for the composting process. So, this is the final vermicompost you
can see. So, this one we will the moisture content is the more than 30 percent, so we will
go for the drying. So, after drying when the moisture content comes 25 around 25 30
percent you can go for the packaging of this vermicompost. So, this can be good for
drying, either the hot air dryers or this can be dried also by the over the floors where with
the sun signs, we can dry these and the moisture content can be decrees to around 25 to
30 percent.
So, this is the for the drying of the vermicompost. So, we have here hot air dryer. So, hot
air is blown for blown here, the vermicompost can be loaded on the top they have thissieves. So, vermicompost  dropt here and you  have the hot air blower with hot air
vermicompost can be dried. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:22)
A vermicompost are loaded on the top is the sieve is there and the from if a vibrations.
So, vermi compost at dropt and with that there is a hot air blowers. So, with hot air the
vermi  compost  can  be  dried  and  collected  at  the  bottom.  So,  after  separations  of
earthworm from the vermicompost, we can go for the hot air drying. Also we can go for
the air drying you can keep on the floors or on the plastic sheets. We can spread this and
we can allow this vermicompost to dry for certain period. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:47)  
So, this is the final vermicompost as we have collected for the separation of earthworm.
This can be spread on the plastic sheets or on the cemented floor also. So, after the air
drying when you observe there is a moisture contents are around 25 to 30 percent. Then
you can go for packaging of this vermicompost. After drying, so you can go for the
packaging. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:42)
So, likewise the vermi compost can be packaged in a corporated gunny bag because this
is a live materials and the microbes are there they do have respirations. So, this is the you
can look with the final vermicompost after drying still the moisture content can be
brought around 25-30 percent and it can be packaged with a gunny bag and this shouldbe labeled also. So, means the label means the vermicompost, the nutrient content has to
be specified and the producer also has specified and amount of specially the major
nutrients and macronutrients, micronutrients and if the vermicompost is prepared for
specific crops like your potato or any vegetables or any fuel grains rice or wheat that also
to be specified on the labels, this vermicompost is suitable for the this type of the crops. 
Now, we can show you a small demo how we can use a vermicompost in vegetable
crops. So, we will go to the field, how we can prepare the fields? How we can needs the
vermicompost in the before planting or the seed or before planting of seedling materials
in the main field? So, well so now we will be discussing about the applications of the
vermicompost or the use of the vermicompost in the crop productions, either it can
vegetables or the cereal crops.
So, this we are showing a integrated farming system concepts, where we have a pond, in
pond we are growing fish culture. We have also the crops, we have the vegetable crops
inside the green house and also we have the crops outside. The concept of this one so
there is a no waste in this systems. So, output of one component which used as a input
for the other components.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:31)
So, here we have the fish, so you do use the freshwater in this pond. So, that fish can
grow and also the water can be recycled back and this water can be used for growing
vegetables or growing field crops. So, this is a green house, what I feel that everyfarmer’s should have a small greenhouse because this is used as a rain out shelters or this
can be used for the specially growing high value crops if some farmer has to become
highly reminarity to have a higher income. 
So,  one  small  greenhouse  can  give  you  a  throughout  year  vegetables  as  a  oxygen
vegetables  or the cash crops. We can growth the cash crops and can have a better
income. So, now we are going for the planting of the brinjal seedling. So, before planting
you have to prepare the soil well and this is a dew period systems. So, after preparing the
soil wells you have to make that particular spacing’s; that means the spacing between the
rows and spacing between plants in the same row.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:29)
So, as for the spacing at particular points, so you have to put the vermicompost. And this
is the region pore system as I have made the regions and this is the pore area and here the
vermicompost are mixed at the point where the plant has to be grown and this should be
mixed well in the soil. So, soil and the vermicompost they should be mixed together. So,
likewise so the vermicompost and soils this should be well mixed. After the proper
mixing of the vermicompost in the soils, so, you can go for the planting of the seedlings. 
So, there is no need of applying vermicompost throughout the field because the so, this is
a localized placement which has a band placement, where the these are the place, where
the crop has to be grown only those place we mix the vermicompost and we calculate the
vermicompost as per the need of the crops.(Refer Slide Time: 18:18)
At the well mixing hen you can go for planting of this and the seedlings or you have any
cropping you have the either the broccoli or you have the capsicums. This seedling’s can
be planted here and this can be made slightly rich so, that water should not accumulate to
the base of the stems, [FL] made rich and of course, the dripper lines we are putting the
dripper lines here and as per the need the dripper systems can provide the water and the
water can be of also excess water can be drain to the pore area. So, crop can be well
protected from the excess water conditions.
So, of course, the drip area we are supplying water as per the need of the crops. So, this
is how when you go for the vermicompost applications, the field should prepared as per
the need of the crops we can apply vermicompost and using vermicompost we can grow
vegetable crops without any requirement of chemical fertilizers. And by the full amount
of vermicompost applications we can get the same yield as of the chemical fertilizers.
We can show you some of the crops we have grown like a cauliflowers in this summer
seasons  like  June,  July.  We  are  able  to  have  cauliflower  productions  using  only
vermicompost. You can see the growth of the crops. So, this is the cauliflowers, we are
able to grow inside this greenhouse and using only vermicompost. In the month of
because it was planted in month of May and now the crop has come to the floating stage. 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:28)So, by having this as a high value crops having this greenhouse, so, you can grow so
high value crops throughout the year and this can give you a better remuneration, so that
the better profits to the farmers of a small farmer or marginal farmers. They can have
such type of the vegetable crops inside greenhouse and using only vermicompost we can
have clergy or organic products as this has the high nutritional value as compared to the
chemical vermi the products from the chemical fertilizers. 
So, it is free from pesticides or insecticides, also it contains a higher amounts of this poly
secondary metabolites. So, you know the like cauliflower this has a higher glucose lot
contents,  antioxidants,  that  is  a  good  for  the  health  of  the  crops.  So,  having  the
greenhouse and doing the organic way by using vermicompost, the farmer can make the
more remuneration more profit can be self sustainable. It can meet is your own family
requirement at the same time he can sell, reproduce and can have a better income for his
own living ok.
Thank you very much.