Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 16
Vermicompost Quality and Marketing
Welcome for the next lecture, Vermicompost Quality and Marketing. So, we discussed
last lecture about the production technology. How we can produce vermicompost in the
farm levels or the small farmers or the marginal farmers. They can used at the farm
resources and they can convert the farm resources suitably to organic fertilizers  by
following the technology as we discussed or making the some structures they form bed
structures and using the waste materials and the mix and also if availables we can add the
natural minerals and the biological resources so, that we can enhance the vermicompost
quality by making the vermicompost. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:07)
So, this lectures we will be discussing about the quality of the vermicompost, how we
can go for the marketing of the vermicompost. So, if you see the quality we divide the
quality in 3 categories; one is of physical characteristics of vermicompost and second is
your  the  chemical  characteristics  of the  vermicompost  and  third  one  the  biological
properties biological characteristics. You would see we just saw for a crop growth and
development for providing the soil environment that is suitables for the better uptake ofnutrients better uptake of waters and to have a good rhizosphere. So, that is a population
of microbes in the soils.
So, we need to maintain the soil the 3 properties of soil physical properties, chemical
properties and biological properties. And the physical properties though are they helps in
the nutrient uptake pattern of the crops. Though they do not supply the nutrient to the
crops, the nutrient supply based on the chemical properties of the characteristic of the
soils, but the physical properties helps in the as a facility term for the nutrient release and
the nutrient uptake by the crops.
And the biological properties like enzyme activity or the microbial activity they help in
the better nutrient mobilization or mineralization and the uptake by the crop. So, if you
see the vermicompost which are the physical like soil the physical characteristics of
vermicompost bulk density and the porosity that indicates the water holding capacity
because few are the vermicompost are the low bulk density as compare to the soil in
because so, that if you add the vermicompost soils so, that decrease bulk density. So,
lowering bulk density means that in the higher porosity. The porosity is higher means,
the micro pores or the higher micro pores, water holding force that increases the water
holding capacity of the soil and the particle size distribution that is that is for the nutrient
release  and  the  uptake  by  the  crops  and  the  moisture  content  depends  upon  the
vermicompost of the physical.
So, moisture content how much moisture because vermicompost a live thing. So, it
contains many microbes. So, this has to have the moisture content and the aerations for
the  proper  growth  or  microbes  in  the  vermicompost.  So,  this  is  the  physical
characteristics, see chemical properties the pH of the vermicompost, cation exchange
capacity or the ion exchange capacity that buffering capacity of the materials, the cation
exchange capacity means the nutrient release pattern.
How we can the nutrient can come to exchange sides and can be available for the crops
that indicate cation exchange capacity of the material, electrical conductivity that salt
concentration. CN ratio; Carbon Nitrogen ratio of this compost total carbon, nitrogen,
phosphorous,  potassium  and  more  importantly  the  ammonical  nitrogen  and  nitrate
nitrogen are the plant test nutrient in the 2 forms. 1 is ammonical nitrogen and nitrate
nitrogen most of the planned crops they prefer to have the nitrate nitrogen, but few cropsthey take like rice they prefer to have the ammonium nitrogen we see the how much the
availability of ammonical nitrogen and nitrate nitrogen in the vermicompost.
And  also  the  secondary  nutrients  like  calcium,  magnesium,  sulphurs  and  the
micronutrients contents in the vermicompost. Biological properties, the enzyme activity
and the microbial community as you discuss the urease activity, phosphatase activity. So,
these are the enzymes presents in the vermicompost and the microbial counts beneficial
micro many beneficial microbes are there in vermicompost and their populations that
makes the entire the vermicompost the organic fertilizer is a healthy and is a better used
for the application filled for the crop uptake.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:32)
And  you  see  the  contents  you  can  see  the  physical  chemical  properties  of  the
vermicompost. Organic carbon contents should be around 20 to 25 percent, pore space or
the porosity around 70 percent, moisture content of vermicompost should be around 30
percent or this at least not less than 30 percent should be more than 30 percent.
pH in the neutral range 6.5 to 7.5, cation exchange capacity 50 to 100 milliequivalent for
100 gram of the vermicompost, then the electrical conductivity soil solution that is less
than 1 decisiemen per meter, total nitrogen contents should be should not be less than 1
percent should be more than 1 percent and it should increase up to 3 or may be it can go
up to 4 percent the total N content. So, that we can minimize the use of chemical, so, thatwe can meet the because nitrogen is the nutrient that are the phosphorous similarly
potash that leads to increasing the growth or increasing the yield of the crop.
If  it  is  a  biomass  increase  that  comes  from  the  weather  nutrients  like  nitrogen,
phosphorus and potash. So, you need to have the vermicompost that rich in NPK, so, that
we should not sacrifices the yield. If you see think of quality, quality is most regulated
by the micro nutrients and the quantity of the productions or the biomass that regulated
by the macro nutrients. So, nitrogen should be around 1 or it can be 3 percent or it can be
more than higher digit should not be less than 1 percent should be definitely more than 1
percent.
It can increase to 4 and 5 percent that is also good compost. CN ratio 10 to 20 is to 1 and
total  phosphorus  the  potash  should  be  higher  than  0.7  percent  and  calcium  and
magnesium should be calcium should be higher than 1 percent, magnesium higher than
0.5 percent, ammonium nitrogen so, should be more than 300 ppm and nitrate nitrogen
around 120 ppm.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:38)
So, these are the quality in the normal vermicompost as you see. So, these are the
qualities of the vermicompost that we have produced from our farm. So, that we see
these are the qualities of the vermicompost. So, if we compare the vermicompost or the
conventional vermicompost and the enriched vermicompost this data is a developed from
our own experiment from the research scholars work.So,  this  is  the  chemical  properties  and  the  conventional  vermicompost  microbial
enriched vermicompost and the rock mineral enriched vermicompost. So, you see the
total nitrogen, phosphorus, total potash total calcium, total magnesium content because
this is the organic materials. So, we consider as a total contents. So, later on because as
microbes are present once applied to the soils. So, because it is a vermicompost has a
high residual effect unlike the chemical fertilizers. So, here the nutrients are available for
the start periods and they are because the very fast mineralizations in case of chemical
fertilizer but vermicompost is slow mineralization it takes long time.
So, total nitrogen this can be available for longer period and it has the if you if you go for
the cropping systems when your nutrient management cropping systems. So, if you are
using the organic fertilizer like vermicompost, we should see the residual effect of the
vermicompost so that the crops in sequence the nutrient management should be taken
care and to have a better productions with the minimum cost of inputs.
For the conventional vermicompost, you see the total nitrogen is 1.3 to 1.5 percent. If
you go for the enrichment with the microbes the a nitrogen content increase 1.8 to 2.4
percent, but only rock enriched it does not have any influence on the nitrogen content
that  remains  almost  same  1.4  to  1.5  percent,  but  microbial  enrichment  using  your
Azotobacter chroccum  or the different microbes. So, they increase they increase the rate
of mineralizations and the N content of the vermicompost form 1.2 to or 2.4 percent.
Similarly,  if  you  go for the phosphorus, total  phosphorus  0.8 to  1 percent  for this
conventional vermicompost, with microbial enrichment this is a 0.9 to 1.3, where as if
you go for the rock enrich rock mineral enrich, so, that is a significant improvement
phosphorus content 2.9 to 3.5 percent.
So, if you see the potash for the conventional vermicompost, this is 1.0 to 1.1 percent
with the microbial enrichment. So, 1.1 to 1.6 small improvement, where as if you go for
the rock mineral enrich the potash content is increased up to 2.8 to 3.5 percent, same for
the calcium and magnesium. The total calcium in case of the conventional vermicompost
0.5 to 0.8 percent and with microbial enrichment, it is 1.5 to 2 percent and with the rock
enriched it is significant improvement as 7 to 8 percent.
For the magnesium, it is a conventional vermicompost 0.1 to 0.2 percent, with microbial
enrichment 0.6 to 0.8 percent and with the rock enriched it is around 1.5 to 2.3 percent.So, the rock minerals and the microbial regulations, so, they can be mixed together for a
preparation of a enriched vermicompost. If you see the available nutrients at the end of
the composting period, so, when you go for the matured compost harvesting, see the
available nutrients.
In case available nitrogen for the conventional vermicompost, say around 103 and some
cases  we  have  seen  that  is  also  increasing  the  different  replication  different
combinations. So, increasing 1326 ppm and the microbial enrichment the there is a good
improvement 1600 to 1700 ppm and for though this rock enriched so this remains around
705 to 1500 ppm or the nitrogen.
Whereas, if you see the Olsen phosphorus or you can say available phosphorus for the
conventional vermin compost is around 900 to 1087 ppm and for the microbial enriched
it is 900 to 1125 ppm, whereas, you go for the rock enriched rock use of rock phosphate
the available phosphorus with the proper dose if you go for the higher dose, so, that
decreases, but it uses rock phosphate around 20 percent the available phosphorus around
1165 to 1444 ppm.
Similarly, ammonium acetate using the mica by mica you can increase the available
ammonium acetate for the conventional vermicompost is around 253 to 3330 ppm. With
the microbial enrichment, it is higher 4320 to 5230 ppm, whereas, with the rock enriched
4320 to it can increase up to 9274 ppm, the micro the use of mica. And this is the
chemical properties, if you see the biological properties of the enriched vermicompost
compared  with  the  conventional  vermicompost  that  is  urease  activity  and  acid
phosphatase activity we have seen.
For the conventional vermicompost urease activity let us say micro gram ammonium for
gram for hour. So, this is a ammonium release from this conventional vermicompost as
you say 80 to 90, whereas the microbial enriched is the higher activity of the microbes
that is 120 to 130 and rock enriched 116 to 130.
Similarly, the acid phosphatate activity for this conventional vermicompost is around
158 to 172, this increase to 200 to 255 for the microbial enriched VC and for the rock
enriched it is 216 to 222. So that means, the with the addition of the microbes that
increases the activity of microbes which ultimately help in the nutrient release pattern theavailability of nutrient in the vermicompost itself and also this can be helpful when apply
the soil file they can help a better soil mineralizations.
And the better availability or the quicker availability to nutrient to crops for meeting the
need of the crop.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:29)
So, there are some as you see the definitely the conventional vermicompost as a higher
the nutritional quality contents as compare to the sorry the enriched vermicompost has a
higher nutritional content as compare to the conventional vermicompost.
So, there is a marketing tips. So, how can go for the marketing?  Suppose, we are
discussing the we will be discussing a cost analysis for a small and marginal farmer, we
can going for the production vermicompost on for his own consumption actually, we can
see what is the return we can get if goes and selling the vermicompost.
But when you  go for marketing, so, to market vermicompost for the top value the
product must be uniform actually and the consistence and the reproducible; that means, it
is very consistence and reproducible and see uniform quality. So, that the consumers can
he can build a trust among the consumers among the farmers, if you for the regular
supply of a produce is the same of principle of the any market.
If you are meeting the demand of the crops and you have a consistent supply and if the
quality is  maintained  and the  supply is  consistence  and also the  quality you  knowconsistent and reproducible then the there will be demand. So, the second do not think
compost as the only end product similarly for the vermicompost organic farming.
So, we do not think that ok, we can provide the compost that is the job is done, no. So,
usually we have to target the consumers or you can say understand the growers, what are
the growers demand, what are the growers needs and their expectations.
The growers actually the farmers as being a if you if you think a farmer, suppose you
become a farmer what I need? Suppose I am growing rice crop, I need a compost which
is suitable for rice crop. So, that I can have a better productions at the same time I can
met the qualities also better with the minimizing the cost of products also.
Similarly, if you are growing a (Refer Time: 14:16) farmers, I am growing potato or I am
growing cabbage or I am growing cauliflowers. So, I need a compost that is fitting to
requirement of the crop because compost for the potato and the compost quality for the
tomato  or  the  cabbage  may  not  be  same.  Potato  is  a  crop  which  require  more  of
phosphorus and more potash.
So, we need to supply compost that is rich in phosphorus and potash. So, that it can you
can maintain the amount of production the quantity of productions at the same time by
improving the quality. And so that the if you meet the customer’s expectations and the
growers expectations.
What they need? Then you can make production if you go for the marketing sales we can
produce the compost in such a way. So, you can meet the target growers the target
growers  demands  can  be  fulfilled  then  there  is  a continuous  supply chain.  So,  the
producers, so, if you see there is a model of this loaded from the Nepal, there is a
marketing channel of and the market volume of vermicompost in Nepal as you said the
producer and consumers.
So, mostly they link 85 percent of their production that goes to consumer linking and
only rest 15 percent either to traders and the co operative. So, there is a direct contact.
So, in vermicomposting you have the direct contact with the producer and the consumer;
that means the farmer. So, farmer is the end users or the beneficiaries.So, if you have the targeted farmers, the group of farmers and you can imagine, you can
visualize, conceptualize what is what is the need of the farmers? So, which crop they are
growing and for that crop they are growing rice grows rice farmers or they vegetable
growers the vegetable growers what type of vegetable they are growing and for those
farmers what type of compost is needed.
So, can you make enrichment, can you enrich the vermicompost in the productions, can
you enhance the quality so that he can directly meet the requirement of the farmer? So, if
you thinking on so, marketing will be much easier and this is supply chain will be also
much smooth.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:12)
So, if this is the from the as once your compost is ready, then you go for the business
scale then order trade taking. So, you can take orders by any media either phone calls or
the email messages or that is the order taking process you can (Refer Time: 16:25) as
you  can  you  can  take  the  orders  from  different  agencies  depending  upon  the
requirements. So, that depends upon the how cantilever making which the consumers
which grows you are targeting based on that you can you can have the order from for
different type compost or the compost or the compost person.(Refer Slide Time: 16:44)
Then accordingly depending upon the order the type of compost you have different
quality, then go for the packing is a breathable packings they. So, that is a vermicompost
live materials. So, their microbes we can it is not use a air tight containers should not be
used. If the containers, the bags we are using that is a perforated or the aerations they
show a proper aerations. So, that compost is the live material is a healthy material live
material life is there. So, you should you should provide the packing material you should
have the proper aerations. Then you can have a is a primary packaging you can say, as
you are making packing and this is one of the box you can see here box there is a
secondary package. So, in a in a box we are putting the a number of pockets and also you
can have the tertiary packages, similar boxes can be put in a containers and finally, this
can be transported to the growers.(Refer Slide Time: 17:36)
And when you when you go for the marketing, sending to the growers or the customers
then you have proper labeling of the vermicompost so, that is very important as per the
marketing. So the product should be named as the name of the product should be given
their name of the product what you are giving the vermicompost or the product can be
given and the logo of the company as the producers they have the certified company, the
logo should be provided. The composition of product is very very important, the main
compositions whether the macronutrients or the micronutrients as a continues specific
enzymes or the hormones or the microbial biomass community.
So, those compositions should be given on the as the labels and crop specific suitability
it is very very essential to specify the suitability of the compost for specific group of
crops. It may be specific for cereals or it may be pulses or oilseeds or vegetables for
which type of crop is most suitable. So, if so, this could be specified on the cover of the
same compost labelling. Then uses details, the quantity of use for which crop and what is
the quantity, the volume of the quantity of the used for the kg, for hectare or the ton per
hectare that can be specified.
Specific action, so, after application what happens, what are the enhance, what are the
changes in the soil fertility changes the growers can expect? So, that is specific action
that can given and finally,  the manufacturing  and expiring dates. So, these are thelabelling process. So, when you go for the composting levels, should be provided for this
given in the compost.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:14)
Then we will go for the sample cost analysis of vermicompost and we will discuss for a
small farmer. Usually, the small farmers the land size is 2 hectares are too small to
medium farmers 2 to 5 or maximum 5 hectares land size. For a small farmer, you can go
for the organic farming right. So, it can take 10 beds, 10 beds and the vermicompost the
matured period is 60 days. So, in a year, so that means, 2 months 1 vermicompost set can
be matured. So, in a year can have the 6 cycles, means 2 months 1 cycle, a vermicompost
can be ready and in a year 12 months, so, we will have the 6 cycles in a year.
So we will give the cost analysis for a 10 beds so, if you see the 10 beds per fixed cost,
construction of bed. If you go for the earthing up or the bricks and cements, so the
cement structure of the bed, bed size as you discussed earlier same bed size each bed size
is 10 to 12 feet length 3 to 4 feet width and 1.5 to 2 feet depth. So, for this bed size single
bed size, you can go for the 10 beds, the construction procedure around 10000 and cost
of construction of shed means also shed materials we are putting here the as asbestos
materials, providing the cover to the beds. The cost of construction shed material is
around 40000, cost of machinery and the implements as you are using for the mixing of
the vermicompost or the shredding for the cutting of vermicompost to the small pieces
and the sieving operations. So, that is we have taken only 20000 cost of machinery.And cost of irrigation facilities, when you go for the vermicompost you have provide the
irrigations  sprinkler irrigations for the regular irrigating or maintaining the moisture
content in the compost bed that you have kept as 30000. So, total cost is 100000; that
means, 1 lakh for 10 bed. So, that remains a fixed cost; that is only construction cost of
the vermicompost. So, 10 beds is around 100000; that is 1 lakh.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:30)
And if you see the variable cost, so, these are the variable cost for the 10 beds. First we
take the organic waste, we have taken the 9 tons, 9 tons means 15 ton based on the dry
weight basis, we have taken almost 15 ton 150 kg for bed 1.5 quintal for 10 beds; that is
the 150 kg per bed; that means, 1.5 quintal.
For 10 beds that is a 15 quintals and for the 6 cycles and that is goes around 9000 kg for
the 1 years if you are using the organic waste that comes 9000 kg in a cycle of 6 cycles
and for 10 beds and the cost or this materials around 2250 rupees and the cow dung we
are using around 4500 kg cow dung for this 6 cycles and the cost of cow dung is also
2250 rupees. Earth worm that is a 20 kg per cycle 2 kg per bed and that is for 10 beds 20
kg for initial release of earthworm we need the bed the kg cost is around 650 rupees. So,
for the 20 kg cost earthworm is 13000 rupees.
And the fungus culture if you see fungus culture that is 30 liters, we are using the 300
rupees and labour we have kept 180 labours in a year of 365 days. So, around the 30
labours per each cycle 10 beds, need 30 labour per each cycle that includes you are theloading or the cutting of the used materials, loading in the bed and maintenance of the
moisture temperature in the bed harvesting, after harvesting separation of earth worm
drying and packaging.
So, this 180 labours for the 10 beds, around 36000 is the labour cost, we have kept 200
rupees per labour as because the usually the farm the labours farm family if a person they
are employed in doing the job.
Electricity, we have kept 3000 rupees per annum and packaging charge, only for this is a
packaging material. So, you have kept around 250 rupees and other expenses kept 1500
rupees. So, total variable cost for the 10 beds it s it comes around 58540 rupees for the
first year. And if we go for the second year, so, all the cost remains same except the earth
worm because the earth worm that is generated from the first cycle these are form can be
used for the for the second cycle also. So, here the only 1 cycle earth worm cost is used,
the same earthworm is multiplied and also you can sale earthworm regularly. So, there is
no cost of earthworm involved. So, this from second year onwards this variable cost is
45540.
And if you see the return, vermicompost almost produced 9 tons in a year from 10 beds
in 6 cycles and the cost of vermicompost the selling price if you are calculate the 10
rupees a kilo for 1 ton around 10000 rupees is for this conventional vermicompost. If you
think of the enriched vermicompost, which here we need add either the rock phosphate
or rock minerals or the microbial inoculants, if you add this the cost or the selling price
of the enriched vermicompost is rupees 15 per kilo and per ton is around rupees 15000 is
taken as the cost of the enriched vermicompost.
So rupees 10000 for the conventional vermicompost and rupees 15000 for the enriched
vermincompost  for  ton  of  produce  s,  here  you  have  taken  the  conventional
vermicompost; so, as a 9 ton, so, 10000 per ton 9 ton around 19000, the income from the
vermicompost selling. Also you have the vermiwash that can be produce around 300
liters and the returns from the vermiwash can be 3600 rupees for 300 liters.
And earthworm also you can sell, 50 kg earthworm we can it can be available from this 1
years and with 20 kg is yield that is every time we used 20 kg and additional 50 kg earth
worm is there. So, that can that is can be also return earthworm first is around 650 rupeesa  kilo.  So,  that  comes  around  35000.  So,  total  return  comes  around  128600  for  a
conventional vermicompost of 10 beds in 1 year.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:58)
 
If you see the cost and return analysis of conventional vermicompost, so, for the year 1,
we have the fixed cost that is your constructions materials that is around 1 lakh and this
is the variable cost of the first year 58540. So, because of you have the earthworm cost
initially involved there.
So, total cost comes around 158540 in the first year and total return is 128600. So, first
year we have a negative return that is a low that is a 29940 because the construction cost,
the fixed cost is involved there. We go to year 2 so, there is no fixed cost. So, only
variable cost is there. So, that is your the 45540 that remains constant for from year 2
onwards and your total cost is the same as your variable cost and total return is same
128600 and here you have the benefit.
The second year around 83000, so and also from second year third year onwards, so, you
can a farmer can get around 84000 of the benefit from second year onwards.(Refer Slide Time: 28:18)
And if you go for the enriched vermicompost, where the fixed cost remain 1 lakh that is
constant and variable cost here we are in addition to the if you see the conventional
vermicompost there is variable cost is higher is 62140, this is because of the natural
minerals. So, around 3600, it is added here for the cost of the natural rock minerals either
is a rock phosphate or the dolomite or the mica that is added for the 10 beds and in unit
cycle also. So, it is comes around 3600. 
So, if you add this one, the total cost is around 162140 and the total return here as we
discussed earlier, if you if you got this total return is 90000 for this a conventional
vermicompost and if you go for the enriched vermicompost the will be 15000 for ton is
the 9 ton this comes around 135000 return and the total return increases here using this
enriched  vermicompost.  So,  total  return  comes  around  173600,  for  the  enriched
vermicompost. But if you see the conventional vermicompost the total return is 128600.
So, this have the higher return 173600 and net return is in the first year only 11460 in
case of the conventional we had a loss first year. First year, we are pay back we are not
getting  any return  rather  there  is  a loss  in  case of the  conventional  vermicompost,
whereas, enriched vermicompost we get around 12000 and net benefit in first year. If we
go to year 2, so, here we have to think that here are some cost is not there the cost is
around 49140 and this total cost is 49140 and return remains constant for year after years
and here the net return is 124460, same for the year 3 and same for year on onwards.So that means, if you go for the enriched vermicompost, so, your net return is around
125000 in span of 12 months for the size of the 10 beds. If the farmers specially for the
small farmers or the medium farmers having 2 hectare of land area if he does not want to
use if somebody goes for the marketing, these are the value of marketing, but farmers
usually the small and medium farmers.
They used to use the compost for their own consumption, for the own field. So the
production is around 9 tons per hectare. So, 9 tons per hectare means if you see it can it
can meet the requirement of 2 hectare of farmlands, you can you 9 tons per hectare and
here the farmers need not sell as is using vermicompost on his own field and only the
cost involved is here or variable cost as you see here and here you can sell only the
earthworm. If you see the earthworm price, the earthworm cost is around 35000. 
So, each year, he can get around 35000 rupees per year through selling of the earthworm
and the vermicompost he can use for his own field can be applied and this a this is the
return he can get and by if you if you we will discuss the other classes when go for
applying the vermicompost, the rate of applications and the year of applications with the
year we can minimize the use of the because initially you may require the high dose of
vermicompost to meet the requirement of the crop.
As we proceeds about the years, then the vermicompost dose can be reduced because the
because this has a residual effect the buildup effect as you go on adding the years. So,
there is a residuals residual and the nutrient ability also increases over the years because
soil has the organic metro pool that stabilize the organic metro pool that gets builds build
up about the year and once the soil stabilize organic metro pool that is built that is settled
then the requirement of the vermicompost can be minimized and however, the soil can
meet the nutrient requirement of the crop can be supplied from the soil once the stabilize
organic metro that is build up.
So, it takes some time in case of composting and in this case the farmers can have the 10
bed and he can produced he is produce from this 10 beds can be utilized for the own
crops can meet the requirement of the crops and the as his not buy the vermicompost
from outside only his farm resource can utilized, the cost of production can be brought
down. This also discuss in the later class in the input management in the crops.So, with this I can say that so, there is a scope Ss, there is a opportunity. So, we can
completely depend upon the organic fertilizers. We can eliminate the use of the chemical
pesticides  or  the  chemical  fertilizers,  while  meeting  the  required  productions  in  a
sustainable environment.
Thank you all.