Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 01
Organic Farming: Introduction and Status
Good  morning.  I  welcome  you  all  to  NPTEL  online  course  Organic  Farming  for
Sustainable  Agricultural  Production.  So,  regarding  agricultural  productions,  so,  the
issues of origins last few decades looking at the adverse effect of conventional farming.
The conventional farming has posed a serious threat on food quality, environments and
water quality too. 
In this view, organic farming is gaining momentum throughout the world to provide a
better environments, better food quality to the consumers. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:18)
So, in these figures see the history of organic farming as you see the  agriculture has
started 10000 years ago, where, the crop cultivation started with the  arable crops like
wheat, barley followed by some pulse rice crops also. During that periods there are no
chemical  fertilizers,  only  farming  system  that  existed  along  with  crops  and  animal
husbandry. So, this was a integrated concepts where the crop was grown through organic use of the
cow  dung. Slowly,  the  cultivation  was  only of  organic  and  that  was  a  subsistence
farming,  but  with  the  increasing  population  growth  if  there  is  a  rapid  demand  of
increasing food productions, so that it encourage the use of high yielding varieties of the
hybrid cultivars for increasing production to meet the growing demand of the population.
So, to exploit the yield potential from the high yielding cultivars there was need for the
use of chemical fertilizer. So, after organic, so, we converted to inorganic to meet the
demand of the growing populations with the increasing food and production. 
So, that happened during the late 60’s. So, time reached when the production became
plateau with the use of the inorganic fertilizer; at the same time it created many adverse
effect like the deterioration of soil quality and the environmental quality; ultimately the
food quality. 
In 90’s then there was a need of good air for breathing, good quality of water to drink.
On early 2000; so, there was need of the good quality food for better human health.
Hence, so to have a better environment, better food quality and better drinking water
quality we are now again converting to organic farming. But issues comes how the
population is growing and we need to meet the demand of the growing populations
through the increasing food and productions, whether the organic way of managing crop
productions can meet the demand of the food and production that is one issue. 
So, in this course we will be delivering the management practices in organic farming. So,
to challenge this is the increasing demand of food and productions by doing the scientific
managements in organic farming, how we can meet the food demand of the growing
population. (Refer Slide Time: 05:16).
So, if you come to organic farming what is organic forming? See, organic farming this is
an ecological production management system that promotes and enhances biodiversity,
biological cycles and soil biological activity. So, why its a biodiversity; means, we need
to include many  crops at a time, so that it can minimize the insect, pest and  disease
pressure. Biological cycle means you have to grow different crops in rotation. So, by
doing so, this also, this can enhance your soil fertility, at the same time it can reduce the
pressure of the insect pest and disease. 
And soil biological activity; soil biological activity we mean to say soil is a living body,
this has many microbial populations. So, this is so the microbial population they do live
they do help in nutrient release pattern in the soil and nutrient availability for the crop
plants. 
So, by doing organic farming we maintain the microbial populations make the soil such a
living body as active and with or the management practices like your crop rotations and
the  crop  diversification  and it  is  based on minimal  use  of off farm  inputs  and on
management practices that restore, maintain and enhance ecological harmony. So, as you
say in inorganic farming, so, we try to minimize use of the off farm inputs, try to use the
on farm inputs to the maximum extent. 
Organic farming, is a other way say is a system which avoids or largely excludes the use
of  synthetic  inputs;  such  as  fertilizers,  pesticides,  growth  hormones  and  the  feedadditives and to the maximum extent feasible rely on crop rotation as you are discussing,
crop residue, in corporations, animal manures, off-farm organic waste, mineral rock
phosphates  rock  minerals  and  biological  system  of nutrient  mobilizations  and  plant
protections. So, through biological nutrient fixations or green manuring so, that can help
in organic farming. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:29)
I want to; so, some lights throw some lights on the pesticide use in India and world. So,
the quality of the food deterioration is due to the indiscriminate and insensitive use of
insecticides,  herbicides  and fungicides  in crop  productions.  If you  see compare  the
insecticide, the pesticide use in India and worldwide, see the India uses the maximum
proportions of the insecticides, it is more than 60 percents followed by fungicides and
herbicides. Whereas, if you see the world level as maximum use of herbicides followed
by insecticides and fungicides. As India being a tropical and sub tropical continents and
that  weather condition  is  highly favorable  for the  growth and multiplication  of the
insects, probably, this is the reasons why use more of the insecticides and if see the effect
of the insecticides or pesticides on human health. (Refer Slide Time: 09:45)
So, this  pesticides  that  has  effect  on the  air  that  we breathe,  so that  also the  that
contaminate the air quality, the soil, the soil gets contaminated to pesticides. The water,
so that influence the aquatic bodies and ultimately the human health as through your
consumption of the foods or breathing airs are getting exposure to the spray of the
insecticides or pesticides. 
These pesticides that pose a serious threat in human health and see they pose a endocrine
disruptor;  that  means,  there  is  a  hormonal imbalance  takes  place  in  human  body,
especially the  research report we are found that DDT is  a chlorinated  hydrocarbon
pesticides and this is found many of the womens and the lactating womens. 
So, that goes the babies through milk to the DDT that also enters to the infants and this is
a endocrine disruptors that say hormonal imbalances that causes many disease including
cancer and the neuro disorder. Then respiratory tract irritations, Parkinson’s disease that
is also because of the in the nervous systems disorders due to the insecticides or the
pesticides, asthma, then the depression and anxiety, cancer that is say including leukemia
or the lymphoma  that  is  say blood  cancer.  The attention  deficity  and hyperactivity
disorders those have the diseases that happens due to exposure to insecticides or the
pesticides.(Refer Slide Time: 12:23)
If I say the pesticides the as a DDT dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane for examples the
average daily intake of organochlorine pesticide DDT in India; so, this is a research
reports from the pesticide use and applications on Indian scenario published in journal of
hazardous materials,  Elsivier publication. If you see the location Punjab, I have taken
into account and the microgram DDT per person in Delhi food. 
In  2001,  the  vegetarian  diet  it  was  2.2  microgram  per  person  per  day  and  if  you
interestingly if you see 2002, this increased to 8.17 from 2.2 to 8.17 and you see the
2001, non-vegetarian diet, around 13.6 microgram per person per day DDT and 2002,
this increased to 27.2 microgram per person per day.
So, this figure shows is highly alarming and if you see because of this see intensive use
of the chemical fertilizers and pesticides in Punjab and over exploitation of groundwater
also  the  groundwater  is  also  contaminated  with  pesticides.  So,  the  cancer  patient
populations is growing in Punjab and you might have known that when the cancer train
moves  Delhi  from  Punjab  to  Rajasthan.  So,  this  is  a  serious  consequence  of  the
indiscriminate use of fertilizers, pesticides and over exploitation of groundwater and
Punjab is facing serious threats of the water availability for agricultural productions. (Refer Slide Time: 14:43)
So, in view of these if you compare the conventional farming versus organic farming, so
different components if you see parameters. So, in many of the parameters the organic
farming has superiority over conventional farming excepting few. The parameters you
have taken suppose the yield,  nutritional  quality minimize  pesticide  residue, reduce
worker exposure to pesticides, then  employment of workers, ecosystem service, total
cost, profitability,  minimize  water  pollution,  biodiversity,  minimize  energy use, soil
quality. 
If you see here as you point out the factors you can see if you see the grain yield, in case
of yield, in case organic and the conventional, yield of conventional farming is higher as
compared to or organic farming. 
If you see the nutritional quality, in case of nutritional quality, the organic shows the
better  nutritional  quality  as  compared  to  chemical  farming.  The  pesticide  residue,
minimizing pesticide residue in this case the organic farming has a significant role as
compared to chemical or the conventional farming and reduced worker exposure to
pesticides in that case the organic farming is superiors over the chemical farming. 
And organic farming also gives more employment of workers over the chemical farming.
Ecosystem service organic farming seems to be better than the chemical farming. If you
come to total costs of the productions, so, there is no much difference between organicand the conventional farming. So, they appears to have the same level of the cost of
production. 
However, see the profitability, organic farming gives the higher profitable as compared
to chemical farming. You see the water pollutions say reducing the water pollutions
organic  farming  has  the  better  role  as  compared  to  chemical  farming.  Biodiversity
organic farming  has the edge over chemical farming and in terms of energy use organic
farming minimize the energy use as compared to chemical farming because chemical
farming you are using the fertilizers urea single super phosphate.
So, that causes the huge amount energy used, but it is a less in case of the organic
farming. And thus you see the soil quality as we discussed earlier the soil quality is better
in terms of the soil productivity microbial populations in organic farming as compared to
chemical forming. Because see soil is the that provides the existence to the plants that
provides nutrients to the crops for its growth and development. So, it is very essential to
maintain the soil quality in long term and that is only possible through organic farming,
so that we can make the soil life and we can may utilize the nutrient you can have the
better neutralizing pattern from the soil for the better growth and development of the
crop.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:45)
We give the example of global growth of organic farming, you can see from this figure
the  Oceania  that  the  highest  growth  of  organic  farming  that  started  from  the  verybeginning  which  is  1999 to 2010 followed  by Europe, Latin  America,  Asia,  North
America and Africa.
If you see the growth, the land wise see the there is a growth is rapid in case of the
Australia or New Zealand, Oceania regions and Europe there is a constant rising the area
under organic farming, Latin America there is a some type of the decreasing in between
and also again its picking up after 2006. Asia the growth seems to be a constant after
2005, there is a constant growth of our organic farming and land area under organic and
a North America  too and Africa there is also a rise in the land area under organic
farming. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 21:50)
If you see the distribution of the lands under organic farming, if you see the distribution
of the land area under organic farming in different continents, see Oceania it is 12.1
million hectare that is a maximum followed by Europe 10 million hectare this is for the
agricultural land and they are the other areas of the beekeeping, aquaculture,  forest
followed by Latin America that is 8.4 million hectare, North America and the Asia that is
be 2.8 and 2.7 million hectares. 
So, the growth of the land area under organic farming is maximum in Oceania region
followed by the Europe, then Latin America, North America, Asia and Africa being the
lowest, where we have the 1.1 million hectares in the agricultural land, but they have theother lands like the aquaculture, forest area, dredged non agricultural lands in organic
farming. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:19)
If you see the global share of organic farming, Oceania 45 percent, Europe 25 percent,
South America 13 percent, Asia 8 percent, North America 6 percent, Africa 3 percent. 
So, if you bring the Indian scenario, so, we are making a progress in organic farming. As
you see the world scenario and number of organic farmers in India, say growing and the
market of organic food market also has a growing over the last few years. 
So, if you see the history and the distribution of the organic agriculture, it appears that
because the demand is there to have a better food, better air and the good quality of water
to drink. So, there is a need to bring more and more area under organic farming. 
So  in  this  aspects  as  you  see  as  we  discussed  that  issue  is  how  to  maintain  the
productions. So, that is a more  important, because we do not want to sacrifice the
production level, in view of the better quality, the view of the better quality. We want a
good production at the same time the better quality because this if you go to specially
Indian farming scenario, now the farmers are using huge amount of insecticide pesticide
in fruits and vegetables and there is no regulation on the dose and the frequency of
application of the pesticides and also those the materials they are plucked on the early
morning or the previous to evening and sent to the market for the human consumption. So, this regulation, so, we need the Indian market we need to regulates in the farmer sites
because you have interaction with the farmers right. So, this is that the crops they are
growing for their own productions is you can say close to organics we may not be fully
organic, but they to apply any insecticides or pesticides for the crops where which crops
they will be consuming, but the vegetables or the fruits they are sending to market in for
those there is they are applying huge amount of insecticides and pesticides. 
But now to stop this,  so,  there  needs  a  increasing  awareness  among  the  farming
community, among the consumers too and initiative from the governments also requires
how to minimize the use of insecticide and pesticides in the farmlands. 
So, as you see the status the organic farming is growing this is a positive directions
because we go for the organics because you can see many of our health issues that comes
from food; if a better quality of food you can remain healthy. So, to have a better food
we need  have  a the  healthy production  systems,  green production systems,  organic
production systems where we can maintain our ecosystems. If you have you have a good
food organic systems we can have a better quality of the water to drink because you see
the  underground  is  getting  polluted  due  to  intensive  use  of  chemical  fertilizer  and
pesticides they do list and it contaminate the underground waters which we are you are
using for the drinking purpose too. 
So, making agricultures as a holistic organic systems we can have a good productions
and we can have a better quality of the foods or you can happen say a good quality of
water drink and the good quality air to breath. 
So, we are progressing in the positive  directions,  but we need to progress furthers
increasing rate, so, that the we can maintain the productions with a better quality of the
foods. With this I conclude the first lecture then we will move to the second lecture
looking at the status of the organic foods in India and the world. 
Thank you. 