Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 22
Introduction to Organic Crop Management (Contd.)
So, welcome to the next lecture, that is this continuing as an Introduction to Organic
Crop Management. So, here we will discuss about the special the nutrient management.
So, look how we can go for the nutrient management means; we will discuss what is
what do you mean by nutrient managements, and how we can go ahead with the nutrient
management practices.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:38)
You see a nutrient management as we have discussed earlier; that means, you have to
manage  all sources  of nutrients  available,  either the native  soil present the nutrient
present in native soils or the organic matters present in the soils, and the biological
resources you are adding, the organic resources you are adding or biological N fixation
(Refer Time:  0:55) those things  have to has  to be taken into  accounts  for nutrient
management; that means, the factors to be considered are; amount of plant available
nutrients  already  present  in  soil,  as  we  discussed  when  you  go  for  the  nutrient
recommendations amount of nutrient you apply. So, you must know how much plantavailable means the mineralizable nitrogen nutrients present in the soils at the time of
your planting or the sowing of the crop.
Then nutrient use efficiency of the crop is a crop specific depends upon the yield of the
crop, how much yield you are targeting yield of the crops and the efficiency of the crop;
that means, the nutrient maybe lost due to several processes, as we have discussed earlier
may be nitrogen leaching, volatilization, denitrification losses are there. So, how much
that that indicates the use efficiency of the crop that also depends upon the method of
application how you are applying the nutrient that indicates the use efficiency.
 Then Physio biochemical needs of the crop; that means requirement of the crop that is
nutrient content of the crops and the organic matter content of the soils that is organic
status or organic carbon status. So, when you go for the nutrient management, the better
nutrient management we have to we have to have the basic information about the soil;
that means, the nutrient available in the soils and nutrient requirement of the soils and the
use efficiency by the crop and finally, how much we need to apply.
The so these are the main 4 things you see say, how much yield you are targeting how;
that means, that indicates how much nutrient requirement by the crop. So, demand is
known; then how much available from the soil, either from the mineralized source or
from other sources is available from the soil. Then we need to calculate how much
nutrient to be applied, based on the efficiency factor. What are the losses? If you looking
at  the  losses,  how  much  nutrient  can  be  applied?  So,  these  are  the  factors  to  be
considered when you go for the nutrient management.
So, basically there are the 4 Rs in precision nutrient management. The first R is the right
quantity; that means, you have to know how much quantity of nutrient required for the
crop. The second R the right source, source means the whether you can go for the
organic source inorganic source the different type of nutrients (Refer Time: 03:10) you
can  go  for  compost,  vermicompost,  crop  residues  or  as  you  discussed  enrich
vermicompost. So, the source what type of source we are using, then when you are using
right time what time that is very important because the crops require nutrients some
specific growth stages. So, your nutrient applications should be at the time of critical
growth stage you can say. Thus, growth stages where the crop needs the nutrients and
water all the inputs and very sensitive, the crop has become very highly sensitive. Anyshorts or any deficiency of nutrients or waters are that stage of course, the crops becomes
highly responsive to applicate some nutrients.
So, those are the critical stages timing of the timing of nutrient application that is also
very, very important. And the 4th R is the right method, what method you are using. So,
that indicates the loss if you are using suppose broadcasting, then there will be less
efficiency, but if you are going for placement deep placement at the right zone, then that
efficiency may be higher.
So, so when you so these are the 4 Rs for the precision nutrient management you have to
select the right source of course, fertilizer. You have to you have to calculate the right
quantity of fertilizers, you have to apply fertilizer right time when the crop needs and
you have to apply fertilizer at in right method. So, that your efficiency is higher, loss is
less and especially we when you go for the organic farming. So, right method is also all
are right method right quantity right source you.
So, must apply right method so that; loss will less the environment is protected. And you
should apply right quantity. So, loss can be minimized that can have a less damage on
the environments and the right source should be used to have the organic source and
right time for the yield improvement.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:59)
So, to recommend the nutrient quantity in general, old method you can conventional
method is the blanket or the general recommendations. Usually the farmers are following
the  traditional  way,  how  they how  it  is  done  as  a  conventional  method  for  the  N
recommendations. General recommendation is based on large number of experiments
conducted at different locations.
And the general fertilizer recommendation is a equated with medium fertility status of
soil. And for low and the high rating soils the dose is correspondingly decreased or
increased by 25 percent of the recommended dose. So, this general recommendation is
basically for the soils  of medium  fertility.  The  soils  are categorized  of low fertile,
medium fertile, high fertile that; you can see the right-hand side here based on the
content  of  organic  carbon,  available  nitrogen,  available  phosphorus  and  available
potassium content of soil. The soil is rated as low, medium and high fertility.
If the organic carbon content is between 0.5 to 0.75 percent, the soil is rated as medium.
Content less than 0.5 percent is low and higher than 0.75 is the high rated soil high fertile
soil. Similarly, available nitrogen between 280 to 560 kg per hectare is a medium fertile
soil if less than 280 the low fertile soil, higher than 560 is a high fertile soil. The
phosphorous if it is 10 to 25 kg per hectare, it is a medium fertile soil less than 10 it is a
low fertile soil, higher than 25 a high fertile soil. Similarly, potash the range of 108 to
280 kg per hectare is a medium fertile soil, less than 108 is the low fertile soil and higher
than 280 the high fertile soil.
So, based on the soil fertility status so we can we can we can recommend the general
recommendation is given and if the soil potash status is low or high. So, the fertilizer
level either the increased or decreased by 20 percent 25 percent. So, for example, for the
nitrogen dose of rice, if you see for the general recommendation for the medium fertile
soil is around 100 kg nitrogen per hectare specially, for the transplanted rice.
If the soil is low fertile then we need to fertilizer by 25 percent dose of 125 kg N per
hectare. If the soil is high fertile then we have to decrease the fertilizer dose to up to 75
kg N per hectare. So, this is how is a done for the soils of medium and low or the high
fertile, but this has some problem; that means, as you assumed your soil is categorized to
medium, low, high irrespective of the crop is a property of soils, without considering thecrop demand. Crop need is without has have a linkage with a crop need this soil is
categorized as low, medium, high fertility.
Moreover, crops have variable requirement of nutrients and the respond differently to
applied  fertilizer  in  different  soils.  So,  this  is  we  can  say  blanket  or  the  general
recommendations which is not specific. Usually the farmers in the farmer’s field they go
for  the  traditional  way  of  applying  fertilizers  or  they  may  they  calculating  the
requirement based on the blanket recommendations, but we will discuss how we can go
very specific for the for particular soil, for particular crop, so this is called as a balance
sheet method the nutrient recommendations using balance sheet method.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:35)
So, that we can have a specific nutrient requirement for the crop, we can calculate the
nutrient requirement of a particular crop for a particular soil; using this balance sheet
method. So, as the Y into b is equal to N rec r e c plus N m i n into E 1 so plus N o into E
2 plus N a into E 3.
So, Y is the left-hand side Y into b this is your demand of nutrient by the crop, or the
nutrient removal by the crop for a particular target yield. So, Y is your crop target yield
that is your kg per hectare and the b the nutrient uptake by the entire crop per unit yield
that that uptake by the both grain and the straw as a byproduct. So, how much nutrient is
taken by the crop for the kg of yield kg, kg uptake for kg yield of the crop. So, if youmultiply the yield with the nutrient uptake by the crop, then this will give the nutrient
demand or total nutrient removal by the crop from area of 1 hectare.
And the right-hand side this should be balanced this much nutrients should be balanced,
either from the soils or from the external applications. So, these are the soil sources N
mineralized nitrogen is a source from soil that is; N min amount of mineral N present in
soil kg per hectare, that is available nitrogen present in the soils before planting or
sowing of the crop inherent fertility of the soil. Similarly, N o that is amount of N
mineralized from organic matter, because soil has organic matter and there is slow
mineralization process they also contribute to nutrient requirement of the crop.
So, that is a N o is the amount of N mineralized from organic matter present in the soil,
that is in kg per hectare. And amount of N supplied to soil through dry and the wet
atmospheric deposition; that means, if there is a rain in the field. So, it is expected that
during the rain if you know the expected amount of rainfall, rainfall also they contribute
to some amount of nitrogen in the soil. So, how much nitrogen comes from the rains so
that is taken care. So, E is the efficiency factor, so that is because of loss because the,
from any of the source they are not 100 percent efficient they lost, lost from different
sources, so E is the efficiency factor for this loss.
So, looking at this if you see your left-hand side is the demand of the crop, and the
demand must be met either from the sources from the soil either the N mineralized
source or organic source or atmospheric depositions. And rest has to be N rec has to
external application, that is as a nutrient recommendation kg per hectare, how much
nutrient to be applied after meeting the requirement after meeting, after knowing the
available nutrient from the soil.
We will do a sum on this how to calculate this one.(Refer Slide Time: 11:38)
Suppose you need to calculate balance sheet method, the compute the N recommendation
kg per hectare for rice crop with the following information. Suppose yield is grain yield
5.0 ton per hectare for grain yield and 4.0 ton per hectare for straw yield those, those are
on dry weight basis. Because when you go for the nutrient uptake especially on dry
weight basis, we assume so there is no moisture.
And the b the grain nutrient content, so grain N content 1.5 percent and straw N content
0.8 percent and N mineralizable that is; available nitrogen soil through mineralization
source 150 kg per hectare. And nutrient can be mineralized from the organic matter
present in the soil. During that growing periods that is 20 kg per hectare and from the
rain or atmospheric deposition it may be 5 kg per hectare. These are source available
from the soil. And these are the efficiency factors E 1 0.4, E 2 0.5 and E 3 0.4. If you put
this one to calculate the how much nutrient requirements for the crops, so, you do the
calculation here.(Refer Slide Time: 12:49)
So, your left-hand side Y into b your grain yield is 5 ton per hectare. That is your 5000
kg into nutrient content or grain nutrient content 1.5 percent. 1.5 by 100 plus your straw
yield is 4 ton that is 4000 kg into straw nutrient content is 0.8 percent. So, the total
demand of the crop is equal to this is 500 into 1.5 by 100. So, this is 75 plus and this
comes 4000, 40 into 0.8 is 32. So, that is equal to 107 kg per hectare. So, this much of
demand to meet the yield of 5 ton per hectare, as a grain yield 4 ton per hectare as a
straw yield and grain nutrient content 1.5 percent and straw nutrient content 0.8 percent.
In that case the nutrient demand is 107 kg per hectare. And if you see the right-hand side
your see that should be met. So, 107 is equal to N recommendation rec plus your N
mineralized nitrogen present 150 into 0.4.
Your efficiency factor E 1 plus the organic source nitrogen you have probably 20 kg per
hectare into 0.5, plus here the atmospheric depositions that was 5 kg per hectare the
efficiency factor probably 0.4. So, if you see this one this is 0.4 into N recommendation
plus 150 into 0.4 is 60, plus 20 into 0.5 10 plus 5 into 0.4 2. This is your 107 or so N
recommendation from here if you calculate what how much recommend N is equal to
107 minus 60 plus 10 plus 2 72 divided by 0.4.
So, that is equal to so this becomes a 35, right? Um 107 minus 72 7 minus 2 5, 10 minus
7 35 divided by 0.4. So, that is equal to 4 into 0.4 350, 8 32 3 7 around 87, right? So, it
becomes 87 kg per hectare. So, this is how you can calculate the nutrient requirement,how much nutrient can be required by the crops. So, using this balance sheet because
demand and the supply from different sources. So, as you know the demand is 107 kg
per hectare. So, the removal by the crops by the grain and straw as from the grain portion
1.5 percent nitrogen and straw content 0.8.
So, this data one the grain nutrient content or straw nutrient content, this is a specially
crop specific, it does not change a there may not be a very significant changes due to
management practices; however, the yield can change. If you know the target yield and
you can know nutrient content, you can you can have a pre assumption you can before
growing the crops, we can we can calculate how much nutrient demand by the crops.
And looking at the soil status the soil analysis, we can know how much nutrient available
from the soil sources or other sources then how much nutrient required. So, this is
usually when we go for nutrient management, we must understand we must calculate the
how much nutrient required by for a particular crop for a particular type of soil.
 (Refer Slide Time: 18:02)
So, if you know this one the nutrient demand, so, by using this balance sheet method, so
you can calculate the quantity of the nutrient the first the 4 Rs, first R is the to know the
quantity of nutrient requirement, by using this we can calculate the quantity.(Refer Slide Time: 18:14)
And then  the source the source of nutrient, so depending  upon the source you  are
interested to the for the crops specific, many sources are available with materials and this
contents of nitrogen, phosphorus and potash. So, like Cattle dung that contains 0.35
percent nitrogen, 0.12 percent P 2O5 0.17 percent K2O.
Similarly, Farmyard manure FYM that contains 0.75 percent nitrogen, 0.2 percent P 2O5,
0.5 percent K2O and rural compost 0.75 percent nitrogen, 0.2 percent P 2O5, 1.5 percent
K2O. Water hyacinth compost 2 percent nitrogen, 1 percent P 2O5, 2.3 percent K2O. Rice
straw contains 0.6 percent nitrogen yeah 0.18 percent P 2O5, 1.38 percent K2O because
why rice straw sometimes we do incorporate the previous crop residue in the field.
So, if you are growing the Rice straw, Wheat straw or Sugarcane whatever you are
incorporating.  So,  you  should  know  what  the  nutrient  contents  of  this  materials.
Similarly, wheat straw contains 0.48 percent nitrogen, 0.16 percent P 2O5, 1.18 percent
K2O. Sugar cane trash that contains 0.4 percent nitrogen, 0.18 percent P 2O5, 1.28 percent
K2O. So, in the Neem Cake, 5.22 percent nitrogen, 1.08 percent P 2O5, 1.48 percent K2O.
So, looking at the nutrient  source, you  can calculate  the nutrient requirement for a
particular the source. Suppose you can for right hand side, you can so nutrient source and
quantity required. Suppose you have N requirement as you calculated previous one 87 kg
per hectare. In case you have requirement 100 kg per hectare is the demand, that isrequirement of the crop; that means, you need to N recommendations we need to apply
100 kg nitrogen per hectare as external source.
In that case what is the source of nutrients? If your source is FYM, FYM contains 0.75
percent nitrogen. If you are using FYM that contains 0.75 percent nitrogen to meet the
100 kg N per hectare how much quantity of FYM required that is 13.3 tons; that means,
the. So, 0.75 kg you are getting from the 100 kg, so 100 by 0.75 into 100 kg that is your
quantity the recommended nitrogen you can get 13.3. For Water hyacinth that contains 2
percent nitrogen. So, that is the 100 by 2 into the 100 that become 100 by 2 is equals to
50, 50 into 100 that is 5000, 5000 kg required for the Water hyacinth.
And; that means, you see the Water hyacinth contains 2 percent nitrogen, FYM contains
0.75 percent nitrogen. So, that is we are discussing if your if the crop requires high
amount of nitrogen, where the source of compost should be rich in nitrogen or you have
to enrich the compost nitrogen, so that the requirement can be decreased. If you use
FYM the amount required 13.3 ton, but if you use the water hyacinth-based compost the
amount reduced to 5.0 ton per hectare.
So; that means, by enriching the compost, you can minimize the requirement because
you have to meet the nutrient demand of the crop at the beginning of the season when
you go for the organic farming, but see the chemical fertilizer Urea, if you are using Urea
it is very less amount that is a 218, as it contains 46 percent nitrogen it requires only 218
kg urea per hectare. So, this is how to calculate the source of nutrients based on the
requirement and the quantity of nutrient from different sources.
Then the timing of application, what time you should apply the 4 R; that means, the third
R right timing, when you should apply fertilizer because the crops require particular
nutrients at the specific growth stages especially cereal crops, if you give example of
Rice crops.(Refer Slide Time: 22:09)
So, Rice have the starting the phases from seedling stage to harvest stage. So, here you
see the darker the shade, the better time of fertilizer application in rice crop; that means,
this is the this is one stage and here is another stage. The stage where the very critical
stages you can say; that stage the crops should not suffer any type of nutrient either from
the water stress also. And if the crop is highly responsive to application of the nutrients
in this stage.
Ah at the 2 to 3 weeks after seeding means is a Tillering stage, the crops starts tillering
and during tillering if there is a nutrient deficiency especially nitrogen deficiency, then
there may be less formation of tiller because the this is a tiller formation; that leads to the
final yield if there is a less number of tiller then there will be less number of panicle
formations and hence there will be less grain yield. So, to have an optimum tiller the
good  growth  of  the  crop,  we  need  to  see  that  whether  the  crop  has  sufficient  N
requirement at this stage. If there is a stress, then nutrients should be ensured nutrient
available to meet the requirement of the crop at this stage.
Similarly, the other is panicle initiation stage, where you can see this stage during the
panicle initiation stage.(Refer Slide Time: 23:34)
Usually for the crops the panicle which initiation this the stage best stage, the panicle
initiation takes place the that is a PI stage and the panicle comes out after 20 to 25 days.
So, this the difference from the panicle initiations and this is the panicle emergence that
is a, PE and this gap is around 25 days. And if there is any stress during panicle initiation
then there will be less number of grain formations and ultimately there will be less in
grain yield.
So, this stage one of the critical stages in Rice crop. So, they the crop should not suffer
any type of nutrient stress at this stage.(Refer Slide Time: 24:23)
So, so if you are supplying the specially the, in a general if your farm yard manure in a
general recommendation to farmers, specially for rice crop you apply the 5 ton per
hectare. And that fertilizer recommendation for specially if you transplanted rice 150 50
kg N P2O5 per hectare and if you go for the usually the phosphorous and potash used as a
basal at the time of the sowing or the transplanting of the crop because at that time it is a
very easier for the better incorporations, in the soils better. So, they can be mixed well in
the soil during the land preparations or the final puddling time.
And nitrogen as it is a subjected to the various types of losses, for nitrogen applied in
split doses to meet the requirement of the crop at different stages, as we are shown the
left-hand sides. So, these are the stages these are very sensitive and the critical stage, you
can say for the nutrient deficiency, so that and the nutrient the nutrient should be applied
at those stages.
But if you go for the specially for the organic farming, if you do not want to apply only
chemical fertilizers, we go for only organic that way; you need to calculate how much
required depending upon the source, what source you are using. And in case of organic.
So, what we have seen from our experience you can apply also 2 splits the 50 percent
can be applied at the time of the final land preparations. If it is a fully decompose manure
that can be well mixed in the soils at the time of sowing or the planting of the crop and
the rest 50 percent can be applied exactly before the panicle initiation stage.So, in that case the yield can be maintained at the same time this will have the higher
residual effect for the subsequent crop, if you are selecting the cropping systems and the
second crop is grown immediately after the first crop. So, that we can we can go for the
split applications of this organic manure too.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:14)
And then the right method so last one the what method you can use the right method of
applications.  You  can  go  for  the  Broadcasting,  Placement,  Pellet  applications  and
through irrigation water of Fertigation and broadcasting know that is a is a inefficient
method not efficient as a traditional method farmers, usually go for the broadcasting
methods where the efficiency is very less; that means, the higher loss of nutrients you go
for the either the basal application that time we do incorporate the fertilizer mix the
fertilizer in the soils at the time of planting or the sowing of the crop, it is a basal and
then top dressing as a broadcast when standing crop in the field then applying the soils
are the top dressing so without proper incorporations. So that is the broadcasting method
which has a less efficient.
But you go for a placement method say more efficient the nutrient management, plough
sole placement during the sowing time and the fertilizer placed below the seed zones as a
plough sole placement, or it is a Deep placement like the rice crops also. So, as the in
case of the lowland rice at the standing water conditions and there is a loss of the
nitrogen through denitrification loss, to avoid the loss the fertilizer placed in the reducedlayers as we discussed earlier class the deep placement layers, where the oxygen is not
present in that zone fertilizer is placed.
Then we can go for Band placement that is a either by the Hill placement for the orchard
crops, around orchard we make a trench inside the trench we put the fertilizer and cover
with soils. So, Hill placements or Row placement that is in fertilizer comes with drill. So,
in a farm machinery so there is a fertilizer drill and also seed drill. So, seeds are placed
and so close to the seed row in fertilizer placed and this is covered also that is a row
placement. Specially, for the row crops like the cereal crops either you can have the corn,
wheat those crops even for rice crops also we can go for the row placement of fertilizer.
So, looking at this the 4 Rs for nutrient management crop precisions, either the first R as
you say, right quantity,  right amount of fertilizer, right amount of fertilizer or right
quantity of fertilizers, right source and right time and right method of application. The
whole process is to have a higher fertilizer efficiency higher yield. So finally, we need to
calculate the fertilizer use efficiency.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:38)
 
So, in terms of agronomic nitrogen N use efficiency or nutrient recovery efficiency.
So, if we calculate the agronomic N use efficiency. So, that is a grain yield in N fertilized
plot minus grain yield in control plot where fertilizer is not applied by quantity of N
fertilizer applied in fertilized plot. Similarly, the recovery efficiency you can calculatetotal N uptake in fertilized plot and total N uptake in control plot by quantity of N
fertilizer applied in fertilized plot.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:20)
So, I can give a small example here how to calculate this one, like if there is with
fertilizer application the yield is. So, where you applied fertilizer nutrient so yield is 5.0
ton per hectare. And where you have not applied fertilizer, control plot yield is 2.0 ton
per hectare. And the nutrient you have applied nitrogen dose that is equal to 100 kg per
hectare, the dose of nitrogen.
So, if you calculate agronomic N use efficiency, so yield in (Refer Time:29:47) treated
plot that is 5000 kg minus the control plot 2000 kg divided by amount of fertilizer
applied that is 100 kg. So, that is equal to that comes around 3000 by 100 that is 30 kg
grain per kg N applied. So, that is what you say fertilizer the agronomic efficiency how
much fertilizer applied. So, depending upon the source the source you are applying from
that source every source we can calculate, what is the use efficiency.  The different
source may have the different use efficiency,  that some  also varies from the either
compost or in it compost or the different the water Hyacinth based compost or paddy
straw-based compost. So, they have the different fertilizer use efficiency.
So, finally, the purpose is when you go for the nutrient management our main objective
is to utilize all the sources of possible nutrition and to have a better yield enhancement
yield and with minimum use of nutrient; that means, how we can increase the fertilizeruse efficiency; that means, we can increase fertilizer use efficiency, when you can have
the higher yield at the same time less loss of nutrient, less loss of nutrient means; that
you  can  minimize  all  losses  through  either  through  different  method  by  applying
different method either band placement. So, that the efficiency can be better yield can be
better and use efficiency can be better.
So, these so by so this two lectures, introduction to organic management; so, we will be
able  to  get  knowledge  take  knowledge  on  so,  what  are  the  specially  for  the  land
managements or the plant planting techniques in organic farming systems and the how to
diagnose  the  nutrient  deficiency  symptoms  due  to  different  a  macronutrients  or
micronutrients and how we can analyze the available nutrient present in the soils and
how we can calculate the recommended nutrients how much nutrient to be applied for a
particular crop, for a particular soils, and the method of application how we can apply.
So, that becomes the higher fertilizer use efficiency. At the same time yield is also
increased or improved. OK
Thank you very much.