Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 24
Organic Vegetable Crop Management (Cereals)
So, welcome for the lecture 24, that is organic field crop management. So, special for the
cereal crops we will be discussing. So, last class we discussed about vegetables. So, if
you see the organic key input management, especially the nutrient management for the
vegetable crops and the cereal crops the crops response differently, you can grow the
vegetable crops with full amount of organic nutrient or the required amount of organic
nutrients, you can attain the yield levels in case of vegetables. Because, in case of the
cereals, there is some because they are the determinant crops, they require the nutrients
at specific growth stages.
So, having organic fertilizers to meet the nutrient requirement of the crops at the specific
stages, that becomes a cost challenge, especially for the cereal crops and to meet the
yield potentials having the organic nutrient management also a challenge. However, by
integrations of the, if the beginning of the organic farming, I can go for the integration of
the organic and the chemical fertilizers. We can maintain the yield levels and slowly we
can reduce the use of the chemical fertilizer and fully convert to organics. This thing will
be discussing in the coming lectures when you go for the transition to organic farming.
So, let us discuss about the cereal crops, 2 crops will discussing here rice and wheat how
we can have a management of the rice and wheat crops in organic farming.(Refer Slide Time: 01:50)
So, rice is a family that is a Poaceae family say origin of South East Asia climatic
requirement know this the rice is grown in hot and humid climate. So, it is best suited in
regions which have the prolonged sunshine and an assured supply of water because, rice
is a loving crop. It needs the water though not standing water, but need saturation
throughout the growing period growing period.
And the average temperature requires for the like periods of the crop ranges from 21 to
37 degree Celsius and at the time of tillering the crop requires higher temperature so that
the tiller  formation  is  better.  The temperature  required for the flowering stress that
remains less than 30 degree Celsius around 26.5 to 29.5 degree Celsius. But, at the time
of the ripening or say (Refer Time: 02:44) grain filling periods, it should be within 20
and 25 degree Celsius. Rice is a short-day plant.
Usually, it is grown during the monsoon seasons that is you say Kharif season, say when
there is the day length is a decreasing trend that flower or the flowering behavior starts in
rice. So, that you say as a short-day plant. Soil; rice can be grown in any type of soil that
is a varying soil type. The major soil groups are, say alluvial soils, red yellow, red loamy,
laterite, coastal alluvium, red sandy, mixed red and black and medium and shallow black
soils.
The pH for the rice optimum range 5.6, 5.5 to 6.5, but it can it can be grown in wide
range of pH up to even if the 5 to 8.(Refer Slide Time: 03:39)
Land preparation, So, you know, we grow rice as a 2 type of rice cultivation system one
is called the upland rice that we say direct seeding and the other one is called the low
land rice or the medium land transplanted rice. So, basically direct seeding rice and the
transplanted rice, the 2 system of rice cultivation. Direct seeding rice usually followed in
the regions where there is no assured rainfall is available. There is a variable rainfalls or
the low rainfall regions.
And the places where water cannot be stored for longer periods, in those locations, those
places, we can go for the direct seeding. At this especially upland ecosystem is unbunded
uplands, water cannot be retained and there we go for the direct seeding rice. But, other
cases, medium land, low land ecosystems having assured rainwaters, water can be stored
in those cases, we go for the transplanted rice cultivations.
So, first we can go for the we can discuss about the upland rice; the direct seeded rice.
So, in this method, the soils are not puddled and there is only for the either the tillage
operation, the primary tillage, secondary tillage is a conventional operation is done to
have a loose seed bed, loose soils for sowing of the seeds.
So, that is done by the construction of bunds. We can have a raise in case of upland
ecosystems, we can raise the bunds. So, in there is a rainfall. So, the water can. So, you
do not allow the runoff loss of water. Water can be stored; one should be well compacted
and properly sealed with no cracks and holes are there. So, this will minimize the waterloss through seepage. It can store the water in case of the upland ecosystem. So, they are
we go for primary tillage normally undertaken when the soil wet enough to allow the
field to be ploughed and strong to give the reasonable level of traction.
So, this can be immediately after the and this can be done after harvest, harvest of the
beginning of the next seasons depending upon the soil moistures and water availability
that is ploughing is done. So, we do prefer to have a summer ploughing. If you go for the
summer ploughing, in case summer ploughing, so the soil is opened as a primary tillage
and it can helpful for the storing of the rain water discharge of the rainwater. Otherwise,
if there is no non ploughed soil, the water maybe loss as runoff loss. So, this type of
tillage operations for the direct seeding.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:59)
You can go for the secondary tillage as a loose soil, then you can level and sow the
seeds. A seed can be sown in case of direct seeding as a dry seed it sown and when the
they area receives the rainfall due to the monsoon rain and the seed can germinate and
this sowing should be advised, we looking at the monsoon pattern or the rainfall pattern.
It should be because, after once the seeds germinate and they come to the above the soil
surface, emergence takes place and if there is a dry spell for the even if for 1-week, it
will affect the crop growth that maybe complete mortality or the death of the whole crop.
So, so, so this sowing should be done in such a time that, so the crop should get the
assured rainfalls for the establishment phase at least up to tillering stage when the croptries to establish. In case of low land rice or say puddled transplanted rice. So, this is
done where there is a rainfall amount sufficient available for the crop growth and also the
field has a capacity. It can store water for longer periods.
In that case, you can go for the transplanted rice, but if they the other cases where there
is shortage of rainfalls, deficit  rainfalls  abnormalities,  we go for the direct  seeding
because, if there is a in case of direct seeding when the crop establishes after tillering
stage.
If there is a stress, the water stress due to the less rainfalls or the dry spell, the crop can
survive the dry spell. But this may not happen in case of the transplanted rice. They the
transplanted rice is less adaptable to climate variability or the dry spell conditions if there
is a dry spell even if for 1 week, the there may be failure of the crops in case of
transplanting condition.
So, we go for the puddling, specially this because of the puddling, because when we go
for puddling, the land should be ploughed immediately after harvest of the previous crop.
Preferably, with mould board plough that breaks hard pan and keeps the soil loose. And
this facilitates sowing of the operations to completed on time. Soon after pre monsoon
showers 1 or 2 summer ploughing also done for this in April-May can keep the land
ready for timely operation.
Then,  you  go  for  the  puddling,  puddling  means,  by  ploughing  the  land  or  tillage
operations (Refer Time: 08:11) in the standing water. We impound the water in the field
and go on ploughing operations. So, that causes the destruction of the soil aggregates, let
say destruction of the soil, structure soil structure. We are destroying the soil structure
through puddling operations.
So, that means, the puddling causes physical destruction of soil aggregates irrigations
and non-capillary pore space as a result of which individual soil particles gets segregated
and dispersed and just say leaving this soil mass into a soft puddle. In this case, through
puddling operations as we go for puddling, the soil particles get dispersed from each
other.
So, if you as you see, if you take a soil, soil in a beaker and mixing in the water,
sufficient amount of water. Mix it thoroughly and leave it for some time you can see. So,there is settling of soil particles the initially the sand settles the being the heavier particle
settles fast followed by the silt particle the next heavier settles and finally, the clay
particles  that clogs  the pore spaces. So, by puddling operation  the pore spaces  are
clogged.
So, that creates an impervious layer. So, due to that, so there is no downward movement
of water. That means, that checks the deep percolation loss of water which helps in
maintaining standing water in the field.
So, that is why, when you go for a puddling operation, usually it maintains standing
water can be maintained the field and during puddling as water is maintained. It is less
prone to as a less the weed infestation because, weed growth will be checked due to
continuous maintenance of standing water under puddled transplanted rice.
And yield wise, if you can see the compare direct seeding and the puddled transplanting
yield wise, the puddled transplanting rice, they have the higher yield as compared to
direct seeding. Because, there is some soil chemical property changes in the puddled
conditions as compare to direct seeding there are many nutrients, they are available.
Because  of  the  reduced  conditions  created  in  case  of  puddling  standing  water  is
maintained. So, that helps in availability of many macro and micro nutrients and the
response to external uptake nutrients is less in case of puddled transplanting as compare
to direct seeding. So, after the puddling you can level the field and you can go for the
planting of the rice.(Refer Slide Time: 10:28)
The advantages of transplanted rice, it helps in maintaining optimum plant population.
Unlike the direct seeding, there may be sparse populations, but in case we are planting
the  with  unified  uniform  spacing,  so  we  can  maintain  proper  populations  and  that
facilitate the uniform healthy crops stand an equal opportunity to utilize space, light,
nutrients and water.
So, that is one reason why the healthy crop, they stand uniform stand population. So, that
also enhances the yield of the crop in case of the transplanted rice, then weeds are
substantially killed in this  process of puddling and subsequent submergence  as you
maintain. So, there is a less weed growth.
So, less competition of weed growth crops, the crops get better nutrients that we also that
helps in enhancing the yield of the crops in the in transplanting as compared to direct
seeding crops. So, this is a conventional method transplanting; also, we just say, we go
for another method system of rice intensification, usually for organic farming.
We do a recommend to go for the S R I, system of rice intensifications. Because, here we
have the we use young seedling as compared to conventional the seedling age is 25 days.
But, in case of the organic systems, we use the young seedling the 15 days  young
seedling and the spacing is the wider spacing 25 centimeter as conventional. It is 20 to 15
centimeters spacing and when you go for the plantings number of seedlings per hill, weuse one seedling per hill in case of the S R I verse 3 to 4 seedling per hill in conventional
and if the water maintenance.
So, you maintain saturation of water in case of the S R I, plus 5 centimeter or more than
5 centimeter standing water in conventional. So, these are the basic differences in case of
the S R I systems with the normal transplanted rice. So, having S R I systems, you are
using the young seedling. We have the different nursery bed raising technique for S R I
systems. There we can use the as a Dapog (Refer Time: 12:25) method of nursery you
can say there the seedling can be ready for transplanting. Within 15 days, if you delay
because the seed the seedling densities around 1 kg per meter square in case of S R I. So,
because of higher seedling density, the seedlings are prepared not on the soil surface and
the putting a plastic sheets or polythene sheets or that the seedling the seedling can a thin
layer of soils. And once when the soil is with vermicompost mix is kept and on that, the
seeds are sown. The sprouted seeds around 1 kg per meter squares. This covered by
again thin layer of vermicompost and the sprinkling water is done in order to avoid any
type of water stress so, so that, this seedling should not dry up.
So, this is the seedling emergence takes place and within 15 days you should go for the
transplanting if you delay transplanting because there is no sufficient supply of nutrients
to the seedlings, but this is grown in a limited soils over the plastic sheets and the
seedling becomes yellow after 15 20 days. So, we have to go for transplanting and we
can use only 1 seedling or maximum 2 seedlings per hill in case of the, S R I technique
and  the  spacing  is  wider  to  give  25  centimeter  and  this  has  advantage  over  the
conventional techniques or conventional planting.
Having wider spacing, young seedling is expected to have the better yield as compared to
older seedlings and the wider spacing means, the it provides the maximum space good
space for a particular seedling 1 or 2 seedling to get the nutrients optimum water and
nutrients for a proper growth and development having 1 seedling or the 2 seedling per
hill. So, that has a greater number of tiller formations as compared to the conventional
practice where we are using 3 to 4 seedlings per hill and the spacing is narrow spacing
around 20 to 15 centimeters.
So, that way, the S R I system the system of rice intensification that have the better yield
as compared to the conventional practice and of course, we are as we are maintaining thesaturation water. We are not giving the standing water while providing the saturation of
water and the standing water. In case of the saturation water, there is a proper exchange
of air between the atmosphere and soil surface and that helps in the better formation of
tillers and.
In SRI, if you especially during the tillering operations, if you only use 1-centimeter
water and use a rotary weeders in the in the inter row areas. So, that causes also aerations
in the soils and the atmosphere that and also that helps in removing the older roots. Older
roots are pruned, they are cut, they are mixed in the soils that helps the formation of the
better root systems.
So, by this way, S R I systems  having the less water exchange of air between the
atmosphere and soil that becomes better that helps in the more and more tiller formation
as compared to conventional in conventional you may have the tiller around 20 tillers per
hill, but S R I the tillers may go up to 30 tillers per hill. So, that that because of higher
tiller formation in S R I s that, due to the wider spacing young tillers and the shallow
water levels  saturations, that helps in more tiller formations  and if tiller formations
increase.
So, that ultimately leads to more number of panicles and having the more number of
panicles that ha that causes in higher yield. So, the research report has given the variable
information about the enhancement yield in S R I as compared to conventional practice if
you maintain a S R I very scientifically and accurately there will be around 20 percent
yield improvement in S R I systems as compared to conventional practice.
And moreover, having the S R I systems, you are saving the huge amount of seed
because, in case of conventional practice, the seed requirement around 50 kg per hectare.
In S R I, this is only 5 kg per hectare. That way, you can you are minimizing around 80
percent of the seed requirement in S R I systems as compared to conventional and further
also water management.
So, as you are maintaining only saturations no standing water is required standing water
never leads to the improvement in crop yield as we discussed earlier also having standing
water that causes the reduced conditions in the soils and also that that causes the loss of
nitrogen as a denitrification loss N 2O loses yield management of fertilizers and also thereis a methane emissions having standing water that causes more emission of methane as a
global warming potentials, but maintaining saturations.
So, you can minimize the emission of greenhouse gases either from methane or nitrous
oxide from the crop field that way you can minimize the global warming potentials. So,
being in the S R I systems, usually for the organic farming system, you go for system of
rice intensifications, you can minimize your seed requirements.
Because, the 80 percent seed requirement can be minimized as compared to conventional
practice as we are using only 5 kg per hectare seed for S R I against 50 kg per hectare in
case of conventional seeds and moreover, the water also you can minimize the water
requirement  around 40 percent  with  maintaining  saturations  only without  going  for
standing water, you can get the better yield as compared to the conventional practice.
So, this is why, so, system of rice intensification that we are going for the organic
farming.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:34)
And in addition to that, you can go for the nutrients managements as transplanted rice or
the direct seeding rice, you can go for the green manure cultivations when you go for the
organic. So, green manures, green manure crop of Sesbania aculeata and Crotalaria
juncea. So, that can be taken the 60-day old crop can contribute approximately 100 kgnitrogen per hectare, 25 to 30 kg P per hectare and 75 kg K per hectare and this can meet
the requirement of organic crops.
So, if you are growing the green manure crops before the rice and the seed rate is around
25 to 30 kg per hectare of Sesbania and the sowing time last week of April to first
fortnight of the May and this is incorporated ploughed back in the field.
So, before when you go for land preparation, when the crop is around 55 to 60 days,
because it is a fleshy stage at the vegetative stage and that can be ploughed back and. At
this stage, if you incorporate in the field, that can be well decomposed in the in the field
and the nutrients can be easily available for the for the rice crop.
By doing green manuring,  you can minimize your the nutrient requirement of the crops
because as you are going for the if you grow transplanted rice, as you see the this way,
you can go for the incorporation of green manures and during the land preparation or the
puddling operations, they can be ploughed back in the soils. And that can be those as it is
a vegetative stage and succulent very succulent and that can be those things can be well
decomposed.
And also, you can use using farm yard manure. The well decomposed farm yard manures
should be applied around 50 to 20 tons per hectare which can supply around 75 to 100 kg
nitrogen per hectare, 35 to 40 kg P 2O5 and 75 to 100 kg K 2O per hectare.
So, FYM should be decomposed by you can have the Trichoderma species fungus that
can be added also to the FYM for a better decomposition. And, it can have the effect on
the field also by avoiding any insect pest and diseases.(Refer Slide Time: 19:43)
We can go for enriched compost like the various methods of composting for nutrient
enrichment through either rock phosphate, pyrite, microorganism have better quality
with respect to N, P and K as discussed (Refer Time: 19:51) rock phosphate or the
dolomite or the mica and the microorganisms can be enriched in the compost preparation
process.
We can have enriched compost productions and we can have the Azolla. The inoculation
of Azolla bio fertilizer at 7 days after transplanting of rice crop at 2 tons per hectare in
standing water and it is growth during the rice crop add organic matter and nitrogen to
the soil. Azolla also can be incorporated at the time of puddling of rice field at 6 tons per
hectare.
Also, we can provide around 25 to 30 kg N per hectare rice crop in organic farming
systems. Vermicompost, application of vermicompost at 5 ton per hectare can meet the
nutrient requirement. So, if you go for, when I go for the organic farming, specially as
rice, we are discussing is a requires nitrogen. Cereal crops they need continuous supply
of nitrogen at the critical growth stages for the better growth and development. Unlike
the vegetable crops like a like we discussed potato or the that needs more of potash.
You know potash the. So, this organic manure that applied at the beginning and this is
slow release unlike the chemical fertilizers they have fast release and if the nutrients are
not taken away crops, the nutrients are lost. But, organic farming, organic nutrients, theslow release, decompositions and the slow mineralization process and the nutrients water
release.
They  meet  the  synchrony  with  the  crops  demand  crop demand  and  loss  is  less  as
compared to the chemical fertilizers. In case of vegetables, as their demand is for potash
or the phosphorus, different nutrients for the in case of the potato or the tomato.
And those applying the organic manures at the basal applications and with the slow
mineralization process. They can meet the nutrient requirement during the growth stages
and those crops like your potato, tomato, vegetables, they are the indeterminate crops
means, so they are the growth phases like vegetative or the reproductive. They are not
synchrony.  Because, the vegetative and the reproductive, they are overlapping, they
continue parallelly, they have the because potato you can see, tomato we do not harvest
tomato all the all fields at 1 stage.
The harvesting starts from 1 stage and it may continue for 1 or 15 days or 1 month
depending upon the fruiting. But this does not have, this is because of the overlapping of
vegetative and reproductive stages and this does not happen in crops like cereals and
wheat. When you go for the cereals, rice crop, we do not harvest in stages. We harvest
rice when matures at a particular time; not like tomato at a as a staggered harvest.
Because, the rice is a determinant crop where the stages are very specific.
And that is why, the nutrient requirement is also very specific. We need the nutrient
requirement at particular growth stages. So, rice has the different critical stages as you
say tillering stage, panicle initiation and the flowering. As discussed earlier also earlier
classes because if we see the nutrient demand that will be higher in case of tillering and
panicle initiation in addition to the basal leads to the initiation of tillers and if you apply
the nutrients at the tillering that leads to maximum tiller formations and after that, you
apply panicle initiations that leads to maximum grain formations.
So, to meet the N requirement at specific growth stages, having the organic either the
green manures, as you say, you have to go for green manures. So, that the release is very
slow and the loss is very less, having green manuring crops or applying the enriched
compost or Azolla or the vermicompost. So, you have to need the huge amounts because,
very high to meet the N requirement and in this case, we can also go for the spilt
applications to meet the requirement. At least in one of the critical stages, we have seenfrom our experiments also. If you go for the split application of vermicompost, especially
at the time of the 50 percent, at the time of the land preparations or the planting times
will and the rest 50 percent just before panicle initiation.
So, the you can maintain the yield level same as of the chemical fertilizer at the same
time the this will have also the higher residual effect for the subsequent crops because,
unlike the chemical fertilizer as you are applying chemical fertilizer exactly at the critical
stages. So, that boosts the yield of the crop. We can get the higher yield, but having the
organic fertilizers mixing also proper mixing the fertilizers with the with the soils that is
very essential to have a better availability of the nutrients.
So, that can be possible only during the basal or the during the land preparation. That is
why you apply the most of the organic fertilizer at the time of land preparations.
And moreover, it is a slow release. So, not like chemical fertilizer nutrients are not fast
release. Release very slow due to the slow process of mineralization of organic fertilizers
and that meets the nutrient requirement of the crops, so, throughout the as per the growth
stages and that can that that can avoid the loss of yield.
But, however, for this especially for the rice crops, if see the integrated organic and the
chemical 50 50 that is giving from the experiment that giving the best result as compare
to the only vermi only organic. Because, you need the you have to by doing integration
of the chemical fertilizers and organic fertilizers you can minimize the requirement of the
vermicompost at the beginning of the organic farming.
So, later on, when the soil gets build up may be after 10 years continuous applications.
So, in that case, you can minimize the use of chemical fertilizer and complete defense
upon the organic fertilizers for the rice productions. So, this is about the then we will
discuss about the this is about the green manuring or use of the bio fertilizer Azolla or
the vermicompost or the N ha compost in the during the land preparations in the rice
cultivations. Then, we will discuss how to calculate the doses of nutrients for the rice and
also, we will discuss the wheat the management of wheat crops in the next class.