Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 20
Level “C” Pest and Disease Management (Contd.)
So,  welcome  next  lecture  20,  say  continuation  of  the  Level  C  Pest  and  Disease
Management. So, earlier lecture we discussed about the bio controls biological control
and use of botanical pesticide in brief, just starting. So, in this lecture, we will discuss in
detail  how  the  botanical  pesticide,  the  plant  based  products  can  be  used  and  their
formulation can be prepared to control the pest and diseases. So, that is the level c pest
and disease management.
So, as you see the Neem oil, we are discussing the action of Neem oils.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:51)
So, the mode of action of neem oils, so, this disrupting or inhibiting development of
eggs, larvae and pupae. So, secondly blocking the moulting of larvae or the nymphs
means the it can affect or it can reduce the moulting means usually the insects they have
to change their outer shells or the feathers. And use of the neem oils they can block the
moulting of the nymphs. So, that the growth is also restricted of the insects and pests.
Then disrupting mating and the sexual communications by using the neem-based products, then repelling the larvae and the adults, deterring female from laying
eggs  and  the  feeding,  sterilizing  the  adults,  poisoning  larvae  and  the  adults.  Then
inhibiting the formation of chitin, in the outer shell wall, constituent of the shell walls.
So, that formation is also affected. So, these are the actions of the neem oils in the insects
pest and diseases, by which it can repel or it can make the paralysis  of the insect pest,
knockdown of insect pest, in control of many insect pest and disease population can be
reduced.
How to make neem formulations? Usually, you can ground 30 gram of neem kernel, that
is the seed of which the seed coat has been removed. Only the inner, the seed portions
that can be grounded, dried and the grounded and can be mixed in 1 liter of water, 30
grams of neem dry powder of neem kernel, in 1 liter of water, that can be mixed and
leave that solution overnight, that can kept for 12 hours. The next morning, you can filter
the solutions through a fine cloth and still with still add with little soap powder and can
be sprayed in the afternoon hours. Or you can so you can filter it such a way that the gap
should be by after filtration and spraying the gap should not be it will be only 4 hours
gap and should be sprayed immediately, but in the afternoon hours because spraying
neem oil, in the morning hours, it is exposed to day lights and the effectiveness is
reduced  because  the  compounds  are  deactivated  by  the  sunlight.  So,  by  using  this
solutions, the 30 gram of powder neem kernel, using 1 liter of water that leave it for the
overnight and next day you can filter the solutions and this can be directly sprayed
without any dilution, directly sprayed in the crop field. So, by spraying this you can do in
a weekly interval. So, that this as a preventive measure we can control many pest and
diseases.
In case of organic farming organic pest management, usually you do have (Refer Time:
04:03) preventive measures we do not wait for the pest or the disease to appear then you
can go and spray. So, this is a regular spraying, having the neem solutions, you can spray
it regularly once in a week in the field. So, that the pest and these insects some can be
reduced.(Refer Slide Time: 04:22)
The other one is a neem as a pyrethrin or the pyrethrum. That is a produce from this
these are the insecticidal chemicals extracted from dried pyrethrum flower. That is a
chrysanthemum flower, this can see this is the flowers, this the pyrethrin the compounds
and this is produced from the chrysanthemum flowers, pyrethrum flowers the pyrethrins.
The flower heads are processed into powder to make dusts. And this dust can be used
directly or infused in the water to make a spray.
And pyrethrins cause immediate paralysis to most of the insects. Low dose do not kill,
but have a knock down effect, and the stronger dose may kill the insect. The pyrethrins,
breakdown very quickly in sunlight,  so like  neem  oil. So, this  also  breakdowns  in
sunlight, this should be applied during the evening hours or the afternoon hours and also
this should be stored in darkness, should be away from light.(Refer Slide Time: 05:33)
The mode of action of pyrethrum that is pyrethrins exerts their toxic effect by disrupting
the sodium and potassium ion exchange process, in insect nerve fibers and interrupting
the normal transmission of nerve impulses. Pyrethrins insecticides are extremely fast
acting and cause an immediate knockdown paralysis in insects.
Despite their rapid toxic action; however, many insects are able to metabolize pyrethrin
quickly. They do the break down the pyrethrin quickly. After brief period of paralysis
these insects may recover rather than die. So, this is the one thing because you know the
some insects, you can say many insects they do break down the compounds, and they do
recover because this make a initial knockdown or the paralysis of the insects and some
insects they do break down the compounds.
So, to prevent this, what you do to prevent insects from metabolizing the pyrethrins and
recovering from the poisoning most of the products containing pyrethrins also contain
the synergist that is PBO piperonyl butoxides. So, this is used in case of the pyrethrin
insecticide, so that the insects cannot breakdown this pyrethrins and this PBO there is a
piperonyl butoxide synergist that is used to increase the effectiveness of the pyrethrine
insects, without PBO the effectiveness of pyrethrines is greatly reduced.(Refer Slide Time: 07:19)
And how can prepare the formulations of this pyrethrin? This pyrethrum powder is made
with a dried ground flowers. The flowers are dried and ground, and to make a liquid
pyrethrum extract mix 20 gram of pyrethrum powder with 10 liter of water; that means, 2
grams per liter of water. So, in a sprayer having 10 liter capacity, 10 liter water, so, 20
gram of pyrethrum powder can be used, add a soap to make the effectiveness to make the
substance  more  effective  for  it  sprayed  on  the  crop  canopy  and  it  can  applied
immediately as a spray. And usually when you go for spraying the spraying should be
done in the afternoon hours.
So,  that  this  should  not  be  thus  the  spraying  should  be  effective,  otherwise  it  do
breakdown very quickly. For best effective this is applied in the evening. Pyrethrum can
also be extracted by using alcohol. This is how the pyrethrum, let say 20 gram of
pyrethrum in 10 liter of water or say 2 gram in one liter of water and with some soap
mix, so that we can make the effective spray of the liquid solution.
So, these are the processes; obtain the flower heads, mix the flower heads with hot water,
allow to stand the for 1 hour, strain off the flower heads, then add the soap powder and
mix, then pour the mixtures into a spray bottle and you can spray directly in on the crop
canopy.(Refer Slide Time: 08:53)
So, this is about the pyrethrin. Then the rotenone, rotenone is an insecticidal compound
that occurs in the roots of  derris species in Asia. And several other related tropical
legumes species from the roots. So, we can extract this rotenone.
 Currently the main commercial source of rotenone is  Peruvian lonchocarpus , which
often referred to as cube root. So, cube roots are the main source of the rotenone.
Rotenone is extracted from the cube root in acetone or in ether. The most rotenone
products  are  made  from  complex  resin  rather  than  from  purified  rotenone  itself.
Alternatively, the cube root may be dried powdered and mixed directly with an inert
carrier to form an insecticidal dust.
So, cube roots like you are doing this say neem based product, either the neem leaf neem
pulp  neem  neem  seeds  like  the  roots  can  be  dried  the  cube  roots  are  that  is  the
compounds  rotenone  present  in  the  cube  roots.  So,  cube  roots  may  be  dried  and
powdered and mixed directly and can be also can be as an insecticidal dust.(Refer Slide Time: 10:07)
Mode of action of rotenone: Rotenone is a powerful inhibitor of cellular respirations. So,
this cellular respiration the process that converts nutrient compounds into energy in the
cellular levels.
So by inhibiting the cellular  respiration so, that affect the conversion nutrients  that
energy the form of energy. So, that way it can uptake the population of the insects. So, in
insects rotenone exerts it is toxic effects primarily on nerve, and the muscle cells. So,
causing rapid cessation of feeding and death occurs several hours to few days of after
exposure.
 Rotenone is extremely toxic to fish, so the this is often used as a fish poison, in water
management programs is to kill the fish the rotenone is used. And rotenone works by
interfering with the electron transport chain in mitochondria. It produces oxygen free
radicals in mitochondria, so, which can damage the DNA and other components  in
mitochondria. So, that way it can inhibit the population of the insect pests.(Refer Slide Time: 11:21)
Then the other one the nicotine; the nicotine is a alkaloid that derived from tobacco,
Nicotiana tabacum  and other Nicotiana species. So, nicotine contents around 2 nicotines
constitutes let us say around 2 to 8 percent of the dried tobacco leaves, that has nicotine.
And the insecticidal formulations generally contain nicotine in the form of as a nicotine
sulphate is around 40 percent.
The mostly effective against minute soft body insects like aphids, white flies, fruit tree
borers, termites, cabbage, butterfly larvae. So, these are the tobacco plants. So, which
can be used for the production of nicotines as a tobacco, different type of tobacco is a
bidi tobacco, cigar tobacco, chewing tobaccos or the hookah tobaccos. So, this tobaccos
can be used for the nicotine production.(Refer Slide Time: 12:13)
The mode of action of nicotine; so, in both insect and mammals, nicotine is an extremely
fast acting nerve toxin. So, this is  a nerve toxin compounds.  So, it competes  with
acetylcholine,  the  major  neurotransfer,  neurotransmitter.  The  acetylcholine,  the
neurotransmitter; so, it competes with the acetylcholine by bonding the acetylcholine
receptors,  at  the  nerves  synapses  and  the  causing  uncontrolled  nerve  firing.  This
disruption of normal nerve impulse activity results in rapid failure of those body systems
and that depends on nervous nerves inputs for proper functioning.
So, in insects the action of nicotine is a fairly selective.(Refer Slide Time: 13:08)
And the other one citrus oil; so, the crude citrus oils and the refined compound like
limonene and linalool are extracted from orange, and other citrus fruits. Limonene a
terpene, that constitutes about 90 percent of crude citrus oil. And is a purified from the
oil by steam distillations. Linalool, a terpene alcohol and is found in small quantities in
citrus peel and in over 200 (Refer Time: 13:43) other herbs, flowers, fruits and woods.
Terpenes and the terpene alcohols are among other major components of many plant
volatiles or essential oils. Essential oils are the volatile compounds responsible for most
taste and the scents of the plants say.(Refer Slide Time: 14:01)
So, how the mode of action of this say limonene, or you can say linalool.. The actions of
this compounds limonene or linalool is a insects are not fully established or not fully
understood. Limonene is thought because an increase in the spontaneous activity of the
sensory  nerves.  And  this  increases  the  heightened  activity  that  sends  the  spurious
informations  to motor  nerves  which is  located  at the  central  nervous  at the central
nervous system the motor nerves, and results in twitching lack of coordinations and
convulsions.
So, that is way that sends some spurious information to motor nerve that located in the
central nervous systems. So, that may cause the irregular contradictions or the reflection
or the muscles and that makes the shaking of the body this convulsion the shaking of the
body. The central nervous system may also be affected resulting additional stimulations
of  motor  nerves.  The  massive  over  stimulations  of  motor  nerves  leads  to  rapid
knockdown in the paralysis. Adult fleas and other insects may recover from knockdown;
however, unless limonene is synergized by PBO. So, that is like this pyrethrins also this
is also the synergist PBO is also used in case of the insecticide, so that they could not
break down the compound.(Refer Slide Time: 15:42)
So, in addition to this, as the plant based products, the you can see the, as we have
discussed the cow is a integral is an integral part of organic farming. So, how we can use
the cow based products, in preparation of the natural pesticides the natural bio pesticides
can be produced by using cow dung or the cow urine, in addition to the other plant based
products.
Ah. So, for example, the using the green chili and the garlic in cow dung and they are the
cow urine, you can prepare the products which can be used as a spray that control the
insect pest many the several the broad spectrum of insect pest and diseases, in addition to
supplying the nutrition or the nutrient requirement for the crop growth and development.
The formulation is the 100 liter of water, 10 liter of urine 1 kg green chili 500-gram local
garlic powder.
By using 100 liter of water with 10 liter urine, 1 kg green chili, 500 gram of garlic
powder, it can be kept for boiling. After boiling, then filter the solutions and keep for
fermentation for one week. So, after that we can go for the spraying directly on the crop
field. And it can be sprayed regularly once in a week. So, that it can control the broad
spectrum insect pest and diseases.
So, as in organic farming, the we are we can cattle is a part of the integral component of
the organic farming or the cow, it is an integral part of organic farming. So, cow dung
and cow urine. So, that are that has a tremendous effect on controlling the harmful insectpest and diseases. This cow dung has a very good insecticidal properties. So, using the
cow dung and the cow urine is the cow urine, like the 100 liter of water with 10 liter of
urine, 1 kg green chili and 500 gram of garlic, this can be prepared farmer they can
prepare in their own field own you can prepare and can use and there is hardly any cost
is involved for this process.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:14)
 And the other one using the neem and cow dung and urine together, you can see the 100
liter of water, 5 liter of urine, 5 kg neem leaves and 5 kg cow dung. So, they are mixed
together. Because the neem leaves that is a chopped neem leaves and the cow dung is
mixed together then leave for fermentations for one week. After one week this can be
filtered and can be sprayed directly in the crop field. So, this way this also this can
control of the organic control also many pest and diseases. (Refer Slide Time: 19:03)
The other formulations; see the seed treatment. So, when you go for a seed treatment,
how organically without using the synthetic pesticides, synthetic fungicides we can go
for seed treatment using the cow dung, cow urine and water? So, say water 20 liter, desi
cow dung 5 kg, desi cow urine 5 liters, and lime 50 grams; these are ingredient can be
used for seed treatment.
5 kg cow dung, 5 liter of cow urine and 20 liter of water they are mixed together. Then
make filtration this one. With the filtrations are 50 gram of lime then it can be applied to
the seeds seed can be treated with the solutions. So, that it can. So, seed bond is just like
fungal diseases can be taken care.(Refer Slide Time: 19:59)
The soil treatment see the for the water. We can have the 200 liters of water with desi
cow dung 10 kg, desi cow urine 5 to 10 liters, jaggery 2 kg, flour of any pulse that is 2
kg, handful of soil from farm or forest. So, (Refer Time: 20:26) with 2, 200 liter of
water. So, these are mixed together 10 kg, 10 kg cow dung 10-liter cow urine, 2 kg
jaggery 2 kg pulse flour and handful of soil. So, this pulse flour has a food materials for
the growth of the beneficial microbes, jaggery also and the soil is also soil is added there.
So, this mixture we can make a filtrations, then you go for the fermentations. And this
can be applied with the irrigation water to the crop field. So, it can treated because by
doing that, this can be the crop field can be irrigated with this solutions. And this can be
prepared farmers himself can be can prepare in their in their own in the home and the
materials are all availables and this because the cow urine and the cow dung jaggery and
the pulse flour.
So, by doing so, by applying in the field, we can we are supplying the many nutrients
like the macronutrients, micronutrients required for the crop, along with so many micro
the beneficial microorganism there (Refer Time: 21:36) the process fermentation process
many beneficial microorganism they also release in the field and they can. So, they can
affect  the  harmful,  they can  control  the  population  of  any harmful  insect  pest  and
diseases. And doing that one as your we can by doing. So, regularly if you can spray this
one, in the field using irrigation water.So, there you can minimize not only the fertilizer requirement the nutrient requirement as
you are not going for any synthetic fertilizers. So, by doing so, by organic way in
addition to the compost applications, this way you can also add nutrient to the soil that
can enrich the soil status, that can improve the soil status soil quality at the same time we
can protect from a many pest and diseases.
 So, here in this lectures as we have discussed the level c, that is a botanical pesticides, or
the use of the by preparing the formulations by in the farm farmer can prepare himself in
the formulations, by the local way, using either the chilies garlics or the neem leaves or
the neem seeds by powdered neem seeds or the chrysanthemum dried flowers. Those
things can be can be grown can be grown in the field or those things can be collected,
and they can be used preparation of this biopesticides or the botanical pesticides for
controlling many type of pest and diseases in the crop field.
 So, as you see if you go for the because as I discussed from the very beginning, the
concept of organic farming that is a minimum or the no use of the of farm inputs. So,
recycling of the on farm the farm resources whatever available and using the local way
by having the cows in the farm house by using the cow dung cow. Cow dung is a you
know that is a very effective as insecticidal properties because it has a high insecticidal
properties like cow urines also, they are very valuable for the for the farmers for the
agricultural purpose for controlling a broad spectrum insect pest and diseases.
 So, by this  lecture  I think, you  will be able to make  the formulations  of the bio
pesticides,  microbial  insecticides.  Especially  the  bio  pesticide  from  the  plant  based
products can be prepared that can be in the farm itself, and that can be used in the farm
regularly. So, unlike the synthetic pesticides, they can be used once in a week. Either the
neem based products or the cow dung local based products as we have shown here. They
can be done they can they can be prepared and used once in especially we advise to use
this in the evening hours.
So, that especially for the pest and disease purposes, because in the sunlight most of the
bio based products they breakdown in the days sunlight, should keep them away from
sunlight it can be used in the evening hours or the evening hours to protect the pest and
diseases. Effectively with this I complete this lecture thank you thank you very much. So, by doing this by local way, by using local resources having the cows cow dungs,
cow urines, neem or the green chili garlic, even the as we discussed chrysanthemum
flowers. Or the Nicotiana tabacum  from tobacco. So, the formulations can be prepared
and that can be used the less cost as a cost that can as compared to the chemical
pesticides or chemical synthetic pesticides, the cost is very, very minimum or we can say
we can say very low cost, because everything is available in the farm except few items,
like jaggery and pulse flour which has to be purchased only very less amount. So, the
farmers can minimum cost he can control the insect pest and diseases.  So, it is there is
some precautions that are to be followed.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:00)
So, use of the plant extracts, some botanicals may be dangerous for humans and they can
be very toxic to natural enemies. So, nicotine for example, derived from tobacco plant is
one of the most toxic organic poisons for humans and other warm blooded animals. So,
pyrethrins are not poisonous for humans and warm blooded animals.
So, before a new botanical pesticide is applied in large scales. So, it is effect on the
ecosystem should be tested in small field experiment. So, do not use botanical pesticides
as a default option, but you need to test this one. So, before applying the small field
experiment, do not have direct skin contact with the crude extract during the process of
preparation and applications. And contact with plant extracts should be avoided in the
eyes. So, make sure that you place the plant extract out of the reach of children andduring storage. So, wear the protective clothings. So, while applying the extracts. So, you
should protect your eyes mouth nose and skin.
Ah then wash your hands after handling the plant extract. So, this is precautions for a
insecticides and pesticides. So, before use you should be very cautious and after also
used you should follow some of the procedures. So, that you can keep yourself free from
any adverse effect of the even if the bio pesticides. 
So, this lecture you will be able to learn the usefulness of the or the extract some process
of the botanical pesticides and their formulations and how this can be effectively used as
a dose and also time of applications so that you can take care of the pest and diseases
very effectively, ok.
Thank you very much.