Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 29
Introduction on transition to organic crop production
So, I welcome you to the lecture 29, Introduction to transition Introduction on transition
to  organic  crop  production.  So,  before  this  we  have  discussed  about  the  organic
management  of  crops,  how  we  can  grow  by  nutrient  managements  or  the  pests
management, land preparations in general for the as a general for crops. And, specifically
we have discussed for the cereals, pulses, oilseeds and vegetable crops, so also plantation
crops. This lecture we will go for the planning, especially when somebody goes for the
organic farming, how can plan organic farming and before planning he has to a as a
process of planning; if you should know how can convert from conventional farming to
organic farming, from the conventional farming to organic so the transition periods. 
So, before the product is sold as organic products as a as a branded as organic. So, he
needs to go for the transition the farm has to go for transition from conventional to
organic. So, what is that transitions? And so, this lecture we are discussing and what is
the transition, time sequence transitions and the make a plan, how you can steps go for
the transition, so that we can you can have a proper way of the organic farming. So, you
can have the you can sell your products, you can sell your produce as a organic products
or you can certify you can get certified as a organic product(Refer Slide Time: 02:04)
So, the question is why transition to organic? So, these things also we have discussed the
preliminary classes you go for though why organic. Then that is what why transition to
organic because studies of farmers participating in the or the practicing the organic
farming for many years, found the some of the common reasons common the problem
they are  facing.  So, that  they want to  convert to  organics. So, as  we in European
countries or see the Australia’s there is a huge conversion from the conventional farming
to organic.
So, India; there is a scope and there is opportunity there is a proper market of organic
farming. So, we can convert; farmers can convert to organic farming. So, the reason for
conversion is so, say effect of chemicals on health we have discussed because of the
using chemical fertilizers or the chemical pesticides that has direct impact on the health
of the human being; as many of the disease they are regulated by the food what we take.
So, how can control the food quality by using the organic way of farming? You can have
a better quality of food, so that we can have better health. So, because of health problem
and next is the effect of conventional farming on soil quality and soil conservations. So,
this is also because soil qualities deteriorating, there is a degrading soil quality over the
years, use of the chemical fertilizers, heavy use of the chemical fertilizer and pesticides.
Not only soil quality, the groundwater quality also treated and also the environment is
also polluted due to use of the chemical. So, how to by avoiding the use of the chemical
fertilizers or chemical pesticides by convert into organic, we can maintain a good soilhealth. Soil health they building with organic carbon, good organic carbons organic
carbon having the soil having higher organic carbon, that increases the cation exchange
capacity of the soils having higher cation exchange capacity.
That means, that makes the plant available nutrients increasing and also that is accessible
to the crops for the better growth and development and also that you have a better air
quality, good air to breathe having organic farming. So, that is the one problem because
of the conventional farming  because, that is degrades  the soil quality and also soil
conservations soil is getting eroded; either the water and wind erosion because of the bad
quality degraded soil quality. So, that need to protect using the organic farming.
And next is dissatisfactions with the conventional farming practices; that means, the
farmers the how say dissatisfaction of farmers with the conventional farming practices?
Means in India also we can see use of the chemical fertilizers so, the yield has reached
plateau. So, there is no further scope of enhancing yield, but at the same time we need to
increase yield because to feed the growing populations, at the same times shrinkage of
land, land area is getting decreased year after years.
So, you have to increase the productions as I say double the productions by 20-22 to feed
the growing population. So, use of the chemical fertilizer is not going to meet our
requirement, meet the demand of the productions. Then we need to somehow the do
some  other  practices,  other  way  technologies  so,  that  the  production  level  can  be
enhanced  from  the  limited  area.  Then  decline  in  the  family  farm  and  the  rural
communities because of the intensive use of chemical fertilizer pesticides. So, that is
made one of the reasons then opportunity to improve the farm profitability.
By doing organic farming, if you can have a better quality of the produce; that means,
you the either the fruits, vegetables and also that say we will discuss about integrated
farming  concepts.  That  means,  the  you  have  the  integration  of  many  components
together not only the crops, you have your field crops, you have your vegetables like
vegetables and you have the fruits. And, in addition to crops we will have the livestock’s,
where you can get milk and also meat, fish and also the composed as integration of this
farming systems, where there is a possibility of having the higher income for a farm
family. So, that is what we are going to the transitions why do why the farmers areinterested to convert their land to organic because, of the reasons have cited some the
reasons is applicable for all over the national and also the international importance.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:48)
When you go for the transition, the considerations for transition to organic systems we
will keep those things in mind those points in mind. Organic crop systems can be more
labor and management-intensive than conventional cropping systems. So, because you
know incase of the organic farming to protect the crops from the weeds, pests; especially
for the weeds, we need to follow many physical methods or the mechanical methods for
the weed control and very regular practice of those methods, so that we can keep the crop
free from weeds, similarly for pest and diseases.
So, somehow as the technology intervention is starting at the very poor incase of the
organic farming. So, as say a labor consuming and also the time taking process in case of
the organic farming as compared to conventional farming. Keeping ahead of weed just
discussed  weed,  insects  and  disease  problem  through  this  observations,  monitoring,
identifications and timely response is the most efficient management strategy organic
production system.
So; that means, as you are going for this fully organic time that the as such you discussed
too many the organic farming system itself is a preventive measure for many weeds,
pest, diseases. In addition to these we have to control some of the practices like label
seed of the pest management. In case there is a that there is a population of the many pestand diseases, then you have to go for label seed botanical pesticides, the extract from
many of the plants. So, that can be used in regular interval to keep the crop free from
many pests and diseases.
Then transistor to organic farming and text time and patience; of course, depending on
the farming system, the crops produced and the transition approach, it takes can take a
three to five years. Specially for the when you go for a conversion or transition from
conventional farming to organic farming usually after 3 years; that means, 36 months the
product can be sold as an organic product. So, before that when you go for transitions,
but before that 2 years it can be sold as a transition to organic; not exactly as a labeled as
organic product only. The 36 after 36 months; that means, the third year the crops grown
that can be sold that can be labeled as organic product.
But the preceding years; that means, 24 months or the 2 years crops those can be labeled
as transition to organic not exactly the organic. Crop yields may decline during the initial
transition periods until a balance in the system is reached, but with time the yields will
rebound. That means, the during transition periods as we are not applying any chemical
fertilizers, you are doing fully organic way. So, there are some crops the yield may not
be attained as of the chemical fertilizer, there may be slightly decline in the yield.
So, the farmers should be or the manager should be prepared to about the loss of yield,
but this yield can rebound with time. Because, you know if you see soil fertility, till the
soil fertility gets build up then the yield can be maintained from organic farming same as
of the chemical farming. You know the soil there are the carbon pool that is very
important for maintaining the soil fertility or the health of the soils or meeting the
nutrient demand of the crop. 
So, the building a carbon pool there are mainly the labile carbon pool as you say and
stabilized carbon pool. And, this a labile carbon pool that is supply nutrients in the
regularly  each  and  every  year,  that  comes  from  the  recent  addition  of  the  organic
residues to the soils.
But the stabilized carbon pool it takes longer periods to build and stabilized carbon pool
it may take around a 10 years or more than 10 years to build the stabilized carbon pool
and the soil physical properties is influenced by the stabilized carbon pools. And that
mixes holistic soil improvement as a physical properties and chemical properties. So,after the stabilized carbon pool is buildup then this soil is able to supply nutrients from
the stabilized carbon pools, carbon pool. So, during that after that periods you minimize
the use of organic residues and soil is capable enough to support the nutrient demand of
crops from this stabilized carbon pool.
But it will take some time after maybe, it may take sometimes in tropical climate like us,
it may take 10 years or more to build the stabilized carbon pools, where for which the
yield can be same as of the chemical fertilizers. That means it is a time taking process, it
takes some time to have the same yield from the organic farming as of the chemical
farming. Some vegetables and fruit crops are easier than others to grow organically. For
a successful transition, to begin with crops that are easier to produce organically, it is a
very important point. When we are going for transition to organic agriculture usually,
what  type  of crop we should select  that  is  very important  at  the  beginning  of the
transitions.
So, during the beginning of the air transitions we should select the crops that require less
of nutrients. If you select crop requires high of nutrient demand as the organic fertilizer
is not able to meet the nutrient demand of the crop, being a slow release pattern then
there is a loss in the yield, the farmers suffer a loss at the beginning of the year. To avoid
those losses, we can have the crops  require less nitrogen, so that  the yield  can be
maintained as good as the chemical fertilizers. This is very important because organic
farming what type of crop you should choose at the during the transition periods, at the
beginning transitions. So, that yield or lost can be substantiated because there is there is
no loss in yield by having the crops of that groups, they require less nutrient.
 Then after gaining experience begin adding the more difficult crops in subsequent
season because, one be at the beginning years you grow the crops of the less nutrient
demanding. So, as you progress with the transition periods then you can add the crops of
the high nutrient demanding. So, during that period the soil fertility somehow is build up
and we can maintain the yield of the organic farming, somehow as good as the chemical
farming. Because, those crops have high nutrient demanding those crops can be selected
at the later stage of transitions in case of the organic farming.(Refer Slide Time: 13:36)
And the transition approach, how you  go for transitions? So, one is called gradual
transitions;  that  means  we  are  also  discussing  where  one  class  of  inputs  is  a  say
withdrawn at a time, slowly discontinuing the use of synthetic inputs while introducing
organic management practices in the system. That means, not fully withdrawing the
chemical farming, chemical fertilizers, especially as a fertilizer is concerned. So, for
those crops like you know cereal crops those are high nutrient demanding crops.
If you go for the fully organic farming fully organic nutrient managements then you may
not able to maintain the yield as good as chemical fertilizer. In those cases you can
gradual transition means so, you can have 50-50; that means, 50 percent of nutrients
supplied through organic and rest 50 percent to near through chemical fertilizers. So, that
the nutrient demand of the crop can is made to have a production as same as a chemical
product.
Maybe you can have a higher production as compared to chemical fertilizer, if you go for
the integrated nutrient management. And, slowly as a soil gets build up slowly you can
reduce the dose of the chemical fertilizers and you can convert fully to organic system
that is a gradual transition as you say. So, this approach requires a longer transitions
time, but can minimize the yield loss during the conversion. So, in this case we will have
to go for the longer periods not exactly as you say 3 to 5 years because minimum
transition requires 3 years. So, in this case you can go more number of years, you canadd more years as you go for the slow transition or the gradual transition to organic
systems.
And, if you see the as the management practice if you see the field; so, in a farm
depending upon the farm area whether you want to convert this whole farm to organic at
a time or you can go for the part by part conversions. So, we can go for the one field at a
time so, that means a part by part. So, it involves using organic management practices on
a portion of your  farm converting to organic production part by part overtime. So,
instead of converting the whole farm to organic we can divide the farm into maybe four
parts or depending upon the farm size four parts. And, first part can be taken care of the
transition to organic and the rest three parts can continue as conventional.
And the first year, second year again second part can be taken into the transition to
organic and rest two parts can continue as a conventional. So, likewise gradually we can
we can convert the whole farm into the organic. So, that the best approach instead of
going for the at a time from the beginning we should not convert jump to organics for the
whole farm. We can divide the farm into several parts, many parts and each part you can
convert to organics and after few years the whole farm can be converted as a organic
systems.
So, the open the one field at a time by part by part conversion is better as compared to
the conversion of whole farm. Because, whole farm conversion you are you may not
sustain the loss. If there is a loss there will be huge loss in the yield to the farmers, if he
goes for converting the whole land to organic at the beginning of the year. So, instead of
that you can go for the part by part conversion. So, economy loss can be compensation
compensated from this chemical farming. This approach provides the opportunity to gain
experience  with the organic  production  methods  on a more  managing  skills, before
converting the entire farm and minimizing the risk. So, this is very important when you
go for the organic conversion.
So, better to go by part by part instead of having whole part to organic systems. So, there
is a whole farm where the use of all synthetic inputs is discontinued, the entire farm from
at the beginning. So, that is the, but the risky approach because farmers may not sustain
the financial loss by converting the whole farm into organic. Rather if you go for the part
by part so, this will be a better alternative.(Refer Slide Time: 17:48)
What is the net transition what is the transition periods? So, as you see the for the land to
be eligible for organic certifications, prohibited substances must not be applied to the
land for a period of three years immediately preceding harvest of the crop. If the crops
which you are targeting planning to be labeled as organic product or to be sold as organic
product; so, before three years of that products the land should not have any chemical
fertilizers or pesticides then only then that product can be labeled as organic products.
So, minimum three years is required for transitions or conversion from the conventional
a product to the organic product. So, growers with little or no farm experience will find
the transitions to organic somehow may be difficult. A primary consideration is the need
for technical product information’s. As the as with the new business, there are many
factors  to  consider  to  ensure  the  success.  So  that  means,  so  when  you  go  for  the
transition a strong business plan ensures a sound approach; a business plan describes. So,
such questions when you answer, when you go for the business plan, a transition to
organic then this questions the persons, the manager should keep those question in mind.
Who you are? What you plan to achieve? What are you are going to produce? How and
when you expect to get started? How you will overcome the risks involved? And what
are the estimated returns? So, these questions when you ask before making a plan or
going for the transition plan or having a set of mind that we are going to convert our
farm to organic conversion to organic transition to organic. So, these are the questions orthe business plan if you go business plan the when you go for the management; so, there
are four pillars of management as I discussed.
So, that means, if you  are making  a plan crop planning like any management  any
business industry, agriculture taken as industry modes; how it can be profitable? So, for
that for management you have the four major components; one is one of the resources,
technology, market and institutions. These four are the major pillars of the management:
resource, technology, market and institutions. So, this four when you consider these four
pillars of management then you will have a business plan or the plan of the as organic
farming or the conversion. And before that you have ask the questions, who you are,
what competency, how you can take up challenge?
How you can convert? What knowledge your that means, what knowledge you have on
organic farming? Whether you have sufficient knowledge for converting your farm to
organic farming? So, this management require resources, technology; technology means
technological know-how. How the management crop management, crop planning, the
selections,  rotations,  one crop after  another crops, input  management  and the plant
protection measures, land types, so, whether that technical competency or the technical
knowledge we have enriched? So, who you are? So, that questions must be asking, must
enriched and you have the technology, your equipped technology, then resources mean
you should have the resource. That means, of course, the field is the main resource what
field you have, the weather is a main resource. What weather you have and also plant sell
resources, from where you can get the funding for doing that one? Once a technology,
resource, then go to the market that that links to planning what market is there, which
crop you have to produce?
What is your plan? Then, why the market? Where you have to sell it? Because, you
know  farmers  they  are  mostly  our  farmers  because  with  farmers  their  economic
conditions are very poor, because, you do not get a proper income for the farmer because
they do not get a proper market for their produce. Because, they do not get the real
benefit, whatever the selling the benefit goes to the third party or the persons who are
involved in the marketing channels they too get the benefit; farmers they do not get the
real benefit. So, to have a proper output or the proper return from the farming we should
know the market and market potentials where to sales, at the market where do you sell
your produce.So, that we can have a higher return and same thing also we need a proper institution
which can so, which can provide the feedback knowledge, the technological support or
the know-how consultancy timely time during the production practices. So, this four are
really important and before that you should if you ask the questions, then you have to
gather the information’s on these four major pillars of the management and that will help
you to go for the organic crop management.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:53)
So, there are some steps how you can go for the organic standard, if you see what the
standards of organic standards. The land must be managed as organic for 36 months I
have discussed, prior to first organic harvest and during the last 12 months  of this
transition periods, it must be under supervision of an organic certification body. So,
when you are applying for the organic certifications of your product so that means, 36
months  is must for the transitions and last 12 months, this should be under proper
supervisions of the organic certification body.
The goal of the enterprise must be for a complete transition of its productions. Parallel
productions of the same product are not allowed in case of the if you are going for the
organic certification for a particular product; so, that product should be grown only
organic during transition period through parallel production means organic and the non
organic should not be followed.(Refer Slide Time: 23:52)
And the production must have distinctly-defined a boundary; that means, if you go for
the transition you are not going to converting a whole farm to organic at one step. If you
are going by part by part then there is a proper boundary between the organic plots and
non-organic plots, that is a buffer zone. Buffer zone should be created between the
organic and non-organic. So, the length of the buffer zone should be minimum of 8
meters. So, between buffer the buffer zone length should be minimum of 8 meters, if you
are going for the part by part conversion of organic, inorganic or the conventional to
organic farms.
So, between the conventional farm and organic farm at least 8 meters buffer zone should
be there and these 8 meters you can use the crops or any maybe permanent hedgerows or
crops can be can be done, but without application of any fertilizers or anything. That can
be grown as a control plot, no application of fertilizers or pesticides as a control. So, that
can be in the buffer zone can be utilized for growing those crops. So, that so this much of
length because to avoid the any movement of the water and nutrients from the or the
pesticides from the chemical farming to organic farming’s.
So, at least 8 meters buffer zone should be there between organic and the chemical plots.
Production units cannot alternate between the organic and non-organic randomly. So,
that is one of the limitations when you go for the organic certifications or the organic
standard that should just carry. So, if you go for the step transition how we can go for thetransition? So, first as we discussed we should gain the knowledge, we should have the
knowledge, what type of knowledge we need, the step transitions. That means, the we
already we have discussed because somebody farmer or manager going for the transition
he  should  be  equipped  himself  the  knowledge,  he  should  have  know  the  gain  the
knowledge and the needs for the field productions on farm processing and market of the
crops.
Then set the goals, learn the organics standards, how to how to go for conversion
minimum time that requires and the transition periods from the conversions. Understand
the  difference  between  the  previous  production  experience  and  your  expectations
organic.  What  assets  and  resource  are  needed  for  transition  of  your  farm?  Use
consultants or the seek advice from the experienced peoples on these sectors. Do not
underestimate the knowledge gap. In many cases it will take several years to do the
appropriate research. So, you have to enrich yourself, gain the knowledge, you have to
equip equipped yourself about the organic and techno farming technology; so, that you
can and take the job.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:37)
Then make a plan so, you can have a plan organic standard require an “Organic Plan”
outlining the details of transitions, productions, preparations, handling, and management
practices. So, update the plan annually and include a record keeping to ensure that
product traceability. In many cases the plan becomes the major part of the application oforganic certification. When you go for the organic certification the plan is required, we
should have proper plans.
Starting from the land preparations or you are making planning and up to the harvest or
the post-harvest the plan should be documented properly. So, that this can be used for the
certification process and then make a good plan. So, that includes the as a crop rotation
as you discussed as you discussed earlier. So, crop rotations they part of the organic
farming and the third one that determine the how the crop will be marketed; the market is
very important as we discussed. Because, if you do not know where to sell your output
so, you do not plant it. So, that is very simple.
So, when you go for the business plan or a make a profitable organic farming approach
profit as a profitable plan and then this case we should know where is our market, where
to sell our produce. If you do not know the market so, better not to plan the crop. So, the
plan should set a reasonable expectation for normal situations and also, we have an
alternate plan. So, in case of that we can we can if some changes you required, that can
be also taken care to accommodate any the changes due to weather or the conditions. So,
there should be some alternate solution then you should have the land also.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:08)
So, this is the selection of crop we will discuss also the next class what type of a crop we
should choose in case of planning. So, usually as we have discussed so, this slide talks
about the land with crops, what type you should choose. So, usually as we discussedfrom the beginning of the transition periods, we should choose a legume crop or forage
crops; those crops they required less of nutrients.
So, that so there will be yield loss will be minimum or no you can say because those
crops require less nutrients, if you go for organic and incorporating adding the problem
transition periods. So, there will be no loss in because there will be nutrient requirement
is less, you can get the same yield as of chemical farming and that can more over that can
build up the soil fertility.  So, this is where the land management if you go for the
transition periods.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:00)
Then the inputs what type of inputs you need, specially go for these organic seeds or the
planting  stock  must  be  available.  If  not,  if  organic  seeds  planting  stocks  is  not
commercially available, the following points may be permitted with the documentation
that  organics  seed  is  not  available;  the  seed  grown  only  with  the  substances  in
accordance with the organic standards. And non-organic untreated seeds and planting
stock that can be used. Non-organic perennial planting stocks may be used provided such
plants have been maintained in accordance with organic standards for at least one year
prior to harvest of the organic products.(Refer Slide Time: 29:46)
So, these are the some of the points to be considered when you go for the organics. Then
as per the you make a plan of organics, as you go for the seed selections and the lands
and before that I say you are planning; that means, you should know what time, what is
your goal, who are you, what is your knowledge, what is your goal and make a proper
plan and document and that should be documented. And, in that case if you go for
organic farming with all steps following minimum 36 months required for transition
from conventional to organic and last 12 months should be under proper supervision of
the certification body; that means you need to apply for organic certifications.
So, submit the complete application and fees for the organic certifications, then there will
be a to the certification body. So, the initial review of your applications, after the review
then initial review letter comes, request for any clarifications or list the records to have
ready for inspections. So, when the team visits for inspections. So, that make a list then
the inspector is assigned for your farm. Then the date is also fixed for inspections,
inspection  day  and  on  that  inspection,  report  received  back  to  the  office;  after  the
inspection the report is received then, if the report goes for the review.
So, final review and the certification decision is taken and the decision letter that gives
the  reminder  or  possible  questions  or  items  still  needs  before  the  decisions  or  the
identifies any areas of non-compliance if applicable. So, that is also mentioned in the
decision letter, if there is any further information required information maybe sort. Thenafter that following certificate may be issued, everything goes well as for the organic
standards then certification is issued by the certifying agency or the it may ask for the
pending for pending further information or denied if information is not received. So, this
is the process if you go for the organic farming; so, you need to apply for the organic
certification and that that goes to certification process finally, you can get a certification.
This is how the transition periods during transition you need to apply for the organic
certifications and the last 12 months of the transitions; so, there will be inspections
proper supervisions by the certification body. And they are satisfied with the all the
norms of the organic standards, then we can get the organic certification. With this we, I
close this lecture.
Thank you.