 Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
 
Lecture – 21
Introduction to Organic Crop Management
So,  I  welcome  you  for  the  lecture  21  that  is  the  Introduction  to  Organic  Crop
Management. So, in this lecture we will be discussing about the Crop Management
practices  that  the  crop  production  technology  and  using  the  way  of  organic.  So,
especially for this lecture introductions, where we discussing about the land preparations,
how can prepare land for the organic farming and the planting techniques for specific
organic farming and nutrient management.
So, this will be basics, may be this is very generally followed for many crops especially
for the field crops. And when you go for the next lectures, we will discuss crop specific
organic management that ensure the climatic requirement for specific crops. This is the
planting technique for crop specific and also the nutrients and the management and plant
protection measures.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:25)
So, coming to this lecture like land preparations if you think land preparation organic
farming specially tillage. So, as we have discussed the earlier lectures, we will follow for
the conservation tillage,  this  stubble mulch  tillage,  minimum  tillage,  or zero tillagepractices are for the organic farming because it enhances soil fertility, it restores the soil
carbon helps in carbon sequestration also increases the infiltration of rainwater in soils,
that protect the soil from the erosions either the wind erosions or the water erosions. 
So, by doing so, this practice  of the conservation  tillage  or the zero tillage  or the
minimum  tillage  technique  that  is  for organic  farming.  So,  this  tillage  operation  is
confined to areas where the crop is being planted, specially the row zone tillage and on
the tillage operation is performed only the rows where the crop has to be planted as
shown in the pictures, you can see these are the areas where the crop is to be planted
where the tillage operation is done or the inter row areas where the planting is not been
performed that is left as fallow. And the stubbles are also left on the soil on the soil
surface the inter rows and areas. And through this the soil environment is less disturbed
thus maintaining the soil flora and the fauna. And this provides the proper drainage,
proper root movement so that you can take for the better water and nutrient uptakes and
also that provides proper aerations for the roots. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:03)
So, this if you go for the planting technique, so, for this organic farming we usually
recommend go for the broad bed and furrow system of planting. So, there are ridge and
furrow, flat bed plantings and the broad bed furrow is one of the suitable technologies,
most convenient technology for farming systems not only organic farming all the any
farming system we do should go for the broad bed and furrow systems. I will discusswhy what are the advantages because it is a bed width should be as you have see here
bed width may be around 1.5 to 2 meter and this is shown in picture, 180 centimeter, the
bed width and this is the broad bed and this is the followed by a furrow and the furrow
width is around 45 centimeter and depth is 20 centimeter. The purpose of making the
broad bed and furrow in that way it controls soil erosions can be checked either through
water and also having a furrow here this increases the infiltration of water in soils
specially for the dry land farming dry areas also.
So, this can serve as a in situ water conservations and water recharge otherwise there
could be runoff loss. And this is having furrow or having a gap specially the gap after the
bed of 1.5 to 2 meter having a gap around 45 centimeters or the 60 centimeter furrow
width. So, that also makes aerations, the movement of air. So, the crop can get the better
aerations and also that helps in the better interceptions of the solar radiations. So, this
helps in the improvement in the earth increase in crop yield.
So, besides having this furrow also having the better aerations and the better interception
of the solar radiations that also minimizes the incidence of many pests and diseases. So,
as you see in the picture this is a broad bed and furrow. So, this crop is grown up four
rows is a bed, followed by the furrow systems, again the four rows in the bed followed
by the furrow. 
Likewise, if you see the maize crop you were growing the maize crop you have the bed
spacing 75 centimeter followed by the furrow of 60 centimeter. Similarly, for other crops
can be grown I can show you how is done for the maize crop having a broad bed and the
furrow systems. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:35)So, if you make a broad bed followed by a furrow and if you are growing maize crop
maize is a row crop and the wider spacing crops. So, maize plant, 2 rows of maize and
the spacing between the maize row, this is around 75 centimeter and this one the spacing
between the furrow width this is 60 centimeter. And this spacing between the furrow and
the first row this is around 7.5 centimeter.
So, in this case, if we use the spacing between this furrow and this furrow this spacing.
This is 75 centimeter in the between the two rows of a maize and 7.5 both the sides 7.5
into 2 that is 15 centimeter, 7.5 centimeter this side also 7.5 centimeter this side 15
centimeter and 60 centimeter is your the furrow spacing. If you take this furrow also half
from this side and half from this side that becomes 60 and this becomes total 90 plus 60
150 centimeter.
So, this becomes  150 centimeter  from this  to this and as you  see the spacing also
between the 2 rows of maize you can see. So, if you have another row of maize like this
side, another row of maize seed, maize plant, this will have 7.5 centimeter and this is
your 60 centimeter plus, this is 7.5 centimeter that becomes also 75 centimeter 60 plus 15
that becomes 75 centimeter. So, having a furrow after two rows of maize crops and this
supports irrigation of course by even provide irrigation the furrow area.
So, that there should be horizontal seepage of the water movement that can support the
meet the irrigation requirement of the both the rows and having a furrow here also, thatcan act as a what is a in situ water conservations and infiltration of more water into the
soil and that that provides a space.
So, that the aerations for the crops and that through the better aerations that minimizes
the pest and disease incidence and moreover the that is a better interception of solar
radiations. And of course, this can provide the movement for the farmers can move in
these furrows for any spraying operations or any intercultural operations or the fertilizers
top dressing can be done so, that the farmers can be passes in this area.
This can be changed for different type of crop suppose you have to take the cabbage or
cauliflower, in that case also the in case of the maize wider row crops we have the
spacing around 75 centimeter. If you go for the other crops like cabbage this is the
furrow and here you can have the 4 rows of cabbage the 4 plants can be here, the spacing
between each plant may be 50 centimeter. So, this spacing is 50 centimeter and the here
it maybe 10 centimeter and this side is also 10 centimeter the boundary side and this for
this maybe 45 centimeter.
So, total spacing here comes around 50 into 3 if you see from the from one furrow to
another furrow this distance this one 50 into 3; 150 centimeter and 10 centimeter both the
sides that is 20 centimeter. And the furrow width is 45 centimeter and total come 150 20
70 plus 45 that is a 215 centimeter from one furrow to another furrow.
So, having the broad bed and the furrow systems so, that has a multiple advantage that
can support the irrigations, the and that can support the water conservations and that can
provide the better environments for the crops. And if you see that there is a because, the
amount of land that is used for making furrows and the because that gives the yield
increment that can be compensated for the land loss.
So, so that is what the broad bed and furrow mostly technique is recommended for any
type of farming for a either organic farming or even if conventional farming having this
furrow systems that improves the that increases the growth and yield of the crops provide
besides the making other facilities for the irrigations and the water conservations.
So, this is the planting technique for the organic farming. So, this broad bed and furrow
can be can be followed in a organic crop productions by which we can ensure a better
yield and we can have a conservation of the natural resources.(Refer Slide Time: 13:00)
So, next come to nutrient management, so, after planting the crops then we usually go for
the  nutrient  management  because,  nutrient  is  essential  for  the  crop  growth  and
development. So, what is nutrient management? Nutrient management implies managing
all nutrient sources just say fertilizer, organic manures, waste materials, soil reserves,
biological nitrogen fixation and biological bio fertilizer is a in such a way that the yield
is not jeopardized, yield is not lost.
So, there is a improvement yield with a minimum loss of nutrient to the environments so,
that we can ensure higher nutrient use efficiency. The basic the focused objectives of
nutrient management to have a better yield and how we can use all possible sources of
nutrition, you can see what is available in the soils as a native soil fertility and from the
source of mineralization, and source of organic manure organic matter present in the
soils or the additions what we are applying a source different sources; may be organic
sources you are using bio fertilizer or maybe the fixation from the as a biological N
fixations.
 Looking at this we can make such a management that so, there is less use of the external
sources at the same time yield is maintained or improved better yield with minimum loss
of nutrient to the environment so, that you can have a higher nutrient use efficiency. So,
there are some criteria followed for the nutrient management that is a Arnon criteria in
1952. The Arnon, the scientist he proposed the three criteria for the can say what are theessential nutrients for the crop growth, which nutrients you can say highly essential
elements means it is required for the crop growth.
So, criteria one says the deficiency of the element in a question results in failure to
complete the life cycle of the crop; that means, so, without the element the crop cannot
complete life cycle. That means, crop cannot perform the growth and development in the
absence of element then that element is known as essential element. If such element in
the is not present in the soils and without its presence and absence crop cannot complete
life cycle then that element is known as the essential element.
Second  criteria,  deficiency  of  element  in  question  can  be  corrected  by  supplying
particular elements; that means, the deficiency is specific in action that mean to say. So,
if the crop suffers from nitrogen deficiency so, the this can be recovered we can take the
crop can recover from nitrogen deficiency by applying only and only nitrogen not any
other nutrient. That means, that says as deficiency are specific in questions; that means,
the deficiency of one element cannot be replaced by another element then, that element is
known as the essential element.
And the third criteria, the element must extend its effect directly and growth and the
metabolism of the crops then, you can say essential element. So, that is what so, these are
three criteria of essentiality they what you say the element essential. So, if you see the
plant nutritional compositions, if you see the content of the plants if a plant tissue, I have
to dry this, oven drying this content almost 60-90 percent water and rest is dry matter.
And of the dry matter the most important constituents you can see carbon, carbon is
around 40 percent and oxygen are also equally 40 percent. Hydrogen is 10 percent or
lower than 10 percent and rest is your inorganic elements as you say essential elements
the less around less than 10 percent.
 (Refer Slide Time: 16:41)So, looking at this what are the essential elements if you see in the crop for the crop
growth and development there are two types of nutrient nutrients say; macronutrients and
micronutrients. Macro macronutrients requirement is higher for the crops, the quantity is
higher we say as a macronutrient. So, their requirement is concentration around 100
microgram per gram of dry matter, for micronutrient the if the content in the plant is
either 100 or around less than 100 microgram per gram of dry matter that you say as
micronutrients.
So, accordingly, we have these are the nutrients the carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. So,
the uptake by the crops usually carbon, hydrogen, oxygen crop takes from the aerial
atmospheres.  So, the  carbon dioxide  from  the atmosphere  and  the hydrogen  or the
oxygen is supplied from the water or from the air in the in the soil as we irrigate the crop
can  take  the  hydrogen,  oxygen.  So,  we  do  not  externally  take  care  of  the  carbon
hydrogen oxygen for the crop though because, the essential the major constituent for the
for the crop dry matter carbon hydrogen oxygen.
So, rest are which we do supply the aim the management practices from the micro
micronutrients or the macronutrients the application is essential for better growth and
development of the crops. So, these are listed under the macronutrients like nitrogen,
phosphorus, potash, calcium, magnesium, sulphur, their requirement is higher for the
crop growth and development, as compared to the micronutrients they are the iron,
manganese, zinc, copper, boron, molybdenum and chlorine. Usually, if you go for the
growth and development better biomass, higher biomass production the macronutrienthas a has a great roles for increasing the biomass of the crop or the growth of the crops or
the yield of the crops like a nitrogen, phosphorus, potash or the calcium, magnesium and
sulphur, but you think of having the better quality.
The good qualities secondary metabolites formations, in that case the micronutrients pay
play a major role for enhancing the better quality of the crops, iron, manganese, zinc,
copper,  boron,  molybdenum,  chlorine.  So,  in  a  so;  that  means,  the  essentiality  of
nutrients; the nutrients are needed for the crop, growth and development and accordingly
the these are the nutrients and these are the forms.
For nitrogen the ionic form the plant can take either the ammonium form or the nitrate
form; for the phosphorous mainly the mono calcium phosphate that is your H 2PO4  that
ion is taken up for crop for potash K similarly potash, calcium, magnesium, sulphur and
the micronutrients these are the ionic form which are preferred or which are usually crop
taken ionic form.
So, as  you  discussed  earlier  class  also  class  also,  whether  you  apply the  chemical
fertilizer or organic fertilizer. So, those has to be converted to ionic form, in case of the
organic fertilizers or chemical fertilizer by hydrolysis incase of urea hydrolysis converted
to ammonium form and the nitrate form later nitrate form. In case of organic fertilizer it
goes  under  mineralization,  the  organic  matter  has  converted  to  ammonization  then,
ammonification and finally, it is available for the for the crop plants so, these are the
forms of the nutrients.(Refer Slide Time: 20:03)
And you can see the what is the functions and deficiency symptoms of the nutrients in
crop plants. So, you have listed the only the macronutrients, nitrogen, phosphorous,
potash, calcium, magnesium, sulphur. What is the function in crop plant crop plant and
what are the deficiency symptoms? If you say the nitrogen the component of many
organic compounds  that is the ranging from protein to nucleic acids and this is an
integral part of chlorophyll and associate with leaf greenness.
So, leaf greenness and the protein and the nucleic acid formations and the chlorophyll
contents that is influence by the regulated by nitrogen content in a crop plant crop plants.
The deficiency symptoms if there is less nitrogen in the soil then, there may be stunted
growth because, nitrogen leads to the better growth of the crop better bio mass higher
biomass. So, deficiency of nitrogen that may have the stunted growth and see the crop
growth may not takes place and yellowing of flower leaves because, nitrogen is a mobile
element in the plant.
So, if there is any deficiency symptoms though nutrient present in the older leaves, they
translocate  to  the  younger  leaves.  So,  the  usually  the  deficiency  symptom  is  first
appearing in the older leaves like a yellowing of leaves then, this is a in special for the
cereal crops, it can reduce the number of tiller formations. Because, when you go for
fertilizer application you will apply at the basal or the tillering, if you do not apply the
fertilizer during the best time at the time of planting or may maybe 10 days 15 days afterthe planting then, there will be reduction in tiller formations if the soil has N deficiency
nitrogen deficiency the crop does not get sufficient amount of nitrogen.
Similarly, if you see the phosphorous the phosphorous usually the function is the energy,
the energy transfer and protein metabolism that is regulated by the phosphorous. And
this is a associated with increased root growth and early maturity phosphorous that
including the root growth better root growth happens, if there is the soil has the required
amount of phosphorous for the crops. Then there is a proper and the after-root growth
and also the maturity also there is a less phosphorus it may regulate it may affect the
maturity of the crops.
So, the deficiency symptom you see the phosphorous this is also a seen in the older
leaves  and  say  new  leaves  say  that  becomes  the  a  dark  green  dark  green  due  to
deficiency of phosphorous. And root poor root system also stunted growth like nitrogen
also phosphorous contributes the growth of the crop, the biomass of the crops.
If the soil has deficit phosphorous as per the need of the crop then, there will be poor
growth or stunted growth of the crop. Potash, the function of potash this potash is a
activator of many enzymes that is a imparts disease resistance in cereals and also drought
resistance in many crops.
So, having a potash because enzymes responsible for a for the biochemical processes in
the plants. So, that they are activated with the potash and also this is a good thing potash
because, they having more potash in soil the crop can escape the dry condition the
drought conditions can be can be escaped. And this is a function and if the deficiency
symptoms usually you see the marginal burning for the leaf tips starting from the leaf tip
the burning of the leaves that is due to the potash deficiency.
Calcium; usually responsible for the cell divisions and if there is deficiency of calcium if
the deficiency appears in the growing tips and the tip of the plant let us say growing
point die and curl and new leaves become white if there is a deficiency in calcium in soil.
Magnesium; like nitrogen this is also component of chlorophyll and there is if there is a
deficiency of magnesium then, there will be interveinal chlorosis that also appears in the
older leaves like nitrogen, nitrogen you have the full chlorosis of the leaves.For nitro for magnesium the difference magnesium, magnesium will have the veins
remains greens, but interveinal area that become chlorosis. I will show this one this
sulphur; that is associate with the chlorophyll formations and the sulphur containing
amino acids and if there is a deficiency of sulphur then, there will be chlorosis of
younger leaves. So, you can see this one what is the symptoms of nutrient deficiency,
either this as interveinal chlorosis that is due to magnesium.
If there is the magnesium deficiency is there, the vein remains green, but the inter vein
areas become yellow or the whitish color that says as interveinal chlorosis that is due to
magnesium deficiency. But if you see the nitrogen deficiency the whole part will become
yellow, the entire leaf portion including the vein and interveinal  area that becomes
yellow that is due to nitrogen deficiency.
And if you find some necrotic spots on the leaves so, this may be due to zinc deficiency
is very common for necrotic spots you can have and are yeah most probably zinc or the
copper may have the necrotic spots on the leaves. And that tip burn; burning of the tip
are the starting from the tip this is due to the potash deficiency, if there is a less in potash
as for the requirement crops.
So, tip burns symptoms due to potash and the chlorosis of veins that is due to of course,
due  to  nitrogen  and  also  deficiency  in  chlorosis  in  vein  as  well  as  the  interveinal
chlorosis. Then purple petiole; so, this is due to phosphorous deficiency if there is less
phosphorous in a soil so, that the leaf the best of the leaf becomes the purple color so,
that is due to that is due to phosphorous deficiency.
 And if see the appearance of the nutrient deficiency in different parts of the plant if you
see is a is a plant. So, is the; so is the older leaves it is an older leaf and if you go to the
younger parts usually, the nitrogen the yellowing of the leaf entire leaves of nitrogen
their symptoms yellowing of entire leaves.
And the phosphorus as a purple color in the leaves and the magnesium the gray the veins
remains green, but the interveinal area becomes yellow and the potash the marginal
burning of leaf tip so, these four nutrient deficiencies appear in the older leaves. They are
quite mobile in the plants so, deficiency symptoms if there is a deficiency in soil so, this
deficiency appears older leaves like the nitrogen, phosphorus, potash and magnesium.
And other nutrient deficiency they appear in the either the middle leaves or in the topleaves like the zinc necrotic spots appear in the middle leaves or the molybdenum or the
copper and the iron, sulphur also as we discussed sulphur this is also chlorosis of the
younger leaves.
If the younger leaves become chlorotic\ devoid of the chlorophyll then, that that might be
due to sulphur deficiency and the growing points. If you see the growing points that is a
die of the growing points they curl and die either due to calcium or the or may be boron
deficiency that happens the tip of the plants they become dying there.
So, this is how we can visualize the deficiency symptoms in the in the crops and the
different parts of the crop plants due to nutrient deficiency there may be some symptoms
may be physiological disorder may be there. But looking at this crops and the this
symptoms we can we can see whether this is a nutrient and disease is different if the
disease so, there is the different symptoms as compared to the nutrient as we discuss the
disease earlier.
So, the purpose of for this lesson that mean; that means, the student if you must be able
to see what do you mean by the for the organic farming, how can go for the land
management. Specially for the organic purpose, the bed technique, the field preparations
you must go for the conservation tillage, either stubble mulch tillage or the row zone
tillage. That means, the area where the crop has been planted only those area to be
ploughed the rest area should be left as such without disturbing and the broad bed and
furrow systems that should be done in case of the farming practices.
So, that it can have multiple advantages besides improving the crop yield and if you go
nutrient management specially you should be careful about the symptoms deficiency
symptoms.  What are the  nutrients  and  what are the  deficiency  symptoms  and then
discuss how we can correct the deficiency symptoms by supplying the required amount
that we will discuss in the next lecture ok.
Thank you very much.