Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 25
Organic Vegetable Crop Management (Cereals Contd.)
So, welcome to lecture 25. So, the continuation of this organic field crop management of
the cereal crops as we are discussing the rice crop, we discussed a previous lecture. So,
specially the planting technique for the rice. So, which planting method is to be followed
for organics especially, go for the young seedling as a wider spacing and a 1 seedling or
2 seedling per hill. So, that can give a better growth and also the better yield so, we at the
same time saving huge amount of the seed requirement and the water requirement.
So now, we will discuss about this nutrient management how to calculate we have to go
for the organic sources. So, as we discussed for potato crops, similarly, for rice crop
based on the nutrient composition of different sources, you can calculate the requirement
of the different organic sources or fertilizer.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:07)
Like  as  we  have  seen  the  potato,  potato  crop,  we  discussed  it  is  a  conventional
vermicompost or the microbial enriched vermicompost, rock enriched vermicompost,
FYM. Thus, the simple FYM, they contain only nitrogen 0.5 percent, total phosphorous
0.2 percent and potash 0.5 percent.To go for the conventional vermicompost as due to release of earthworms, that contains
around 1.3 to 1.5 percent nitrogen and 0.81 percent phosphorous, 1 to 1.1 percent K 2O.
So, by changing your composting process from the conventional farmyard manure to
conventional vermicompost by using earthworm as we have discussed earlier; so, this
increases the quality of the compost by increasing  nitrogen, phosphorus and potash
content.  Because  the  earthworm  secretions  (Refer  Time:  02:03)  and  the  process  of
mineralization that helps having the higher nutrient content.
So, if you go on improving the conventional vermicompost with a microbial enrichment
by using different microbes either the nitrogen fixing, phosphate solubilizing or the
potash releasing microbes as we have discussed also. So, that also helps increasing the
nitrogen and the phosphorus and potash content. So, in addition that, if you go for the
enrichment with specific elements either for the nitrogen or for the phosphorous or the
potash by having the rock enriched vermicompost you can have improvement in the
(Refer Time: 02:45) N P K content.
And using those different sources, we can calculate the dose of rice like potato we
calculated the dose of the sources of manures or the fertilizers, fertilizer based on the
potash contents. In case of potato, here, as the requirement of chemical fertilizers 100 kg
nitrogen, 50 kg P2O5, 60 kg K2O per hectare for the rice crop the cereal crops. So,
nitrogen requirement is higher as compared to phosphorous and potash. So, you calculate
the doses of this organic sources based on the N requirement that is 100 kg per hectare.
So, likewise, as you did for the potato crop so, for the farm yard manure containing only
0.5 percent nitrogen. So, use 20 tons of farm yard manure to meet the nutrient demand of
the crops. But, if we use conventional vermicompost or the rock enriched vermicompost,
they have the similar requirement either 7 tones. This is because of the conventional
vermicompost or the rock enriched vermicompost. There is no change in N content, the
nitrogen content remains same.
So, as we are trying to meet the N demand of the crop. So, that the yield level should be
maintained we do not want to sacrifice the yield in case of organic farming. So, that it
will  meet  the  nutrient  the  nitrogen  demand.  So,  the  requirement  of  conventional
vermicompost or enriched vermicompost remain same, but you go for the microbial
enriched where there is a higher nitrogen content as compared to conventional or therock enriched vermicompost. With microbial enrichment the dose of the vermicompost is
reduced to 4 tons per hectare.
So, the application of this; this can be applied basally (Refer Time: 04:33); that means, at
the  time  of  the  final  land  preparation,  just  before  planting  and  this  say  can  be
incorporated either you can use conventional vermicompost or microbial enriched or the
rock enriched vermicompost. This compost should be well incorporated in the soil at the
time of the final land preparations; that means, when you go for the leveling and then
you can go for the planting operation.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:58)
So, come to the pest and disease management in case of the rice. So, as in general, as a
general application as we have discussed for the organic farming, you should follow
resistant variety which is free from most of the pest and diseases. So, select the resistant
as well as well adapted varieties for specific areas. Then, select the clean and disease-
free seeds because many diseases are the seed born diseases. So, while selecting the seed
should be free from diseases.
And proper agronomical practices like it is the optimum planting time is very important
in case of the organic farming. Because, if you make a delay planting or early planting,
first of all the yield gets reduced because, if in case of rice crop.Suppose, the planting time in followed for the months the kharif rice (Refer Time: 05:49)
around June July 15 or 25 30 the best, July 15 to July 30 we can say best times specially
for Eastern India, you go for the planting. If you go for the early planting, what will
happen?  Because  there  is  optimum  temperature  for  the  flowering  period  also.  So,
temperature may be around 25 degree Celsius the grain filling. So, that increase the
better grain filling.
So, early planting, the crop may not get that favorable temperature for grain filling the
yield will be reduced and late planting the. So, that the temperature become very low,
then also the grain filling becomes poor that causes yield reduction. And moreover, the
changing planting time and the temperature and the humidity that becomes congenial or
favorable for many insect pest and disease, the crop also suffer from the pest and disease
attack by shifting the planting time if you go for the early or the late planting.
So, the crop is also infested by several pest and diseases that causes also yield reduction.
So, that is a planting time is very, very important for the farming practice. That should be
followed very strictly to have a better yield and to have a pest and disease-free crops by
having the optimum planting time.
Then of course, the good water management that can keep if there is (Refer Time: 07:15)
some insect and disease attack the field should be well drained out. The water should be
drained out from the field to protect the crop from the spread of the pests and diseases.
Then, you go for the field preparations at the field preparations, what precaution you can
take for the pest and disease management? Apply a farm yard manure pre colonized with
Trichoderma  harzianum  or  Pseudomonas  fluorescens.  So,  this  microbe  can  be  pre
colonized with the farm yard manure that can be released in the field so, that they can
protect the crop from many insect, pest and diseases.
For the pre colonization of farm yard manure either the Trichoderma harzianum or the
Pseudomonas fluorescens is to be added at monthly interval in the FYM pits around at
the rate of 100 gram per pit and this pits should be covered with the either rice straw or
the sugarcane leaves  and should be watered regularly so, that to maintain  a proper
moisture  for  the  growth  of  the  microbes,  beneficial  microbes,  as  a  Trichoderma
harzianum or the Pseudomonas fluorescens.In green manuring, when you go for the incorporation of green manures in the field,
before at the time of land preparations, before the transplanting of the rice crops at that
times. So, Trichoderma harzianum or the Pseudomonas fluorescens can be also applied
in the field at the rate of 5 gram per litre. So, that can be incorporated in the field also
that can serve a, that can protect the crop from many insect, pest and diseases.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:55)
Nursery sowing time also, when you go for the nursery seeding, because when you go
for rice crop, we can go of the different type of nursery. So, the nursery field, the seed
can  be  treated  with  salted  water  followed  by  Trichoderma  harzianum  and  the
Pseudomonas fluorescens at 5 gram each per kg of seeds. When we because, when we go
for the nursery seeding, because we soak the seeds in water for around 12 hours, 12 20
hours they can be soaked and then it is a packed in a gunny bag or perforated (Refer
Time: 09:31) bags for maintaining a optimum temperature for germinations of the seeds.
So, during soaking there will be swelling of seeds, use the salted water and as this
microbial inoculum (Refer Time: 09:44) as a Trichoderma harzianum and Pseudomonas
fluorescens that can so, that the seed born disease can be avoided. Use pheromone trap
also, in the nursery bed (Refer Time: 09:51) to control the stem borers and that can be 1
pheromone trap can be used per 100-meter square of nursery area and also you can
release that Trichogramma Japonicum or Trichogramma Chilonis around the 150000
parasitoids per hectares to control any insect pest and disease in the nursery bed.So, while going for transplanting; so, before transplanting nursery bed can be treated
with the there is a drenching of Pseudomonas fluorescens at one gram per meter square
of nursery. So, that can be treated 1 day before transplanting for the seedling treatment.
So, that seedling the main field should not be infested with the pest and disease. So, these
are the some of the measures that can be taken cares without waiting for the appearance
of the disease or the attack of insect, pest and disease.
So, (Refer Time: 10:53) or the seedling can be dipped or the root of the seedling can be
dipped in the suspension of Pseudomonas fluorescens that is around 5 grams per litre the.
So, this is either the applying the Pseudomonas fluorescens in the nursery beds before
uprooting of the nursery or after uprooting the seedlings can be dipped in the suspension
of Pseudomonas fluorescens. So, that we can control many of the pest and diseases in the
main field.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:25)
After transplanting, so, till maturity, when the crop in the main field we can use the
pheromone trap and the number of traps around 20 traps per 1 hectare of main field and 1
trap. The area of around 20 meters into 25-meter area and 5 milligram pheromones per
trap and these pheromones  that can be also that can be used week before week of
transplanting for stem borer and replace these pheromones at every (Refer Time: 12:00)
30 days.So, this pheromone trap as we discussed earlier, also this can be used in the main field
for controlling especially, the stem borers. Avoid water stagnation and at the time of the
attack of insects and pest diseases the field should be drained out. So, the if the standing
water the field can be drained out. So, the spread of the disease or the insect pest can be
can be controlled. 
So, in that case, as we are discussing the SRI (Refer Time: 12:30) system, that is a very
good because it is less infested by pest and disease. Because, you do not put the standing
water only saturation is maintained field capacity and saturations no standing water. In
that case there is a less disease and pest in case of SRI (Refer Time: 12:45) as compared
to  the  conventional  transplanting  where  more  than  5  centimeter  standing  water  is
maintained.
Of course, we can spray 10 percent cow urine mixed with Neem leaves or the spray of
cow urine should be started at 25 days after transplanting and subsequently 3 to 4 sprays
at 15 days interval and we can spray a vermiwash, 5 percent vermiwash or vermicompost
tea, compost tea treated with Trichoderma harzianum and Pseudomonas fluorescens. So,
compost tea that is also a very good aspect to have a control on pest and diseases. What it
will do? Also, this supplies many nutrients.
So, the compost around 1 part of compost mixed with a 10 litre 1 kg of compost 10 litre
of water and they are stirred by the mixed like a mixy with a high-speed stirring. And
after stirring for stirring the when the compost is fully mixed with the water, then you
make filtration and this the liquid extracted the filtered liquid; that is known as compost
tea and the tea can be sprayed on the on the canopy and you can make some dilution also
with water may be 1 is to 5 time 1 is to 5 times that can be sprayed over the crop canopy.
And with that, we can control many pest and diseases. And of course, it supplies most of
the nutrients or the foliar (Refer Time: 14:15) spray for the growth and development of
the crop.
And, spray mixed formulation of compatible strains of Pseudomonas fluorescens and
Trichoderma harzianum at (Refer Time: 14:25) 5 gram each per liter of water at panicle
initiations for sheath blight, sheath rot, neck blast one spray to be given at weekly
intervals. So, by using the Pseudomonas fluorescens or the Trichoderma harzianums.
The strains are mixed together and they are 5 grams per liter of water and they can besprayed regularly to control so, blight disease rot, disease and the blast disease of the
rice.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:55)
And coming to wheat crop, because wheat see this is a cool season crop and the average
temperature, during the sowings around 10 degree Celsius to 15 degree Celsius and
ripening or the grain filling periods. As you said, that is a 21 degree Celsius to 26 degree
Celsius.  Wheat  grows  better  in those  areas  where  rainfall  occurs  in  usually winter
seasons and irrigations serve serves the best if the rainfall is below 50 centimeters and
you can provide the irrigation water.
And soil, wheat grows best in well drained fertile loam of either alluvial soils type or the
black soil types the optimum pH range is 6 to 7. So, unlike the rice you go for the
puddling,  but  wheat  does  not  require  puddling  we  can  go  for  the  normal  tillage
operations primary tillage followed by secondary tillage to have a loose soil for sowing
of seeds. So, before sowing, usually when you go for the wheat we go for the (Refer
Time: 15:59) pre sowing irrigations, if the soil is hard, there is less moistures. You go for
the pre sowing irrigation yeah irrigation. So, that the soil can be brought to optimum
moisture content for proper tillage because, if you till the soil at the high the high
moisture content, there will be (Refer Time: 16:20) clod  formations that is not good for
the wheat sowing and with the low moisture content you require the more draft (Refer
Time: 16:25) for the tillage operations.So, there is optimum moisture content that should till, so that you can have a loose soil
not very high if you go for the high moisture content there is higher (Refer Time: 16:38)
clod formation which is not good for the wheat germination, because it can affect the
germination or the establishment of the wheat seedling. So, proper soil moisture content
tillage operations should be performed then seeds sown in row spacing 20 centimeters.
So, after a land preparation usually the depending upon the soil moisture if it is very dry,
you can go for the pre sowing irrigations and then go for the sowing of the wheats.
Or after sowing, we can go for irrigations because post sowing irrigations causes the less
emergence of the wheat seedling as compared to pre sowing irrigations. Pre sowing
irrigation is a preferred than the post sowing because, pre sowing post sowing irrigations,
there  will be  drifting  of the seeds  from one  place  to other  place  and there  maybe
accumulation of water in the field. If the field is not well leveled, that causes the loss of
seedlings or the death of the seedlings that the seedlings may not emerge because of the
water accumulation.
So, that is why, we go for the pre sowing irrigation, then go for the sowing that have a
uniform (Refer Time: 17:45) germinations and the (Refer Time: 17:49) establishment.
And so, in the sowing time you can have the source of mustard crops on the sides of the
field. So, that it can serve as a trap crop for some insect pest that attract. They attracted
towards the mustards. So, main crop can be free from many insect pest and diseases.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:58)
Nutrient management; so, like rice, wheat also that is requires nitrogen in the greater
amount as compared to phosphorus and potash. The dose of chemical for wheat is higher
as (Refer Time: 18:13) compared to 120 kg nitrogen, 50 kg P 2O5, 60 kg K2O per hectare
so. In fact, if you say the especially for the rice as you see, as we as we discussed also.
Rice is grown under transplanted conditions and under flooded (Refer Time: 18:26)
because you are going anerobic (Refer Time: 18:25) conditions in that case as you are
maintaining water. In that case many, of the micronutrients at the saturated conditions or
the standing water as you see many of the micronutrients are available in the rice field.
So, the efficiency of the applied external source nitrogen is very low in case of rice, but
this does not happen in the aerobic crops like a wheat crop where we require the we need
fertilizer. So, without fertilizer without nutrient applications yield will be very, very low.
So, the nutrient dose is 120 kg nitrogen, 50 kg P 2O5, 60 kg K2O per hectare and based on
the similar calculation as we discussed for the potato crop, rice crops also to based on the
N contents point. So, FYM contains 0.5 percent nitrogen and to meet 120 kg of nitrogen,
we require 24 tons of FYM per hectare.
But if you use the conventional vermicompost or the rock enriched vermicompost, the
requirement is 8 tons per hectare. For microbial enriched vermicompost, 5 tons per
hectare. So, to reduce the size of the vermi, the compost material or the organic sources,
we need to go for enrichment. If you can go for enrichment, we can have to apply less
amount which is very feasible we can get the amount less amount at the same time, we
can meet the requirement of the crops to have a better growth and yield of the crops so
on.
So, that is why, the when you go for the organic farming the enriched vermicompost
either  the  microbial  enriched  or  any  specific  nutrients  rock  enriched  to  meet  the
phosphorous  and  the  mica  enriched  compost  or  the  (Refer  Time:  19:54)  dolomite
enriched compost to have calcium, magnesium, mica for the potash and the microbial
enriched forms like nitrogen fixing organisms or the phosphorous solubilizing or potash
releasing  bacteria  that  can  be  incorporated  in  composting  process  to  have  a  better
availability of minerals from nitrogen in the main field itself.
So, that is how based on your enrichment, we can minimize the requirement of the
organic  resources  by from  24 tons  to 5 tons. So, there  is  a huge reduction  in therequirement  of  organic  resources  by  doing  vermicomposting  and  enriching  with
microbes and also other rock minerals.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:34)
See, the pest and disease of wheats, usually the aphids; aphids we can control biological
control  agents  such as  lady beetles  and parasitic  wasps  and or the  fly Syrphid  fly
maggots fungal which are often abundant in say in small grains.
So, we can have the biological control agents. Also, you can use the Trichoderms that
can be released in the field so, that they can control many pest and diseases. In addition
to this, we can go to regular spray of the as we discussed the earlier, the pest and disease
control this cow dung, urine, mix and also, the cow dung, urine, jaggery, pulse powder
that mix and that that formulation can be sprayed regularly at least 7 to 10 days interval.
So, that we can keep the crop free from many insecticides or the insect pest and diseases.
And armyworm also, that is a as you see the armyworm, that is also very common in
case  of  the  wheat  crops.  To  control  this  armyworm,  we  can  go  for  the  biological
insecticides, bio pesticides, that is pyrethrum as we discussed Pyrethrum, how to prepare
Pyrethrums we have discussed earlier class. So, using pyrethrum in 10 days interval and
20 gram of pyrethrum powders in 10 litre of water, in 2 grams per litre of water in case
of the spray at 10 litre of water, 20-gram pyrethrum can be used and that can be sprayed
to regularly 10 days interval to control this armyworm.(Refer Slide Time: 22:09)
Loose smut as say this a for the loose smut or the leaf rust sorry fungal disease. So, the
certified seeds in organic farming as discussed either this loose smut or the leaf rust. So,
as causes due to the fungal disease fungus certified seed, fields are inspected for loose
smut and strict standards are enforced to collect the seeds. That is free from any pest and
disease infestations seeds from field with loose smut should be rejected; should not be
used in case of organic farming. So, using certified seeds is highly effective way to avoid
loose smut.
Similarly, leaf rust organic producers must select variety with a good resistance to leaf
rust  and  select  varieties  that have a combination  of powdery mildew  and  leaf  rust
resistance. So, because the seed the source so many pathogens many diseases in the field
appears to the seeds. So, while collecting seeds, seeds should be collected from a trusted
source and this should be free from the pest and disease infestation those seeds can be
useful so, can you can minimize many pest and disease infest in the field.
In addition, we have to provide you have to maintain in organic farming itself is a
preventive measure as I discussed. By doing so, organics using the organic manures in
the field because of the soil environment changes release of carbon dioxide in the soil
that causes the death of the many pathogenic bacteria.
And because of the because, as we are applying the organics that increases population of
many beneficial microorganisms and there is a feed material, food materials for thepathogens also limited that way also there. There also the population is reduced and
applying this, either the botanical pesticides or the doing organics and as you are the as
itself, organic farming the slow release of nutrients so, that as there is a stress (Refer
Time: 24:09). So, there is a (Refer Time: 24:11) Phytohormone secreted in the leaf
canopy leaf.
So, in that way also, there that is a less infested by the pest and disease so, doing
organics as a preventive and also as we discussed earlier classes, the formulations of the
cow dung, cow urines and the neem leaves or the garlic, chilli extract, the formulation as
we have discussed those formulations can be sprayed because those are inexpensive.
So, those are available with the farming community, having a cow is an integral part of
organic farming. So, having cattle, so, having cow dung and preparing the cow dung-
based  products  using  the  neem  leaf  or  the  green  chilli,  garlic  extracts.  So,  this
formulation can be sprayed regular intervals of 10 days or 15 within 2-week intervals so
that as a preventive measure to avoid the infestation of any pests and diseases.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:07)
So, this if you see. So, by doing so, by doing the organic farming, we are trying to the
meet the maintain the yield level. Because, specially as we discussed the cereal (Refer
Time: 25:19) crops the challenge  to have the same  yield  levels  using the chemical
farming by you have to add the huge amount of organic fertilizers, organic manures to
have the same yield levels as of chemical farming.But, the beginning I can advise at the beginner, to avoid the yield loss, we can go for the;
because,  especially  the  locations  like  tropical  country  and  (Refer  Time:  25:47)
subtropical countries where the rate of mineralization is very fast in that case. So, to meet
the requirement of the crops we need to apply the chemical fertilizers and the organic as
the combinations the beginning of the organic farming.
Later, when the soil fertility gets improved with a continuous addition of the organic
manures, we can slowly reduce the chemical fertilizers and fully convert to the organic
farming. So, there are some research information of the quality of the products of the rice
and wheat using the organic technique, organic production technology. So, there is a Gi
Soo et al 2007 they have reported there are no difference in amylose and protein contents
within organically grown and ordinarily grown rice.
So, they are almost same the other thing that they; however, the superoxide dismutase
that is enzyme that is activity of methanol extract from organically grown rice were
higher than those of the conventional rice.
So, there is a superoxide dismutase that is enzyme which fight against the cancer disease,
like cancer disease as a anti-oxidants. So, those are higher in case of the organically
produced rice as compared to conventional rice. And, second report from Saha et al
2007, they have mentioned, organic nutrient source can perform comparatively as well as
a chemical and physio chemical properties cooking quality of rice if not better in some
parameters than inorganic fertilization.
So, there is a. So, there is not much difference in case of the either chemical properties,
physio  chemical  properties  or  cooking  quality  of  rice.  They  are  same  as  of  the
conventional farming and there is a Mader et al 2007, they have reported high wheat
quality in organic farming is achievable by lower inputs thereby, safeguarding natural
resources this with organic resources, the quality of wheat is better as compared to the
chemical farming, chemical fertilizers.
So, the as you see the cereal crops production, you concerned specially for the tropical
and sub-tropical countries. So, beginning to protect the yield to have a same yield at
beginning, we can go for the integrations of the organic and chemicals. But we should
avoid, we must not use any type of synthetic pesticides that should be banned. Nothings
in organic farming, we should not use any type of chemical pesticides, but as per thenutrient  is  concerned,  to maintain  the yield  levels  at the beginning, being the crop
specific for especially cereal crops, we can we can go for the integrated nutrient at the
beginning. But later on, we can minimize use of the chemical fertilizer. Slowly you can
convert to fields of organic fertilizer so, that we can have a we can maintain the yield
level. We should not sacrifice the yield levels.
But we should not use any synthetic pesticides in case of the organic farming or organic
productions because, having the synthetic pesticides, we can you can determine the
quality of the produce. We want to have better quality and the healthy produce. At the
same time, the production should be maintained. So, go for the organics as a as nutrient
managements go for the organics and as for the formulations we have given.
So, use those organic formulations regularly, maybe 10 days intervals. So, that the crop
should be protected from many pest and diseases and you can maintain the yield levels.
At the same time, we can have a better quality of the produce and at the same time, we
can have a better environment to living. With this, we conclude this lecture.
Thank you very much.