Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 27
Organic Plantation Crop Management
So, welcome to lecture 27; that is Organic Plantation Crop Management. So, we have
discussed about the field crops that is your cereals, pulses, oil seeds and vegetables. So,
though I have given example of few crops for each group, most of the crops of the same
groups the management practices almost quite similar so, knowing one crop we will be
able to manage other crops through organic farming.
So, similarly we will be discussing about the plantation crop there are many plantation
crops are Mango, Guava, Sapota most of the orchard (Refer Time: 00:51) crops as comes
under plantation crops. So, we will discuss here only 2 crops. One is the mango and the
tea those are the perennial crops. Unlike the cereal field crops, they have the different
management  practices.  In  case  of  field  crops,  they  are  seasonal  right.  So,  they  do
complete the life cycles in 3 months 4 months 5 months maximum 6, 6 months. And
there is a rotation after one crop we do go for the other crops. So, whereas, for this a
plantation crops these are all the perennial they can they grow more than and either 2
years 3 years, they can their lives they can continue after 20 years, 30 years, 40 years.
So, for them, because the particular field is fixed for growing this type of crops, how we
can produce the fruits specially and also, we can discuss about mango for the fruits. And
also, the tea as a green tea and the black tea as you can as you take as we drink the tea.
So, how can have organic tea or the organic fruits to have a the regular of course, they
have the effect on the human health having organic foods. How we can manage those
organic foods or organic tea in the field levels. So, that we can have a better output at the
same time when we look for the healthy product.(Refer Slide Time: 02:14).
So, coming for the mango, this mango this is a special the tropical crop or subtropical
crop as you say. This origin in south Southern Asia mango trees can tolerate a wide
range of climatic conditions. So, climatic requirement of mango is concerned. And it has
grown from very hot and humid to cool dry and very hot and arid climate. And for
optimum growth and production the average maximum temperature should be between
27 and 38 degree Celsius. So, most their tropical crops subtropical crops, where it is
mango is grown.
Soil, mango tree grows and produce well on a various wide range of soils. And the ideal
soil texture of mango cultivation under sandy loam or the loam soils which have the clay
content of 15 to 25 percent, but soil with the clay content up to 50 percent also suitable
for mango, where mango can be grown. Mango tree grows best on slight slope, which
enable runoff of excess water and prevents water logging because of the specially the
during the sapling stage at the beginning of the grows. So, most of the fruit trees they do
not sustains the water logging.
So, if you are as you are the sowing time in the time planting time usually in the
monsoon seasons the start of the monsoon periods. So, grow the fruit trees in the sloppy
lands at the raised (Refer Time: 03:47) lands where there is there should not be any water
accumulations even water accumulations for few days, can have very adverse effect onthe establishment of the crop. And also, this grows best in the soil with a pH value of 6 to
7.2.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:07)
 Land preparation. So, as we discuss the land preparation for the field crops there is a as
we discuss the cereals, pulses, vegetable, oil seeds. So, as seasonal crops we go for the
broad bed and furrow I will discuss common way of land preparation, broad bed and
furrow we go for the particular spacing, but for these crops as a perennial crops and it is
a permanent field because the crop can be grown for 30 years 40 years in the same field.
So, we will make the pits and the proper spacing as per the crops. So, pits are prepared
with spacings depending upon the crops and the variety of the crops the spacing the
decided.
 For this mango, the land is prepared usually by ploughing harrowing and levelling is
done. And a gentle slope is provided facilitate proper irrigations and prompt drainage to
avoid harmful effects of water stagnation as we discussed. So, this crop does not sustains
water stagnations. So, there should be the provision for the proper drainage. As you are
planting seasons is in the monsoon seasons for a better establishment because if you
plant the crops on monsoon seasons so the crop can get water from the natural rainfalls.
So, there is no need of the irrigation requirement.
So, in that if there is a heavy downpour or the heavy rainfalls in that case there should be
a  proper  drainage  facility  so  that  water  should  not  accumulate  in  the  field.  Wateraccumulate field will affect the establishment of this saplings (Refer Time: 05:28). After
marking all of the points for the plants pit size the spacing for this crops the wider
spacing 90 centimeter; that means, the width and the length is a 90 and 90 centimeter and
the depth is 90 centimeters. 
So, this pit is prepared, spacing depending upon the crop it can be minimum should be 5
meters. And it can be go up to even if the 10 meters depending upon the crop type the
spacing between the plants in the in the row or the or plants in a in between row.
While digging of pits is essential to keep the top soil and subsoil separately, in 2 heaps
near each pit. So, after digging a pit on the your digging the pits of 90-centimeter 90
centimeter the length and width and depth. The soils are removed and soils are kept as a
layer wise because we can have 2 layers at least the 90-centimeter depth. If you have the
3 layers better is it, it is. 
So, the layers top layers soil should be kept separately and the middle layers and the
bottom layers, the layers because know the top layers are the mostly fertile soils because
they are rich in carbon and because of the fall of the leaves and the microbial activity in
the top layers. And the bottom layers are less fertile somehow because when you grow a
crop usually you will keep the layer of the soil same. And the mango as we making 97
100 pits also will fill the soils and will with the composting the, I will discuss that one
with the compost materials. So, that fill this then we put the soils as per the layer wise
and fill this fill the pit.
So, what is say for this after digging the pit, then you keep the soil separately the layer
wise which can be refilled afterwards after planting. And moreover, the exposing soils in
the summer seasons because the pits are dug in the you can and the summer seasons of
around April may. And the soil can be left open that expose to sunshine. So, the many
insect pest and disease are also killed.
And (Refer Time: 07:32) soil borne pathogens the those are those are destroyed the those
are killed during the exposure to the suns. And the pit is filled with 20 kg farm yard
manure, 5 kg vermicompost and biofertilizers used azospirillum and phosphobacteria
neem cake 500-gram, bone meal 500 gram is used in each pit. So, after exposure of one
month then pit can be filled with 20 kg farm yard manure, 5 kg vermicompost along with
biofertilizers. Neem cake of 500 gram and the bone meal 500 gram they can mixedtogether in the in the pit. And soil can be again replaced as per the layer wise and the pit
should be covered. And this should be the pit should be left as such for at least 15 days
for incubation before planting 15 20 days.
So, you can leave the pit as such then, you can go for applying green manures in the inter
row areas, where the pit can be marked with a stick. And other areas we can go for the
green leaf manuring like daincha can be sown and it can add nitrogen to the field.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:44)
And spacing like the spacing around 5 to 7 meter 5 meter minimum spacing and can be 7
sometimes in mango to 10 meter too, planting materials the mango papaya by graft
grafted  mango  is  the  mango  saplings  (Refer  Time:  08:53)  are  used  for  planting  is
procured  from  nurseries  which  propagated  by  organic  means  because  the  planting
materials they should have the organic material inside for the planting material. Planting
it is done with the onset of the monsoons are usually in the June July periods on this
monsoon onset (Refer Time: 09:12) we go for planting the July to December depending
upon the monsoon availability and the irrigation facility.(Refer Slide Time: 09:22).
And nutrient management, for the mango is concerned. So, we go for the ok. So, when
you fill the pit then the after 15 days the again the pit can be opened. And you can plant a
mango seedling and pit should be covered as such. So, depending upon the layer wise
soils removed same layer can be replaced in the pit. And we can go from after the
planting we can go for the mulching, mulching means mulching materials become bio
mulch usually the nut shells, weeds, grass, wood chips, silage, paddy and wheat straw,
rice  husk,  coir  dust,  banana  sugarcane  leaf  it  see  that  can  be  used  as  a  mulching
materials. 
So, we have discussed already the advantage of mulching. So, this because having the
bio mulch it adds nutrients to the soils, it suppresses the weed growth and increases the
infiltration of rain waters into the soil and also minimizes the soil erosion, that is a soil
conservation.
As I discussed we can go for green manuring. And we can add the bio already apply the
biofertilizer that is the phosphorous solubilizing bacteria and the other azospirillums
during the pit preparations and also soil application during the crop growth periods. And
as far as organic manure is concerned, we can apply organic manures like the 10 to 20 kg
per  tree  per  years.  That  is  either  through  vermicompost,  biodynamic  compost  or
microbial  mediated  compost  the compost should be applied around 10 to 20 kg of
compost  per  tree  per  year.  Even  after  the  plantation  years  this  can  be  continuedapplications. (Refer Time: 10:56) Every year around 10 to 20 kg compost can be applied
for each tree.
Then growing of legume  or green manuring  as inter crop a because you  know the
beginning of the at least up to 2 to 3 or 3 years, when the canopy mango canopy not fully
covered. That inter space area can be utilized for growing leguminous crops, we can go
for the as we discussed you can go for the peanuts specially or you can grow chickpea
depending upon the seasons and the irrigation water availability, we can grow different
crops are the peanut, chickpea, legume crops like pulse crops can be grown in the inter
space  area  so, that  we can  give  a good return. So, without  applying  any chemical
fertilizers thus only through organic way if I apply organic way.
So, inter space area can be utilized for 2 years. We can have a good returns because to
for 2 years the inter space inter row area (Refer Time: 11:55) remains vacant and the
after year 2 to 3 years only the canopy (Refer Time: 11:58) covers when you may not get
good returns but in spite, even you even you have canopy (Refer Time: 12:02) coverage
after 2 years we can grow some crops which does not require the high sunshine, like your
the turmeric and the ginger also can be grown in the shade area, on to have a better return
from this system.
Then mulching after application of you can have the you can the cow pit pat, cow pat pit
sorry, cow pat pit as we discussed last class it can be applied also cow horn manures and
release of earthworms can be done a for a big tree and in followed by followed by the
mulching.
Then need based foliar spraying of biodynamic liquid manure vermi wash or you can go
for the neem seed kernel extract also vermiwash can be was a 1 is to 6 5 times. So, one
parts of vermi wash with the one litre of vermiwash 5 litre of water can be mixed
together can be sprayed, and neem seed kernel extract are around the 5 percent 50 ml per
litre that can be sprayed in regular intervals to protect the crop from many pests and
diseases.(Refer Slide Time: 13:05)
Then coming to tea, tea mango is grown in their flatland, but we do manage (Refer Time:
13:09) for the slopes. So, that that is not water accumulations. Tea usually grown in the
sloppy lands it does not require it does not sustain a standing water tea. So, in hilly areas
usually in case in India, just see the Darjeeling, Assam, northeast area very famous
(Refer Time: 13:26) for tea. In south also we have the tea in the hilly areas and Srilanka
also very good the production of tea Srilanka, China. So, usually in the hilly areas and
cool climates cool climates favors (Refer Time: 13:39) for the tea cultivations where
there should not be any stagnant water.
So, the arrangement in a the temperature, if we see the temperature is around 21 to 29
degree Celsius is favorable for the tea cultivations, but temperature more than 35 degree
Celsius or less than 15 degrees Celsius causes reduction in growth due to affecting the
affecting the process of photosynthesis is (Refer Time: 14:00) affected with very high
temperature  and also very low temperature, having high temperature, more  than 35
degree Celsius also that influence the that affect the quality of the tea because the tea
aroma the aroma is protected in a cooler climate rather than the a dry climates, where the
there is a Darjeeling tea this having into a very low temperature is a high aroma that is a
more tastier as compared to the tea from the yeah from the plane lands in Kharagpur also
we are successful in growing tea, the temperature goes around now 45 degree Celsius
sometimes to more than 45 few days it may be close to 45 degree Celsius. So, in that conditions also we are successful growing and tea the quality though not same
as of the tea grown from the temperate climate like the Darjeeling, but we are successful
having a good quality of tea by having the microclimates. So, we are growing the many
trees like Albizia Lebbeck or the Suppota tree or some of the fruit is a Guava trees are
grown in this. So, that way the microclimate is maintained the temperature inside a tea
gardens remains around 3 degree or lower as compared to the outside during (Refer
Time: 15:12) summer during summers. So, we are able we are able to have the tea
cultivations in a nontraditional area like the Kharagpur as a high (Refer Time: 15:23)
high temperature high temperature condition.
Soil it is able to thrive in a well-drained drained deep and friable and loamy soils,
because know for a well drain soils because they tea does not sustain the standing water
stagnation. So, should be well drained soil and pH is around 4.3 to 5.8 tea prefer to have
a acid soils for it is better growth and the development and better quality of the tea, 4.3 to
5 point less than 6 pH.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:59).
Nutrient management. As you see as a perennial crop it can grow it can continue for 20
year 30 years. So, like also you make pits like mango. Mango has a wider spacing craft,
but tea is a narrow spacing as compared mango. The pit size is around 45 centimeter and
45 centimeter in length and width and 60 centimeter is the depth (Refer Time: 16:19).
And spacing here is around 1 meter into 0.75-meter, 100 centimeters into 75-centimeter,100 centimeter is a row to row spacing and 75 centimeter is the plant to plant spacing in
the same row and this is the size of each pit 45 centimeter of length 45 centimeter of
width and 60 centimeters of depth.
In nutrient dose usually the tea requires and 200 kg nitrogen, 60 kg P 2O5, 120 kg K2O per
hectare as a normal as a medium fertile soil. So, each year we need to apply we need to
supply this much of N P and K for the tea cultivations. And as we are going for the
organic if we go for the conventional vermicompost to supply 200 kg nitrogen per
hectare, it comes around 13 tons per hectare. 
And this and if you go for the initial planting years (Refer Time: 17:13) for the if you see
the  pit  basis  is  it  comes  around  1  kg  vermicompost  per  pit  and  the  spacing  100
centimeters into 75 centimeters. And this comes around 13000 plants for hectare and per
each plant around 1 kg of vermicompost in the beginning of the planting here 1 kg
vermicompost 50 gram of neem cake and 100 gram of bone meal powder can be mixed
together in the pits.
So, same way also you when you go for the planting the starting of the planting seasons.
So, you open the pits in the summer and dry seasons around April - May and keep the pit
exposed for maybe 15 to 20 days so, that the many harmful insect pest and disease can
be killed. So, after that we fill the pits with the vermicompost and neem cake, bone meals
and with the soil has been excavated from the pit soil can be refilled. And leave the pit
for and keep a mark in every pit and the leave the pit for 15 days for incubations before
going for the seedling. So, we after that we can open reopen the pit and go for the tea
seedling planting.
Compost, oil cake, rock phosphate are the main substitute inputs. Those to substitute the
removal of the nutrients have the for the organic farming manure fertilizer given at least
3 times per year after plantation. So, after plantation years from second year onwards this
is the fertilizers as you say the either the compost can be applied the require amount of
compost can be applied in three splits in a year. And this can be applied to the bush tea
bush and can be incorporated in the soils in the soils by loosening the soil. The dose of
manure should be maintained on the basis of the soil status and the crop demand.(Refer Slide Time: 19:08)
Use of botanical pesticides for the tea as you know these a say they as a long-lived
woody perennials and monoculture system you know. So, plantation crops provide a
stable microclimate, and a continuous supply of food for rapid buildup the phytophagous
species that includes insects, pest and disease. So, unlike a field crops this is a single
crop and the perennial crops. So, this becomes a good host for many pests and diseases.
So, tea mosquito bugs, red spider mite, termites, Flushworm, Aphid, Jassid, Thrips and
nematodes are the major pests of the plantation crops.
So, for botanical antimicrobials derived from plants are currently recognized. So, as we
discussed. So, as a biocontrol agent are botanical pesticides there as is biodegradable.
And systemic and eco friendly non toxic to mammals are the thus considered a for the
safe use for the organic farming. And natural compounds are well suited to organic food
production in industrialized countries. 
And can be better roles in protection of the food crops in developing countries as we
have also discussed this one previous class as brief introduction for this natural pesticide,
and some plant-based antimicrobial. So, is a neem products pyrethroids and essential oils
already used to manage pest population large scale in case of the plantation crops.(Refer Slide Time: 20:45)
So, what are the crops can be the botanical pesticides can be extracted some of the crops
we have discussed earlier, but the for this plantation crops use of botanical pesticides
from those trees, we can have the neem, karanja, tobacco and the a rotenone as we have
discussed annona lantana datura and chrysanthemum. So, this is trees is the product from
this this plant can be used for preparation of the botanical pesticides. So, how they are
effective  for  which  type  of  pest  specially  the  neem  is  effective  for  the  root  knot
nematode, and it is and the karanja for the root knot nematode and the helopeltis like a
these are the worms or the moths. 
So, the (Refer Time: 21:31) and the tobacco that is. So, that thrips, scales, aphids and the
looper caterpillars. Rotenone that is a, that work can work against sucking pest caterpillar
and the beetles. Annona that is a helopeltis that is a insect and the datura that can work
against tea mosquito bug and thrips, jassids, aphids, lantana against red spider mites and
the aphids and chrysanthemum against tea mosquito bug, thrips aphids and scale insects.
So, these are the products from this extract from this of the plants, plants can be used for
the many pest and disease control. (Refer Slide Time: 22:19)
How to prepare these products specially preparation if say the aqueous (Refer Time:
22:21) extract of these products. So, first the collection of leaves, seeds or rhizomes from
those plants. So, either the leaves can be used seeds can be used and the rhizomes also
can be used from those plants. Then de pulping and drying. So, this is can be de pulping
removal of the pulps and the, that can be kept for the drying. Followed by remove the
seed coat the upper layer the seed coat in case of the seeds the seed coats have to be
removed. Then you go for the oven dry and make them powder. So, by oven drying,
remove the moistures and this can be powder these the products either leaves, seeds and
rhizomes can be made in the powder form.
And to this what the powder takes 25 kg of this powder. Either leaves seeds or rhizomes
can mix also can take 25 kg add 250 ml adjuvant that uses adjuvant is used to increase
the efficiency of the activity of this the ingredients, are they can be the effective the more
effective adding this adjuvant. And soak in 50 litre of water over nights. So, after that
overnight then extract and filter through fine cloths then add 500 liters of water, spray
the solution in one-hectare area of plantations.
So, this is around you can get the add 500 liters of waters around 25 kg of powders.
Initially you add with the 50 liters of water and soak it a overnight keep overnight. So,
the next morning you can filter it, and the, that can they can you can add 500 liters of
water. And that can be sprayed immediate because you cannot spray for longer periods,it can be sprayed immediately because for the formulations the botanical pesticides. So,
keeping for longer periods it may de compound may be deactivated as we discussed
earlier classes. 
So, as soon as you prepare it can be sprayed and a very importantly it should be sprayed
during  the  afternoon  hours,  because  when  because  in  case  of  the  sun  shines  the
compound maybe also deactivated. So, these are some of the botanical pesticides and can
be extracted from this plant. And that can be used for the garden’s orchards or the tea
gardens to control the several pest and diseases.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:49)
As you see the quality as is the (Refer Time: 24:49) quality of the organic tea, how the
organic  farming  because  the  organic  way  of  nutrient  management  having  organic
farming that can that will affect (Refer Time: 25:01) on the quality. So, we had one
experiment in the tea garden hear in IIT Kharagpur where, we have around 15 acres tea
garden and we are getting of course, the green tea and the black tea produced and
processed here as a green and black tea. 
So, we have seen through a research work as a research scholar’s (Refer Time: 25:29)
experiment where we have divided in a particular area into 4 parts. So, one part we did
not apply anything there is a no applications that is the nothing is applied tea is grown, as
a native soil and they as you see the no applications nutrient source. So, one part weseparated this 1 by providing the sheets like the tin sheets to a depth of around 1 meter
so, that the movement of the nutrients from one plot to another plot can be restricted.
So, one part, no application nothing it the tea was grown as in the native soils without
application of any fertilizer any fertilizers or any external source of nutrients. And the
other part we have applied as of chemical fertilizers, the normal dose as 200 kg nitrogen,
60 kg P2O5 and 100 kg K2O per hectare as a normal recommendation for this soil.
 And  the  third  part  we  applied  only  vermicompost  meeting  the  normal  nutrient
recommendation at the beginning. So, vermicompost as 13 tons per hectare and forth part
we applied vermicompost same as 13 tons per hectare in addition to that also we did
spray vermiwash regularly in the in the field having the dilution of one part of one litre
of vermiwash with the around 5 to 6 litre of water and the vermiwash sprayed on the
crop canopy (Refer Time: 26:53).
And this treatment we did from the beginning of the plantation years. So, after 4 this is
applied for the 4 years continuous. And then the observations were taken as we want to
calculate  the  determine  the  total  contents  of  catechins  that  is  a  polyphenol  at  the
antioxidant presents in the tea catechins and the percentage of increase or decrease in
catechins over the control treatment where nothing was applied.
So, interestingly we can find that the content of catechins. So, there is a component of tea
is at milligram per gram of tea leaves (Refer Time: 27:26) that helps in the controlling
and that as a that helps in having the tea regularly the polyphenols that help to reduce the
periodicals formation of the bodies and also that is a cause of the that minimize the
exposure of human body to cancer diseases, can say a green tea is much better than this
the black tea, but it is a catechins these are some of the antioxidants present tea, tea the in
case of no applications the native soil fertility it was 14.75 milligram per gram of tea by
applying chemical fertilizer the catechin content of tea is decreased, say around decrease
around 50 percent decrease in the catechin content by using chemical fertilizers.
But whereas, if you go for only application of the vermicompost no chemical fertilizers
the contents of the catechin is increased by 11 percent and if you apply vermiwash also is
increased  by 26  percent;  that  means,  know  it  say  that  by  having  the  organic  way
management we can improve the quality and if you see the amount of productions, the
amount of production of the tea leaves from this a chemical fertilizers from the noapplications these are very less very low productions, but the chemical organic and the 3
organics they are almost comparable though the chemical have the higher production as
compared to organic, but the quality wise the organic treated plot have the better quality
having higher content of catechins as compare to the chemical products. 
So, that  is  why we see  the  total  phenol  and the catechinic  contents  of organically
produced  tea  is  vermicompost  or  vermiwash  was  significantly  higher  than  the
conventionally  produced tea.  And this  is  published  in ASAB, American  Society of
Agricultural and Biological engineering.
So,  the  point  is  that  the,  we  the  plantation  crops  there  the  requirement  and  the
managements differs from the field crops and here the as a perennial crop. We can grow
the crops for the longer periods. So, from the very the very beginning when you go for
the pit making for the planting of the sapling, we should take care of the initial nutrient
recommendation management. And after that when the crop establishes then year wise,
we  can  go  for  the  applications  of  the  nutrients  through  organic  either  through
vermicompost or the compost or the enriched compost better you can. 
So, the  you  can minimize  the  quantity  of the required  quantity requirement  of the
compost. At the same time, we can go for the applying the neem-based neem extracts
and also the plant-based extract as we discussed they from the botanical extracts the
botanical pesticides regularly around 10 days (Refer Time: 30:01) or the 15 days interval
or at the beginning of the year. So, so, that we can control many insect pest diseases in
case of the plantation crops and to have a better production at the same time having
organics management we can have better quality, we can have a higher food value for
the better human health.
Thank you very much.