Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 28
Organic Meat Production
So, welcome to the lecture 28, that is Organic Meat Production. So, this is a different
topic. So, this is actually we are discussing about the fruits, vegetables including your
rice crops, cereals, pulses, oilseeds, fruits, vegetables, tea. But how meat is organic? So,
as we discuss the meat as a non-vegetarian. So, we have discussed about the vegetarian
food how we are growing organic way. As a non vegetarians either we can have the
meat, fish, even the milk also. So, how we can have organic meat, organic fish or the
organic milk? So, that is a very challenge actually, it looks interesting actually. How
what  is  a  organic  meat?  And  how  we  can  go  for  the  organic  meat  productions
organically?
And how the organic meat will have the effect on the human health like your organic
vegetables, organic fruits, organic cereals like you have the meat, but that is organically
grown; that means, they are grown organically, the management is a such a way that, we
can we can certified as a organic produce. So now, we discuss the how we can go for the
organic meat productions?
(Refer Slide Time: 01:35)
What is a organic meat? So, if you see the what do you mean by organic meat? What is
required  for  meat  to  earn  the  organic  labels?  We  can  say  organic  meat  or  the
conventional most of we know that is a meat is conventional is meant is meat is a
conventional meat, but how we can have the organic meat.
So, USDA united state department of agriculture passed rules in 2002 that sets guidelines
to be considered for certified organic meat. They include these following criteria; that
means, the for organic meet, the meat has to be certified as organic the cattle are born
and raised on certified organic pasture. That means, the feed material the food material
of the cattle should grown organically. No chemical fertilizer no chemical pesticides
should be used in the pasture, which is used for feeding the cattle. So, that should be free
from fertilizers and pesticides
Second those cattle or the poultry; they should not receive any antibiotics. Then only you
can certify as organic. And they never receive growth hormones, growth promoting
hormones not used in while rearing this live stock or the poultry or the cattle, they should
have any growth hormones. And they are fed only certified  organic grains and the
grasses, because the food as we discussed either the pasture that should be organic no
synthetic chemical fertilizers or synthetic pesticides are used.
Similarly, the processed food if they are you are feeding, the cattle the processed food
also should be grown as organic. Or they should be collected from the organic sources,
because they the places they should grown should be organic way no fertilizers pesticide
is used for the food material, that is used for the processing of the process feed for the
cattle.
 And they have unrestricted outdoor access. Because they have the free locomotion, free
movement should not be confined to a 4 to 4 walls. So, they should have the free access
to outdoor access free to outdoors they have the free movement. So, if they satisfy, the
farm certify or they meet this criteria then the meats produced or the milk produced from
the farm can be branded as organic meat or organic poultry or organic milk also you can
say milk as a milk organic milk.
So, organic meat, poultry meat or dairy products as you say milk from animals that are
given to a given no antibiotics or the growth hormones. And the feed materials they are
because are mostly grown are only grown through organic way. Then only those livestocks or the meat produced from those livestock’s or the eggs or the dairy products like
a milk or the cheese they can be certified as organic. This is how meat is organic.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:40)
So, how do differentiate between the conventional meat, organic meat, natural meat and
the grass-fed meat. So, there is a united state department of agriculture definitions say
conventional meat no definitions. For the organic meat, that is a produced according to
USDA national organic standards. So, organic standards mean, there should not, they
should not use any growth hormones growth promoting hormones no antibiotics.
And the feed material is grown only organics there, without any chemical fertilizer and
pesticides. So, these are the and also the outdoor access free movement. So, the life style
should not suffer from any stress, any physical injury. So, in that way you can say as
organic measure or regulations for the organic meat the meat the standard regulations to
have the organic meat. Natural meat no artificial ingredients minimal processing that can
natural meat and the grass-fed meat. So, there is no specific regulations for the grass-fed
meat.
 Uses of hormones: So, in organic not allowed. No hormones growth promoting hormone
are allowed in organic farming, or the organic meats, but the conventional it is allowed
and natural meat or grass-fed meat. So, this varies there is no proper definition it may or
may not be used. Similarly, the antibiotics is not allowed in case of organic meats, but it
is allowed in case of conventional and the natural and the grass fed it also vary.Feed grown with chemical pesticides and fertilizers these are not allowed in organic meat
productions, but these are allowed for the conventional meat and in case of the natural
meat or the grass-fed meat also they vary.
Necessary to allow the cattle to graze on pasture, conventional meat is only restricted
there is no outdoor access, but in case of organic, it is must. The cattle should have
outdoor access. And in case of the natural no standard normally farmers they do allow
the cattle to graze outside, outdoor access and in case of same for the grass-fed meat also
normally farmers allow the cattle to graze outside.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:55)
And in case of animal confinement, in case of conventional meat production is yes. So,
they are confined to a particular location there is a free movement free locomotion in the
in case of the conventional meet.
But organic meat, so, there is outdoor access only in case there is a weather is not
convenient not favorable they can be indoor. Otherwise they have the outdoor access.
Natural meat, no standard; normally the farmers use to provide the outdoor access and
also same for the grass-fed meat. Meat irradiation; so, that is not allowed in case of the
organic meat or in case of the natural meat. So, there is no irradiations.
Usually  irradiation  is  done  using  the  electromagnetic  radiations  to  protect  the  food
materials from the infestation of the insect pest and to have a longer shelf life of this foodmaterials. But this is because of using the x ray and the gamma radiations. So, this is not
allowed in case of the organic meat or the natural meat. Though there is a it is research
says so this has no harmful effects on the human health still, it is it is prohibited in
organic and the natural meat.
 Presence of GMO that is genetically modified organism, in the food materials this is not
allowed in organic meat or the natural meat, but this allowed in case of the conventional
meat or the sometimes the grass-fed meat also this that vary. So, these are the some of
the characteristic different as we can see the conventional meat organic meat is a branded
as a organic and the natural meat formers because the natural meat or the grass fed meat.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:34)
 So, that say the animal welfare. So, that we will discuss then, what is a mean by animal
welfare? Because we know this is the behavior of the animal. I can tell you once example
in case of the in Kobe, or it is a it is a Japan the Kobe beef is famous worldwide, and also
very expensive. We cannot say exactly organic meat, but this rearing the way of organic
say organic meats are really expensive there.
And this one, they manage the cattle actually in case. While managing cattle, they do not
give any type of pain or the suffering any injury to the cattle. The cattle are grown as
ambient very comfortable and healthy environments.And free locomotion free movement area. At the same time what they do in every
evening or you can say morning also. So, there is some music. So, cattles used to dance.
So, they do play the music and cattle used to dance with the tune of the music; that
means, that type of the environment is provided to the to those cattles, and though that
make them so much happy; that means, making happy, the welfare the animal making
them happy making them free and the meat produced or the milk produced from such
animals, they do not have any type of the stress. They do not have any type of (Refer
Time: 09:58) stress and happy and a stress at any stage also they. So, they free from
stress. So, those meats are rich in quality better quality. And that that is as a branded
those are branded as a organic meat and also very expensive.
So, that is what’s a nowadays  meat produced are being used to animal welfare are
beginning  to  use  the  animal  welfare  methodology.  What  do  you  mean  by  animal
welfare?  Animal  welfare  is  in  organic  meat  productions  or  otherwise  call  for
implementing various guidelines  that includes providing more  space to animals  and
reducing the number of animals per acre, so, having the more space.
So, free movement; so, they can they can bring some type of changes in their in the
behavior of the animals. So, that is required that is required when you go for the organic
meat productions. Provide access to sufficient open fields, water and the food materials;
that means; no stress. Live happily happy living for the animal. So, that is that is that is a
main criterion for this organic meat productions.
So, ensuring holistic food instead of feeding the purely energy rich. So, combination of
foods. So, this is, that gives the better meats as compared to having only a single type of
the single nutrient diets, greater healthcare facilities and reducing the stress levels of the
animal. That is very, very important. So, healthcare’s maintenance healthcares and the
stress animals should not give any type of injury, no pain no stress to animals in case in
if a branding as organic.(Refer Slide Time: 11:34)
On 4 types of freedom of animals, we can say the farm animal’s welfare councils a UK
based organizations as laid stress on 5. 4 types of freedom for animals whether on the
farm or in transit before the slaughterhouse or in slaughterhouse. So, where you have to
maintain this is the freedom for the animal’s freedom from hunger and thirst; that means,
livestock should be given a free access to fresh water source and fresh diet. At every step
in the farm the transit means before slaughter house and in the slaughter house also. This
should there should be free access to food and to water.
Freedom from discomfort; that means, the animals should be given comfort shelter, at
every step, in the farm transit and the slaughter; transit means transportation from the
farm to the slaughter house. So, transit also. So, all steps there should their environment
should be very convenient and very comfortable for them. Freedom from pain injury or
disease; that means, the healthy conditions should be maintained and immediate attention
should be paid to disease and the disorder. So, they should not suffer from any type of
stress, either through pain injury or disease. So, that should be taken care very quickly
and effectively.
Freedom  to  express  normal  behavior;  the  animals  should  be  given  free  space  and
company of their own space as I have an example of the Kobe in Japan. So, they rear the
animals in a happy environment. Animals do live very happily and also; they do massage
in the neck area they make a regular massage the animals. So, that way that bring somechanges in that the physiological behavior of the animals, and the product of this animals
either with the meat or the milk there are the that is the tastier you can say better taste
tastier and also that is a good for health good for health and also that is also very, very
expensive.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:33)
 And the breeds and breeding. The as you see the breeds should be chosen which are
adapted to local condition. Usually we have we avoid the GM genetically modified are
specially the local cows, as organics local cow the milk of the local cow has a better
quality as compared to the milk of the hybrid cow, that has a better health effects in the
local cow we have the better health benefit as compared to the hybrid cow.
Therefore, locally adapted and reproduction techniques should be natural no artificial
techniques should be used for the reproductions.
Then embryo transfer technique is not allowed in case of the organic meat productions.
Hormonal heat treatment is also not allowed. So, very natural way and use of GMO is
also  not  allowed  in  case  of  organic  breeding,  organic  meat.  Feeding,  that  means,
livestock should be fed 100 percent organically grown feeds as we discussed the feeds
should be produced organically.More than 50 percent of the feeds shall come from the farm unit itself. And the or shall
be provided in the regions so; that means, in form. So, whatever we produced in the farm
that can be used for the feeding the animals.
However, in some cases 15 to 20 percent total feed could be obtained from conventional
farms. So, most of the feeds more than 50 percent feeds should come from the organic
sources and moreover that should be produced in the farm itself to have organic meat
production or organic farming. And the use of synthetic growth promoter substances as a
synthetic appetizer or the preservatives, artificial coloring agents, urea, solvent extracted
from oilcake genetically engineered organisms or product thereof are not allowed in feed
for the feeding in case of the organic farming or the organic meat production.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:26)
 Animal health; if you talk of the animal health. So, an important objective of organic
livestock husbandry is the avoidance of reliance upon the routines or the prophylactic use
of  the  conventional  veterinary  medicines.  So,  that  is  the  usually,  avoided  the
conventional  veterinary  medicines  will  not  be  used  in  case  of  the  organic  meat
productions so; however, you can use natural medicines and the natural methods as a
including the homeopathy, homeopathy is allowed.
Ayurvedic medicine is also allowed like the plant-based extracts that can be used. And
the acupuncture also that is a very common because you know the human being also do
acupuncture suppose you have some suppose you see you palm and there is a certainpositions if you press there different positions acupuncture, if you press the swans then
you have relief on your face, and eye and your tooth, you can have some relax on your
face, eye and tooth that make some relaxation.
Similarly, if you see this portion also. So, the knee this portion here also you can have a
press also this can have an effect on your heart, also on your teeth, and your brain. And
also similar like acupuncture that can be that can be used in case of the organic meat
productions the homeopathy ayurvedic and acupuncture that is that is allowed in case of
the organic meat production. The use of conventional veterinary medicines is allowed
when no other non-allopathic alternatives is available. And we cannot cure with the
either the homeopathic medicine ayurvedic or acupuncture fails in that case we cannot
see the livestock are suffering. So, in that case we can go for the conventional allopathic
medicine can be used.
But however, if we you are you are going for the certifying organic products, and this is
the conventional the allopathic medicines that can be used twice in a year. So, if you are
using more than 2 times in a year of the conventional medicine, then your products
should not be certified as organic. So, that should be kept in mind. So, up to 2 times are
allowed because to protect the livestock from the sufferings.
Vaccines shall be used when the disease are known or expected to be a problem in the
regions of the farm, and where the disease cannot be controlled by other management
techniques. So; however, genetically engineered vaccines are prohibited. So, this vaccine
non genetically engineered normal vaccines can be used for a location specific where
there is a specific disease are known to be prevalence in that case the vaccines can be or
vaccines are allowed, but not genetically engineered.(Refer Slide Time: 18:12)
So, if we discuss this one for the general in case of the livestock, if you discuss out
organic cattle rearing for the cattle how you can follow the specific rules and regulations
for the organic cattle. In case of the space allowance as we are discussing there should be
indoor space as well as outdoor space for the organic productions. Indoor area to be
supplemented by outdoor area that is that must be there for indoor and outdoor.
The animals should not be kept in close confinement as it influences both physical and
behavioral issues are changed with the close confinement. Like human being also free
airs  outside  outdoor access  that  have  they better  feelings,  that  make  some  changes
behavioral changes according there is a chemical secretion in the animal body that makes
their meat or the milk that healthier and the better quality the tastier as compared to the
conventional meat.
And the greater space and environmental diversity that permit expression of a wider
range of behavior, that behavior that is a better behavior with the happy living. So, we
have more space and more environmental diversity. So, that gives a happy living and that
has effect on the final quality of these meat or the milk as the product of these livestock.
Then flooring and provision of bedding; so, when you go for the indoor space that
flooring farm  animals  must  be provided  with  the  litters  not this  no slated  flooring
completely slatted floors are not allowed. Only the litters; that means, straw bedding.
The straws can be used on the floor and the animals can have a comfortable sleeping thesleep having a straw bedding rather than having a complete slatted the slatted floor is not
allowed in case of the organic meat production.
 Nutrition and feeding, the cattle especially the grass-based systems. In that case at least
60 percent of dry matter in daily rations has to has to consist of roughages fresh or dried
fodder or silage. Because silage we can make the preservation keep it for longer periods.
So, when for the delevations 60 percent of dry matter should come from the roughages
fresh dried fodder or silages.
So, when you go for the fresh dry matter the grass-based system the fresh dry matter the
fresh grasses are the best. And of course, we have the processed feed, as we discussed
process feed can be used, but those process feed should be grown organically. There
should be the area where there should grown only organic no chemical fertilizer or
synthetic pesticides are not used, only those feeds can be used for the processing or the
process feed can be used for the organic production.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:49)
Human care; in human care, so, the cleaning, disinfections and vaccinations, that is also
should be should be taken care. So, this the houses the animal house should be made
clean, and should be free from any pest and diseases regular cleaning is required then
cattle  reared  in  organic  systems  had  less  liver  and  kidney  disease  compared  to
conventional  system  the report  is  sent. So, having  organic systems  and  the regularcleaning and disinfection and vaccination that also helps in have a better health of this
cattle.
Mutilations; that means, physical injury, so, as we say; so, the animals should not suffer
from any injury, any the act of physical injury, that degrades the appearance or function
of any living body. So, that is a mutilations means the castration or the dehorning tail
docking and beak trimming also in hen, in for the hens you go for the beak trimming, the
beak trimming that causes that brings fear, pain, distress among the animals, the birds
that should be avoided when you go for the organic production.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:59)
 Health treatment the health treatment regular patient careful observations are essentials.
As you see the managing very carefully and the systematic way as organic way standard
organic  meat  productions.  So,  regular  maintenance  the  cleaning  disinfection  of  the
animal house is essential. In order to perform clinical examinations animals showing
disease symptoms has to be separated from their groups.
So, with some animals they suffer from any type of disease they should be removed from
the groups and it should be kept in isolations, so that this disease should not be spread to
other animals. Immediately the animals should be removed from the groups and should
be kept in isolations.And  in  as  we  discussed  in  organic  farming,  phytotherapeutic  and  the  homeopathic
products are used in preference to chemically synthesized allopathic medicinal products
or  antibiotics.  So,  usually  go  for  the  as  homeopathic  or  the  ayurvedic  plant-based
products for the curing for the control of any diseases that can be used.
But in if the use of the authorized substances or the phytotherapeutic or the homeopathic
are  not  effective.  And  if  the  treatment  is  essential  to  avoid  suffering  and  distress
chemical products may be used. So, as we discussed. So, you do not want that to seeing
the animals are dying, that with that we cannot do unlike like crops or something because
it is very live, we can see their symptoms like human being also.
So, when you go for the because they can because you know they can listen to us. So, we
cannot see that they do suffer from disease. So, in that case when the allowed medicines
are not effective for control of any diseases, then we can for the chemical methods the
allopathic methods, we can use, but there is a limitations if the animal receive more than
2 courses of treatment with chemical product within a year, and that the product derived
from that may not be sold as organic. So, if there is a more than 2 times, 2 times a year is
allowed to go for the chemical treatment. If there is a more than 2 time, then that product
may not be labeled as organic product.
So, these discuss some of the management practices for the organic meat productions,
either the poultry or the livestock. Livestock you say how they can be reared; that means,
the all the processes are behavioral issue in the animals we should see that they should
not suffer they should not have any injury they should not go under stress. Always happy
living, happy life, make them the animal house should be clean neat and clean that
should be maintained regularly and there should not be any disease. If any animal any
that is noticed of any disease any disease that animals should be isolated should be taken
out from the group that can be kept in isolations treated separately not in not in the
group.(Refer Slide Time: 25:05)
And these are the management practices as you go for the organic meat we will discuss
some of how the pros and the cons of the eating organic meat and say this is that in
organic meat that reduces exposure to harmful chemicals, as well as growth hormones
and genetically modified organisms and organic meat of course, they are tastier and they
better as compared to conventional meat, organic meat is tracked from farm to plate as
you go to the certification process where somebody applies for organic certifications
then certifications starts from the farm maintenance of the farm.
How the farm is maintained? How the animals are reared? how the animals are treated
for the for the diseases and the food materials everything is a is inspected regularly. So,
that is why the inspection process that goes from farm to plate. So, in that way that is a
much safer that have a health benefits otherwise a chemical. So, they do not have any
regulations on the conventional meat.
Reduces  exposures  to  illness  transmitted  through  animals.  Because  as  they  are
maintained through organically. So, there is less effect of the illness, less effect on the
bad effect on the health in organic meat as compared to conventional meat, but there are
some negatives such that should be more expensive as compared to the conventional
meat organic butcher shops are not conveniently located. Moreover, organic meats are
not usually available at most of restaurants. So, that is some problems with the as a
organic meat.(Refer Slide Time: 26:32)
So, quality; how we can say why though organic meat and brand organic meat is a (Refer
Time: 26:36) organic produced organically has a better some of the research information
you can see how the organic meats organic products has better quality as compared to
conventional meat. So, there was a little difference see the meat quality. So, you could
not find much difference with respect to pH, shear force and the colour organic meat and
conventional meat appears to be same.
But the fat profile varied considerably between production systems and season. That
means, fat means meat fat from organic cattle contain higher concentration of conjugated
linoleic acid and omega 3 fatty acid and had a lower ratio of omega 6 to omega 3 fatty
acid as compared to the non organic meat. So, omega 6 fatty omega 3 fatty acid omega
fatty acid is essential for the, of course, for the health and the linoleic acids that is also
good for the as a good for the health. So, those contents are higher in case of the organic
meat as compared to the conventional meat.
And also the content of dry matters, crude protein, ash, fat and n 3 fatty acids was higher
in organic chicken meat and the also the sensory the panelists suggested organic broiler
meat as tougher and the tastier as compared to the conventional broiler meat.
So, there are information research information, that is that shows that the organic meats
they are of the safer and of the better quality and as compared to the conventional meat.And to have that this has effect on the food quality because as many say linoleic acid
(Refer Time: 28:18) is a good fatty acid.
So, that is good for health that is that is higher in case of the organic meat as compared to
the conventional meat and this dry matter crude protein, ash, fat and n 3 fatty acid, they
are also higher in case of the organic meat as compared to the conventional meat. So, this
have there is a there is a positive effect of organic way of managing, that can that can
have a better quality of the produce and this is the way of managing being having
organic way we can run the products by maintaining from the farm to plate the organic
way
Even if as we say that is a farm transit and the slaughterhouse finally, coming into the
plates. If we manage this organic way of the animals rearing, the better living happy
living of the animals. So, that causes some of the behavioral changes in the animal body
as compared to the conventional farming. And that brings a tastier the meat as a milk and
the quality  of the milk  and meat  has  better  as  compared  to the  conventional  meat
productions. With this I close this lecture.
Thank you very much.