Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 26
Organic Field Crop Management (Pulse and Oilseed Crop)
So, welcome to the lecture 26; Organic Field Crop Management, will discuss here the
Pulses and Oilseed Crops. So, previous lectures we have discussed about the cereals we
have the how we can grow cereal crops also we have discussed about some vegetable
crops like it to for potato, tomato. And today we will be discussing about the pulse crops
and oilseed crops as you know the input managements that differs as per the crops
because some crops require more of nitrogen, some may require more of phosphorus and
some may require more of potash.
So, depending upon the nutrient demand of the crops and the inherent soil potentials or
the native soil fertility we need to manage the nutrients and also the planting also differs
from the crop specific, and also the pest and disease management as per the crops using
organic way, how we can control the pest and disease I can protect the crops from the
loss of yield. So, in this (Refer Time: 01:32) pulse and oil seed will discuss one crops its
arhar as the pulse crop and the peanuts say groundnut, that is for the oil seed crop and
both the crops they belong to leguminous family; that means, say they are the root
noduling, nodulating plants, they do fix their atmospheric nitrogen and more over the
pulse crops they require less of nitrogen, and more of phosphorus.
Because the, if you if you provide the more of nitrogen, it will inter interfere with the
growth and development of the crops by here inhibiting the activity of some enzymes
and  like  the  nitrogen,  Rhizobium,  nitro  enzyme,  nitrogenase  enzyme,  which  is
responsible for the nodulations and the nitrogen fixation in the crops. So, to have a better
nodulations or the better biological nitrogen fixations, from these leguminous crops we
do supply less of nitrogen unlike a other crops like cereals where they require more of
nitrogen. (Refer Slide Time: 02:32)
So, we will discuss about the arhar that is a Cajanus cajan that is a toor dal that is from
arhar origins India and climatic requirement because the this is a pigeon pea that can be
grown  between  the  in  India  14  degree  north  and  28-degree  north  latitudes.  The
temperature ranging from 26 degree Celsius to 30 degree Celsius in the rainy seasons,
and post rainy seasons that is a 17 to 22 degree Celsius during November and March.
The length of growing seasons that the varies from 120 degree Celsius to sorry 120 to
180 days. So, there are the short duration arhars there may be long durations. So, the
duration may vary from 120 days to 180 days. It is that the crop is very sensitive to low
radiations at the pod development stage. As per as soil is a concerned it is a grown well
and wide range of soils varying from sandy loams, to clay loams soils, it does best on
fertile and well drained loamy soil say this crop cannot sustain the water stagnations. So,
as you have discussed many crops, cereal crops, rice can sustain the standing water. So,
on other crops except rice they do not sustain the standing water even for 2 days or 3
days.
So, you need a well-drained soils water should accumulate in the field and these are the
as per the pH is concerned, this saline and alkaline waterlogged soil is unfit for this for
the pigeon pea cultivations, and the optimum pH range is around 5.5 to 7.5.(Refer Slide Time: 04:18)
 The land preparations; so, we have discussed land preparation for the cereal crops,
where discussed land preparation for the you know vegetable crops and like a can say for
the vegetable crops, as the broad bed and furrow systems this types of land preparation
also suitable for this say arhar it is a pigeon pea. So, land preparation for pigeon pea that
requires the at least one ploughing during the dry season, that is a summer season
followed by 2 or 3 harrowing. Summer plowing that helps in minimizing the weed flora
weeds and pest and disease that controlled by summer plowing as we have discussed
earlier classes.
Summer plowing is a as a benefit in controlling the pests and diseases and weeds at the
same time it has also the positive effect in allowing the water, the water infiltrations the
storing the water; water conservations the soil as a in situ water conservation. And well-
drained soil is necessary for good root and the nodule development they root nodulating
the plant, where they do the leguminous and the as a root nodulation. So, some bacteria
they say symbiotic bacteria they took (Refer Time: 05:31) atmospheric nitrogen for this
we need well drained soils, and the light soils better the nodulation of root system.
So, ridge and furrow system are useful for preventing water logging you can go broad
bed and furrow for because we make ridge, it can broad bed and furrow for a system of
planting as we discussed earlier that can be also suitable for the for growing of the
pigeon pea.So, if soil is very acidic conditions, then you can apply a lime at around 2 to 4 tones per
hectares and that can be applied 3 to 4 weeks before sowing to take care of the pH of this
soil. So, you can because you know the nutrient availability from the soil that depends
upon the pH. If pH is very highly acidic or maybe highly alkaline soils the availability of
nutrients so, will be less are the pH comes neutral range. So, many of the nutrients in the
macronutrients and for micronutrients there available on the neutral range around 6.5 to
7.5.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:30)
And the fertilizer management for this say arhar or say pigeon pea we can here also like
cereals we can go for the green manuring crops as a as a part of the organic farming
where you can sow the seeds of the Sunhemp or the dhaincha before sowing the main
crop and when the crop grows around 60 days or the active vegetative stage this the crop
can be ploughed back in the soil. So, they can add nutrients specially for the nitrogen
requirement  can be minimized,  and also, they add phosphorous, potash many other
micronutrients.
So, the like the taking advantage of a monsoon showers so 1 to 2 kg of Sunhemp;
Sunhemp can be sown Sesbania or the Horse Gram, Cow pea or the Green gram, Black
gram that can be grown and in the soils for the 30 to maybe around 50 60 days and can
incorporates the green manure crops in the soils by shallow tilling during the first week
of July, and go for the sowing of the red gram. So, usually the it does not like rice (ReferTime: 07:40) in the growing season we can grow in June July and the land suitable
especially upland conditions. We do not grow the green gram in the lowland, where there
may be water accumulations and it does not require high amount of rain falls like rice
crop like unlike rice, they require they require the rainfall amount is higher.
So, where there is a less rainfall and upland ecosystems which where standing water
cannot be maintained or we cannot have the standing water, in that case we can go for
the arhar crops. So, they are the pigeon pea it can grow well with less water, and also
with the upland conditions well drained soil. And you can go for addition of Neem leaf
or the neem seed manure at 5 to 10 quintals per hectare has been found to be beneficial
not only in terms of increased nutrient supply, it can be it can also have the reduced
problem of the soil borne pathogens and the nematodes. We can go for the liquid manure
prepare from the cattle dung and the cow urine is a key on farm inputs in fertility
management of soils under organic management, as you discussed liquid manure how
can use the cow dung cow urines with the jaggery and the pulse floor mixed together if
we can apply in the soil. So, that it can maintain the fertility of the soils in organic farm.
So, that can minimize the use of the chemical fertilizer.
Specially incase of the leguminous crops, here where chemical fertilizer is not at all used
in organic farming. If you go for the cereal crops to maintain the yield at the cereal crops
as we discussed earlier class, we need to go for the yeah 50 50 as a chemical fertilizer
and organic fertilizer to maintain the yield of the crops. But in case of the legume crops,
where they do not depend upon the more of the nitrogen fertilizers, or they do not have
the much N requirement N requirement for the growth and development.
So, in that case we can fully depend upon the organic fertilizers or the compost or the
vermicompost  can  applied  full  amount  to  meet  the  requirement  of  the  nutrient
requirement crops and to have the productions as good as of the chemical fertilizers
without adding any chemical fertilizer.(Refer Slide Time: 10:05)
And the other hand amrutpani that is a that is a formulation that made from ghee 0.25 kg
ghee, 5 kg honey, 10 kg fresh cow dung with the 200 liters of water. So, that can be soil
tonic can also be used in soil applications.
So, there minimum of three applications first at the time of sowing, second at after 25 to
30 days after a first weeding and then 50 to 60 days of sowing can be applied three times.
So, that you can you can provide nutrient at the same time it can protect the crop from
many pest and disease then foliar spraying of panchagavya that is a cow dung 7 kg, cow
ghee 1 kg, cow urine 10 liters, cow milk 3 liters and the cow curd 2 liters with the 10
liters of water and that can be sprayed at the 3 percent; that means, the 30 ml of this
panchagavya per 1 liter of water 10 to 15 days interval after from first month after
sowing. So, in that case you can control from. So, you can many pest and diseases.
In case of organic farming as a preventing measures we keep on applying this cow dung
based neem based products or you can say chilly or the garlic those products we have we
have discussed previous classes. Those formulations can be prepared and applied as a
preventive measure in regular intervals at least 7 to 10 days intervals so, that we can keep
the crop free from many of the insect pest and diseases.(Refer Slide Time: 11:46)
And if say as discuss nutrient management. So, being a leguminous crop unlike cereal
crops near the chemical fertilizer requirement and 30, 60, 40 kg per hectare of N, P 2O5
and K2O. In case of the cereal crops, the nitrogen requirement was around 100 kg per
hectare. In case of as being a leguminous crop as they fix their own atmospheric nitrogen
through the symbiotic nitrogen fixations the help of the nodulations in the root systems.
So, they require less of nitrogen moreover applying high nitrogen to the crops like a or
any leguminous crop, they interfere with the biological nitrogen fixation they interfere
with the nitrogen enzymes and enzymes presents and also, they reduce the N fixation
capacity.
So, to have a better N fixation as a biological N fixation, we can minimize the we can
apply less nitrogen demand external demand of nitrogen by the crops. But however, it
has a more  phosphorus demand  and also the potash demand.  So, the nutrient  dose
calculation for these sources whether you can go for the conventional vermicompost or
microbial enriched vermicompost or rock enriched vermicompost or FYM. So, based on
the content of the phosphorous this is the column for the phosphorous content based on
the P contents of these sources we can calculate the dose of the source.
So, if you calculate the farm yard manure, it comes around 13 ton per hectare already we
have discuss the process the procedure for calculation of the different sources of fertilizer
based on the nutrient content. Because the farm yard manure that contains 0.2 percent Pand if you convert to you need to convert to P 2O5  because your dose is 60 kg P 2O5. So,
you have to multiply 0.2 into 2.29. So, this may come around 0.46 right 0.46 of P 2O5 total
P is 0.2, but P2O5 can be a can be about 0.46.
So,  total  as  per  requirement  of  phosphorus  that  is  100  divided  by  0.46  into  the
requirement of 60 kg per hectare, this comes around 13 tons per hectare. And if you are
using FYM that is a content less of phosphorus 13 ton, if you go for the conventional
vermicompost that contains around one percent P, it comes around 3 tons per hectare.
And, if you if you go for the microbial enriched vermicompost that contains around 1.3
percent of phosphorus. So, it comes around 2 tons per hectare if you go for the rock
enriched vermicompost it comes around 1 ton per hectare.
So, so, that is why if you go for the enrichment of the vermicompost with specific
nutrients. So, you can minimize the loading of the organic resources, but that we can
dependence on the high volume of the organic resources can be minimized. So, having
the enriched compost so, having enrichment. So, in rock enriched vermicompost, that is a
best suitable for these crops, they require high amount of phosphorus.
And the for the crops like cereal crops, we should have the vermicompost its a microbial
enriched at that contains higher content of nitrogen because the cereal crops they are the
more demand of nitrogen, phosphorus and potash too, but if you among these three
nutrients nitrogen demand is much higher than the phosphorous and potash. So, we for
this cereal crop we should choose the vermicompost that is enriched with nitrogen. And
for the pulses are the can you say legume crops you even if the oilseed crops, we should
choose the vermicompost rich in phosphorus like the rock enriched vermicompost with
the best suited for growing the pulses or the oilseed crops where we requirement of
phosphorus is high.
And if you go for the a potato like discussed that a vegetable crops, that require more of
potassium in that case you have you may have the mica enriched vermicompost can be
enriched in mica, that contains higher dose of potash and that can be suitable for growing
potato or the tomato crop.(Refer Slide Time: 16:03)
So, this is the nutrient management for this arhar, you see the pests and the disease
management say this is a very common pests are the pod borer and the boll worm.
Aphids, jassids, thrips, mites are some of the important insect pests of red gram fusarium
wilt disease that can also be a serious problem in some places the year that is caused by
the fungal disease. So, that is also a problem for the arhar. Preventive measures; So, we
have discussed. So, you can follow the organic way of managing crops because as it is
discussed itself organic way of management is a preventive measure of many insect pests
and disease, but we can use the organic formulations either the cow dung, the urine or
the neem based, chilli, garlic based and also as we discussed many botanical pesticides,
neem seed extract, neem seed, neem leaf extract, neem seed kernel extracts, pyrethrum,
rotenones.
So, those are the many pesticides as we have discussed those are those formulation can
be prepared and can be sprayed in regular intervals. So, for this intercropping, as a
cultural major, intercropping red gram with soybean, moong, groundnut, sorghum and
maize and planting  marigold  in bunds helps in keeping the pest control pest under
control. So, from these we can in sorghum and the pigeon pea intercropping is very
popular and common in case of in semi arid tropics.
Usually the this arhar crop is grown mostly in the semi arid tropics in large scale, and the
intercropping with the sorghum or the maize the sorghum and maize they require lesswater say less water demanding crops. So, also the arhar and they have the same growing
season, sorghum maize and the arhar the wet seasons that is a monsoon season, the
sowing starts or the plant in June July. So, they can be grown as intercropping and
sorghum and maize they are the high nitrogen demanding and these this arhar is a less
nitrogen more of phosphorus demanding.
So, the combination is also best having one of the cereal crops and leguminous crops
they can their compatible they can complement with each other with the nutrients, rather
they can be on some cases you should they should not compete with each other, having
the crops proper crops in the intercropping systems. So, sorghum and the pigeon pea or
the maize and pigeon pea intercropping was one of the best intercropping, which can be
followed it can supplement the nutrients at the same time the crop can be controlled from
many pest and diseases and having marigold in the border area also the take as a trap
crops so, to protect crops from many pests and diseases.
Then we can release the trichogramma. Trichogramma as a fungus that is 50000 eggs
after  30 days  of sowing can keep the problem  of pests  below  threshold level.  So,
trichogramma fungus can be released in the field, curative measures there we can go on
spraying neem seed kernel extract that is around 5 percent; that means, 50 50 ml per liter
of water at the 15 days interval. So, those can be sprayed to control some known or the
common pests and the diseases. 
A neem seed kernel extract enriched with 5 percent cow urine has been found to be more
effective as compared to only neem seed kernel extract that can be sprayed, because the
neem seed kernel extract that contain azadirachtin the compound chemical compound
that controls the boll worm and other sucking pests. Of course, you can use for the neem
leaves boiled with 100 liter of water that can also be sprayed or we can go for the garlic,
chili or the neem crushed in cow urine can be also sprayed as we discussed many of the
formulation previous classes. So, those formulations can be used for controlling the pests
and diseases.(Refer Slide Time: 20:03)
Coming to groundnut as this is oilseed crop its kind is also a leguminous crops and. So, if
that fix their own nitrogen at nitrogen fixing biological nitrogen fixation can happen to
the  root  nodulations  the  like  arhar,  they  also  require  less  of  nitrogen  more  of
phosphorous or the potash. The climate requires a long and warm growing season. So, it
at least so, rainfall is around 50 centimeters during growing seasons more sunshine and
relatively warm and optimum temperature ranges from 21 to 26.5 degree Celsius. As a
climatic condition, soil as in peanut is the pod formation takes place under the ground.
So, in that case it needs a soil of older and the loose soil are considered light textured soil
that is sandy loam soil are the best suited for growing peanut.
Clay soils or the heavy soils are not suitable, specially for peanut cultivations as the
peanut formation takes place underground. So, you need a loose soil because you know
peanut the flowering takes  place in the top as a flower the branches in the flower
branches,  there  flower  appears  after  fertilization,  the  flower  moves  downwards  say
geotropic movement and enters the soil and that at comes to the soil. So, inside the soil
and root by the pod formation takes place inside. So, when the flower does enter into the
soil that is a gynophore and the gynophore entry of the gynophores it needs a loose soil.
If soil is very hard the gynophores they may not enter very swiftly into the soil and it
may dry upon the above ground. So, for a better entry of the gynophores in the soils,
usually we go for the intercultural operations loosening of the soils when the ground nutbecomes around 25 days in the before the just flower appearance the top soil it can be
loose.
So, that the peg can enter the gynophore the peg is a peg that can enter swiftly and very
smooth enter inside the soils for the formation of pods. That is why so, heavy soils say
so, you do not prefer heavy soils or the clay soils for the groundnut cultivations that
interfere with the peg development optimum pH is 6 to 6.5.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:22)
Land preparation so, like way like we do not prefer to go for the deep ploughing in case
of the groundnut cultivation, because having the deep ploughing. So, the pod enters to
avoid the pod enters to the deeper layers make a swallow around 15 centimeter or the 15
20 centimeters not more than ploughing is required for the groundnut cultivations. So,
this is due to fact that deep ploughing encourages the development of pods in deeper
layers sub soil, which makes harvesting difficult. So, go for around 15 to 20 centimeter
ploughing you can loose soils or the well-drained soil of course, the loose soils.
So, that we can light soils, it can helpful for the better penetration of the peg into the
soils  for the pod development. So, for this  one ploughing with soil turning plough
followed by two harrowing is the best for the crops and 1 to 2 summer ploughings will
minimize the weeds. So, summer ploughing is a very common if you go for organic
farming is we must practice we must go for summer ploughing. So, by doing summer
ploughing so, it has a multiple as discussed multiple advantages it can decrease theweeds pests and disease populations at the same time it can have a in situ groundwater
rain water recharge.
So, groundwater can be because you can increase ground water resources by a ploughing
the lands summer ploughs because pre monsoon showers in this monsoon. So, water can
be  in filtration  water  infiltration  will  be much  higher  in case  of  ploughed  land  as
compared to the barren land. In barren land the runoff the run off will be more for the
rainfalls whereas, in case of the ploughed land the you can minimize the runoff we can
increase the infiltration of rainwater into the soils, and you can store the water. So,
summer ploughing is really essential very essential for organic farming.
Then nutrient management a as we discussed for the arhar being a leguminous crop, it
may this all similar nutrient management, in ground application of farm yard manure
around 10 to 15 ton per hectare. So, is increased the pod and haulm yields and improved
the yield parameters like shelling percentage, 1000 seed weight it is a kernel weight and
the a sound mature kernel compared to recommended dose of fertilizers having farmyard
manure, organic manures or can vermicompost that can have a better agile, because they
there do not require more of nitrogen more of phosphorus and potash. So, it can work
because this those crops can grow better in full application of organic resources or
vermicompost or the farm yard manure.
Foliar applications of cow urine at 10 percent at the panchagavya spray at 3 percent as a
source of nutrients, and growth promoter at 45 and 60 days it can be it can be applied.
So, it can control for the pests and diseases and also it can be promoting the growth and
development of the crops, and nutrients management. So, that is remains similar as of the
arhar like the dose is same 30 60 40 kg per hectare of N, P 2O5, K2O and the as per the
dose depending upon the source of your nutrients either the conventional vermicompost
microbial enriched vermicompost or the rock enriched or FYM.
So, depending upon that the calculation can be made as discussed for the arhar that
remains same. So, I will depend on source if you want FYM. So, you can 13 tons per
hectare and if you go for the vermicompost specially rock enriched vermicompost. So,
that becomes 1 ton per hectare we can minimize the quantity by enrichment of the
compost.(Refer Slide Time: 25:53)
And disease and the pest management for this peanut use of pheromone traps around at 5
numbers per hectare for monitoring the spodoptera litura this is of the nocturnal moth,
and that is a very common in case of the groundnut field or even the Arhar field also. So,
those things can we control by having the pheromone traps.
And neem seed kernel extracts same as 5 percent as a foliar spray; that means 50 ml per
liter at 45 and 60 days after sowing against the management of defoliators the insects.
So, it can be controlled by applying neem seed kernel extract or having the pheromone
traps, for specific pest if you see the groundnut leaf miner that is a can go for the cultural
control that is a stray planting of cowpea and soybean it can acts as a trap crop for this
leaf miner. So, they can attract the leaf miner towards the as the soybeans or the cowpea
the crop the main crop can be protected from the leaf miner or the crop rotation with non
leguminous crops.
So, that we can minimize the population of this leaf miner or you can have crop rotation
of groundnut with soybean and other leguminous crops should be avoided. Because, you
know this with rotations with non leguminous crops can helpful for minimizing the
population of the leaf miners. We must avoid having rotation with the soybeans or the
any other leguminous crops, use resistant or tolerant varieties can be used.
Mechanical control you can collect and destroy the egg masses and early instars larvae
can be controlled control the insect pests or you can have the pheromone trap, (ReferTime: 27:44) pheromone trap also around 5 numbers per hectare for the mass trapping of
the insects and spray neem based formulation as we discussed the neem seed kernel
extract 5 percent that is 50 ml per litre of water can be sprayed.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:56)
A biological control that we can have the release of a trichogramma can be release
around 50,000 numbers per hectare then conserve the natural bio control population like
the spiders that is a robar fly, green lace wings, then flower bugs shield bugs lady bird
beetle those population can be conserved.
I we have discussed how this important conserving this natural the bioresources, the
biological biocontrol can be conserved by planting some of the flowering plants. As a
around the main crops so, that the nectar producing plant. So, they can they can provide
the food materials for the populations of this bio control agents then mulching with rice
straw that causes reduction in leaf miners. So, that is also incidence of any increase in
parasitism,  and  intercropping  groundnut  with  the  pennisetum  glacum  enhanced  the
parasitoid goniozus species on leaf miner. So, it can you have intercropping with the
pennisetum glacum fodder crops is a non leguminous crops so, that can be planted to
have a less population of the leaf miner.(Refer Slide Time: 29:03)
So, another pest is the red hairy caterpillar. So, this is the cultural control you can go for
the summer ploughing is very common, then you can have the earlier sowing because
timely sowing (Refer Time: 29:15) timely sowing very important to have a better yield at
the same time, to have a control on pest and diseases, intercropping with the row of a
castor crops also that can control the pests like red hairy caterpillar or also you can have
the crop rotation, with the sorghum and the pearl millet as we discussed so, that that can
be followed.
Then vegetative trap using the jatropa or the ipomoea prevent the migration of the
grown-up larvae, and irrigate once to avoid prolonged mid season drought to prevent pre
harvest infestation. So, if there is a need of water it can be irrigated to avoid drought
conditions.
Mechanical control as a light trap can be put there as a 12 light traps per hectare of field
and erection of light traps soon after the monsoons that is a 20 to 45 days and collection
and killing of these moths, collection and destroy egg masses in the field around light
trap areas.(Refer Slide Time: 30:11)
 And biological control we can go for this a as a release of Bracon hebetor its around 5
ton per hectare that can control this a pests conserve the dominant predators like the
Coccinella, Minochilus species that they can minimize the pest populations conserve the
biocontrol populations as we have discussed and also we can use neem seed kernel
extract for a controlling this pests.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:39)
Then another is the leaf spot, leaf spot also you can use those cultural practices fungal
disease. So, this can be by using resistant variety or intercropping with sorghum or thepearl millet. So, that can control the leaf spot. Mechanical controls deep burying at the
crop residues in the soils or you can have the biological control foliar application of the
neem seed kernel extract at 2 to 4 5 percent 5 percent that can be applied in two weeks
interval to control the leaf spot.
(Refer Slide Time: 31:10)
Similarly rust also can we controlled having this cultural practice you have discuss that
can intercropping with pearl millet or the sorghums, sowing actually the early sowing
that can avoid the rust.
And mechanical control destroys the volunteer of the self-grown groundnut plants, which
can be host to the rust biological control that is way botanical pesticides the neem-based
products, that is a neem seed kernel extract can be sprayed in regular intervals to take
care of the rust. So, what say, this say pulse crops or say oilseed crops being leguminous
crops, they have the less nitrogen requirement more of the phosphorous potash and other
nutrient because they fix their atmospheric nitrogen through the help of the a nitrogenase
enzymes and some bacteria present in a soil symbiotic bacteria, they fix in atmospheric
nitrogen and nitrogen.
So, external supply nitrogen is not demanded by the crops, and for those type of crops
we can swiftly use the fully organic fertilizer from the very beginning and you can have
the same  amount  of yield  as  of the chemical  farming  yield.  So, yield  may not  be
sacrificed here by going for the completely organic farming from the very beginning ofyour organic cultivations. And, as far as the pests and the disease concerned. So, we can
go for the organic formulations either the neem-based formulation formulations specially
that can be useful for controlling so, many pests and diseases at the regular spray 5
percent neem seed kernel extract very common. And you can have the cultural methods
like intercropping growing the peanut crops or this arhar crops with sorghums or the
maize because sorghums and maize.
They require less of water and arhar and peanut they also require less water. So, they are
they are very compatible crops, and they can complement each other in the nutrient
demand also they can have the intercropping having the biodiversity in the field, we can
control many pests and diseases. So, by the cultural and also mechanical as a light trap or
the pheromone trap that can be used to control many pests and diseases. OK
Thank you very much.