Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 34
Natural Sources of Antioxidants for Health Defense
So,  welcome  to  lecture  34  that  is  the  Natural  Sources  of  Antioxidants  for  Health
Defense. So, as you see in previous lectures, we are discussing about the quality of
organic  foods  and  somehow,  we  have  focused  towards  the  secondary  metabolites
because if you see the quality of organic foods, that means the food quality as in general
the food quality because of higher content of secondary metabolites in organic foods.
And that is what is needed for the defense mechanism to fight against many diseases in
the human health.
So,  this  lecture  is  natural  sources  of  antioxidants  for  health  defense  means  the
antioxidants, they can fight against the many diseases like cancer, the cancer diseases
and this is the how the organic foods have the higher content of antioxidants. And what
are the natural sources means because the body the natural sources can be you can have
regularly natural sources of antioxidants, so that you can keep your body fit or you can
avoid so many chronic diseases.
So, this we will discuss in this lecture about the natural sources of antioxidants for the
health defense.(Refer Slide Time: 01:36)
So, you can see what you eat, that means your body means say is yourself your body is
yours and you need to manage your body and because managing your body, keeping
your body fit, the food has an important, very significant role in keeping you fit in
addition to other many other things are there. But the what you take, what you daily
intake that regulates to that, leads to defining the health status; how you can maintain
your health through your food.
So, that is various stresses and the pollutants because either you can go for the excessive
work or the smoking, chronic infections or the pollutions, excessive some stress and
malnutrition. That is a poor nutritional food release free radical in human body which
cause damage to various organs. That means, if you see this figure. So that is a stress
comes from the pollutions or the excessive some stress or the stresses, but either the
mental stress may be sometimes go for the depression or the work pressure, excessive
work that comes a mental stress or may be poor nutrition, the food you are eating, the
poor nutrition. So, those things, they cause or they favor the formation of free radicals in
human body.
So, there is free radicals means the unpaired electrons such as reactive compounds are
formed the human body. So, once there is a formation of free radicals, so they do make
cell damage, so that they damaged cell. So, due to formation of free radicals, they do
cause cell damage, and this is a normal cell, and the damage cell due to the regular or theformation of free radicals. But if you have the antioxidants or antioxidant means they do
neutralize  the  free  radicals,  they  do  donate  the  electrons,  so  that  they  can  have  a
scavenging effect on the free radicals. So, they make them there is an inert unreactive.
The compounds can become unreactive, less reactive by having anti-oxidants. When you
apply when you the take regularly anti-oxidants, then your cell can be free that, can
remain free from the free radical damage that can be healthy cells. So, that is what.
So, if there is a damage of cells slowly and slowly, so it may happen after accumulation.
So, that leads to mainly cancer diseases due to the damage of the free radicals the
causing the cell damage. To protect this, we should have the anti-oxidant. So, mostly
how  can  we the  anti-oxidant  means  the  free  radicals  are  oxygen  or nitrogen-based
molecules with unpaired electron that are generated by a number of metabolic process
within the body as you see.
So, these free radicals are generated in the body. Preventive nutrition is proactive and
holistic generally boost human body own repair mechanism and defense against odd
factors like stress generating free radical; so, in our body also there are enzymes. So, the
enzyme they act the released they do fight back this and they do not allow the formation
of free radicals itself. So, it is that we have self-defense mechanism in the body also
there.
So, there some enzymes here they do fight back and that do not allow the formation of
favor, the formation of the free radicals, but in addition to that we need to have an
external supply of the free the antioxidants, so that you can neutralize, you can deactivate
the free radicals. So, that is a plant antioxidant. The natural antioxidants are the vital
constituent in food which promote health defense by neutralizing or scavenging the
action of free radicals to avoid cell damage. So, you need to have the regular supply of
the natural antioxidants by the intake of the fresh fruits and vegetables. Those are rich in
antioxidants and we should have the fruits and vegetables regularly.
So, that can have a health defense and they can be neutralizing or the scavenging action
of free radicals can be enhanced by having this natural antioxidant in our regular diet. In
general, the consumer perceives that organic foods as being healthier and safer than the
conventional food because you say that organic foods that contains higher content of
antioxidants as compared to the conventional foods. As you as discussed just in the lastclass because of stress mechanism, organic foods have the stress mechanism and supply
balance nutrition including macro and micronutrients  and the stress mechanism that
helps the formation of secretion of phyto hormones or the phytochemicals in the plant
body and those are the secondary metabolites, the higher secondary metabolites contains
and those are, they have the higher antioxidant activity of these food crops and specially
organic foods have the higher anti activity and having the organic foods regularly.
So, we can protect the human being from many of the health related issues and specially
the disease like cancer.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:54)
So, that means the antioxidant, the main components of because as you see the organic
foods  or  the  any  the  natural  sources  of  fruits  and  vegetables  having  the  higher
antioxidants, so we have to have a regular intake of fruits and vegetables. So, what is that
antioxidant that is required? Daily required antioxidants for the in daily intake or daily
diets  that  is  a  substance  that  opposes  oxidations  or  inhibits  reactions  promoted  by
oxygens or the peroxide. That means the oxidation reaction is inhibited by the anti-
oxidant. There is there is no formation of free radicals because the by releasing giving
the electron that that compounds becomes active reactive, very reactive compounds to
make it less reactive, we have to stop the oxidations.
So, that is what is done by the chemical definition of anti-oxidants job or the biological
definition says; synthetic or natural substances that prevent or delay the deterioration of aproduct or are capable of counteracting the damaging effects of oxidations in animal
tissue, and Institute of medicine definition say a substance that significantly decreases
the adverse effect of reactive species such as reactive oxygen species or reactive nitrogen
species on normal physiological function of human. So, these are the definition of anti-
oxidants.  So,  as  you  take  as  they  can  neutralize  the  formation  of,  they  can  have
scavenging effect, they can stop the formation of they can limit the formation of free
radicals in human body.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:31)
So, how do what are these reactive oxygen species? They formed the human body as
regularly as you say the reason is because of the stress excessive stress, may be work
stress or the mental stress is of working habit.
So, that makes a stress in human body or you are taking the bad food, very junk foods
that causes also the release of free radicals or excessive some stress. So, these are the
hum diets. What diets you are taking? The bad foods you are taking? What type of the
food you are taking? Most of foods are these high pesticide residues; those type of foods
you are taking. So, that causes the formation of free radical. Those have the super oxides.
These are the examples of free radical; they form the human body super oxides O2 minus
dot or hydroxyl radical, perapsi radicals, alkoxy radicals or peroxynitrite.
So, these are the free radicals, they form human body as a result of stress inflammations
or the poor nutrition that enhances the formation of the free radicals. What they do? Theydo to target the tissues, proteins, lipids and DNA for these free radicals are there very
active highly reactive. They are on pair; they have the unpaired electrons. So, they do
make the cell damage. So, they do damage. The tissues they do damage the proteins
lipids or DNA damage. Finally, they lead to get the disease like cancer. So, to counteract
the formation of free radicals, then we use anti-oxidants.
So, what is the job of anti-oxidants? What anti-oxidants do really, they prevent the
formation of reactive oxygen species? So, anti-oxidants they do not allow the formation
of these the free radicals, these are the reactive oxygen species, they are the free radicals.
So, they cause this cell damage, they prevent formation of reactive oxygen species or
inhibit the oxidation process in the body. So that the free load the free that is a free
radical formation are inhibited or scavenge or remove the reactive oxygen species before
they can damage the important bio molecules or that is proteins lipids and DNA.
So, before they make damage, they can they can scavenge or remove the reactive oxygen
species or they aid the human body’s natural defenses which includes enzyme because
what you say in your human body the natural defense mechanism. So, these are the
enzymes and they help, they are they are available, they are present in the body like
super oxide smooth age catalase, glutathione peroxidase, and glutathione reeducates.
The job of the enzymes here, they have to control balance the formation of the free
radicals. They are not allowing the formation of free radicals. These enzymes and the
activity of the enzymes are increased by having more and more anti-oxidants. They do
help. That is human body’s natural defense mechanism. They boost the natural defense
mechanism repair the oxidative damage the free radicals and prevent mutations change
of gene also prevented by having the antioxidants.(Refer Slide Time: 11:42)
So, the thing that, so what is the role of? So, same here containing what is the role of the
antioxidants and antioxidant is a molecule that is capable of inhibiting the oxidation of
other. That means, that stops the oxidation process that stops, they want to stop the
formation of free radicals or the or that is compound, that unpaired electron formations is
stopped or can be reduced in the body having antioxidants. Oxidation is a chemical
reaction that transfers electrons or hydrogen from a substance to the oxidizing agent.
So, there is an oxidation reaction can produce that produces free radicals in term these
radicals can start chain reaction. So, in normal oxygen atoms if there is an oxidation
process say this is electron loss and that creates free radicals, so if there is a the free
radical formation takes place due to oxidations. And that is the reason you are discussed
because of the stress or the bad foods or the many other reasons. There was a free radical
formation takes place, then there is a free radical setup chain.
So, there is a set up chain that causes the cell damage. So, that is the erosion of the cell
membranes due to the formation of these free radicals. So, antioxidants, what is the job
of antioxidants? They terminate the chain reaction by removing free radicals, radical
intermediates and inhibit other oxidation reaction. So, what anti oxidation they do? So,
they inhibit the formation of the free radicals, so that they can protect the cells from the
damage.So, that is what the role of anti-oxidants. They do not allow the formation of, they
neutralize the free radical radicals and they do not allow the formation of free radicals by
these steps, defense managing of anti-oxidants functions through several roots that is first
to inhibit the formation  of active oxygen  species  and free radical.  That means, the
reactive oxygen species are inhibited by having anti-oxidants in the body; the second, the
radical  scavenging  anti-oxidants  methods;  and  third  by the  repair  and  cleansing  of
oxidative damaged lipids proteins and DNA.
So, that is what the role of antioxidants as you take the enzymes with different enzymes
are there in the body. So, they do not allow the formation or neutralize or the scavenging
activity and the free radicals.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:03)
So, these are the classification of antioxidants. So, you have the synthetic or natural we
have synthetic anti natural antioxidants. It is synthetic primary secondary as you are
discussing the natural anti-oxidant means they are all plant origins or it can from the fish
and meat also.
So, those are as the natural antioxidants. So, these are the anti-oxidants ascorbic acids
that is Vitamin C, Beta Carotene, Vitamin A Anthocyanin, Vitamin E, Tocopherols,
Flavonoids and Polyphenols. These are the natural anti-oxidants that supplies either from
the plant-based products or the animal-based products.(Refer Slide Time: 14:47)
So, if you see the natural antioxidants, these are those anti-oxidants that they are they are
found in natural sources such as fruits, vegetables milk and meats.
So, most common anti-oxidants are found in every day foods. That means, as you take
the everyday foods as fruits, vegetables milk and meats, these are the Vitamin C that is
an ascorbic acid Vitamin E; it is tocopherols, Vitamin A that is carotenoids, various
polyphenols including the flavonoids and the anthocyanin as type of flavonoids. So,
these are the antioxidants we do take regularly in the human diet.
So, these are the structure of the antioxidants as Vitamin C, polyphenols Vitamin E and
Vitamin A.(Refer Slide Time: 15:34)
So, now we discuss the common natural anti-oxidants and their sources. So, what are
antioxidant? Usually these are the left side, see these have the compound name that is
anti-oxidants,  and  the  natural  sources  how  we  can  get  which  type  of  fruits  and
vegetables, we can get those anti-oxidants like Vitamin C ascorbic acid.
So, the sources are mostly citrus fruits and some vegetables and tomato. They can they
can supply the ascorbic acids Vitamin C and Vitamin A that comes from the, sorry
Vitamin E that get tocopherol that comes from the cereal, grains, broccoli, sprouts or the
cauliflowers, the cooking oils, olive oil, sunflower oil or the safflower oils, then almond
and black rice. Black rice is a good source of Vitamin E. You can know that is an
anthocyanin pigments of the black pigments of their, so Vitamin E that comes from the
black rice too beta carotenes, vitamin A. 
So this comes  from vegetables  such as spinach, tomato,  carrots, sweet potato, then
apricots  and  papaya  that  gives  the  beta  carotenes.  Similarly,  flavonoids  or  the
polyphenols  we  can  get  from  potato,  tomato,  lettuce,  onion  wheat,  dark  chocolate,
grapes, red wine, black tea and black rice. Also, you can have the flavo, the flavonoids
polyphenols. Then you can have the various polyphenol compounds you can get from
green tea, many red and purple fruits vegetable such as red cabbage, blue berries.
So, these are the red colored cabbage. That is a red cabbage or the blue berries. There is
anthocyanin  polyphenols  are,  they  have  the  better  health  benefits  like  there  manypolyphenols, they can fight backs, they do not allow the formation of the free radicals in
the human body. So, lycopene that is you can get from tomato papaya water melon pink
grape fruit and the guava and coenzyme Q 10. That is also an antioxidant enzyme that it
that you can get from the wheat bran, fish and the chicken liver.
So, these are the natural sources from where we can get the antioxidant, but you need the
regular diet in regular diet. So, those fruits or the vegetables or the milk produce or the
fish that can be included in the regular diet, so that you can get the regular supply of
natural  anti-oxidants.  They can fight, they can have defense;  they can  increase  the
defense mechanism of the human body. So, think of that. So, how can you consume? The
consumption also depends upon how you are consuming the anti-oxidants, so that it can
increase the defense mechanisms.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:27)
So, this is the natural anti-oxidants and technique to optimize consumption. How we can
increase the consumption of the; or the effectiveness of the anti-oxidants that can be very
effective in the human body. So, you can see few examples here like ascorbic acids,
Vitamin C. How this can be very effective through a fruit consumption particularly citrus
fruit and also you have to take consume moderate quantity of citrus fruit throughout the
day to increase the absorption of the ascorbic acids or the Vitamin C.
Flavonoids, so that is polyphenols. The consumption of whole grain fruits or the whole
wheat bread and consume lots of green vegetables that can increase the flavonoid asconsumed with the intake and the human body or they eat tocopherol rich fruits like your
know you know olive oil, oils and the almonds with some sorts of unsaturated fats that is
polyphenol unlike you have olive oil. So, this one, the consumption or the use of the
flavonoids body can be observed the observantly availability can be better.
beta carotene so, if consume fruits and vegetables with a reddish orange colors such as
carrot and papaya that can have supply the beta carotenes, then tocopherols Vitamin E
consume foods such as potatoes, onions, black tea and grapes. Flavonoids are better
observed when the molecule is not attached to any sugar molecules. That means, so
flavonoids obtained from the onions would be better observed than those obtained from
the grapes.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:05)
The anthocyanin that polyphenols, so that observance of anthocyanin can be increased.
So, eat fruits such as blueberries, blackberries, grapes as well as dark chocolates. So, you
can have the higher intake of the anthocyanin through other foods like strawberries
contents, the anthocyanin from the darker foods are observed better than the lighter foods
light food. That means, the blackberry or the blueberries, they or the dark chocolate also
chocolates, so if you are taken take daily intake also, so that can increase the anthocyanin
observation in the body. The polyphenols consumed foods as the teas dark berries, grape
fruits and juice and consumption guidelines from anthocyanin flavonoids are supplied to
most of the polyphenols for lycopene consume tomato products.So, tomato means you can have it is much easier to observe lycopene from cooked
tomato and products, because if you take raw tomato, you have less body absorption of
the lycopene. To have the better absorption, higher absorptions we can take cooked
tomato that is stuffed tomato is much better than the cooked tomato. You can say stuffed
tomato. So, that has a better observation of the lycopene by human body consuming
tomato with the diet repair, the cooking oils  that increases absorption of lycopenes
instead of raw tomato.
Then Coenzyme Q10, so consume whole wheat breads or the meat especially the liver.
That means, the organ meats contain more Coenzyme Q10 as compared to the muscle
red meats, organic meats, either the liver meats or the brain meats or the kidney meats.
So, those type of organic meats, they contain the higher Coenzyme Q10 as compared to
the muscles red meat. So, these are the compounds the anti-oxidants and they have the
natural sources from where it is available. So, in the daily food or the diet intake, you can
at least include some of the antioxidants, so that we can keep yourself fit from many of
the chronic diseases.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:06)
So, similarly the phytochemicals phytochemical means they are plant origin. So, they
also contain anti-oxidants, the phytochemicals like polyphenols they have these are all
anti-oxidants. So, phyto comes from the Greek word that means plant. Phytochemicalmeans plant chemicals and secondary metabolites, so substances in plant that may help
prevent the diseases like cancer and the heart disease.
So,  those  are  phytochemicals.  So,  as  far  scientists  know  about  of  3000  different
phytochemicals with possible health benefits more than 100 phytochemicals are from
vegetable sources. So, some foods are such as the whole grains, vegetable, beans, fruits
and herbs contains many phytochemicals. The easiest way to get more phytochemicals is
to eat more fruits. That is blueberries and the cranberries, cherries apple. So, they can
provide the phytochemical and vegetables like cauliflower, cabbage, carrot and broccoli.
So,  you  thought  that  those  vegetables  and  fruits  and  vegetables,  they  provide  the
phytochemical. That means, in your daily intake we are having the carbohydrates, we are
having the proteins, we are having the fats. In addition to that we should take regularly
few fruits like the berries, fruits or cherries, apple and also the vegetables  like the
cauliflowers. Also cooking it depends upon your cooking process how you are cooking,
not over cooking, so that the phytochemicals can remain intact, active and they can be
better observed by the human body like the cauliflower, the cabbage, the carrots, the
broccoli examples the good source of best source of the phytochemicals for the human
body.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:58)
So, see how do phytochemicals work. So, that is the question how you can be effective
phytochemicals. So, that phytochemicals they do contain they provide the anti-oxidantactivity because they increase the anti-oxidant activity of the food materials  having
phytochemicals. The most phytochemicals have anti-oxidants activity that means and
protect ourselves against oxidative damage and reduce the risk of developing certain type
of cancer.
So, those for example phytochemicals with anti-oxidant activity that is allyl sulfides that
comes from onion leeks and garlic and the carotenoids comes from fruits like carrots and
the flavonoids comes from fruits and vegetables and polyphenols comes from teas and
grapes. So, those are the anti-oxidants say poly the phytochemicals come from the plant
origin anti-oxidants. They do help in fighting or in protecting the human being from so
many types  of cancers, then also there the phytochemicals  they have the hormonal
actions like the isoflavones. That is flavonoids isoflavones. So, that comes from basically
found in the soybean fruits and that inhibited the human extrusions and help to reduce
menopausal symptoms and the osteoporosis.
This  is  especially  for  the  ladies  as  for  the  later  age.  So,  they  do  suffer  from  the
osteoporosis. To avoid that because the loss in the weights, loss in height and also the
growth, the bone fractures or the weakness in the bone that comes especially in the
ladies. So, by having the isoflavones and that comes from the soya bean, you know the
isoflavones  that  has  the  higher  bioavailability  and  soya  bean  is  the  best  source  of
providing isoflavones.
So, daily intake of soya bean, so that it can protect from this type of disease and mostly
soya bean has. Soya bean can be found in many ways. You can have the soya bean seeds,
you can have as tofu, soya tofu, we can have the soya milk also and they have a better
even the children also can be can be provided daily intake of the soya milk. So, that
provides  this  flavonoid  or  the  phytochemicals  and  it  can  protect  from  any  type  of
diseases in the starting from the child age.
Then, also this phytochemical they have the stimulation of enzymes, they have that
means indoles which are found in cabbage simulate enzymes that make the estrogens less
effective and could reduce the risk of the breast cancer. So, that is what some enzymes
they also simulate enzymes that comes from the phytochemicals. Then interference with
the DNA replications that is in saponins found in beans, interfere with the replication of
cell DNA thereby preventing the multiplication of the cancer cells.So, that is what the phytochemicals they work. They prevent the multiplication of the
cancer cells. Now, also it has a antibacterial effect. So, the phytochemicals allicin from
garlic has antibacterial effect. So, these are the activity of the; or the job or the benefits
of having the phytochemicals. They come from the plant sources, so that provide the
antioxidants especially for the to protect from cancers and the heart that regulate the
hormonal  actions  stimulations  of  the  enzymes  and  also  interference  with  the  DNA
replications that that avoid the multiplication of the cancer cell and has antibacterial
effects.
So, having the fruits and vegetables in the daily intake more and more of fruits and
vegetables, so you can keep yourself healthy; that means, the health mechanism, health
defense mechanism in the body can be enhanced can be, can be increased or improved
by having the fruits and vegetables and those anti-oxidants or the phytochemicals. You
can find the organic foods as say has the better contents as compared to conventional.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:56)
This is how you can say almost if you see talk about the secondary metabolites especially
as antioxidants or the phytochemicals, definitely organic foods are healthier or have the
superiority as compared to conventional foods.
So, 10-year comparisons of the influence of organic and conventional crop management
practice on flavonoids content tomato. So, this research came from the Mitchell at el in
2007. So, from the 10 years study they have found these are the flavonoid compounds orthe quercetin naringenin and the kampferol. These are the compounds; these are content
in  the  conventional  food.  That  is  chemical  fertilizers  or  the  chemical  pesticide
application  and  this  is  the  fully  organic  no  application  of  chemical  fertilizers  and
chemical pesticides. So, if you see the quercetin: so, in this case of conventional is 64.6,
but in organic it is 115.5 and same for the naringenin.
This is 30.2 in case of conventional. This is very high in organic and kampferol and these
are 32.06, 63.3 in case of organic. That means, the content of the secondary metabolites
is definitely higher in organic products as compared to conventional products. And
especially to fight against the disease, to increase the immune systems of the body, to
enhance immune system of the body, to have a better health systems we should have the
daily intake of the anti-oxidants or that is phytochemicals, and should come from the
natural sources say plant based products and because our health systems body systems
they have the many enzymes like superoxide dismutase.
So, enzymes are there, they do fight the formation of, against the formation of the free
radicals like the super oxides. So, as there is a regular formation of free radicals due to
several reason either you are taking very bad foods or you are under stress conditions or,
there is a high pollution in that case, there is a release of the free radical in the body. So,
there is a need to neutralize those free radicals and not to allow the formation of free
radicals and not to allow the reactive oxygen species formation in the body to have to
reduce those formations which there should be anti-oxidants.
So, anti-oxidants should neutralize the formation of free radicals and they do help in
improving the immune systems of the body and they can prevent from many cancer
diseases. And those antioxidants can be supplied from the natural sources and the natural
sources especially from the organic grown products, because the organic grown products
have higher content of phytochemicals or antioxidants and they can fight back many type
of diseases like cardiovascular  diseases or the cancer diseases or the many chronic
diseases can be can be cured or cannot because the patient or the human beings may not
suffer from this type of diseases if you regularly take or in your daily diets, these type of
antioxidants from the natural sources, and mostly organic products, they have the higher
content of these antioxidants.
With this I conclude this lecture.Thank you very much.