Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 31
Crop Planning and Rotation Design in Organic System (Contd.)
So, I welcome you to lecture 31; Crop Planning and Rotation Design in a Organic
System. This is a continuation of the previous lecture, lecture 30. So, we have discussed
in the last lecture the type of crops to be selected when you go for the conversion or the
transition from the conventional farming to organic farming.
So, what steps you should follow and the crop types because that the beginning of the
year when are you going for the transition periods the yield may be reduced. So, to
compensate the yield loss we should choose the crops that can that require that are that
have the demand of the less nutrients and slowly as you go on with the progress of the
years transition then and third year you go for the organic labeling of the product.
So, in that year you can grow the crops of the high nutrient demanding by the time
probably  the  soil  might  haven  build  up  with  the  fertility  due  to  the  introducing
leguminous crops or the low nutrient requiring crops. So, that the yield loss in the main
crop that can be compensated by the way of managing of the soil fertility.
So, here we can discuss what is the planning or the how can plan the crops in a particular
area or particular farm, if you are planning to convert your farm to organic from the
transition periods and the organic productions.
So, what are the management and specially the crop selections how you can say the
crops. So, can you can have a good returns economic returns at the same time you can
have a better quality of the products produce in organic farming.(Refer Slide Time: 02:02)
So, as I discussed in the last class the crop mix or the crop plan or the crop combinations
or the rotations so, that depends upon the you know on the four major components as you
go for crop planning in the crop rotation plan. The components are one is resource,
technology, market and institutions; these are the four major pillar.
When you go for the planning of these the rotation designs or the crop productions
because  know  you  need  the  resource  means  you  are  the  land,  labour,  capital,
infrastructure these comes  under the resource and also of the natural resources that
means, the climatic conditions of the locations. So, that indicates what type of crops you
are choosing.
So,  the  resources  then  technology  means  the  technological  knowledge  to  build
knowledge means the organic farming practices, the equipment used for the organic
farming starting from your land preparations to the sowing of the seeds, the nutrient
organic manure applications, then intercultural operations, weeding operations, spray a
plant  protection  measures  and  finally,  the  harvesting  and  post  harvest  processing
through.
So, the technology that indicates what type of crops you are trying to choose what type
of crops you are selecting in the rotation plan then of course, the market. So, as I
discussed  market  is  the  very  important  because  you  are  the  selection  of  the  crops
depends on the market potentials.If somebody has to go for the productive or the have a benefit economic because we are
going for the organic farming of economic output the better returns higher economy in
that case you have to see the market where you are going to sell your produce. So, that is
as we discussed last class if you do not know where is a market, how to sell your produce
better not to plant it.
So, market is very important then institutions that is a linkage where you can have a
collaboration, where you can have a as a consultancy feedback advice you can take. So,
you have to collaborate institutions, these are the four major pillars of the crop planning.
So, that indicates as we discussed this is a then based on this the resource, technology,
market, and institutions we can have a goal, the objectives, resource goals.
Then based on these market and the production options the plan we can have a crop mix
or the crop rotations or the cropping system plan and which can be changed in between
based on the weather or the market we can have a alternate plans to meet the demand or
the to meet the objectives and also at the same time it should be economically viable,
ecologically sustainable and that can give the maximum profit this is how say the crop
rotation plan. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:50)
So, we discuss the effect of rotation crops, how they influence the specially the soil
fertility as you see as you go for rotations if you see the as we have discussed earlier
classes when you go for the rotation design or the selecting crops in the rotations youshould choose such type of such type of crops means there should be deep root crops
should follow shallow root crops, cereal crops may be legumes crops because crops of
same group should not be grown together.
So, that there should not be any competitions among the crops or the between the crops
for the nutrients or water and also there will be less incidence of pest and diseases. For
this research report I can see research information’s. Studies have shown that organic
matter losses from the intensively tilled row crops can be regained when the field is
rotated with a perennial legume or short crops. That means, if you are growing the two
crops one is the corn crops that require intensive tillage, conventional tillage and if are
going for the conventional tillage operations then you can see from this figure.
So, there is a decrease in soil organic matrix are declined in soil organic matter with a
continuous cultivation of the corn crops that means, the conventional tillage the with this
operation if you go to 0 to around 25 years it is seen. If you continue corn planting with
conventional tillage there is a sharp decline in soil organic matter from the beginning to
the end of these 25 years. And after that what is said is this first rapid rate of organic
matter decomposition from tillage is stopped under legume or grass crop. 
If you go for the after that there is a legume grass crops then there is slowly increase in
the soil organic matter content of the soils that means, with conventional tillage and
growing same type of crops of course, there is a decline in organic matter of the soils.
And as you replace the crops with the grass or legume crops then there is a increase in
organic matter content of soil. So, the organic matter content is against build up that is a
accumulated as regained by changing the cropping pattern.
So, that you say by grass or legume developed extensive root systems and that have
continually grown and also die off. The dead roots supplies source of fresh and the active
organic matter to the soil which feeds the soil or as feeds soil organism and that are
involved in building soil aggregation. That means, having the grass crops or the legume
crops they leave lot amount of the huge amount of crop residue in the soils.
So, that helps that this active organic matter that acts a food material for the native soil
microbes and they build up their populations by the tab. So, in that way they can build
the soil aggregation at the soil organic matter content. This is how the loss and gain of
the organic matter with the change of cropping systems as you go on from the cornplanting to legume crops there is a increase in soil organic carbons and moreover if you
go for the tillage operation also if you follow the minimum tillage or zero tillage, stubble
mulch tillage in that case also so, there the organic matter or the organic carbon content
can be regained can be accumulated by continuously following the conservation tillage
as you say or the stubble mulch tillage, minimum tillage or the zero tillage operations.
So, this research report has been collected from Crop Rotations on Organic Farms: A
Planning  Manual.  There  is  a  natural  NRAES,  Natural  Resource  Agricultural  and
Engineering and Services. For this how the they have the long-term experiment where
you have the where you have seen that is the building or the loss in organic matter or the
change in organic matter content of soils by change in crops.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:39).
And if you go to designing the crop rotation experiment, when you go for the evaluation
of the rotation design you have the two alternate plans of course, based on your the
market or the know the resource and technology and the institution linkage we have
developed some crop plan also at the same time as we discussed we should have a
alternate crop plan in case of weather uncertainty or the market fluctuations to tackle
those situations we can have a the second plan on table.
So, when you go for the evaluations of this or the designing of a crop rotation experiment
where experiment. So, there should be some of the things we should be considering in
mind. Flexibility,  so that means  so, there is often need to change management andincludes that is a new aspect of or investigations over the course of the experiment. So
that means, there should have some rooms to make a change and make additions or the
deletions of the some of the components as and when needed.
Changes should be kept in an absolute minimum within a rotation force that means a
small  change  can  be  accommodated  that  means,  this  system  should  flexible  to
accommodate some changes as and when needed during the force of investigations. Then
scale also so, better to have the plot and field should have a should be as large as possible
because when you are planning go for large scales that means, farmers field not exactly
at the small plot in the experiment. So, it should address the large scale that can be scaled
up to larger area. And the time often as you go for the organic farming or the rotation
designing it is a time taking process.
So, if you continue for the more years then you can have a better interpretation of the
results for the evaluation of the cropping system design.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:25)
And also, when you go for the design, the design you can choose as a factorial design
that is a specially for this say there may be two factors or more than two factors of the
experiment for the evaluation of this rotation design 
And the management detail guidelines on the practical management of the crops and the
plots should be formulated in order to minimize the effects of change in managementover time and that means, this should be already the planning that should be made much
before the implementation definitely and the management staff often needs to learn the
functions of rotations before the proper experiment can starts.
And of course, the minimum data sets say protocols when you go for the experimental
for the design for the evaluation of the rotation experiment then the protocols of the
experiment protocols that should be set and the data minimum data set because without
so, that is the effective of a proper evaluations what are the input and data sets that
should be documented what are the methodology and what data what are the data should
be collected for the crop rotation experiment evaluation.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:31)
So, this is the when you go for the rotation balance is the rotation design experiment,
rotation balance. So, what do you mean by the rotation balance means when you go for
the designing or the planning a rotation experiment, we plan for the seasonal, annual or
the multiyear farm plan and also we plan for the field scale and the farm scale that
means, the field to farm.
If you see a particular farm there may be many fields, fields have can have different
types all the field may not be same some fields may be upland ecosystem say farm may
have the area around 50 hectares or 100-hectare farm may be there in that farm. Some
field may be upland some field may be lower land some field may be medium land. And
also the field there many entity the entities maybe there; some may have the some mayhave the crops some may have the livestock some may have the horticultural crops
seasonal crops.
So, looking at those aspects those entities  or those enterprise  when you  go for the
rotation balance or the rotation design, we go for the we look for the annual and also the
multiyear rotations. Annual means that means, the if you make for annual plan that gives
seasonal returns, every year returns that leads to economic output. So, every year there
should be some return. So, that is as a business plan.
So, there should be return of every year and the multi year that is a perennial crop
because when you have the crops like perennial crops you have orchard crops as a fruits,
fruit crops and you have the other entities like you know you have the livestock or the
poultry where your return may not get on the beginning of the years.
So, return you may get after 2 years 3 years depending upon the crop or the depending
upon the enterprise. In that case that is a multi years. In for those conditions we look for
the mainly that focus on biology that means, when you go for the multiyear crop plans in
addition to annuals then multiyear over lapping over the annuals then that indicates in
addition to economic returns, it indicates other values like biology means it should give a
better  output,  the  production  should  be  high.  At  the  same  time,  you  should  have
environmentally sustainable means; there should less emission of green house gas at the
atmosphere.
So, having the multi year plan, so that means, the enhancing soil fertility, the maintaining
soil fertility in a long term basis that is taken into account when you go for the multiyear
crop planning that means, it building the soil fertility or as we discussed just before or
the increase in the soil carbon content over the years that comes in the multiyear crop
rotation or the multiyear plans having different entities that together in the systems.
And also, we should see there is a less emission of that means, green house gas at
atmosphere. The system should have the less impact or no impact on the environments.
So that means, this is a sustainable environment that lay minimizing green house gas
emissions at the same time we have the better productions and the better-quality food
quality because as we are going for the organic concept you are using the organic input
management. So, it indicates there should be good quality. The quality of the food is
much better, better environment; so, less pollutions of the water and less pollution of theair. So, better environment and the high productions. So, this looks to the biological
value when you go for the multiyear crop plan. 
So, as we see the rotation planning balances the management of field and the farm level
decision on an annual and the multi year basis. The annual farm level decision lead to
prioritize  the  business  concerns  and  the  multiyear  decisions  tend  to  prioritize  and
accommodate the biological demands that as we discussed. So, there should be income
generation you should have the high income, high profit. Profit should be maximized at
the same time if you go for the multiyear planning you should see.
So, this sustainable means there is a less effect or zero effect on the environments. And
also there is a buildup of a soil carbon, the soil fertility is improved over the years and at
the same time the quality you get the better and better quality for the better human
health.
So, as you see the rotation balance, so, these are the components as we discussing here.
Crop rotation requires multi dimensional thinking. So, when you go for the planning or
the design as a field scale or the farm scale integrating the farm scale will integrate the
field scale because in farm there may be several fields.
So, you have when you go for the planning of this rotations we have to take account of
the field at the same time the farm as a whole and also annual and multiyear; you think
the long term planning thinking the and also multi dimension means number of entities,
how many entities we can accommodate in the farms.
So,  like  the  crops,  livestock  or  the  fishery  or  the  poultry.  So,  those  you  need
multidimensional thinking can be taken to consider when you go for the crop rotations.
And the rotation management requires understanding both the whole farm and each
individual field and balancing field and field and the farm scale decisions. So, that
means, as you discuss the field may be in the farm all field may not of same fertility or
they may not be of same topography some field may be a high land some field may be
lowlands.
So, that means, when you go for the rotational design you have to consider you have to
have a decision-making process you have to understanding about the field where you are
operating and the whole farm as a whole to have a proper decision. Then on successfulfarms rotation planning is a rolling and the responsive process as you go from rotation.
So, you should get response from these rotations and expert farmers are continually
balancing annual and multiyear decisions because as a short annual means short term
plan and the multi year is long term plan.
So, when you go for the rotation design in a farm, we look for the both, we look for the
annual and we look for the multi years. So, annual plan means that gives each year return
that means, from seasonal crops like your you have the vegetables or may be floriculture
or the field crops like a cereal, oil seed, pulses. So, those crops are rotated. So, they give
the annual returns or the return every year may be every six months you can get returns
and the multiyear planning where you have the perennial crops like the orchard crops or
you have the different entities like your you have the livestock, poultry, fishery.
So, there you can get the return from return multiyear that is a. So, both the short term
and long term is important because annual and the multiyear planning is successful for
this rotation design.
So, business decision must be optimized for annual returns and cash flow. Then expert
growers indicate that in any given season, market opportunities and logistical needs
maybe may override the biological concern. That means the depending upon the market
potential, if there is a market for depending upon the crops or the entities.
So, as we are planning so, we are looking at the market. So, how what is the demand of
market which crop you can grow so, that you can sell it very smoothly very comfortably
and you can get a good price.
So, that is taken by account. So, that is a major factor that content that decides the crops
to be grown. Then experts manage multiple, interacting factors as they implement crop
rotation. So, those things as you go on process of rotation design, so, the either the
nutrient management, the pest management, the weed management. So, those are taken
cares.
Organic farmers relay on rotations and long-term soil quality to deal with the problems
and ensure the productivity on the fields. So, as we discussed already this one. So, we
need the long term soil fertility, soil fertility has to build up, enhanced long term basis inorganic forming. When you go for rotations and there should taken into account how you
can build up the soil fertility over the years.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:11)
And then you go for the organic transition or the production plan, how you can go for the
organic production. So, these are the some of the steps you need to follow when you go
for the organic transitions and these plans has to be take taken care when you are
converting your field from conventional farming to organic farming. 
The first one; the set your objectives because you know this is for any business if you go
for the any business or farming is a business then you have to set your objective. What is
the objective for what you are going to make organic? So, you are going for the field
crops or the vegetables, the horticulture orchard crops or the poultry or the livestock. 
So, depending upon these or you have integrations as you say so that means, your
objective has to be set, what you are going to do, what production you are what type of
production depending upon the then you have to take care of the climate and the resource
and the technology and institution based on that you have to set your objectives. What is
your objective?
Suppose  somebody  objective  has  only  to  produce  the  vegetables,  the  cash  crops,
vegetable crops fresh vegetables in the field. So, or somebody has the milk production or
maybe meat productions or some may have integration of all vegetables, cereals, grains,oil seeds and wheat production. Based on the resource technology available institution
market you have to set your objectives what type of entities or enterprises and what
should be your objective accordingly you can set your objective.
Then follow part by part transition to organic. Once you have set your objectives then go
for transitions for a field. Suppose we will give example of a field crops if you are going
for growing a field crops then you have to divide the field into four parts. Suppose this is
a field where you are going to have the crops maybe vegetable crops or field crops,
cereal crops or the oil seed crops, pulses that case you divide the field into four parts;
field 1, field 2, field 3 and fold field 4. And also you can at the area that depends upon
the type of the topography the soil suppose some field is up land, low land, medium land
or the that depending upon the field situation you can have a four almost equal parts or
may be some uneven that is no problem, but you have to divide the field into four parts.
Then make a cropping plan in transition based on market potential and transition needs.
So, if, so, make a cropping in a transition period. So, from one field you can starts part
by part. So, field 4 or you can start the transition and the crop planning depends upon the
market or the resource available technology and the institutions. So, that you can have a
plan here, implement these on the field 4 then analyze the economics of these transitions.
So, looking at the history or the information’s from the base experiments. So, if you go
for that transition the plan of the organic production plan for any type any field then what
is the returns then can have the economic returns of that plan.
Then prepare an alternate plan in case of weather and market uncertainty. So, looking at
the as you see market uncertainty or there may be weather fluctuation sometimes it may
be dry year sometime they very wet year or the flood or the drought looking at the
extreme conditions we can have a the second alternate plan must be ready because
weather you cannot prediction you cannot do for a long term basis.
So, when you go for the seasonal plan, so, based on the future weather of two months or
three months weather the forecasting whether the rainfall or the monsoon should be
normal or there is some variation or the dry conditions. So, depending upon that the crop
can be say changed actual decision. Suppose you are planning for a rice crop in case of
the upland eco system or the low land ecosystem, upland ecosystem based on the normal
rainfall if there is monsoon is normal.In case there is a fluctuation monsoon or the prediction there will be dry years there will
be variability in monsoon then you may switch over from rice to some other crops like
corn crops can be taken instead of rice crop because corn crops require less water that
can survive in even if the less rainfall areas.
So, accordingly, so, you can have a alternate plan or in case have they very flood years
you are planning a flood years that maybe flood condition in that case you have (Refer
Time: 23:24) chosen some other crops you can shift to rice crops which can sustain on
the flood conditions. So, likewise prepare alternate plan and in case of the weather or the
market uncertainty same for the market uncertainty.
Once you have the plan ready then acquire resources and organize the use of resources
within timeline. So, once you have made the plans for the transition or the organic
productions then accordingly the resource should be you know the source obtain the
resource the resource should be gathered the acquired resources and organized the use of
resources with timeline. Then its times will active times should be prepared at what time,
what type activities should be performed to attain or to reach the goal.
Then implement the plan and follow record keeping at every stage. So, that is very
important as we discussed also earlier class. Whatever you do in an organic farming
record keeping is very very important starting from the land preparation or you have
planning, there is a planning. From planning it is then land acquire of resources from
where you are getting resources. Suppose seeds fertilizer the manures or seed stock from
where are you getting those should be documented proper records should be there and up
to  the  harvest  and  post  harvest  whatever  the  operations  you  are  performing  each
operations should be documented because those documents you are because you will be
requiring when your  certifying  agent will review  one audit  records  that  is  required
documentation is highly essential as record keeping is very important when you go for
the applying for certification process.
Then make decisions and take action; this is very important as and when needed to solve
any problem and evaluate the resource of the result of the decision. That means, what
you say? Suppose that is anything unwanted things may happen because you unexpected
things  may happens  during  the  course of the  experiment  because planning  becausesuppose you have the plan there is a immediate or the sudden outbreak or the any disease
or the pest.
So, that we are not usually prepared to tackle. In that case, so, you have to take a quick
decision and also implement the actions as quick as possible of your decisions and at the
same time you have to evaluate this say the results or the decisions whether this decision
was proper or wrong decision. It may be wrong decisions sometime not necessary that
always your decision may be right, sometimes it may be wrong decision, but you can get
a learning, even the wrong decisions you can take learning, you can have a learning of
this your decisions.Then you have to analyze the results of the decisions. Then monitor
the progress towards the goal objective, so, regular monitoring. So, in between, so, there
is a regular assessment. So, whether we are meeting when you are attending as per the
goals.
So, these are the steps that should be followed when you go for the organic transitions or
the conventional field to organic fields, that means, you have the field, you divide the
field four parts and go on the transition have a plan transition plan and go for the
implementation of the plans from the year the transition year.
So, as you see example you can give example for transitions.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:21)
So, this is a field plan of organic rice chickpea system. So, this is a whole field. So, this
divided into four parts; field 1, field 2, field 3 and field 4. In case of field 4, so, when you
go for the transition, so, leave field 1, field 2, field 3, start your transition from field 4.
From field 4, you have the crop transition plan.
So, here we have taken the beginning of the transition. You have the system of rice
chickpea. You want to have the rice and rice chickpea, your main crop for the systems.
In this case transition years, we are introducing soya bean in the Kharif season followed
by radish in the on dry season they are winter seasons. So, the purpose of having soybean
and radish I discussed these are the crops which require less nutrient, less demand of
nitrogen.
So, having soybean or the radish at the beginning at the transition that can so, that we can
get the same yield, yield level can be maintained.
So, the yield loss can be compensated having the soybean or radish because they have
the less demand of nutrients. So, through organic farming we can attend the yield as of
chemical farming for those type of crops soybean or radish. So, and the second year we
are going to send soybean crops and the carrot, soybean is a leguminous crop.
So, in the way it can fix atmospheric nitrogen and you can build up the soil fertility and
the inertia of changing the carrots also a low nutrient demanding crops and once you
have done the two years then you go for the third year the yours the main crop as you are
the system rice chickpea system and this is the third year the product can be labeled as a
organic product and from the third year you can it because you already have followed
transitions for the last two years and you can apply transit with the certificate in the third
years and third year will be a review process there will be proper revision and the
verification of the system of the production systems then you can apply for certification
you can get the certification organic, you can sell your (Refer Time: 28:17) produce as
organic from the third years. 
Now, similarly from the field 3, so, you can go for all the fields are conventional and the
field 3 is second year you can start for the transition and accordingly you can get organic
in the fourth year and same process for a field 2, you can go for transition from the third
year and you can get the organic the produce in the fifth year and the finally, the field 1you can start the transition fourth years and you can get organic in the sixth year that
means, after fifth year from sixth year onwards the whole farm is converted to organic.
So, by step by step as you go for this one the organic you can get the whole farm organic
from the sixth year. We have one economic analysis of this system.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:58)
If you see after third year, we did analyze what is the economic returns of the organic
rice chickpea system. So, we compare three fertilizers; one is from this our experiment
where one plot we applied no fertilizer is this is grown on as a native soil as a control one
and the other plot we have plot only chemical fertilizers and the other the third plot
organic fertilizers. That means no chemicals. 
So, in this if you see the yield of rice and chickpea, so, in case of no fertilizer control
yield is a very low and the chickpea is was grown on an residual fertility of rice no
fertilizer  applied  to  the  chickpea  crop,  only fertilizer  was  applied  to  rice  crop  and
chickpea was grown after harvest of rice in the same soil without adding any fertilizers
even if a chemical fertilizer organic fertilizer.
So, that is why if you see the residual effect of no fertilizer is nothing. So, the chickpea
yield is very low and same for the chemical fertilizer there is a very because as we
discussed earlier also is a very short acting and also the very fast release and it has very
low or no residual as good as a no application of fertilizer because yield remains samechickpea whether you go for no fertilizer or the chemical fertilizer they have no residual,
but if you see of organic fertilizers, it has a high residual effect and the yield we are
getting from the residual of organic is 650 kg per hectare. Whereas, in case of chemical
fertilizer is 105 kg per hectare of chickpea yield that mean it indicates that that organic
fertilizer has a high residual activity, it can because the residual activity organic fertilizer
that can meets some of the nutrient demand of chickpea crops at it can give some of the
returns which is based significantly higher than that of chemical fertilizer. 
And with this if you see the this is a cost of production of both rice and chickpea and this
is a gross return of rice and chickpea and it is net return in case of no fertilizer there is a
loss  around  20850  rupees  per  hectare  because  so,  as  because  you  are  spending
everything,  land  preparation,  seeds,  labour  everything;  irrigation  you  are  putting
everything on no fertilizers. So, there is a negative return. The loss one if you are going
chemical fertilizer the return is around 37625 rupees per hectare whereas, you are going
for organic fertilizer the return is around 51300 rupees per hectare and if see because
there.
So, there is a increasing return, we have put in organic fertilizer organic the organic
farming as compared to chemical farming. The price selling price of the produce we have
kept 23 percent higher in organic farming as compared to chemical farming and also
there  is  a  production  cost  is  higher  in  organic  farming  because  you  are  using  the
vermicompost that is a high dose as compared to the chemical fertilizer.
So, because of that the production cost is higher in case of the organic farming though
there is a high production cost and because high residual effect and it compensate the
nutrient requirement of the succeeding crops. So, you are able to get the higher return in
case of the organic farming as compared to chemical farming.
So, the point is that here when you go for the rotation design, your crop planning and
rotation design you should keep in mind that the type of crops you are choosing in the
beginning  at  the  transition  periods  when you  are targeting  a main  crops, transition
periods take the crops which requires a low nutrients and less maintenance and that can
suppress their weed growth in that way we can build the soil fertility for your main crops
and also different type of crops combinations should be chosen and you go for the
economic analysis you can see that the organic farming that give that if you do properlyproper  management,  scientific  management  organic  farming  definitely  will  give  the
better return as compared to the chemical farming. With this I conclude this lecture.
Thank you very much.