Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 37
Organic Standard
So, good morning to all. So, I welcome you to the lecture 37, the last week of this lecture
organic standards. So, we have discussed earlier. So, with respect to the organic farming
for  sustainable  agricultural  productions;  we  discussed  about  the  principles  and  the
concepts  of  organic  farming,  as  a  introduction  to  organic  farming.  In  the  nutrient
management or the productions of the organic fertilizers like a vermicompost or enriched
vermicompost. The plant protection measures how you can prepare the bio pesticides,
botanical pesticides from the plant extracts, that can be used for protecting pest and
diseases of the crops. And also we discussed about the management practices of field
crops, horticulture crops and plantation crops in organic farming.
The nutrient management land preparations, production practices and the pest and its
controls in for the organic crop productions. We also discussed the organic means the
how the organic foods can lay to the better health, antioxidant capacity of the foods and
vegetables, how the produce of the organic or origins are the better than the produce of
the conventional products. Today will be discussing about organic standards, because no
as I have gone through the classes, you know the how you can produce crops organically,
how  can  you  manage  your  crops,  and  also  the  crop  planning  transition  to  organic
farming. So, there are some sets of rules or the standards are established for the organic
productions. 
By knowing this standards, so this helps in building a trust between the producers and
the consumers because bringing transparency between the producers and the consumers
and also it can help in a better marketing of the organic foods and bringing the brand of
the organic foods and having the consumer confidence on the organic foods by having
some set of organic standards.(Refer Slide Time: 02:57)
So, in this the, what is the aim of this and the scope of this organic standards. Means this
standard provides the basis for sustainable developments of organic productions while
ensuring the effective  functioning  of the market.  Because as you  are going for the
organic  market  this  is  a  challenge  because  unlike  the  European  countries  or  the
developed countries where this has gained a momentum already is established organic
farming, organic products are the better preferred by the consumers and the consumers
want to pay the premium price for the organic products pickers. So, already is a trust
building because certification is very strong and if the produce is organic the consumer
has assurance is a organic foods.
So, that type of marketing or the organic foods and guaranteeing fair competition some
with  the  conventional  products.  And  ensuring  consumer  confidence  that  is  very
important  the  consumers  should  be  satisfied  about  this  produce  and  protecting  the
consumer interest. So, it establishes the common objectives and principles in the, to
underpin  the  rules  set  under  these  standards  concerning  that  means,  all  stages  of
productions, processing and distribution of organic products and their control. 
So, there is a set of standards governing as you  have discussed earlier the organic
productions  principles  and  practices,  and  this  the  including  your  land  preparation,
nutrient management and plant protection measures, and the transition plan how you can
follow  for  the  organic  certification  process  that  is  from  the  productions,  and  theprocessing, till up to the market distribution; then, the use of indications referring to
organic productions in labelling and the advertising also.
So, these are the aims of the organic standards this, also the standard lays down the
specific rules on organic productions, labeling and control in respect of products. And
the scopes, this can standards are applied to the following products originating from
agricultural productions that a live or unprocessed agricultural product then, processed
agricultural products for use as a food, then vegetative propagating materials, and the
seeds for the cultivations, then the yeasts used as a food or the feed material. So, this can
be included for the organic standard purpose. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:33)
So, for this if you go for the organic standard starting from the land preparations up to as
we are dealing with the harvest and the post harvest processing, will deal with our
standards  involved  for  the  organic  certification  process  for  the  landscape,  the  land
resource recommended thing. So, which is recommended for the organic production,
these are areas which should be managed properly and linked to facilitate by facilitated
the biodiversity. 
So  that  means  the  growing  different  crops  of  many  varieties  of  crops  should
accommodate as a rule of principles of organic farming. So, maintaining the genetic
biodiversity, various crop many crops and many varieties of a particular prop can be
grown. In general, the area should not be heavily fertilized, usually can choose the landwhich is less fertilized earlier or layer not intensively fertilized or may be the land which
is not cultivated earlier that can be used for the organic farming purpose.
Extensive pastures meadows and grasslands, extensive orchards, hedgerows, trees and
the forest line also can be used for this organic from productions. Ecological rich fallow
land or the arable land that is a fallow land, the land which was not cultivated for longer
periods remaining fallow and the arable lands land can be cultivable arable lands. So,
those can be used for the organic production standards. So, the water ways or the pools
the springs, ditches, wetlands, swamps and other watery areas which are not used for the
intensive agriculture and aqua culture production that also can be converted to organics.
The standard the certification programs are developed landscape and the biodiversity
standards. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:29)
So, then we go for the once should the lands. Lands should not be heavily manure or
heavily fertilized, the land should be very fallow lands which because (Refer Time:
07:38) or the fallow for the last several years, can be used for the organic productions.
And the arable lands, that is a suitable for a cultivation of crops for growing of the crops
those lands can be chosen for the organic, organic production. So, one chose the lands
then you can see the varieties or the crops or the varieties which can be selected for the
organic farming or the organic production purposes. So, there are some recommendations, and that means, the species and varieties cultivated
should be adapted to the soil, and climate conditions and we resistant to several pest and
diseases  that means, the species or the cultivars we are choosing so that should that
should suitable for particular soils and particular climatic conditions. And also, that
cultivar should have the resistant to many pests and diseases. And the choice of varieties
of genetic diversity should be taken into consideration because that is as a biodiversity
we consider, as a biodiversity as a component of the organic farming.
Standards: when the organic seeds and the plant materials are available, they must be
used for the organic production practices. In case when the certified organic seeds and
the plant materials are not available, so chemically untreated conventional materials can
be used; it may not be possible all the times to get the organic seeds or the organic plant
materials for the purpose of the growing of the crops. So, when there is organic seeds
and plant materials are not available, then conventional seeds or the plant materials are
allowed. We can use provided they should not be treated with any chemicals. 
The use of genetically engineered seeds pollens, transgene plants or the plant materials
are not allowed in organic production. So, these materials are prohibited specially the
genetic G or GMO, genetically modified organism they are strictly prohibited from the
use of the organic farming.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:57)
So, the plant materials those are prohibited are not allowed the GMO such a genetically
modified organisms which we have discussed the classes also. Then in view of their
incompatibility and the potential risk they pose on environment and the human health.
So, they are not allowed the seeds, seedling, plant propagations materials, inoculants,
other microbial inputs, nutrient inputs, and the biocides, and other crop production inputs
containing GMOs are strictly prohibited from use of the organic productions.
Feed for organic livestock must not contained any GMO and their derivatives. Even, the
use of genetically engineered semen, embryos and breeding stock and veterinary and the
health care products containing GMOs are prohibited. So, GMOs they are not used,
though we are now the in Europe also some (Refer Time: 10:56) they allow for the GMO
crops because there is a high yielding to increase the production and protect from the use
of pesticides and the fungicides. So, they allow, but in India. So, in organic farming as a
natural farming we do not permit do not allow GMO crops because it has a potential
health risk to avoid here the health risk or the to avoid the adverse effect on the human
health. So, we must have a GMO seed, GMO in organic production. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:30)
Manures and plant waste more about the GMO crops unless until you establish because
you this is because the potential health risk may happen as a cumulative after few years
you can have the adverse effect of the GMO crops on human health. So, once you have
this seed material of the planting stocks and the know the lands for the organic farming,then next comes your manures, the inputs and the plant waste are the inputs for the
organic productions.
So, what are the inputs are recommended? The manures and plant wastes; so, fertilizers
and management  should minimize  the nutrient  losses because when you  go for the
manure management or the fertilizer managements, we have discussed in the production
practices  what is the time of applications  and method of applications, how we can
properly incorporate in the fields. Even if the organic manures or the vermicompost there
should be well incorporated in the field at proper depth so that the loss will be minimum
to the atmosphere and also that can be a better utilization by the crops.
So, that is a minimum loss to the nutrients all manures should be composted and slurry
should be aerated.  We should not use any on undecomposed  manures  in the field,
because if you are using the fresh manures I will say fresh waste materials or the fresh
cow dung you been applying in the field that has a adverse effect on crop growth and
development  because  the  microbes  are  used  for  the  decompositions  of  this  waste
materials in the field itself. 
So, the crop may suffer from the lack of nutrients from the in the field. So, to avoid that
one the all the manures should be properly composted before their application to the crop
field and slurry also should be aerated. So, because it can remove by aeration (Refer
Time: 13:13) can be odorless to minimize the odor and also to minimize the emission of
greenhouse gas to atmospheres. 
Non-synthetic mineral fertilizers and brought in fertilizers  of biological origin those
should be regarded as supplementary to and not as replacement of nutrient recycling
because as you say that for organic farming principles also, we have discussed. So,
should be it should be originated from the farm itself all the waste materials should be
composted, in the farm itself and the brought in materials should be avoided as much as
possible. 
Then accumulation of heavy metals and other pollutants in the soil should be prevented.
So, these are the recommendations for the manures and the plant waste. What are the
permitted for the organic farming? As you have discussed earlier straws that means, the
crop residues, farm yard manures, poultry manures from organic sources preferably afterbeing properly composted. So, whatever the organic waste we are using they should be
well decomposed and well composted before applications to the crop field. 
The  plant  waste  materials  and  the  plant  bi-products  from  organic  food  processing
industries preferably after being treated they can be used for the field slurry, urine and
the what dirty water from organic sources preferably after being aerated, slurry aeration
must  then  microbials  and  the  plant  extracts  they  are  permitted  for  the  organic
productions. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:41)
What  are  restricted?  The  restricted  means  the  limited  use.  So,  some  materials  are
restricted means they can be used with proper permissions from the certification agency.
So, the restricted materials use of all plant waste and animal manures, mushroom, house
waste,  waste  from  the  food  processing  industry,  poultry  manures  from  nonorganic
sources they are restricted for use that means, know they can be used, but there some
restrictions. 
However, the need of them must be recognized and approved by the certification body.
So, they can be used with proper approval from the certification agency. And they must
receive the treatment specified before they use details of the waste must be provided
including its source of origin should be should be known these wastes can be used after
being composted for at least 3 months.So, these waste materials they are originated from the non-organic sources. So, they can
be  used  with  proper  approval  from  the  certification  agency  and  also  those  waste
materials should be composted for at least 3 months before their application. So, those
are prohibited, those are sewage sludge and from the cities or the city waste or the waste
water sewage sludge or the municipal waste and the peat soils. So, they are prohibited
from  the  use  of  the  organic  productions.  They contain  most  the  heavy  metals  and
contaminants are there, so unless they are, so those are sewage sludge and the peats they
are not allowed for the organic productions.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:15)
The mineral fertilizers and the supplementary nutrients as we have discussed because no
for this a enriching the organic fertilizers like vermicompost, if you want to have a
enriched vermicompost productions, enriched specific nutrients either the nitrogen or the
phosphorus potash then you have to add some natural minerals rock minerals during the
composting process. So, recommended the mineral fertilizer they can be used for the
composition process or they can be directly applied to the field also for the organic
productions.  Natural  rock  phosphates,  calcined  aluminum  phosphate  rocks,  minor
minerals like calcareous magnesium rock, gypsum, ground chalk, lime stone, Epsom
salts, magnesium rock, clay. So, these are allowed for the organic productions.
Then trace elements like the stone meals or this a ground basalt, these are, Potassium
source like wood ash and plant extracts, that can be used for the organic productions.And the materials which are restricted because they can be used limited use or they can
be  used  with  proper  approval  from  the  certification  agency.  So,  in  absence  of  the
accepted materials  this can be used like soluble fertilizers, is allowed with specific
approval from the certification body. 
And also, the potassium sources like natural rock potash or the sulphate of potash sulfur
trace elements like boron, copper, iron, manganese, molybdenum, cobalt, selenium, zinc.
So, these are micro elements micro nutrients they can be used as a spray as we observed
the deficiency symptoms of these elements that can be used in organic productions.
Then dried seaweed meals,  liquid  seaweed,  basic  slag  and sylvinite,  natural  potash
source there also used with proper approval from the certification agency which are not
used all the synthetic fertilizers as you see prohibited, all the synthetic fertilizers are not
allowed in the organic production. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:25)
If you see the weed control usually when we talk about the weed control, so you will go
for the physical method or the mechanical methods or may be cultural methods of weed
control. So, what is recommended? The balanced rotations including weed suppressing
and weed susceptible crops.
So, this a cultural practice we have discussed in the lectures. So, what the rotations
should be followed for different type of rotations? Same crops should not follow, samecrops in the rotations, so where this same type of weeds does not ha proliferate does not
grow in the year after year to avoid that one goes for cultural practices cultural controls.
So, balanced rotational crops including the crops which can suppress weeds and they can
susceptible crops so that the weeds can be can be controlled.
Then composting the manures and the plant waste and aeration of slurry that means, the
by proper composting we can sum up weed seeds are destroy the inactivated in the
process of compositing the high temperature, and the microbial decomposition process.
And pre-sowing cultivations, this also because we destroy the summer ploughing one of
the practice for the cultural method of weed control by doing summer planning, so you
can increase the soil temperatures as compared to the ambient temperatures, by raising
the soil temperature this spoils some weed seeds at the same time also this also inactivate
or the kills some of the harmful insect pests and the pathogens also.
So, pre-sowing cultivation is required to remove the weeds and stale seed bed technique,
this is a new one stale seed bed technique means, we need to irrigate the field and we do
allow the weeds do germinate. So, what about the weed population there? They do
germinate by allowing the by putting the proper water or providing the proper moisture
and the temperature so that the seeds whatever the weeds itself they do germinate. 
So, after they come up, we do go for the manual method of weed control by the remove
the weeds. So, by the way; so, we can control the weeds for the crops and use of high
seed rates, so this is usually sometimes you know we do follow, we may not follow also
using high purpose is if a high seed rate. So, this increases the population density of the
crops so that the weed seed may not be able to grow may not compete with the crop.
Usually what happens in some cases having the high the population density of the main
crops may affect the yield of the crops because of the competitions between the seeds of
the same crop.
So, you must try to avoid high seed rate, but we should go for the other methods pre pre
sowing cultivation and the stale seed bed techniques by the cultural practices we do
follow for controlling weeds. And what are the permitted for the organic standards?
Mulches, plastic mulches specially (Refer Time: 21:23) the black plastic mulches you
can see. So, this can be used for the controlling weeds as this does not allow these solarradiation interceptions in the ground surface. So, weeds, weeds cannot grow here on the
dark condition conditions. So, this can control on the weeds; black plastic mulch.
Then pre-emergence and post-emergence mechanical operations and the flame weeding
also permitted. What is prohibited? Use of agrochemicals, and hormone herbicides in the
crops or the edge of the crops it is not allowed in organic productions, and steam
pasteurization are the sterilization of the soil for the weed control is also not allowed
because by using the stream sterilization will be killing most of the beneficial microbes
also, gets affected,  gets eliminated from the field that is why we do not allow  the
sterilization of the soils for this weed control. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:21)
Then pests and disease the recommended is creation of diverse eco-systems and within
and around the crop to encourage natural  predators by companion planting  and the
rotational cropping, use of resistant varieties and strategic planting dates. So, these are all
the preventive methods say the cultural methods of pests and the disease management
having  crop  rotations,  growing  different  crops  in  rotations  or  choosing  the  crops
specially the resistant to some type of the test and diseases. 
And going for inter crop inter cropping so that it can take different crops so that would
the pest population can be minimized; as we have discussed growing of this Sesamum
(Refer Time: 23:05) as seen the Sesamum in the boundary of this the rice plant it can
minimize the brown plant to attack. Similarly, marigold also grown the boundary toprotect the crop from the Nemotode (Refer Time: 23:17), many other pest, pest and
diseases.
So, these are the cultural methods for the pest and its management organic farming. So,
in addition to this the permitted have the mechanical and the biological control measure.
We have discussed in detail the mechanical control measure and the biological control
measure by use of biopesticides. Then restricted use of some chemicals used that, the
following products practices required approval from the certification body those are the
copper sulphate, copper hydroxides, copper oxides, copper oxy chlorides, and copper
ammonium carbonates. So, these are used, can be used for this pest and its management
provided  you  need  to  take  approval  from  the  certification  agency for  use  of  these
products. 
Then what are prohibited? All this synthetic pesticide like formaldehyde and phenols for
the soil sterilization, so methyl, bromide and other chemicals soil sterilant. So, they are
prohibited.  They are not used for the organic productions. Seed dressing based on,
mercurial and the organo chlorine compounds that is also prohibited, all other synthetic
pesticides  including  aluminum  or  metal  metaldehyde,  those  are  prohibited  steam
sterilization  or  pasteurization  of  soil  for  the  pests  and  disease  also  prohibited.  So,
synthetic pesticides, the chemical pesticides because the centrally government of India
has banned many of the pesticides, pesticides for use from the agricultural purposes.
So, now because now it is a very high time to minimize the use or not restrict the use of
the synthetic pesticides, for use in agricultural production because you know this creates
say this link to the food and health they as we discussed is a quite link well linked
because whatever the health problem do we face today. So, mostly they regulated what
about the food we take regularly and there is a food you know that contains the many the
pesticide residues or the insecticide residues are there. So, they go to food chains. So,
you are suffering the chronic diseases like the cancers or the cardiovascular disease or
many other diseases are very common due to the heavy intake of the pesticides which are
highly carcinogenic and that you see the effect on the adverse effect on human health. 
So, this, so these are the pesticide or the synthetic pesticide should be many are banned
now, but those should be restricted or banned from agricultural purposes and more of the
farmers  should  become  dependent  on  the  bio  pesticides  or  the  cultural  methodsmechanical methods or the bio pesticides. And you can use the natural sources like cow
dung, as we discussed cow dung, cow urines and many of the pulse flours can be used
for as a combination to prepare the pesticides for controlling the pest and disease organic
farming. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:19)
So, these are the some of the production practices. How we can do at the field labels we
have discussed in detail in classes, but this a standard as per the national program for
organic productions NPOP standards.
So, standards are the guidelines when the any business man or any entrepreneur want to
go for the organic productions, so guidelines set to them. So, they have to follow the
guidelines for the organic production because as you are going for the business modes to
brand their product as organic and to bring their product to consumer as a organic and to
have a trustworthy and the building the confidence between the producer and consumers
organic  products.  So,  they  have  to  follow  some  standards,  before  they  go  for  the
certification process for the organic produce.
So, after the production from the field of course, the product should go for the should
follow minimum standards for the processing as well so that it can be labeled as a
organic products. So, standards for the food processing after harvest of the products. So,
what have the in brief what are the practices we must follow so that the product can be
labeled as organic in processing too. The products shall be protected from nonorganicand products and they should, should not be stored and transported together. So, after the
harvesting the post harvest processing when you are this storing at the products or the
transporting products like you are may be rice or the wheat or the grain products. So, this
should be operation done should be separately not in the same baskets. So, that should be
the non-organic products should not mix with the organic products, during the storage or
during the transport operations.
Then when go for the food processing we have some coloring agents. So, when we go
for food processing of these products then the coloring agents like the flavors and the
appetite  stimulants, they should be only from the natural sources, chemical  sources
should not be allowed for the organic certification or the organic products. And the
probiotics, enzymes, micro organisms they are allowed. So, probiotics are the good for
health for the digestion process they are present in our guts (Refer Time: 28:30) also. 
So, the probiotics, enzymes of the microbe benefits are the for the health point of view
they have the health benefit point of view. So, they are allowed in organic products.
Water and salts  may be used in organic products. So, they are allowed  in organic
products. Antioxidants and the preservatives only natural sources are allowed, so not
chemical sources or any antioxidants or any preservatives.
Special conditions for the storage, they like your control atmosphere storage cooling,
freezing, drying or maintaining the desired humidity is allow in organic productions or
organic processing. Ethylene gas is permitted for ripening of the foods, for the organic.
Then by for the packaging usually we must use the biodegradables, recyclable, reusable
systems and eco friendly packaging materials shall be used in organic food processing. 
The  package  shall  be  closed  in  such  a  manner  that  distribution  of  the  contents
substitutions of the contents cannot be achieved without manipulation of damage of the
seals, because know while packaging the organic products the sealing should be very
perfect it because the take out of the materials from the inside cannot be possible without
breaking the seal of the packaging materials. So, this sealing should be very perfect that
means, the substitutions for the contents should not be possible without breaking the
seals.
So, this packaging, my packaging the then the permissible packaging materials are the
paper, wax papers, paper coated with polyethylene, polystyrene and cold waxes with thepolyethylene coating film. So, these are allowed for the permissible packaging materials
for the organic foods. 
So, from this lecture we can see this is the while say as we discussed previous lectures
are the organic managements, organic input managements, organic pest managements
and handling the products while ruing the organic. So, this is a brief about those lectures
as standards, these standards by the national program for the organic productions. 
So,  they  have  set  some  standards  when  you  go  for  the  initially  for  the  organic
conversions or the organic food productions, we must follow the standards by meeting
the standards. So, we will that make assurance that your products are of the organic
quality  so  that  makes  a  connection  between  the  producers  and  the  consumers.  So,
consumers have a trust where the trust building and the producers, and once the linkage
is well established then it facilitates better marketing of this organic foods.
So, to have a better marketing of the organic foods, to have the expansion of the organic
food market, and bring the awareness among the farmers for conversion of the land from
the conventional to organics, so this standard is a must. So, farmers the entrepreneurs
they must follow this standard to have organic productions and to have a linkage better
linkage between the producers and the consumer. With this I close lecture.
Thank you very much. 