Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 32
Integrated Farming System and Urban Agriculture
So, lecture 32 this is Integrated Farming System and Urban Agriculture. So, as we are
discussing about organic farming. So, integrated farming system is a systems or the
platform where this can be performed or the evaluated activity can be performed to
through organic way only. So, integrated farming system does not allow use of any
chemical fertilizers chemical pesticides. This is a cyclic manner in a cycling. So, there
are many enterprises. 
If we discuss what is the integrated farming systems, so there are many components are
there many enterprise. So, bi-product of one enterprise that becomes as a inputs of the
other enterprise that means, the output or the waste materials of one enterprise that
becomes useful of the input of the other enterprise, so that in that way so, there is no
waste, no waste generation from these farming systems. And that also he says 0 emission
concept  with  the  less  emission  or  no  emission  of  the  greenhouse  gases  to  the
atmospheres. So, is a healthy systems where the waste recycling system we can say. So,
there is a no wastes, the waste of one that say input of the useful materials of the other
components. So, this we will discuss about integrated farming systems, how we can
arrange the resources.
And the second one urban agriculture, so as you know that we are moving to industrial
agriculture I can say urban agriculture I say then in cities the people or the people who
want also fresh vegetables and good quality vegetables. And to meet the requirement of
the because city population is a growing over the years also. And to meet the need of the
city population how can we cater the requirement of the best especially the vegetables
we are not going for the urban agriculture for the cereal crops I would say the rice or the
oil seeds, pulses that are not included in urban agriculture, especially vegetable crops
cash crops high value crops, which the village resident sorry city residents or the city
population that needs on day to day basis vegetables.So, can we meet the requirement of the city peoples, it is urban agriculture. So that we
will  discuss  also  and  that  can  be  done  through  organics  to  have  a  very  quality
productions and that can meet the requirement of cities. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:25)
So, this we will discuss this integrated farming system. So, what is integrated farming
systems? If you see the integrated farming system represents an appropriate combination
of farm enterprises that is a cropping system, horticulture, livestocks, fishery, forestry,
poultry and the means are available to the farmers to raise them for profitability.
And moreover, it interacts adequately with the environments without dislocating the
ecological and socio-economic balance on one hand, and attempt to meet the national
goal on the other. And the IFS in its real sense will help in different ways to leave the
economy of agricultural agriculture, and the standard of living of farmers of the country
as a whole. So that means, as you discussed integrated farming system that interacts with
many components that comes that integrates the many enterprises, you can as many
enterprise as possible depending upon the locations and the climatic conditions.
So, the locations where you do belong what is the field area where you want to go for the
integrated farming systems and the climate of course the climates and if technology
available. Based on that, so you can have the crops, you can have the live stocks, you can
poultry, fishery, piggery. So, the appear also beekeeping also one of the parts of the
integrated farming system. So that can be in because you know so that can be integratedin a system so that means, the and that there is no use of the there is no need of using the
external resources. So, only farm resources, farm output can be recycled the on farm
resources can be used in this component to have a better productions, to have a healthy
systems we can say or the health healthy crops.
That means, in IFS the farm resources are allocated to the needs and priorities of the
farmers in these local circumstances, which depends on say climatic conditions. Such as
the quantity and distribution of rainfalls, temperature, humidity sunshine hours and the
wind velocity these are the some of the component that that determines your (Refer
Time: 04:23) planning of the enterprise combinations or the structure you are (Refer
Time: 04:26) making to. Of course, the soil type and soil topography as you discussed.
You have also discussed the market so that is a very important the market opportunities
what is the market situations, and the market potential, for a particular demand for the
particular crop or the particular produce or the particular enterprise and economics the
fund  availability.  And  the  institution  institutional  and  the  infrastructure  support  is
available that means, the linkage with the institutions resource institutions, from where
you can get regular advice regular training can be can be obtained and we can get the
consultancy from the institutions and the availability of the facility as a infrastructural
facility.
So, this is what to say integrated farming systems  where the many components are
integrated  joined together  to solve a that  means,  economic  output to have a better
economic output. And sometimes you have the sustainability, sustainable productions
and also this less impact, on the less on the environment.(Refer Slide Time: 05:22)
So, why do go for IFS there is integrated farming systems? There so that is to ensure
income throughout the year because if you go for the suppose in case if we go for only
crops right as the single farming. In case there is a natural calamity,  there may be
drought, there may be floods any situation or their market price slash lashes for that
particular crop then there is a huge loss of the farmers.
On the other hand, you have the many components. So, suppose there is the loss of crops
the loss in crops can be compensated from maybe other enterprise, you have the live
stocks, you have the horticultural crops, you have the live stocks, you have the poultry.
So, this loss can be compensated from other. So, this is this is farmers are also well
acquainted with this because you know a tomato sometimes you see the tomato price that
goes off it maybe a tomato or onion market it goes around 100 rupees more than 100 to
200 rupees. Beans also that goes recently market bean price is 200 rupees a kilo and in
some place in some period the tomato same tomato it is sold around 1 rupee, 2 rupees a
kilo.
So, this type of market uncertainty the market fluctuation if some farmer is growing only
tomato and the market price goes down or there may be the environmental calamities.
So, there is a complete loss. So, if there is a combination of tomato or maybe chilli some
other crops then it can because if there is a loss to some crops then this loss may be
compensated with some other crops.Even if I even if you know the sometimes that tomato the farmers do not want to pluck
the produce harvest the produced from the field let it spoil in the field itself because the
amount of money you are spending putting labors for harvesting and transport that from
market you may not get that price you may not get from the market. So that is what the
integrated farming systems having different components together you can compensate
the yield loss in case with the market price goes down or the market slash falls or there
may be natural calamity. So, that the farmers should not bear the economic loss that
means, this loss can be compensated some other entities.
So that is what the, to ensure the economy income throughout the year. There is a need to
reorient to the present ways of agricultural practice and develop suitable multi-enterprise
agricultural system for farmers, as single crop production enterprises are subject to high
risk of natural calamities, irregular and uncertain income and employment of the farmer.
So that  is  we have  to  go  for the  multi-enterprise.  So, that  you  can  get  the  return
throughout the year, you can have the return at least you can there is an assured return
you can get. And also, same time that it can give the employment generation to the part
of farmers because that can give can keep the farmers employed throughout the year.
Shifting from single to integrated multi-enterprise system will help to conserve natural
resources and restore to the farmer’s confidence in agriculture besides increasing the
income of the farmer per unit land and water. So, as per the if you go for the multiple
enterprises. So, that is of course, there is a resource conservation that that builds the soil
fertility and the natural resource conservations and also at the same time that is a more
productions per unit of land and on water to.
The governing idea behind the multi-enterprise agricultural system is that farmers can
adopt  enterprise  such  as  you  know  dairy,  horticulture,  floriculture,  bee  keeping,
vegetables,  poultry,  duckery,  piggery,  mushroom,  fisheries,  bio  gas  plant  and  solar
heater, solar plant. So, these are the components which can be integrated in a particular
farm. And the entire philosophy for multi-enterprise farming system revolves efficient
utilization of resources time and family labors while attaining the food and nutritional
security of poor farmers that means, no you know as you are discussing also what is the
food security. Food security does not mean that you to only feed your family peoples
only cereals, like rice and wheat or the pulses know.In this say balance nutrition not only for security it should provide nutritional security
that comes when you the child we could now see that the malnourished child because of
the nutritional insecurity there is no proper nutrition. To have a balanced nutrition they
should  take  carbohydrate  they  should  take  protein  proper  protein  then  proper  fats,
minerals, vitamins from other sources. So, that can be available many of the mix of fruits
or vegetables.
You have to take cereals daily, daily consumptions know a healthy a healthy human
being or you can say healthy child to have a healthy child he should take the proper
combination of the carbohydrates, protein, fats, mineral, vitamins and that can those can
be available from sources of the fruits and vegetables you have the cereals, you have the
pulses, you have the oil seeds, and at the same time you have the vegetables and also
fruits you have taken regularly. So, that there is a balanced nutrition that can give a
nutritional security. Moreover, if only you take the pulse crops or the cereal crops the
cereal crops may not be utilized as we discussed the food security, the utilization of the
food may not be proper if there is no balance right or there in balanced nutrition from
other sources.
So that is what having an integrated farming system the farm family can get not only
crops, you can get the crops, you can get the milk also, you can get egg as poultry you
can get egg, you can get fish from the fish pond, can get fish and vegetables. And also,
orchard should have or orchard is the fruit crops can be. So that can give a balanced
nutrition for the farm family to have a help to have a healthy because know the body is
your say. So, the purpose of this subject is to make the to have a healthy diet so that body
remains always with the human with the persons. So, you have to keep your body fit for
every time and if you are a fit enough then you can be more efficient to give you a better
output or a better work.(Refer Slide Time: 10:58)
Then key principles of integrated farming systems so that is a cyclic principle. So, we
have discussed a lot about this that means, the so let us say organic the cycling organic
resource livestock land crop that means, these are the resource organic resources or the
waste of the output or the output of the one enterprise that becomes input of the other
enterprise such as recycling principles.
Then efficient use of resources that also have this in case of the integrated farming
systems; efficient crop residues and organic wastes are more rationally is an important
activity of IFS. So, for resource poor farmers the correct management of organic waste
together with an optimal allocation of resource scarce resources leads to sustainable
production that means, the which type of the that means, that comes from crop planning
or the farm planning.
So, what type of enterprise you have to choose, depending upon the locations and the
climates? So that gives a benefit means what type of the combination what how much
area can be diverted to field crops or a vegetable crops or maybe the horticultural crops
or maybe the ponds or the poultry. So, those optimum allocation that can decide, that can
give a better return.
Then  eco-sustainable  and  economically  viable  that  is  the  combining  ecological
sustainability  and  economic  viability.  The  integrated  farming  system  maintains  and
improves  agricultural  productivity  while  also  reducing  the  negative  environmentalimpact  that  means,  or  we  are  having  integrated  farming  systems.  This  is  a  waste
recycling concept that means, there is no waste generation. In case in this system there is
0 waste that means, the waste of one input that becomes the one enterprise that becomes
the input material for the other enterprise.
So, there is no waste generation in that case there is no emission or the no emission of
greenhouse gases or to the atmospheres  or there is less pollution of the air or less
pollution of the ground waters. And the as the wastes are recycled to the in the systems
they are used as input management also there is a less use of the resources from the
external resources. So, the with the on-farm resources we can we can manage the system
integrated farming system the components in a better way. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:11)
And the, what are the objectives of integrated farming systems? The objectives are it
should  formulate  location  specific  model  involving  main  and  allied  enterprises  for
different farming situation. That means, based on the locations that means, your land
type soil type and the climate and of course, the market potentials in that you can have a
plan.
So, the main with the main enterprise depending upon if you are going for the specially
for the vegetable productions. The vegetable in the main enterprise then have the allied
enterprise that may have the livestock or poultry or the fishery, fishery pond or maybe
the  field  crops  those  are  becomes  the  allied  enterprise.  So, you  have  to  select  theplanning, what type that depends upon the objectives. But what are we are setting your
objectives based on the locations or the soil type and the climate and the technology
available. 
Then the IFS it should ensure optimal utilization and conservation of natural resources
with the efficient recycling within each system for sustainable production. So that is
what the objective of the IFS that means, optimum utilization of the natural resources
and efficient utilization of resources within the systems. So, that we have we have a
sustainable production that is one of the objectives of the IFS. Then it should raise the
net return of the farm household by complementing the main activity with the allied
enterprise. That means, when you have the different combination of enterprise so that the
objective is not only have a high production at the same time it should be remunerative,
you should provide the economy returns there should be profitable.
And it should concentrate on developing institutional and market linkage by inclusion of
new inter interventional technology that means, having that that means, the when you go
for the farming systems or the organic farming or the intake they say, as an integrated
farming  system  say all  organic concept  then you  should have the linkage  with the
institutions from where you can get the consultancy or the advice expert advice as on
when you need because sometimes we may need the advice based on many factors where
the irrigation management, or the nutrient management or the pest management or the
processing post harvest processing also. In that case we should have the support from the
institutions and where we can get the regular consultancy. 
And it should address the nutritional insecurity of resource poor farmers vulnerability
and poverty of landless live that means, that is a very important in this case integrated
farming system, that is the objective because in this case we are we are having the many
enterprises so that the nutritional insecurity can be served. Because the farm the farm
family or the farm children they can get proper diet, the proper diet and balanced diet he
can get balanced diet.
So that you can have a healthy human being the raising the children from the beginning
because know like plant also the children now see the nutrition with the; if you go for the
what is say in case of the crop productions the you need to nourish the young seedling,
young seedling requires the much attentions. Once the seedling grows established a rootsystem then you may give less attention because the root system is enlarged enough to
take care of themselves. Similarly, for the young children this should be proper nutrition
this we should avoid the malnutrition and a farm family should grow the balance of crops
balanced so that can provide balanced diet at the beginning.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:27)
So, this outline of an integrated farming systems as you say. So, different components
you can see here the you can have the multipurpose crops, you can have the either crops
as a field crops that includes your these cereal, grains or the pulses, oil seeds or the
vegetables or you can have the orchard crops where I can have the fruit trees. So, there is
a multipurpose crop and the planning also know not necessary depending upon the farms
farm types on where you can have the what type of crops depends suppose you have the
upland, medium layer and low land area.
So, usually when you go for the vegetable crops or the special for the orchard crops, we
should  choose  for  the  upland  area  where  water  does  not  accumulate  as  you  have
discussed in the previous class. So, only if you have the lowland area that can be diverted
either making a pond or the fishery or you can grow if the go thinks of the growing up
the  rice  crops  which  can  sustain  under  the  lowland  conditions  and  the  high-water
stagnation conditions.
So, depending on the land type we can choose what type of crops can be chosen and can
be allocated to which land topography. This is one enterprise and it should have theanimal there is a livestock that is second enterprise, and the pond that the fish production
the third enterprise and also you have the biogas plant. 
So, this waste materials can be utilized and recycled the bio gas plant that can provide
electricity to the farm family, at the same time it can provide the fertilizers for these crop
productions. So that means, the from the crops this crop residue can be used as a I can
grow for the fodder crop of course, that can be used as a feeding material for the animals
and you go for the full system as the organic concept. No application of any fertilizer
chemical fertilizers or any synthetic pesticides.
So, everything the farm resource are recycled and put back in the farm itself. So, no
external use of resources, only natural sources you can you can have the natural minerals
can be used to meet the requirement of the crops only natural sources no chemical or the
synthetic sources are used in the crops or grown organics and that is fed to the animals
either you can have the livestock or a poultry. So, that can be as you discussed that can
be; so, the produce can be sold as a branded as organic. They produce here as a milk
meat or the eggs and the animals can be used for this may be for the cultivation purposes
that the workforce. The produced can be labeled and stored as organic products similarly
for the crops or the food and fiber that can be labeled as organic as you are growing
organic concept.
And this is a bio gas from this in the waste that goes to the biogas plant and you have the
energy for this maybe farm family also we can have the you can have the bio fertilizer.
We can have a vermi  compost  farmyard  manure  production and that can meet  the
nutrient requirement of the crops and also you have to supply the nutrient. Also, you can
sometimes you go for the vermi compost unit above the pond. So that the vermi compost
leachate that can be entered the pond area that can as a nutrient for the pond and the fish
also that can be marketed as organic because the fish feed also produced from these
crops what you are growing organically there is a feed material for the fish.
And also use the vermicompost leachates, as leachates that goes to the field pond also
and the fish can be branded as organic and it is sold as organic fish. And the water and
pond water that is a nutrient rich water that can be used for the irrigation purpose of the
crops the crops and also you can get the nutrient from the bio fertilizer from the compost
you can get nutrients. So that means, so there is this concept is a 0-waste concept thatmeans, there is no waste on the output of one enterprise that becomes the input of the
other enterprise this cycling manner, cycling, cycling manner and all the products from
these systems that are sold as organic.
So, it is a only in Northeast India there is a crop fishery livestock farming systems,
Northeast parts there is a very successful farming system in northeast regions and the
crops where you can go upland conditions we can go for the upland, upland paddy. On
upland also he can go up they can grow maize crops also there are many the horticultural
crops litchi, guava and the papaya, horticultural crops. Livestock; they have dairy cattle,
pigs, chicken, duck and the rabbits as a live stocks and the fish different fish (Refer
Time: 20:33) like rohu, katla and mirgal, the fish are grown also. So, having this, so in a
in a small the farmers are they around having two hectare of lands or a 2 to 3 hectares of
land say land size.
So, he can he can keep all the enterprise and with the optimum combination of the
resources so that the farm family can get a diet, also healthy diets or the you can say
balanced diet we can say at the same time you can get the remunerations maximum,
maximum profit from the farm and you can you can help in the improving the living
standard of the farm family. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:08)
So, what are the benefits? See the benefits  of an integrated  farming  system  as  we
discussed this one, this is recycling of resources you have discussed, because there is nowaste generation. So, this is the waste recycling so that means, the biproduct of a one
enterprise that becomes has input for the other enterprise then improves the soil fertility
and the soil health of course, as you are going for organic systems. So, there is a gradual
improvement in the maintaining the soil fertility.
Reduction in production cost because we are not using any external resources only the
farm resources are recycled back, so that way we are we are minimizing the production
cost decrease a farm input requirement of course. Efficient utilization of family labor that
means, as you have the many enterprises and you have the output from there from
throughout the years and then also the engagement requires throughout the years. So, that
is a full-time engagement for the family labors.
Now, reduction in animal feeding requirement as because you  know on the we are
getting from the same farm, and minimize the use of chemical fertilizers of course,
provide the balanced nutrition food for the farmers as you discussed now. So, solve the
energy problems with a biogas because as you have the waste material. So, they can have
the biogas plant, we can have bio gas the energy and also you can provide electricity for
the farm family.
Enhance  employment  generation  because  you  are  giving  the  throughout  the  year
employment to the farm family, then pollution free environment because here there is no
use of chemical fertilizer chemical pesticides. So, there is no pollution either ground
water or the air pollution is also, also avoided this reduced. Then increasing economic
yield per unit area because the same area you have the many enterprise and also, we are
not keeping the land vacant, because the crops are grown throughout the years, like the
multi cropping systems. So, the land as the land is not vacant and resources because the
resource is not kept unutilized. So, as a use of resource efficient use of resources, so that
causes the increasing economic yield per unit area.
Then multiple income source and the family income support as because there are many
enterprises are there, so there is income source are multiple then improve the status and
livelihood  of  the  farmer  by  the  way  doing  the  integrated  farming  system.  So  that
enhances the living status or livelihood to the farmers so like though you can have the
integrated farming system we have a farm pond where you have the fish. And also at the same time we should we must of having a greenhouse is also a must for a
for a particular farmer, because you know in greenhouse required to protect as it not only
as a shelter because in case of the rainy seasons we can grow offseason crops in the
greenhouse and that can be highly remunerative, that can add (Refer Time: 23:40) to the
income of the farmers having offseason crops inside the greenhouse or the plastic house.
So that is a plastic house may should be is essential for every farmer to have a better
income. And the fishes they are also inside the greenhouse we can grow the crop because
in the winter season. So, we can grow crops it can give you a better a yield is higher, and
better quality because the crops inside greenhouse are protected from the pests and
diseases, less pests and diseases. And you can use whole organic concept to grow the
crops  inside  the  greenhouse,  vegetables,  special  vegetables  you  can  have  luxurious
vegetable the growth of you can a sweet corn, and the pulse crops their growth is very
luxuriant growth in green house because they get temperature good temperature at the
same time, they are protected from the rainfall no and also there the pests and diseases.
And we have the of course, the compost unit vermicompost is there. So, the regular
training can be provide given to the farmers on the vermi composting how can they use
composting, how can they as you discussed earlier so that that training can provided. So,
having  a  integrated  farming  system  concept  the  farmers  can  get  training  from  the
multiple enterprises, making the ponds, making the having the greenhouse production
that is how what is the proper planning, how can I grow the crops in the greenhouse. And
those type of the, they can get a holistic training can be given to farmers to the multiple
because benefit they have the good return as well as the good food for the farm family. (Refer Slide Time: 25:02)
And there are some of the examples of this is the integrated farming systems in upland
ecosystems say as there is a discussed water is available used the high volume. So, I can
have a intercropping of crops like as we discussed for the rain fed area or maybe the and
there is a less what water, low water area low rainfall areas or the upland ecosystem
where you can have the inter cropping system.
Either sunflower cowpea or maize green gram depending upon the location and the
climate you can intercropping you can have the livestocks, we can have the cows and
you can have the goat farming and poultry too, and we have the fodder crops we can
meet the requirement of the of the fodder of the of the cattle because I discussed.
Because if you go for the organic cattle production at least 60 of these deliberations to
come from the fresh for us the fresh, the grasses the grass feeding systems. So that way
they are that enhances the quality of the milk and the meat also better having the fresh
products. So, if you go for the integrated you have the crops, integrated crops, livestock
and the gotary and the poultry that can make a integrated farming systems concept.
So, this is how say the farming systems are as in village at rural area, as you can go up
every farmer having land of 2 hectare to 3 hectares are, they can also cooperative farmer
can join together. Thus, different farm, many farmers they can join together to have
integrated farming system concept where. So, there is no use of any chemical fertilizer
pesticides you can get a variety of returns variety of a items because many enterprisesyou can be taken and the returns comes throughout the years. And you have the water
source for irrigating at least the source of water to have irrigation for the crops and also
you can get a healthy food throughout the throughout the year. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:51)
And this is allowed the integrated farming system I discussed about urban agriculture.
So, as you are moving to cities because no other so that the population of city is growing.
So, how can the people in the city they can get a good quality or the fresh vegetables or
the healthy  vegetables,  usually for the  urban agriculture  that  is  confined  limited  to
growing  vegetable  crops  especially,  vegetable  crops  are  maybe  the  ornamental  the
floriculture crops, floriculture and vegetables there is a common for growing in urban
agriculture.
So, there are two systems or two type of farming that can be done for the that can (Refer
Time: 27:24) practiced for the urban agriculture or the cities to meet the need of the
cities one is called the hydroponics the other is vertical farming. So, in this hydroponics
that means, the this is a soilless culture where the crop is grown without any soil that is
through the nutrient solution. So, these are the pipes are there perforated hollow, hollow
pipes where the nutrient is supplied through these pipes and the crops are grown in
grown in this part seedling stage.
And here see there is a because continuous supply of nutrients the crop needs nutrients
throughout the growth especially the vegetables crops and as we can supply the nutrientsthrough ionic form, through different sources you can meet the requirement and we can
have better growth in a confined chamber like a the glass house, glass house where you
can have the productions or the good quality. Because those crops are less affected by
pests and disease as there is no soil there is a less pest and disinfestation and is a
confined chamber.
And this is the hydroponic system, so we can do and if you come to about vertical
farming that is also in cities. So, this is like this is the structure of vertical farming there
are different structural of vertical farming where the mainly the hydroponic the crops are
grown, hydroponic systems are accommodated in vertical farming. So, you go for the
growing the by the aquaponics or hydroponics the crops are grown, and here you can
have the rainwater tank to collect the rainwater. 
And the ground floor we can have the aquaponic tank where you can the fish rearing, and
the water can be stored and this water can be lifted to different floors or many floors are
there and the crops are grown in different floors, through hydroponic the vegetables are
grown, through hydroponic systems and that that irrigation water can be supplied from
this pond to different floors.
So, this is how the in case in urban agriculture or the cities, as there is a need there is a
demand for the healthy vegetables or the good quality vegetables, good quality a regular
supply of a need of the vegetable, so that the hydroponics and the vertical farming is as
expected to meet the need of the city population.(Refer Slide Time: 29:26)
So, as you see hydroponic, what is hydroponics? Hydroponic is the method of growing
plants without using soil that is a soilless culture we discussed. So, this technique uses
the mineral nutrient solutions in water solvent, along the nutrient uptake process to be
more efficient and then when using through soil. So, hydroponic is growing allows a
clean and controlled environment as see the hydroponic systems. So, the land the land,
nutrition, water pests and diseases and labor they are all controlled here because you are
not using very controlled environment here.
So, there is a less pest, and easy to manage. And the nutrition means is a tailored macro
and micronutrients are formulated and supplied regularly to the crop lands and the water
there is a less use of water, because the water is recycled. Here in case we are not same
water nutrients are recycled back to the; into the plant the plants, so there is a less use of
water. No pest and (Refer Time: 30:17) disease as it is a confined area, there is no soil
medium the confined environment, less pest and disease and this is a reduced labor time,
because there is no other operation like a maintenance like a disease, weeds no matter no
need of disease control or weed control so less labor requirement.(Refer Slide Time: 30:35)
So, it is a hydroponic system, so why do go for hydroponic because you see the see the
(Refer Time: 30:37) crops and this is the crop with soil the small plant with the large
because when you have the growing in soil roots goes in the sorts of a nutrients. So, root
the root grows deeper and deeper, when in case of the hydroponic as you are supplying
nutrients to the root medium regularly root growth is less, but at the same time you have
the better growth of the crop.
So, these are the does not require soil can be done in home in cities, you can home or the
courtyard we can do we can have a system hydroponic system. Crops grow at fast pace
than in soil require very less amount of water and 0 use of pesticide then no use of
pesticide for hydroponic, and 0 there is no weed problem at all. So, can be adapted easily
concept in a vertical farm, as you go hydroponic the is a component of the vertical
farming.(Refer Slide Time: 31:22)
So, these are the nutrient solutions can be used hydroponic the vermi as the vermi
compost can be made tea, vermicompost tea can be grind the with a mixer you can mix
with water and the tea vermi  compost  tea can be used as nutrient solutions or the
vermiwash they contain less nutrients. It is better to have the vermicompost tea has a
higher nutrient content as compared to vermi wash. The tea can be prepared from the
vermi compost and the vermi compost tea can be as a system the system they can be a
tank here,  where the  nutrient  can be  stored with a motor  is  there  and that  can  be
circulated to this pipe and this also can be recycled back to the tank itself.
So, there is a regular recycling of the nutrients and you have to judge the quality of the
nutrient solution, so the pH, and other nutrient content and that if necessary, that has to
replace in regular intervals to avoid any adverse effect on the growth of the crop.(Refer Slide Time: 32:11)
So, likewise you can go for the say vertical farming. So, in 2050 about 80 percent of the
world population will be are around urban centers and plus 3 Billion population more.
So, most of the water is used around 70 percent fresh water used for agriculture, but the
however, the water is going to be limited in future due to climate change. So, and also
land area is also going to limited.
So, you have to go for the production the limited lands. So, hydroponics or the vertical
farming, one of the opportunities where you can we can progress much we can do much
progress to challenge the issues of the land degradation or the shrinking of the land area
and the availability of water for the future agricultural productions. 
So, multi-storeyed building growing different crops at each floor integrated assembly
assembly line including the seed sorting facilities and distribution. So, we have different
floors,  we  can  have  the  different  crops  and  different  activities  in  different  floors,
continuous planting system including monitoring and growth harvesting. Creating and
maintenance of eco-system that acts to enable the urban populations to manufacture and
produce food quality.
So, in case of vertical farming, so different layers are there, we can have the different
activity when the nursery raisings or the supplying the nursery to different nursery can be
raised also in many floors. Seed materials, seed raisings or nursery raisings and also
different vegetable can be grown in different layers. And there is system of we cansupply water, as the water can supply to all the floors and water is collected from the
rooftop having the rainwater tank and can be collected fish can be grown. Of course, if I
am going for the aquaponics also here you can have the floating, aquaponics. So, here
the vegetables can be grown under aquaponics system also, with hydroponics with the
aquaculture system.
(Refer Slide Time: 33:46)
So, these are the systems used vertical farming. Usually the hydroponics is a component
of vertical farming can go for the nutrient less, sorry soil less nutrient solution culture is
used  for  the  hydroponics  and  also  float  systems  as  aquaponics  combined  with
hydroponics. So, in the pond we can have the fishery you can have aquaculture at the
same time and the pond also you can grow the vegetable crops using some structural
materials, and the nutrient solutions vegetables can be grown over on the pond also.
Then aeroponic also that is here you can have a spraying of the nutrient solution by the
mist  and  nutrient  solution  through the  air,  the  root  system  root  can  be  kept  moist
throughout through the aeroponic systems.  So, these are the some  of the  high-tech
agriculture I can say, for this say urban areas, areas where there is a need some group of
population they want. Because many of many people are very interested  to have a
healthy vegetable good quality vegetables which can be for supplied to the cities by
having hydroponics or the vertical farming in cities can be established and that can meet
a target certain group of a peoples who can afford because of course (Refer Time: 34:49)that can be expensive crops as compared to normal soil, but yield is a higher. So, this can
meet the requirement of the cities.
At the same time you go for the integrated farming systems for the rural areas where we
can have a mix of the enterprises, many enterprises can be taken and the whole systems
either hydro either the integrated farming systems or the hydroponics or the vertical
farming, whole system comes on the organic concept organic farming concept so that we
can have a better quality of produce. So, we can avoid use of the synthetic fertilizers and
pesticides. So, with this I close this lecture.
Thank you very much.