Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 30
Crop Planning and Rotation Design in Organic System
So, I welcome you to lecture 30, Crop Planning and Rotation Design in Organic System.
So, for this lecture so, previous lecture was only introduction to transitions when you go
for the planning for the conversion from conventional to organic farming, what are the
organic standards for the transition plan you should follow or the transition the steps you
follow for the transition to organic farming. So, this lecture will be focusing what type of
what are the crop rotations and what type of crops you should select in the transitions.
And the next lecture we will be discussed about the rotation design; so, which crops
should be grown after what type of crops and the design and the economics of this a
conversion to organic systems.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:07)
So, the in the crop planning so, as we discuss; we will discuss why we go for the crop
planning, because if you see the crop rotations. So, that is an integral part of the organic
farming as we have discussed in the introductory classes, if you go for the organic
farming  crop  rotation.  Let  us  say  biological  cycle  soil  biological  activity  can  be
maintained enhanced by using the crop rotation. In organic farming, you do not allow togrow same crops repeatedly year after years or season after seasons. So, reason is that, so
there is if you grow same crops where the repeatedly, then there will be more the insect
pest and is very difficult control insect pest and diseases and also that influence the soil
quality also deteriorated. Therefore, having a similar crop because they have the similar
rooting systems. They do extract nutrients from the same layers and the soil becomes less
fertile over the years.
To have this one in organic farming go for the crop rotations. So, same crops should not
be grown in a field year after year. So, there should be crop rotations. So, crop rotation
means is a system of growing different kind of crops in recurrent successions on the on
the same lands. So, it may include 2 to 6 different crops with each crop having particular
benefit either financial or environmental; that means, when you go for the crop rotations.
So, you should have the economic impact or the economic benefit of that crop and also
the effect on the environment definitely as you are growing different crops in a in a
sequence. So, they are the compatible crops should be should be should be chosen. So,
they have the benefits on the on the economy and also, they have the they maintain the
soil health and also environment on long term basis.
The crops  may be rotated  every year  or at different  times  in the growing seasons,
because if you grow same; some crops maybe they can be grown throughout the years.
They can be grown in different seasons like the three distinct agricultural season Kharif
season, Rabi season and Zaid season. You can say, suppose I can take a rice crop or the
corn crop, those crops are the you can see in tomato also. So, those crops can be grown
throughout the years. So, you can grow in wet season, you can grow in Rabi season, you
can grow in dry season too. But growing same crops should not be done should not be
repeated year after years to in organic farming.
Many crop rotations will include a legume; that means, in a rotation you must see that is
one legume crop is there in the rotations. So, having legume crop in the rotations, so,
there is advantages because it can add atmospheric nitrogen, in the soils by biological
nitrogen fixations. It can enhance the soil fertility and at the same times it can minimize
the nutrient demand of the subsequent crops can be grown with less nutrients or less
resources. Because having a leguminous crop in the system. So, that is a crop rotation
may you have to, that is an integral part of the organic farming where different crops can
be grown to meet the requirement of the farm at the same to have a better production.(Refer Slide Time: 04:00)
So, why to rotate crops? So, this is a very simpler simple and already we know this one
why rotate crop. So, according to a cereal legume or legume having legume cropping
systems the enhance soil and water conversations, build soil organic matter. So, having
different crops in the system because, they have the nutrient removals are also different.
Because if you so, have the deep-rooted crops with shallow rooted. So, it can maintain
the soil fertility shallow rooted crops takes nutrients from the shallow layers around
twenty centimeters and the deep-rooted crops takes nutrient and water from the deeper
less may 40 centimeter. So, that is a balance so, nutrient the deficit of the soil can
maintain its own fertility and also build soil organic matter having legumes in the in the
systems provide the weeds, disease and insect control. Because the most of the weeds is
the  same  crop  is  rotated,  the  host  plant  remains  same;  there  is  rapid  increase  in
populations.
So, having the crop rotation that minimizes that destroys the host plants. Having no host
plant also this minimizes the population of the pests or the weeds and diseases. They
enhance the biological diversity because having the different type of crops, they have the
different bio agents are there; microbial organisms are there; that means, that enhances
the soil biological diversity having more number of crops that different root systems
different root systems have the; different microbial affinity in the crops. So, that that
have a better biological diversity and also this ensures the economic profitability for the
farming systems having different crops are together. More over you know earlier whathappens beginning the farmers were going for the mixed farming when there is no
intercropping system, we are going mixed farming, because in a same field, they are
growing  different  crops;  they  are  growing  wheat,  they  are  growing  mustard  also.
Because they having two crops in a same field, it happens that if there is a shortage of
resources because in case of the drought or the in case specially in case of dry land
farming dry land area, we go for intercropping systems.
Sorghum-pigeon pea intercropping system is very common in semi arid tropic regions
where if there is a stress because the specially for peanut it does not require, sorry, arhar;
if you having arhar in sorghum plus arhar, arhar does not require high water more over
the deep rooted crops and sorghum is a shallow rooted crops or the moderately and
moderately deep. But the arhar is a deep-rooted crop, they can have the nutrient demand
from the different layer of the soils and arhar can sustain on the drought conditions.
Because having deep rooted, they can take water or the nutrient from the deeper layer
deeper layers and it in the under dry conditions, it can survive it can survive.
So, having two crops give a financial return assurance the farmers. If some crop fails due
to weather abnormalities, the other crops is likely to give some returns. So, that is what
you say the having the rotation, we say the crop rotation say profitable. You have in
different  crops  that  maintain  the  biological  diversity,  soil  fertility  and  because  soil
quality is improve with having different crops in rotations. So, that is that is one of the
main components of organic farming. We must rotate crops.(Refer Slide Time: 07:11)
See the right-hand side figure, you can you can see here from this the soil fertility
complex in relation to external factors. So, if you see the this is the soil fertility. How we
can maintain a soil fertility? Soil fertility means this is a complex of this is a soil physical
property,  chemical  properties,  biological  properties.  The  three  properties  are  well
developed and integrated, then you can have the soil as fertile soil the soil structure, soil
reserves and soil life. 
Soil structures mainly contribute to the indicate the physical properties of soils; that
means, you are what is the textural class, structure of the soil, the bulk density, porosity
of the soil that indicates that the indicates the physical properties of the soils means the
nutrients supplying capacity of the soil depends upon the physical properties. If the soil
has is a bulk density is a; that means, the this is heavy soils having very high bulk
density, then they have the less are the less porosity the nutrient supplying or the water
supplying capacity because supplying capacity of the soil to the crops will be very poor.
So; that means, the soil bulk density or the soil physical properties, the soil structure,
physical properties soil reserve means the soil chemical properties soil nutrient status and
soil  life  is  here  soil  microbial  populations.  Soil  is  a  living  body.  Soil  microbial
population  and  their  soil  microbial  population  of  the  soil  microbial  organisms  that
depends upon soil structure and the soil reserves. How much the physical ambience orthe physical structure is there and what is the soil nutrient available that also determine
the soil microbial population or the soil life.
So, these  three  are  integrated  because,  to  have  the  nutrient  available  for the  crops
smoothly and the crop can take nutrient from the soil. The soil should be good in the
physical structure. The good physical properties and have well chemical properties are
well because they have sufficient nutrients. At the same time, this soil should be reaching
microbial population because the microbial population like the urea or the urea chemical
fertilizer as we discussed the nitrogen is available for the crop in the form of ammonium
form and nitrate form as we discussed earlier class.
And to have the ammonium form nitrate form if you apply the organic sources, either the
compost or the farmyard manure. So, they go on mineralization process there is a slow
mineralization. The organic compounds  through mineralization that converted to the
amines, aminos, then go ammonification, amminizations, ammonification that comes to
ammonium and then the process of mineralization ammonium converted to nitrate. And
this process of conversion either to the organic compounds to ammonium form or the
nitrate form these are mediated by the microorganisms like the nitrosomonas bacteria
that is involve for conversion of ammonium to nitrite and nitrite to nitrate by Nitro
bacter.
So, these micro organisms, they are involved in the process of mineralization from the
organic matter to the nitrate for nitrate the nutrient, the ionic form of nutrient which is
required by the crops. So, the life of this the populations of these a microbes this as a soil
life that depends upon the soil structure, physical properties and the soil reserve the soil
the chemical properties of the soils have the nutrient availability in (Refer Time: 10:41)
soil; because microorganism also require nutrient for their own survivals. So, this two if
this  three  are  integrated;  that  means,  physical  properties,  chemical  properties  and
biological properties are integrated to know to make it as soil health. Soil health means
you do not say you cannot say healthy soil. If soil has high amount of nitrogen, you
cannot say healthy soil ok. It may be high fertile, but high fertile, but a short term, but
this may not be healthy soils.
We can say healthy soils, if the soil has with well build, well-structured soil has also
fertile good amount of nutrients  at the same  time it has the required population ofmicrobial populations microorganism. So, that that can help in nutrient availability for
the  crops  or  maybe  the  high  in  nutrient  mineral  nutrients  for  nutrient  may  not  be
available for the crop unless until soil has a good amount of microbial populations in the
soil for the conversion of the either the organic compounds or the chemical compounds
present to the ionic form nitrate form for uptake of the crop.
And those make a healthy soil, for the healthy soil depends upon the four components.
That you say as soil cultivation, soil fertilizations, climate and the crop rotations. So, we
because soil cultivation, we have discussed how the having a proper cultivation. If you
go for the zero tillage or minimum tillage stubble mulch tillage, we have seen that in
organic farming. We go for the minimum tillage and stubble mulch tillage. So, that you
can have a better carbon sequestration and you can protect the microbes in the soils
(Refer Time: 12:13) better microbial populations and you can have a better soil fertility
having  the  minimum  tillage.  And  fertilization  means  you  are  using  no  chemical
fertilizers. You are using organic fertilizers, organics sources so, that; so, that you can
enhance fertility of the soils and climate, how the climate plays a role in the soil in the
soil health.
Because you know as there is a climate change. So, as you see because of climate change
there is increasing intensity of high precipitation events. In that case, there is a though
the loss of the top soil layers the soil erosions. So, that also influence the climate because
having the high temperature also that cause the rapid mineralization, then loss of the
carbon as a carbon dioxide. So, that also influence the soil health and finally, the crop
rotations what type of crop you are choosing in the rotations. That also we are as a
discussed. We will be discussing also in the how the crop rotation that also influence the
soil health.
If you see the rotation and soil quality; if you take row crops or you take grass and
legumes. If you take row crops having more number of row crops that soil quality
declines. If you see this figure, if you go on taking more number of row crops means
your cereal crops like rice, wheat and maize; if you continue in rotational rice, wheat,
maize; then, that causes declines in soil fertility.
On the other hand, if you take the grasses or the legume crops like alpha alpha the cover
crops you can check. The chickpea or the groundnut legume crops or the arhar even alsoor arhar legume crops that causes the improvement in the soil fertility or the soil quality
improves having the legume crops or the cover crops in rotations. So, having the crops in
rotations in organic farming including the legume crops in the rotations that enhances the
soil fertility and also that minimizes the nutrient requirement of the crops in sequence.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:00)
So, how the soil fertility as a quality production; as a function of crop rotations, if you
see the if are the crop rotations having the different crops in a year or in a season of
different  crops.  Then  that  prevents  almost  the  influence  of  the  pest  and  disease
populations. So, that is of the as you follow the crop rotation organic farming as an
integral part of organic farming crop rotations. They preventive measure in that case. So,
many of the pest and disease populations are lower or decreased having different crops in
the rotations and also that that influence the soil fertility.
So, having the less pest and disease and improvement in soil fertility that gives healthy
crops  in  that  systems  and  in  addition  to  this  we  have  the  other  management.  As
fertilizations, we go for the what type of the nutrient sources you are using or the as
organic source of nutrients and the soil cultivation as I discussed. A soil cultivation
means  you  are  going  for  the  minimum  tillage  instead  of  conventional  because
conventional tillage that makes a very the opening of the soil loss of carbon as carbon
dioxide.  And having  the  minimum  tillage  or you  can  say stubble  mulch  tillage  by
incorporating the stubbles or crop residue in the soil itself. So, that adds organic matterinto soils and the less opening of soils, less emission of carbon as a carbon dioxide it
atmosphere that causes a carbon sequestrations. And having the cropping systems and
then crop protections organic way of crop protections and the nature the management;
so, that gives a quality protection.
So, crop rotations as a function of crop rotations as in as a role as a better role significant
role  in  having  healthy  crops  or  the  quality  crops.  At  the  same  time  maintaining
environmental sustainability having the building the soil fertility and less effects less
effect on the environment. Because environment as we say 0 effect on the environmental,
you can say the effect of agriculture on environment can be minimized having different
crops in a in a system as a crop rotation.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:03)
So, the crop selections; so, as you see a this where the crop selections what type of crop
we should choose when you go for the rotations. So, there are some of the tips you can
follow  the when  you  choosing crops. Follow  a  legume  crops  with  a high nitrogen
demanding crops when you go for the rotations. So, initially you can take a legume crop.
The legume crop can be followed by the legume crop is a less nitrogen demanding and
the legume crops can be followed by high nitrogen demanding crops. So, that you can
minimize the yield loss of the subsequent crops by having the legume crops earlier,
because  that  fixes  atmosphere  nitrogen  that  make  the  soil  fertility  and  the  nutrient
demand external demand of the subsequent high demanding crops can be reduced havinga legume crop. Then grow less nitrogen demanding crops in initial phase of the rotation
as we are discussing.
When  you  go  for the  rotations,  beginning  of  the  years  the  transition  of  years;  the
beginning of the transition  years,  so, choose the crops require less nitrogen or low
nitrogen like leguminous crops or you can take cover crops. You can take chickpea; you
can take peanuts. So, these are the alpha or there is a lucerne, also the cover crops that
help in protecting the soil from the erosions and also building the soil fertility, if you
have the cover crops at the beginning of the rotation. Then try to go a deep-rooted crop
as a part of rotations; that means, you should follow because shallow and deep rooted not
as shallow rooted crops in sequence. So, if you take deep rooted crops, then the nutrient
demand from the top soils and the bottom soils. They become balanced. So, that way you
can have deep rooted crops in the rotations
Grow the same annual crop for only one year. Do not repeat the same crops year after
year. Use crop sequence that promote healthier crops the healthier the environment, then
use crop sequence that aid in controlling weeds because if you take the like the like the
sorghum example that control many of the weeds against sorghum or the rye in the
systems. So, the crops can be chosen that can have a less that can control the weed
populations and grows up some crops that will have significant amount of residue. They
can leave the residue in the soil. So, residue can be incorporated in the soils as a as a
organic farming. So, that can add nutrients to the soil so these some of the tips to be kept
in mind while going for the crop selections.(Refer Slide Time: 18:27)
Then conditions for successful crop rotations as we say, the include the use of cover
crops to provide the fertility and control weeds and provide habitat for beneficial insects;
that means, the cover crop is a lucerne is a good cover crops, but it is grow in temperate
climates. But in our case, we can go for chickpea. Chickpea also that because the cover
crops means small growing crops that cover the entire land surface and they do not
expose the land surface to the atmosphere. In that way they can build as a legume crops,
that can build a soil fertility and they can protect the soil from erosion. If there is a heavy
downfall heavy rainfall having cover crops. So, the soil can be protected either from the
water or the wind erosion.
Then have a diversity of plants species to encourage natural predators, discourage pest
and disease build up minimize economic and environmental risk. So, that already I have
discussed having the diversified because rotations usually follow the different crops. So,
that you can pest populations. We can we can have we can have the crops which can
have we can enhance the provide the feeding materials of the natural predators. So, those
type of crops should be chosen; so, that you can have bio biocontrol biological control of
the pest and diseases.
Provide a balance between soil conservation and crop production by adding organic
matter to soil to both supply nutrients and improve soil quality properties such as water
infiltration and water holding capacity this is also, I have discussed in detail. Provideweed control by altering the between the warm and cool weather plants and including the
weed inhibiting plants like the rye and sorghum the having the crops. Rye and sorghum,
they can minimize the population of weeds in the field.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:07)
Then what is the common goals of crop rotation? Why we should go for the crop
rotations? Usually the so, this is the if you see this point- maintain healthy soil by adding
nitrogen and other nutrients in a way that is environmentally safe and conforms with
regulations. So, I by having the crop rotations you are maintaining the soil fertility or by
adding nitrogen different source organic source of nutrients that say that maintain the soil
fertility that have no effect zero effect on the environment; that is an environment safe.
So, the purpose of these having crop rotation, if you see the right-hand side what is the
benefit of this that maintains the biotic diversity unlock the living potential of the soil.
That means having a crop rotations and different crops they can add the nutrient the
nitrogen to the soils. In addition to the effect is the maintain the biological diversity
biological diversity in the soils and also that increases the soil fertility unlock the living
potential; that means, more of the microbial populations living potential of the soils that
enhance the soil fertility. So, that is the purpose of having the crop rotation. If you see
that the other purposes, this one left hand side produce nutritious food, it captures solar
energy  wherever  possible,  control  insect  and  pest  and  diseases  and  reduced  weed
pressures. So, these are the some of the break the wilting cycle among the crops intomato family and the weed pressure for manage the rotation to confuse the weeds means
you have the different type of the crops in rotations.
So,  disease  cycle  means  the  broken;  that  means,  less  disease  and  the  weed  also
population is also because managed the less weed populations. So, having this in crop
rotation with the advantage of having crop rotation the main goal we are satisfying what?
Having different crops diversify tasks to keep the labor happy and productive all the
season so; that means, having different tasks different activity. In case of the you have to
go for the pest or the disease control for physical method or mechanical method, use the
light trap pheromone trap and the cards sticky cards, yellow sticky cards those are used.
So, doing that so, farmers are involved different type of activity different activity that
gives different type of pleasures to the farmers that is one diversify tasks keep the labor
happy and productive all season.
And balance the need of the farm with the needs of the farmers and develop a spiritual
relationship with the land that type  of that brings organic farming  one type  that is
spiritual relationship that makes attachment with the farm and refine the aesthetic quality
of the fields and farms. So, this is having this the nutritious food, good food, quality
foods and healthy environments, less pest, less disease that makes. So, that that gives this
type of the benefits for this for the farm family. 
And the finally, we are going for the minimizing off farm inputs by doing the organic
farming, we are using only the on-farm resources inputs were recycled minimizing off
farm inputs and provide economic stability. So, main purpose is the increase profitability
having a diverse line of products to market. So, different crops we have. So, different
crops, so having the crops to sending markets not single crop. So, many crops having
together; so, that have a chance of having the opportunity of having higher profitability
in the markets; So, being in crop rotation.(Refer Slide Time: 23:26)
 
So, so, farm size as we say and cover crops and crop rotations the farm size that affects a
cover cropping and the management of the crop rotations. Organic farm plant cover
crops to protect the soil; soil increase the soil organic matter and improve soil physical
properties already we have discussed. This one cover crops may also provide habitat for
beneficial insects or help the remove the weeds that also we discussed. Most expert
farmers integrate cover crops into their fields at every opportunity
So, that is what say as a cover crops or the legume crops, we should have at least one
cover crops, legume crops in a rotation. So, in a year you have the one cover crops, it
built soil fertility and they protect the soil from erosions; either water erosion and wind
erosion. So, that should be any expert farmer they have their intension is to put one cover
crop ah. In the in the systems many expert farmers use a full year cover crops to restore
the soil after intensive use of chemical. Because when we go for transition, the first year
they go for only cover crops that is for the large farmers. 
They have the large farm land and for them they can because this it does not give any
good income actually to maintain the soil and preparing for the transition preparing for
organic. So, first year they can go for only cover crops whole seasons. So, that the soil
fertility can be restored, but the farmers have limited acreage less than 5 acres. Find the
that including cover crops throughout the year may be a difficult for them (Refer Time:24:48) and providing adequate rotation of the crop families on a given field maybe a
challenge.
So, in that cases, what they do? They use only beginning of the once in maybe cover
crops and they have to use adequate amount of the compost or the mulch short term
winter crops in place of multi season cover crops specially for the small farmer. They do
not go for the whole year as a cover crop. They can go for the one season cover crops
and they can take other measure to take care of the soil
(Refer Slide Time: 25:14)
And as we discussed then I have the crop selections, what type of crop you should
choose when you go for the transition period of organic farming ah. Usually you should
choose crops of low nutrient demanding. So, that you can maintain the yield because you
have chosen the crops of the high nutrient demanding; the yield may not be maintained.
So, ranking of annual vegetable based on the relative nutrient requirement the vegetables
or the seasonal vegetables  as you  say the low nutrient demanding  medium nutrient
demanding and high nutrient demanding. So, these are the vegetables, they are some
examples are given their many; there is a low nutrient demand is like bean crops beet,
carrot, peas and radish
So, these are the root crops. The root crops, they have the very low nutrient demand and
the bean crops leguminous crops. So, they have the very low nutrient demand or you can
go here also Chickpea and all many leguminous crops. We can go for chickpea or arharor green gram, black gram those many legume crops can be grown like beans as a
legume crop. So, like chickpea, moong or there is a black gram, green gram. So, those
crops  can  be  grown  at  the  beginning  of  the  rotations.  Those  crops  require  less  of
nutrients mostly leguminous crops beets, carrots, peas and radish.
Those crops require medium amount of nutrient. They can be grown at after growing the
low nutrient demanding, you can we can switch over to medium nutrient demanding
crops like your cucumber, brinjal, pumpkin, spinach, sweet potato, water melon and
brassica greens also. Those greens brassica groups are greens vegetable. So, those crops
are nutrient demand is medium slightly higher than the low. So, those crops can be
chosen immediately after the low nutrient for that the crop yield can be maintained. But
those crops are high nutrient demanding specially the broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower,
lettuce, potato, tomato or sweet corn also cereal crop sweet corn. They are high nitrogen
demand phosphorus and as well as potash demand as we are discussed few crops we
have discussed about the potato we have discussed tomato potato requires huge amount
of potash also tomato also phosphorus and potash
So, so, also nitrogen for those crops, we should not choose those crops at the beginning
of the transition. If you choose at the beginning at the transition, there will be severe loss
in yield of those crops to avoid those losses. We can choose these crops at the latter part
the transitions. When this the soil has a because after 1-2 years, we can choose those
crops. So, that the yield cannot be sacrificed there will be less loss in yield and yield can
be maintained as good as organic sorry chemical farming by having the crops at the latter
part of the transition. So, that is why when you go for the crop planning. During the
transition to organic productions, choose first the low nutrient demanding crops followed
by a medium, then you can go for the high nutrients slowly you can transfer to high
nutrient demanding crops as you move during the transition period.(Refer Slide Time: 28:14)
And also, we can choose crops shallow rooted, deep rooted, moderately deep rooted and
deep rooted and very deep rooted. If you see the crops in a transition when you go for
slitting crops do not choose the shallow rooted followed by shallow followed by shallow
in sequence. So, that can we shallow, deep or deep-rooted crops. So, that they can
nutrient balance the uptake of nutrient from the from the systems can be balanced like
those  are  the  shallow  rooted  crops  like  a  rice,  onion,  cabbage,  cauliflower,  potato,
lettuce,  shallow  rooted  means  60  centimeter.  Those  crops  should  not  be  grown  in
sequence together; rice, onion, cabbage, cauliflower, potato. They should not be grown
one after another because if you grow same crops one after another, then the nutrient
demand from the same layer increases the soil becomes very unsustainable to provide the
nutrient demand of the crops.
So, likewise these are the moderately deep-rooted crops: groundnut, tobacco, wheat,
chilli  French,  bean,  carrot  90  centimeter  and  the  deep-rooted  crops  around  120
centimeters; cotton, maize, sorghum, pearlmillet, soybean, sugarcane, arhar and very
deep-rooted crops 180 centimeter: safflower, citrus, grapevine, coffee, lucern. So; that
means, the you should not grow shallow rooted, after shallow rooted. You can go for
shallow rooted after deep rooted, after deep rooted or shallow rooted crop should follow
deep rooted crop. So, that soil the fertility can be sustainable to meet the demand of this
crop in cropping systems.(Refer Slide Time: 29:44)
So, if you see the schematic summary of the crop rotation, I will discuss in the crop
planning have to go for the crop planning in the crop rotations. So, in brief we will
discuss, then in the next level discuss detail about the about the rotation design. See this
one as you go for the as we discuss the planning, if you go for planning, what is your
goal? That is life and the farm goals. If you go for the goal set the goal set the objectives.
So, when you go for the organic farming as a conversion or the transition from the
conventional  to  organic,  you  first  the  set the  goals  then  income  goals  and income
requirements, then you see the market opportunity, then say production options.
So, this so, initially you have to set your goals, then set the income how much income
you are expecting your target, benefit or profit output. Then what is the market potential
the market opportunity, then you can have the production options. Production options
based on the what is the resource and the technology available and the market and. So,
this resource and technology that is your this is your resource and technology that gives a
production;  that  means,  resource  is  your  labor  or  the  field,  crop,  climate  and  the
equipment limits.
So, the technologically know how; so, that gives you the crop plan, based on this the
labor, field, crop, climate and the equipment. So, that based on this resource available
and the technology, so, you can have a have a production options that can production
options that gives you the crop rotation crop mix. You can decide what type of rotationdesign you can fix which crop has to be grown and what crop should follow which crops
how you can make a rotation plan rotation design for the organic systems, based on your
resource based on technology, based on the market potential. Then you can take the
support from the institutions as a know how technical knowhow consultancy can be
taken from institution and with this, we can have a crop mix, then match field and the
crops.
The sometimes there is you can have an alternate plan also. When you go for any
business  plan,  we  should  have  alternate  plans;  that  means,  the  weather  and  other
uncontrollable events. If there are some unforced events that like weather or something
else, then you can have the looking at the then market opportunity production options,
then you can have an alternate crop plan. So, like wise you can you can have a set your
the plan and set your rotation design based on the resource available with you the field
what type of climate is there and what the technology you have and the market demand,
what where you want to sell your product so; that means, if you do not know where to
sell do not plant it. 
So, you have to see the market accordingly, you can have a balance as a mix as a crop
mix what type of rotation design you can fix. And once you have the rotation design,
then you may have one alternate plan also. If there is something unforced event takes
weather abnormal there may be drought, there may be flood problem in that case how we
can tackle the situation that will also some alternate proposal has to be made ready. So,
this what the summary of crop planning. The many expert farmers do extensive planning
you say and record keeping up on paper. So, that is very important when you go for the
record most have some from field maps some use computers a few keep all details in
their in their heads. 
The most of the panel farmers agreed that farmers should write down their field records
and make a plan should be record many of the key responsibilities and tasks requires
reflections and observation as well as information. So, the chart illustrates the central
role of rotation as we discussed role of rotations in the overall farming operation. So, that
if you go for the rotation design how you can make a crop plan you should keep in mind
what is the resource what technology, what market you have; then accordingly you can
make a crop plan and go for the implementation.(Refer Slide Time: 33:48)
So, this is how so, different as example of crop rotation in India. Different type of crops
we have the root crops, we have the cereal crops, we have the legume crops, you have
the fruits and you have the brassica, brassica family; so, different type of crops legumes.
So, those crops can be rotated in a system so, that you can maintain the soil fertility you
can maintain a better soil health, you can have a better quality of produce and you can
have a better environment to live in.
Thank you very much. 