Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 35
Antioxidant Capacity of Fruits and Vegetables
 So, welcome to the lecture 35, Antioxidant Capacity of Fruits and Vegetables. So,
previous lecture we have discussed about the antioxidants and the role of antioxidants in
neutralizing the free radicals and what are the free radical formations takes place in
human body; either due to the food habit or due to the environmental pollutions or the
work pressure intense work pressures. So, there is a formation of free radicals and the
role of antioxidants how to neutralize the free radicals and keep the human being healthy
and to avoid from any chronic diseases.
So, this lecture will be discussing about the antioxidant capacity of different fruits and
vegetables and also discuss how high the organic foods have the higher antioxidant
capacity as compared to conventional  or the chemically produced food. So, that so
having the organic foods it can have a better health benefit. So, if we can avoid many
diseases the regular intake of the organic foods.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:24)
So,  coming  to  this  let  us  have  this;  what  is  antioxidant  capacity.  So,  usually  the
antioxidant capacity is known as the oxygen radical absorbance capacity; that means,there is a free radical formation takes place like the superoxide or the OH groups. So,
how, this means oxygen radical absorbance capacity by the antioxidants. So, that is
known as antioxidant capacity that is oxygen radical absorbance capacity.
So,  measuring  the  ORAC  allows  us  to  compare  the  capacity  of  individual  fruits
vegetables  and  other  antioxidant  rich  foods  by knowing  the  ORAC  value.  We  can
compare  different  fruits  also  you  can  compare  with  the  organic  foods  with  the
conventional foods based on the ORAC value. That is Oxygen Radical Absorbance
Capacity how to scavenge the free radicals and free radical absorbance capacity by the
antioxidants; that is the antioxidant capacity. 
So, foods that are higher on the ORAC value are the more effectively to neutralize the
free radicals means, there is a free radical formation in the human body. So, if you can
take the natural sources of the antioxidant, so those are the higher ORAC value that is
oxygen  radical  absorbance  capacity.  So,  that  can  better  neutralize  the  free  radical
formations in the human body.
So, now we will discuss what is the function of antioxidants, how the antioxidants can
neutralize the formation of free radicals.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:50)
So, this is for example, one of the antioxidants that say vitamin C is ascorbic acids. So,
this is a water soluble and this is the antioxidant represent in citrus fruits, say potato,tomato  and green leafy vegetables  they are the ascorbic acids. It is  chain  breaking
antioxidants as a reducing agent or this act as electron donor because, it can donate
electron and that electron can neutralize the free radical formation in the human body.
It  scavenges  radicals  and  inhibits  the  lipid  peroxydations.  It  also  promotes  the
regeneration of a tocopherols vitamin E. So, let us say so, it gives example how it can
donate electron and it can neutralize the free radical formation, as you see the chain of
actions here is. So, donate one electron that becomes semi dehydroascorbate, the final
the  stable  protocols  as  a  by donating  electron.  So,  this  is  what  the  ascorbic  acids
compounds the AscH 2. So, by releasing hydrogen this becomes the O negative that
becomes ascorbate Ass minus s minus and this what you can do so, this can donate 1
electron and this becomes O dot, that is the ascorbate radical. And this ascorbate radical
of course, it can release this OH that can release hydrogen ion that become again the O
minus  and  this  also  this  can  release  the  1  electron.  So,  that  becomes  the
dehydroascorbate.
And from here also chain of action here AscH minus, this also this hydrogen ion can be
they can take away hydrogen ion that becomes  also O minus. And here, it can be
donating 1 electron from this O minus that becomes the O dot AscH minus. So, by this
chain of action so, this ascorbic acid it becomes a stable product dehydroascorbate. And
in this process this ascorbic acid that donates many electrons and these electrons are
utilized for neutralizing the free radicals, as we discussed the earlier class there is a
formation  of free  radicals  either  the  superoxide  OH  radicals  RO  radicals,  so  those
radicals can be neutralized so, having electron from these antioxidants like the ascorbic
acids.(Refer Slide Time: 05:28)
Similarly, we have the vitamin A, that is a B-carrotene and also vitamin E tocopherols.
So, they donate the electrons, that electron is utilized  to neutralize  the free radical
formations in the human body. Vitamin A is a group of unsaturated nutritional organic
compounds that includes retinols, retionic acids and several pro vitamins A carrotinoids,
especially beta-carrotene.
So, this as the structure of this ones, so double bonds are there so, they can donate
electrons and these electrons can be utilized for neutralizing the free radicals. Similarly,
the vitamin E that is a tocopherol, that is a most important and effective lipid soluble
antioxidant, so vital to maintain the cell membrane integrity. So, antioxidant present in
unsaturated fats like sunflower, safflower and olive oils that vitamin E tocopherols and
this also donates electrons, release electrons, those electrons can be utilized by the or the
free radicals are they can scavenge activity. So, they can neutralize the free radicals by
donating electrons.
This is how the antioxidants they can donate the electrons in this process. So, electrons
can be utilized to neutralize the free radical formations in the plant body. So, that you
can so build the free radicals they cause cell damage. So, they can about the cell damage
having regular intake of the antioxidants.(Refer Slide Time: 06:48)
So, similarly, the polyphenols like these are the reaction mechanism of the catechol as at
the poly antioxidants. Polyphenols are group of a phenolic compounds containing more
than 1 phenol units are molecules are found.
And the polyphenol divided into two major types: One is a flavonoid the basic structure
consisting of 2 benzene rings linked through heterocyclic the pyrone C ring and also non
flavonoids  phenolic  groups  more  heterogeneous  group  of  compounds.  And  it  is  a
widespread constituent of fruits, vegetables, cereals, olives, dry legumes, chocolates, tea,
coffee and wines.
 So, the polyphenols they also as the group of antioxidants are so regular intake of
polyphenols. They can release the yes so, this by this polyphenols the OH and HH, so the
H can be released from here they can neutralize the ROO then neutral ROOH. So, by this
way we can neutralize this is the free radicals R double O, radical this radical can be
neutralized having these poly phenolic compounds.
So, by this either the antioxidants or the poly phenyl compounds so, they release the by
having the electrons from this compound. So, we can have a neutralization of the free
radicals there is a formation in the human body and we can avoid the cell damage or
damage of the DNA structure.(Refer Slide Time: 08:14)
How can determine the antioxidant capacity? So, that is say the different methods how
can you calculate or the estimate the antioxidant capacity of any fruits and vegetables.
Let us say ORAC, as we discussed oxygen radical absorbance capacity or the TRAP as a
Total  Radical  Trapping  Antioxidant  Parameters,  TEAC,  Trolox  Trolox  Equivalent
Antioxidant Capacity and DPPH, Di-phenyl picryl hydrazyl TOSC, Total Oxyradical
Scavenging  Capacity,  PSC  Peroxyl  Radical  Scavenging  Capacity,  FRAP,  Ferric
Reducing  Antioxidant  Power.  So,  these  are  the  some  of  the  methods  we  used  for
determining antioxidant capacity of fruits or vegetables.
So, ORAC that is oxygen radical absorbance capacity, they reported as a hydrophilic
ORAC or the lipophilic ORAC and the total ORAC and total phenolics as a TP. So, if
there is a hydrophilic or ORAC or the lipophilic ORAC or the total ORAC they reported
as a in micro mole Trolox equivalent for a 100 gram about the fruit of the fresh fruits or
the vegetables; that means, the Trolox is a standard that is as usual antioxidant standards
the chemical standards Trolox.
So, this H ORAC or the L ORAC or the total ORAC are (Refer Time: 09:40) as a
presented in terms of a Trolox equivalent per 100 grams of the produce. As a micro
mole, TE micro mole Trolox equivalent per 100 gram of the materials or the fruits or
vegetables, that you say the H ORAC value. If there is a total phenolics, so that isestimated as presented in terms of milligram, gallic acid equivalent for 100 grams of the
fruit fruits or vegetables as a material. 
So, these are the standards are the gallic acids or the Trolox so though as standards used.
And this ORAC value are the are the total phenolics are repented in terms of the Trolox
equivalent and all the milligram gallic acid equivalent. And one only the hydrophilic
ORAC value was available for the particular food items low in fat then, H ORAC value
was also utilized for the total ORAC you see, when there is a hydrophilic ORAC and
there is low in very low in fat content. So, H ORAC is as good as is equal to your the
total ORAC present in their fruits and vegetables 
This is how we can determine the antioxidant capacity of different fruits and vegetable.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:50)
 Now we will be so what are the ORAC value that is oxygen radical absorbance capacity
or of the free radicals, oxygen radical absorbance capacity of some fruits and vegetables. 
If you see the fruits, among the fruits, prunes have the maximum ORAC value that is
5770 that is the micro mole as micro mole t equivalent per 100 grams of the fruits. The
prunes have the maximum 5770 ORAC value, followed by the raisin there is a dried
grape; that are the also very good value of the ORAC value 2830 
Then,  blueberries  2400,  blackberries  2036,  cranberries  1750,  strawberries  1540,
pomegranate followed by plums, orange then grapes, red grapes then cherries, kiwifruitthat is around 600 the ORAC value grapes, white grapes then banana, apple, apricot,
peach and pear.
There are also several other fruits have had the ORAC value. So, these are the some of
the fruits have the high ORAC value; that means, so, if daily intake of the foods we can
include some of the fruits having the high ORAC value. So, there is a natural source of
antioxidants and the also resources of antioxidants, so natural sources and resources. So,
regular intake of these fruits so, they can fight against many chronic diseases and we can
keep your body the fit or the healthy for the good work. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:26)
And then some vegetables among the vegetables you can see spinach; say raw spinach
so, that has the very big as compared to the fruits, vegetables have lower ORAC value.
You can see the fruits the ORAC value of fruits is around 5770, the maximum case of
prunes and here among the vegetables if you see the spinach it has 1260 ORAC value.
That  is  that  means,  the  fruits  have  the much  higher ORAC  value, as  compared  to
vegetable So, regular intake of fruits is really very essential to have a natural source of
antioxidants to keep your healthy body.
So, among the vegetables as you see spinach and that has the 1260 ORAC value, that is a
raw spinach and the brussels sprout this is a this is a family of the either the cabbage
groups or the crucifer groups, so those sprouts also have the high ORAC value 980.
Alfalfa sprouts is used as a salad and salad also it takes the alfalfa sprouts that has the930 ORAC value, spinach esteemed that has 909 ORAC value, broccoli florets there is a
good ORAC value that is 890. 
Then the beets 841, red bell pepper 713, onion 450, corn say 400; 400 verses is the if the
vegetable corns usually the sweet corns we get take this the vegetable corn, sweet corns
that have the high ORAC value. Then the brinjals 390, cauliflower also 370 because in
cauliflower or the broccoli we get the antioxidant as a glucosinolate, so that is a very
good powerful antioxidants to neutralize the free radicals and the peas the frozen peas
364, potato 313, sweet potato 301, carrots 207, beans 201, tomato 189, and yellow
squash like the cucumber family 150.
So, these are the ORAC value of some vegetable so, that means, when you so the daily
intake of these are the fruits and the combination of the vegetables, we can get the
natural source of antioxidants as a balanced diet for human health. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:40)
So, now let us see why organic foods are or what is of the contents of the organic foods.
So, the organic foods have the higher ORAC value as compared to the many cases we
have seen organic foods has given the high ORAC value as compared to conventionally
grown or the chemically produced foods. So, there is a comparison between the organic
and inorganic vegetables for antioxidants contents because, a high an antioxidant; that
means, it had the high ORAC value If you see the apple, so the bioactive substance is a compound is the polyphenols as a
antioxidant in apple polyphenols and this polyphenol is found to be higher in the apple is
produced organically. That means the organic apples have the higher antioxidants as
compared to the apple from the chemical farming. Similarly, for spinach the compounds
are flavonoids or the anthocyanin these are the antioxidants. So, those three seems to be
higher in organic can be produced spinach as compared to the conventionally or the
chemical were chemically produced spinach. 
And tomato is a lycopene or the carotene. So, those are higher though those seems to be
similar  contents  in  both  systems;  either  the  chemical  farming  or  this  conventional
farming or the organic farming, there is not much difference in the lycopene content or
the  carotene  content  of  tomato.  So,  this  is  as  for  the  source  is  the  Aires  A.  the
conventional and organic farming. .
So, does organic farming benefit plan compositions phenolic diversity and antioxidant
properties in organic farming a promising way of food production intake intakes. So, this
so this  is  a publications,  where  we have found that  in some  cases  the there  is  no
difference in the ORAC value of the produce from organic or the conventional and in
many cases you can find that organic produce have the very higher ORAC value as
compared to the chemically produced fruits or vegetables.
And you can see the similarly, the blueberry that contains polyphenols that is higher in
the blueberry, when organically produced, but as a carrot, so this carotenoids as the
tomato carrot is a carotenoids, the similar contents in both systems either go for the
organic or inorganic so, there is not much change in the ORAC value. Cauliflowers the
glucosinolate as you are discussing the glucosinolate is the powerful antioxidant.
So, this is a so that is also similar contents in both the systems whereas, the strawberry
the  anthocyanin  so  there  is  a  higher  in  organic  systems,  the  broccoli  that  is  a
glucosinolate or the polyphenols that is higher in organic system. So, here you have the
cauliflower, so there is no change in the glucosinolate contents either in the organic or
conventional systems whereas, in broccoli though grow in organically has the higher
content of glucosinolates as a polyphenol as compared to the conventional systems. And
the blueberries also flavonoids that is higher in organic systems as compared to the
conventional system.(Refer Slide Time: 17:38)
So, from one of our experiments, so what we did here in our institute experimental farm
was  as  a  tea  garden  yield  and  total  phenols  of  tea  grown  following  organic  and
conventional practice. So, this is a as a beginning of the; we can say the experiment. So,
this is this tea garden was closely 3 to 5; 3 years  old garden, where we have the
treatments we can say that there is a control where no fertilizer is applied as a field of the
native  need  native  soil  fertility  without  the  application  of  any  chemical  fertilizer
pesticide, but only initially probably it was given only the for initial establishment of the
seedling (Refer Time: 18:20).
And in the main field we do not apply anything, the annual application after 1 year. Then
the  chemical  fertilizer  plot  where  only  chemical  fertilizer  applied  as  per  the
recommended dose and organic fertilizer also the organic fertilizer like vermicompost, it
was applied to meet the requirement of the nitrogen demand of the crop throughout the
year. 
So, in this case if you see the yield of made tea in kg per hectare per year, where there is
a in case of control as we do not apply any fertilizers or as a grown as a native soil
fertility the yield was very low, it was 190 kg per hectare per year. The yield was
maximum yield we got from the chemical fertilizer treated plot around 601 kg per
hectare per years.And if you see for the organic fertilizer yield was in between the either no applications or
the chemical fertilizer. And we can say as good as the chemical fertilizer it was yield is
around 587 kg per hectare per year; that means, the yield wise the chemical fertilizer is
giving the higher yield as compared to the organic fertilizer the made tea productions,
but I can say those are quite comparable. But if you say phenol contents there is a
content phenol content in milli  milligram per gram in gallic  acid equivalent  as  we
discussed in gallic acid equivalent.
In that case the chemical fertilizer that report was very lowest the lowest content of the
phenols in the tea grown chemical fertilizer, that is 197.4 milligram per gram of tea
milligram gallic acid equivalent per gram of tea. Whereas, we have the organic fertilizer,
it was higher phenol that say 288 very significantly consisting higher phenol contents
and the control also that has a very good phenol content as compared  to chemical
fertilizer. 
Where you have applied chemical fertilizer the content is very low whereas, in case of
the control there is no application it has the high content of the phenols; that means
application  of  chemical  fertilizer  that  reduces  the  further  the  compounds  like  the
secondary metabolites formation is inhibited if you are going for the application of the
chemical fertilizer that seen from the experiment that with chemical fertilizer the content
is very low.
Similarly, the total catechins content say it was very low in case of chemical fertilizers,
that is 4.9 per milligram per gram of tea leaves whereas, the control has quite good 12.61
per gram of tea leaves and the organic fertilizer 16.48. But if you see because, we can
say  in  control  though  the  content  is  as  much  higher  as  compared  to  the  chemical
fertilizer, but the production is very low. 
So, if you see the yield of the total catechin will be also low in case of control whereas,
in case of the organic fertilizer as the content is very high is 4 times almost four times
higher, as compared to chemical fertilizer the content of the total catechinics organics.
So, if you see the yield of the catechins from the from the organic tea will be though the
production level almost same or slightly lower, but you see the yield of the or the
production of the secondary metabolites are significantly higher in case of the organic tea
as compared to conventional tea. And here you can see the percentage of increase or decrease of catechinic content over
the control treatment if you see control with no application of the fertilizers. And the
chemical fertilizer, if you apply chemical fertilizer that the decrease in the catechinic
contents around 60 percent and go for the organic fertilizers applications that increases
the catechinic content by 30.7 percent.
So, that mean you say that with this is a 3 years tea garden. So, initially we planted the
tea in a barren land was a mid cultivables and the tea was grown, so this is 3rd year, we
we took these observations for the tea productions and the catechinic contents with
regular applications of the chemical fertilizers or the or the organic fertilizers and the
cases, where there is no fertilizer applications.
So, in this case we can see so, this is clear cut indication that with application of the
organic  fertilizer,  so  there  is  better  formation,  higher  formations  of  the  secondary
metabolites, as compared to the chemical fertilizer where, chemical fertilizer decreases
the formations of the secondary metabolites. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:23)
And another experiment from the other researchers they have also indicated the mean
antioxidant  capacity.  In  fresh  eggplant  grown  under  conventional  and  the  organic
cultivation systems, so you can see there is a chemical fertilizer, organic fertilizer, the
soluble antioxidants capacity, the ORAC value, the micro mole Trolox equivalent pergram of a fresh weight. In case of chemical fertilizer at 36.61 and the organic fertilizer
50.60 and it is also highly significant.
There significant increase in the soluble antioxidant capacity ORAC value of the organic
produced a plant as compared to chemically produced plant. Similarly, you can see other
antioxidants, hydrolyzable antioxidants here also, there is a significant increase in the in
case of organic fertilizers as compared to chemical fertilizer it is 47.71, here it is 75.06.
Though would not see any there is no difference in case of the anthocyanin pigments,
there is a anthocyanin antioxidants, so, there is no much difference between the organic
and the chemical fertilizer they are almost similar because, they are statistically at par
there is no change.
So,  whereas,  the  ORAC  value  or  the  soluble  antioxidants  or  the  hydrolyzable
antioxidants. So, they are much higher in case of the organic curry produced to the
eggplant, as compared to the chemically produced plant. So, that is clear indication that,
so having the growing the crops organically. So, you can have the more and more the
secondary metabolites.
There is antioxidant either the phenols or the vitamin C, vitamin A those and secondary
metabolites formations as much higher. If the produce the fruits or vegetables grown
organically as compared to the inorganic or the chemical farming. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:11)
So, the question comes  then, why the organic fruits and vegetables  produce higher
antioxidants levels than their conventional the counterparts. So, for; what is the reasons
why the organic farming or the produce of organic farming have the higher antioxidants,
as compared to conventional farming. 
So, there are the 2 leading the theories I can say the one is the oxidative stress hypothesis
and  the  other  one  is  the  growth  differentiation  balance  hypothesis.  So,  there  two
hypotheses say why the organic produced, the producer of the organic farming of the
higher antioxidant capacity or you can say, ORAC capacity oxygen radical absorbance
capacity as compared to the produce of the chemical farming. 
The oxidative stress hypothesis says that, this stress can be caused the stress hypothesis,
stress can be caused by many environmental factors that such as the herbivory by insects
or the low nutrient levels. As we are not applying any pesticides or any fertilizer as
chemical fertilizer, only you are going for the organic farming or the organic nutrient
management. So, there is a release pattern of nutrients very slow as for the demand of the
crops are the slow and steady release. So, that causes some nutritional stress in the plant
body and also there may be some the herbivory insects.
So, by this the stress may be there; there may be oxidative stress in the plant body. And
that that may cause the imbalance the growth imbalance either to talk vegetative growth
or the reproductive growth or the plant depends. When there is an oxidative stress so,
there is a plant defense mechanism it triggers.
So, there is so that means, because crops are grown organically are not sprayed with
synthetic pesticides or high levels of applied fertilizers, they experience more stress than
conventional crops. So, thus produce a higher level of antioxidants in response to that
stress, so if there is the oxidative stress in the plant body because of the low level of
nutrients or the less use of the pesticides or no use of pesticides. So, there is a stress, so
there is a secretion of phytohormones, those antioxidants. So, there is more formation
anti antioxidants. So, this is a plant defense mechanism so, that way that can, so as we
discussed earlier classes, so we are by growing crops as a natural or the organic systems.
So, there is a natural defense mechanism of plants because of this oxidative stress.
So, there is phytohormones or the secondary metabolites formation takes place. And that
is a less infested by the pests and diseases, but what happens in that process, so there is aonce there is a stress either due to the nutrient deficiency or this the less pesticide or the
herbivory insect herbivory insects. So, there is a stress, so that causes the formations of
the antioxidants in the plant body. This is one of the oxidative stress hypotheses. 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:03)
The other the second one is say the growth difference balance hypothesis; that means, as
you  see  the  what  this  hypothesis  says,  in  high  nutrient  environments  such  as  the
conditions on the conventional farms where synthetic fertilizers used, plant will spend
their resources creating new plant tissue rather than secondary metabolites this also we
have discussed in the preliminary classes.
So, if you are supplying the nutrients as per the requirement the crops sufficient nutrients
available for the crops. So, the crops look for the more of the growth, more of the
biomass formation, that is more of the vegetative growths and also the reproductive
growth if there is the ample or the sufficient supply of nutrients. So, the crop does not
bother to formation of these secondary metabolites. So, there is more and more the plant
tissue formations for the better growth and yield.
And whereas in case have the in less risk conditions however the growth is limited by
lack  of  nutrients  so,  more  resource  will  be  available  to  be  spend  on  secondary
metabolites. So, when there is a limitation of nutrients, so there is a stress. In ultimately,
there is oxidative stress because of stress, so plant does not to spend its energy for the
formation of the new cells or the biomass because, it is a limited available nutrientsrather it spends its energy for the formation of secondary metabolites or the antioxidant
formations are triggered or the enhanced by the stress mechanism. Thus, as nutrient level
decreases from high to intermediate anti oxygen levels may actually in.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:33)
So, that is what why organic farming So, they have the so from this slide last slide can
show you the why organic fruits and vegetables that produce the higher antioxidant,
because in case of organic you can see this figure this is a nutrient availability from low
to high. In case of low; that means, you are not applying any fertilizer, this grown as a
native soil fertility or no external fertilizer application or there is inherent soil fertility is
very low. And the high means, here we are applying high nutrient levels like those found
in conventional farms like chemical farming, where you have the sufficient the optimum
supply of sufficient supply nutrients as needed the crops.
In  that  case  if  there  is  a  nutrient  high  nutrient  available  and  intermediate  nutrient
available in case of the organic farming. So, where we go for organic farming though we
are not able to supply the nutrients in the rapidly or in the sufficient amount as per the
requirement the crops for there is a the slow mineralization and the steady release of
nutrients; that means, there is a the nutrient the availabilities intermediate not exactly
excessive or not low as of the control or the nonuse of the fertilizers. But it is with
organic farming or the organic nutrients so, the nutrient availabilities intermediate; thatmeans, the not high or not excessively low. So, as being intermediate, so this favors the
formation of the secondary metabolites.
So, here because in this because as organic farming we are here, here we are there the
nutrient availability is intermediate not exactly high as of the chemical farming, not low
because you do not apply any fertilizer pesticides, but the intermediate levels. So, that
helps the formation of the more formation of the higher formation of the antioxidant.
So,  this  you  say  the  highest  level  of  antioxidants  are  found  in  environments  with
intermediate level of nutrients, not excessive nutrients or not exactly very low or deficit
nutrients. Very low level of nutrients will also result in low levels of antioxidant, because
there will be not enough resources for catering or creating the secondary metabolites not
plant growth. Basically, at very low levels nutrients you will have an unhealthy plant. So,
plant depends the plant will be on unhealthy plants with less nutrient.
So, in that case in case of the low chemical low fertilizers or low soil fertility, so the
plant may not have the higher secondary metabolites. Those intermediate nutrient levels
where there is a nutrient available is there, so considers are similar to those found in
organic farms. So, while the high nutrient condition is similar to those found in the
conventional farming. So, intermediate nutrient levels as organic farming.
So, there these are more formation of the secondary metabolites. Thus, the intermediate
nutrient  levels  of  organic  farms  should  result  in  crops  with  the  higher  antioxidant
productions then crops grown conventional farms. So, this say that if you go for organic
farming in the earlier report, we have shown in our tea garden. See control fertilizer
without application in fertilizer that gives a higher level of the catechins as compared to
chemical fertilizers. Though that is a very low fertilizer levels, but still we are finding a
contradicting these results this hypothesis that we are getting the more of the catechins as
compared to chemical fertilizer. Reason I can say that, so that crop was the starting
phase. 
So, we have started only three years old tea garden So, if you go for the long run maybe
after maybe 5 6 years 7 years or 8 years 9 years, we can find that still control will not
give the higher secondary metabolites, because all the nutrients that might because tea is
a perennial crop that might have any existed a by their by the time.So, that means, your part to have a higher metabolite or the secondary metabolites or the
higher level of antioxidants. Organic farming is the best suited that we can undoubtedly,
we can say though having organic produce though yield is lower or as good as chemical
fertilizer, but having the more of more of secondary metabolites. So, if you are going for
the quality of the products high antioxidants then organic farming can produce more of
antioxidants from a particular area as compared to chemical farming.
So, having the organic produce we can minimize your food intake also is in view of the
quality. So, if you take the high the volume of the chemical your produce from chemical
fertilizers, we can take less volume of produce from organic fertilizer to provide the
same level of antioxidants as in of the chemical fertilizers chemical farming.
Moreover, this having organic fruits and vegetables, so having the high antioxidants and
also free from the pesticides or the residue that has a better health many benefits and we
can avoid the risk of many diseases. So, what we can say the organic farming or the
produce of organic farming that that from this research evidence we can be sure that the
produce of organic farming has the higher level of antioxidant, many cases we have seen
as compared to conventional farming. With these I
Thank you all.