Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 39
Operational Structure of Organic Certification
So, welcome to the lecture 39. So, as we discussed earlier lecture 38 was the Organic
Certification process. So, in this lecture we will discuss the Operational Structure of this
Organic  Certification;  that  means,  what  are  the  agencies  are  there  involved  in
certification of organic products and what are the roles of different agencies those who
are involved in this certification  process. So, you  see if you  see this flowchart the
Operational Structure of the National Programme for Organic Production.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:53)
.
So, in India NPOP, the National Programme for Organic Productions, so, they have
formulated  certain  the  combinational  structures  for  this  certification  of  the  organic
products. As you see the government of India, so, in that are the body of the Ministry of
Commerce and Ministry of Agricultures.
So, that take the person’s the technical persons from the Ministry of Commerce and
Ministry of Agriculture. They to formulate a National Steering Committee for National
Programme for Organic Production NPOP that is a SCNPOP that is the National SteeringCommittee for National Programme for Organic Productions. So, the members appointed
for this the so, steering committee are from Ministry of Commerce and Ministry of
Agriculture, so, also APEDA; so, Agricultural and Processed food Export Development
Authority.
So, these members, they do form a national steering committee for NPOP. So, what is
the job of this the steering committee? So, there is part of the governments there is a
person are from the Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Agriculture and APEDA, so,
Agricultural and Processed food Export Development Authority. So, what they do? They
form National Standard for Organic Production. So, these different methods, so, standard
criteria they are this formulated by this the steering committee. So, they the steering
committee they do formulate the National Standard and also the National Accreditation
Policy and Program.
So, NAPP, the National Accreditation Policy and Programme and National Standards for
Organic Productions, so, this is formulated by the National Steering Committee and also,
they do make a Technical Committee; so, this Technical Committee for review of the,
National  Standards  for  Organic  Productions  and  National  Accreditation  Policy  and
Program.  So,  this  is  a  regular  review  process  procedure  for  inspections  and  the
certification agency. So, they do the Technical Committee also appointed by this the
steering committee. So, their job is for the review of the NSOP; National Standards for
Organic Productions and the review of the National Accreditation Policy Program.
Of course, they also define the procedure for inspections and the certification agencies.
So, these are the inspections and the certification agency, they also define the procedures
and this review process is met the regularly. So, that the update the standards and update
the accreditation policy program.
And the APEDA, the apex body you can say the secretariat, that coordinates between the
steering committee and also steering committee they formulate a National Accreditation
Body. So, these are this the members of this National Accreditation Body, they do come
from the Minister of Commerce, Minister of Agriculture and from APEDA as well.
So, this they coordinate the APEDA is a as a secretariat that coordinate between the
Steering Committee and the National Accreditation Body as well as the certification
programme is mostly is mainly coordinated by APEDA.So,  what  are  the  National  Accreditation  Body,  that  then  what  they  do,  it  helps  in
Accreditation  of  the  Inspections  and  Certification  Agency  the  job  of  the  National
Accreditation Body for the Accreditation of the Certifications and Inspection Agency
and that is done by forming one Evaluation Committee. The Evaluation Committee also
members of this evaluation committee they are decided by the National Accreditation
Body and they also come from Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Agriculture and
APEDA.
So, the Evaluation Committee that does evaluate the Inspections and the Certification
Agency based on the there the operational procedures. And based on the feedback or the
recommendations of this Evaluation Committee then the National Accreditation Body
does  the  Inspections  and  the  Certification  Agency  are  accredited  by  this  National
Accreditation Body based on the report of this Evaluation Committee. And this, the
Inspections and Certification Agency they do provides certification through APEDA
they (Refer Time: 06:10) APEDA does receive the applications from farmers or the
operators or the processors, the organic processors.
So,  there  you  see  applications  through  this  certification  agency  and  APEDA  does
formulate  because  coordinate  between  the  as  the  Steering  Committee  between  the
National  Accreditation  Bodies.  And  National  Accreditation  Body  so  that  form  the
Evaluation Committee and based on the feedback from this Evaluation Committee this
agency the Inspections and the Certification Agency they are accredited and finally,
based on their recommendations the certificate is issued to the farmers, operators and the
processors.
Because the farmers record the farmers or the operator of the processor they do apply to
the national certification agency and this the sorry Inspections and the Certification
Agency they do send the forward the application to the APEDA and APEDA then does
coordinate  between  the  NAB,  National  Accreditation  Boards  and  the  Evaluation
Committee and finally, these are the certification is issued to the farmers or the operators
or the processors.
This is the how the structure that happens structure exist for the certifications of the
organic products or the processed or the field grown (Refer Time: 07:36) products or the
organic the process products, food processing of the organic origin. So, here the becausethe agency are the members from the Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Agricultures
and the APEDA. They form the National the Steering Committee for the NPOP and
Steering Committee formulate a Technical Committee.
The  Technical  Committee  does  evaluate  regularly  this  the  standards  for  organic
productions or the accreditation policy and the programs such a regular evaluation and
their refinement takes place also. And also, this APEDA as a secretariat that coordinate
with  the  Steering  Committee  and  also  National  Accreditation  Body.  National
Accreditation Body that does accredited the Inspections and the Certification Agency
based  on  the  recommendation  of  the  independent  or  the  third  party  the  evaluation
committee. The members of the Evaluation Committee they also come from the Ministry
of Agriculture or Ministry of Commerce and the APEDA.
And after the accreditation of the inspections and the certification agency, so, they are
the then certify they have the capable of the providing or granting certificate organic
certificate  to the farmers  or the operators  and processors through APEDA, because
APEDA  receives  the  application  settle  the  applications  and  finally,  application  the
certification  issued  the  end  users,  they  may  be  the  farmers,  the  operators  and  the
processors. So, this is the whole diagram whole structures of the certification process.
So, now, we will discuss what we discussed now, we will discuss the detail work plans
of different committee or the different sectors organizations in the certification process.
So, coming to the National Steering Committee.(Refer Slide Time: 09:37)
.
So, as  you  see the National  Steering  Committee  let  us  say operational  structure of
National Programme for Organic Productions, National steering committee.
So, the programme will be developed and implemented by government of India through
it is  Ministry of Commerce  and Industry as  the  apex body.  And the  Ministry will
constitute  a  National  Steering  Committee  for  National  Programme  for  Organic
Productions, whose members will be drawn from Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development
Authority, Coffee Board and the Spices Boards and Tea Board and other government and
private organizations associated with the organic movement.
So,  this  Steering  Committee  that  is  for  the  National  Programme  of  for  Organic
Productions will formulate the National Accreditation Policy and the Programmes and
draw National Standards for Organic Products which will includes the standards for
organic  productions  and process  as  well as  the  regulations  for use of the  National
Organic  Certification  Mark.  So,  this  steering  committee  so,  they  do  formulate  the
standards National Standards for the Organic Products or the National Accreditation
Policy is formulated by the Steering Committee and also the regulations for use of the
national organic certifications.
So, this is the job of the steering committee.(Refer Slide Time: 11:13)
.
The National Accreditation Policy and Programme; so, this is what the NAPP will be
administered by the National Accreditation Body which will define the overall policy
objectives for the Accreditation programmes and operations. The NAPP and NSOP are
subject to periodic internal review which will be conducted by the technical committee.
Which will advise the National Steering Committee about the need and contents of such
amendments in the National Programme for Organic Productions.
So, as we discussed the Steering Committee the sorry it is Technical Committee that is
constituted by this the Steering Committee, the Technical Committee will advise the
Steering Committee for any modifications in the national standards or the accreditation
policy the NAPP policy programmes. So, because they will convey this advice, the
Steering Committee about this need and the contents of such amendments in the National
Programme for Organic Productions.(Refer Slide Time: 12:25)
.
And, the National Accreditation Body; so, the National Steering Committee would also
function as the National Accreditation Body. The members of the NAB or the National
Accreditation  Bodies  shall  compromise  the  representatives  from  this  Ministry  of
Agriculture, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, APEDA, Coffee Board, Spices Board
and Tea Board.
So, they are the members of the NAB, then they that the work is drawing up procedures
for evaluation and accreditations of certification programs, formulating procedures for
evaluation  of  the  agencies  implementing  the  programmes,  then,  accreditations  of
inspections and certification agencies.
So, the  NAB  what they do by formulating  the evaluation  committee,  they make  a
evaluation committee through this feedback of this evaluation committee. So, they do the
accreditations  of the  inspections  and  certification  agencies  they are involved  in  the
organic certification process.(Refer Slide Time: 13:30)
.
And what does the Evaluation Committee?  The Evaluation Committee, the Eligible
Inspections and Certification Agencies implementing certification programmes will be
evaluated by an Evaluation Committee. So, as we discussed this one the structure the
flow diagrams this inspections and agency are this and this certification agencies. So,
they are evaluated by this the Evaluation Committee. So, they are appointed by the
National Accreditation Boards.
So, this is Evaluation Committee will be appointed by this the National Accreditation
Boards. So, the members of the Evaluation Committee also come from APEDA, from
Coffee  Board,  Spice  Board,  Tea  Board,  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  the  Extension
Inspection Agency, Inspection Ministry of Agriculture and Export Inspection council of
India then Export Inspection Agency.  So, these are the members  of this  evaluation
committee.
So, APEDA as Agriculture and Processed food Product Export Development Authority,
APEDA  on  behalf  of  the  NAB  will  receive  and  the  screen  applications  from  this
certification  agencies,  will  coordinate  and  arrange  evaluation  visits  to  ascertain  the
credential of certification programmes of the applicants.
So; that means, the APEDA is a coordinating as a secretariat. So, that receives the
applications from this certification agency; that means, the producers or the processors
has to apply for organic certification to a certification agency and the certification agencywill forward the application to APEDA for issue for the certifying the producers for the
operators.
Then APEDA does coordinate this program through this NAB National Accreditation
Board, Evaluation Committee and that will coordinate and arrange of the evaluations
visits to ascertain that the credentials of certification programmes of the applicants.
Then Evaluation Committee will submit its recommendation to NAB for considering
accreditation,  because  the  certification  agency  there  also  the  accreditations  done
regularly. So, the evaluation committee that submit recommendations to the NAB based
on certain regulations and the based on the existing operational procedures, for this
inspections and the certification agency because they depends upon the following the
proper the organic standards and the inspections field, visits, based on this procedures,
the Evaluation  Committee will submit  recommendation  to the NAB for considering
accreditations of this inspection agency.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:30)
So, Accredited Inspection and Certification Agency; so, based on the recommendation of
the  Evaluation  Committee  eligible  Inspections  and  Certification  Agencies  will  be
accredited by the National Accreditation Body. The agencies should be well versed with
the  operating  procedures,  the  National  Standards  for  Organic  Products  and  the
international standards.So, those are the Inspections and the Certification Agency they should have the well
experience  well  versed  with  the  operating  procedures  of  the  organic  certification
programmes and the standards and the accreditation policy and the programmes. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:15)
.
The inspectors what does the inspector the appointed by the Accredited Inspections and
Certification Agency will carry out inspections of the operations through the record
maintained  by  the  operator  as  per  the  specified  formats  and  also  by  periodic  site
inspection. So, inspectors they do visit the fields or these sites to also checking the
records and the regular visits because one once you apply for this know certification
programme.  So, these visit  to the  fields  and  to check  these operations  for this  the
National Standards for the Organic Products.
Based on the complaints with the standards and certification programmes, Accredited
Inspections  and Certification Agency will certify the organic status of products and
operations, specifying their conditions and recommendation.(Refer Slide Time: 18:17)
.
So, this inspection and this you known certifications by the accredited agency they do the
receipt of applications, then providing they because the they receive applications from
the farmers or the processors those who are applying for this organic certification, they
apply  to  the  certification  agency.  So,  they  providing  the  standards  and  operational
documents because once you apply for the certifications then you get the standards of the
as you discussed in the earlier classes.
And  as  you  have  discussed  for  the  operations  or  the  management,  the  production
practices for the organic food productions at different stages how it can maintain the
organic products from the starting from the land preparations up to harvest of the crops.
Specially  for  the  single  ingredient  products  if  you  go for processing  of the  or  the
processed products, then starting from the production as well as processing methods
should be should be as follow the organic standards.
Then the agreements then the demand for these the organic certifications and demand for
the fee as applicable, then document audit or the physical field inspections. So, there is a
by the inspectors they do visit the fields and those who are applying for the organic
certification  certifications  field  sites  and  risk  assessments  is  done  the  complaints
verifications  as per the as per the standards on the record keeping. So, if that they
following as per the standards reporting by the inspectors, review and those reports will
be reviewed by the reviewers, then certification decision.So, what is see here, the usually the Inspections and the Certification Agency they do
assigns the inspectors for the field visit, site seeing and site visits, auditing and making
the assessment of the record keeping, the procedures followed. Because when somebody
if  some  agency  of  the  framers  of  the  groups  they  are  applying  for  the  organic
certifications they should have the record keeping record keepings. So, this is verified
based on this the organic standards and the operational documents as per the report of
this  inspector  that  is  verified  with  reviewers,  then  final  decision  is  taken  for  the
certifications by the APEDA.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:57)
.
The inspection methods what they do for the visit of facilities and the fields, that is done
review  of  records  and  the  accounts.  Then  calculation  of  input  output  norms,  the
production estimates, assessment of the production systems especially from the land
preparation up to harvest production systems. And the interview with the responsible
persons so, as per the either the producers or the farmers or the any groups so, the
inspector has a interview with the persons. So, who is a involving in the production
process and the risk assessments in if there is any failure or the loss, risk assessments and
the part conversion and the parallel production?
Because sometimes you we do recommend to for the conversion of the field as a step by
step basis not the whole field can be converted to organic at a time. So, there may be
organic products as well as the conventional products, but there should be a proper bufferzones at least we have mentioned at least 8 meters buffer zone should maintain between
the organic field and the conventional field and also during transfer milling operations
because organic products should be milled separately this should be intermingled with
the  conventional  products  and  even  transportation  also  this  should  have  a  separate
transportation for the organic and the non organic or the conventional products.
So, this inspection goes on then inspection of for use of genetically engineering products,
then use of off-farm inputs. Usually in case of organic farming we do advice to go for the
on farm because the in the crop waste or the biological waste of the farms itself. But
sometimes the off-farm inputs are used restricted, but it should have the permission from
the certification agency priors if you are using any off-farm inputs then analysis for
residue testing.
So, it requires  because know  though it  is a very difficult  and the challenging  task
whether you can by testing the quality you can say it is organic or the conventional, but
thing that the pesticide residue can be detected if there is a beyond the threshold levels
then that test would be taken to brand it is organic, usually the most of the organic crops
organic  products  are  the  free  from  pesticide  residues.  So,  that  testing  should be  if
required that can be taken up from this certification process.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:31)
.
Then  we  have  the  grower  group  certification  sometimes  know  this  is  individual
certifications  are the grower group based on the group of the people, group of thefarmers that involved in organic farming. So, that can be group certification can be can
be issued so, based on the Internal Quality System. So, this is applicable to producer
group, farmers, cooperatives, say contract productions and small-scale processing units.
So, this is a grower groups or that the group of the farmers require the cooperatives it can
be issued the certifications. The producer in the group must apply must have similar
production systems and the farm should be in geographical proximity. That means, in a
particular area close proximity in a in a low in a particular area small distance small
distance and they follow the same norms and procedures for the organic production
process.  So,  that  this  groups  are  the  corporative  they  can  apply  for  this  organic
certification.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:31)
So, this Internal Quality Systems  as you  discussed what do you  means  a group of
producers create the internal team for some tasks. So, say internal teams for this they
common tasks they are growing for applying as a group they are applying for the organic
production systems. So, the external certification agency delegates some inspection tasks
to this group as a named as Internal Quality Systems.
The IQS that undertakes the inspections on behalf on behalf of the certifications board
the certification agency evaluates the working of the Internal Quality Systems and do
random field inspections for verifications. Certification is granted to group as a whole as
a unit. So, if there is a group of farmers or the cooperative, they are doing a particulartype specific type of farming. So, in that case the group certifications can be issued to a
particular grower.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:37)
.
And this is the minimum requirement for the Internal Quality Systems, the development
of internal control systems identifications of producer groups. Creation of awareness
about the about group certifications among the members of this know internal control
system quality systems.
Identification of qualified personnel for maintaining the internal control systems; so,
within that the grower groups or the community or the cooperatives so, we have to assign
some of the persons. So, that I can train them, regarding the internal the quality controls
systems for these organic certifications. So, necessary training in productions and the
Internal Quality System development and preparation of the Internal Quality System
manual  containing  policies  and  procedures  for  the  organic  productions  and  the
processing.
Implementation of the policies and procedures, then review and an improvement of the
Internal  Quality  System  documents  for  maintaining  a  harmonized  Internal  Quality
System. So, in this process the operational structure as we discussed though, so, a group
of the farmers or the individual farmers and the producers, the operators, they can apply
for the organic certification process.They can apply to the certifications the inspections agency or the certification agency
and they can forward the applications to the APEDA and the application is scrutinized or
the or the  verified  by the APEDA  and  APEDA  does  coordinate  with the National
Accreditation  Boards  and  also  Evaluation  Committee  and  the  Inspections  and  the
Certification Agencies  and the review  the applications  and formulate the evaluation
comments and based on the feedback of the Evaluation Committees. And the certificate
is issued and the as per the norms or the or the policy or the procedures are followed for
the  organic  certification  processes  and  certification  is  issued  to  the  farmers  or  the
operators or the group of farmers depending upon their requirement.
So, this is how the certification process or the structure of certification in India. So, by
having the so, as you discussed certifications which is required to have a branded as
organic product. So, that we can the producers can get the price where the price the of
the organic product and that helps in the converting at the conversion of the more and
more the conventional farm to the organic farm. With this I conclude this lecture.
Thank you very much.