Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 33
Quality of Organic Food
So, I welcome you to the lecture 33 that is Quality of Organic Food. We have discussed
the earlier classes regarding the production practices of organics, how can make the
organic inputs and field level productions and including nutrient managements, land
management, plant protection measures, for the organic farming standards. 
Last class we discussed about the transition to organic; that means the farmers, how they
can  convert  from  the  conventional  farming  to  organic  farming,  what  are  the  steps
involved and how you can smoothly convert your land from conventional to organic
production. 
So, the main objectives of having a organic farming or to convert land to organic farming
is to have a better quality of the foods to increased productions. At the same time, we see
there is less effect of this organic managements on the environments; that means, it
ensures environmental sustainability food quality and the better food production. 
So, as our aim or the say goal of organic farming to have a good quality of food, in
addition to other benefits like, the environmental sustainability or the better productions.
So, how it can compare the organic food with conventional food? And what do you mean
by the food quality? How the organic food has superiority forgot the conventional food?
Those things you we will discuss in this lecture. (Refer Slide Time: 02:02)
So, if you see the by Worthington 1998 what he has coated since the 1920’s, when
chemical fertilizer was first used commercially on a large scale. 
There  have  been  claims  that  agricultural  chemical  produce  less  healthful  and  less
nutritious food crops. Later in 1940, the organic farming movement had bigger in part,
due to this belief that food grown using more traditional chemical free methods was
more helpful, the foods grown by these methods came to be known as organic. 
So, as we have discussed the earlier classes, how it can brand as organic, because foods
are grown organic way; that means, without use of any synthetic chemicals or synthetic
chemical  fertilizers  or the  pesticides  and  those  foods  are  branded  as  organic  foods
starting from 1920 when there was a need then chemical fertilizer because they are
realized also. Because that is a harmful or the bad the bad effect of adverse effect of the
chemical farming on human health and then came the organic farming and where he
believed that, there is a traditional way of growing crops the chemical free methods can
provide the good food or the healthy foods. 
Then in the right-hand side if you can see why do people, choose organic foods because,
see the health, taste and caring for nature so and the environments  are the 3 most
significant motivations for buying organic products. So, people want to be healthy foods
and caring for the nature and the environments and the test of the foods. So, from this
you can see approximately 55 percent population, support that the organic foods therethey are consuming organic food, because of the healthy health for point of view healthy
eating, healthy foods and 53 percent people, this also avoiding chemical residue. 
The organic foods as very less or no chemical residue to avoid chemical residue, that you
can consume the organic foods 35 percent, they do the opinion of the taste of organic
foods, 31 the 44 percent. They do have the opinion that care for the environments, to
have a better environment better air to live and the better water the clean water drink. So,
go for the organic there, 44 percent of the part the populations of the opinion and 34, 31
percent populations have the opinions of the animal welfare. So, this is why the people
choose organic foods then, if you see the food quality.
What do you mean by food quality? The quality is the measure of or an expression of
goodness, because if you compare of the foods quality, as you say the quality aspect the
goodness; that means, the we have the strong belief or the say the good quality; that
means, the expressions or the goodness of the foods, that is a good for what? You know
the quality say the distinctive rate characteristic capacity of a product that sets it apart
from others. So, you can differentiate from others by some measures that is the quality
how can differentiate, one type of food from other type of food with some criteria, some
characteristic or the trades as a capacity by which, we can differentiate.
So, one product from the other product so, that is of the product quality. So, as you see
the food quality, the quality characteristics of food that is acceptable to consumers and
this includes the external factors, how can see with good quality or the bad quality food.
So, based on the external factors, that may be the size, colour, appearance of the foods or
the consistency of the foods.
As you say the external factors, how can I, can differentiate from the 2 type of foods
good quality or not quality not up to the mark; texture, flavor and the internal properties
of the physical properties, chemical properties are the biological the microbial properties.
Microbial contents on that way, we can differentiate between foods or among the foods
then you can say the quality foods. 
So, either the because sometimes the consumers, they get tempted, they have the eye
appearance, the physical appearance of the foods that looks shining or the colour is good,
appearance and size also good they do buy. So, they have the while buying they do havethe probably less concerned about the quality, the pay, the chemical properties nutritional
quality of the foods. 
Usually from the health point of view, we should concerned about the nutritional quality
of the foods, contents of the foods, that from the organic foods though, they do not have
the good size, they may not be get the good size or the shape may not be as of the
chemical produced, but they have the nutritional quality, the chemical properties is much
better, far better for from the human health point of view.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:39)
So, if you see the quality. So, as you say the 10 so, 10 reasons why organic foods are
healthier? So, this is a one, this is higher in nutrients as we have discussing. So, usually
people should prefer the buyers, because with the education. So, the literature, gives
awareness that is among these consumers, we should go for the higher in nutrients or the
nutritional quality or from healthy foods from health point of view. There should be
higher in nutrients free of neurotoxins that is a less of chemical residues, brain and the
body growth boosters. 
No artificial colors not exposed to gas ripening, that is a no artificial ripening, natural
ripening process say tasty that is a better test as compared to the conventional foods.
Reduce cancer risk, because it contains less of pesticides that minimizes the not only
cancer risk, that many diseases crooning diseases avoided due to the organic foods, no
chemical fertilizer of course lessens your exposure to antibiotics, synthetics, hormonesand drugs, because this is free from any the growth hormones or the antibiotics and the
of the other thing, that it is tested, proven. So, proven technology say proven technology
is the best one.
So,  the  organic  foods  are  proven  are  known,  well  known  of  the  better  quality  as
compared to conventional food. So, if you think of the quality, first discuss about the
nutritional quality, how the organic foods are better as compared to the conventional
foods? It may happen that not exactly the way some researchers have seen organic foods
and conventional food, if you see the quality there may be up part there, may not be
difference, but many research reports have established that organic products are a better
quality as compared to conventional products. 
So, if this nutritional quality, it contents primary essential nutrients such as water fiber,
proteins, fats, carbohydrates vitamins, say dry matter and minerals of the secondary
metabolites  or the phytonutrients  as  say,  in plants  there  are  around 5000 to 10000
secondary compounds in plants, which are considered as health promoting and protective
and thus necessary for health. 
So, therefore, there are the major 4 categories of phytonutrients, phenolics, terpenes,
alkaloids and sulfur containing compound. So, what you say here? If you think of the
quality, the nutritional quality and secondary metabolites, the nutritional quality because
these  elements  essential  elements  contents  in  the  food  products,  as  you  see  for
enhancing, the growth and the bio mass of the crop, yield of crop that depends upon the
contents of the essential elements in the soil as supply of the essential elements. 
But if you see the secondary metabolites though, they are not essential for the growth
and development of the crops, but having secondary the metabolites in the plants the
production of secondary metabolites, they have the action against in many diseases in
human body. They protect the human being from many diseases, if the crop if the food
materials has higher content of secondary metabolites. 
So, they have the function of having the defense mechanisms or they fight for many
diseases in human body. So, that is why, the secondary metabolites are very important
and in many products having the higher secondary metabolites like the organic products
are expected to have the higher content of secondary metabolites, because the organic
farming  goes  under  the  nutritional  stress  conditions.  These  secondary  metabolitesformation  takes  place,  when  the  crop  passes  through  a  phase  of  nutrient  stress
mechanism.
So, there is secretion of formation of pyto hormones or the pyto chemicals in the plant
body, that creates the, that causes for the formation of secondary metabolites and that has
a health benefit means, that protect the human being from many type of the chronic
diseases like one of the heart disease is a cardiovascular disease, or the cancer. 
Because now cancer is becoming very common so, to fight against cancers the product to
have the more contents of the secondary metabolites and organic products are expected
to have higher content of this secondary metabolites. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:37)
And the some of the evidences you can see the here the conventionally produced crops
have significantly higher content of nitrogen and organically produce produced crop
have significantly higher contain of phosphorus and higher titratable acidity. That means,
now  if  you  see  the  nitrogen  content,  this  is  obvious  because,  the  quick  supply  of
nitrogenous fertilizers are the nitrogen available in the soil, the plant expected to have the
higher nitrogen  contents  and the  atmosphere,  if sometimes  you  say that  the nitrate
content is a higher in conventional food as compared to organic foods, we need nitrates
certain limits, but the excessive nitrate may have the will have the adverse effect on the
human health.But the organic produce has been reported to have the higher phosphorus content as
compared to conventional produce. On the basis of systematic review of studies of
satisfactory quality there is no evidence  of a difference in nutrient quality between
organically and conventionally produced foodstuffs, this small difference  in nutrient
content  detected  are  biological  plausible  and  mostly  related  to  difference  in  the
production methods.
So, same author they have seen the Dangour et al 2009 so, they have reported that the
because the organic produce content higher phosphorous content as compared to the
conventional or the chemically produced foodstuffs, but in general if you say. So, there is
no such significant difference in the nutritional compositions between the organic and
the chemically produced food. 
And the other authors, they have said that as a 25 to 30 percent increase in lysine has
been reported in organic wheat. Compared to studies from performed on hen eggs and
the raw cow’s milk did not show any noticeable difference in protein levels. 
So, there is a different report, some report says, there is a lysine there is a higher content
lysine’s in the organic wheats and if you say e x or the cow milk. So, there is no
difference the protein content in the organic milk or the conventional produced milk or
the egg. According to Brandt et al 2011, who conducted a meta-analysis of the published
comparative  studies  of  the  content  of  secondary  metabolites,  in  organic  versus
conventional crops just say, organic one content of 12 percent higher level of favorable
secondary metabolites then, corresponding conventional fruits and vegetables.
So, this report they have seen that, the secondary metabolites contents are higher in
organic  fruits  and  vegetables  as  compared  to  the  chemically  produced  fruits  and
vegetable. So, there are the different opinions from different researchers, but if you see in
majority cases many cases. So, there is a report has been found that, organic products the
though there is no difference in the essential elements as you say either the. So, macro
nutrients, micro nutrients but so, the as with respect to the secondary metabolites the
organic products have superiority,  they have the higher content as compared to the
conventional products.(Refer Slide Time: 16:00)
And see the organic crops overall content 12 21 percent more irons and 29 percent more
magnesium, then there conventional counterparts similarly, they Dangour et al 2009,also
reported organic plant product tend to have more dry matter and some minerals like iron,
magnesium and antioxidant micronutrients, phenols while animal organic products have
more polyunsaturated fatty acids. 
So, the plant products they content more of micronutrients as because you know this is
also expected, because as your applying the organic fertilizers, they contain most of the
micro nutrients. So, the micro nutrient contents of the crops expect to be higher having
the organic farming as the annual products, they have the more poly unsaturated fatty
acids that is good for the health for the human health.
You should go for the poly unsaturated fatty acid like olive oils or the omega fatty acids,
they have the poly unsaturated fatty acids for the for the good for the human health point
of view. And the other reports as a Kumar et al 2018, this is the research from our own
experiment no significant difference in protein content, but higher amylose content of
rice  then, who was  noted  in organic  fertilizer  application  as  compared  to  chemical
fertilizer. So, we had this experiment for the past more than 4 year sorry 5 years. So, this
experiment was conducted for the rice chickpea cropping systems. So, may be 7th and
8th years of the experiments, where have seen the chemical fertilizer, organic fertilizer,
then they do not deform much with respect to protein contents are specially the nitrogen.So, nitrogen contents in the rice grain, but if you see the amylose content on rice grain
was  significantly  higher  in  organic  treated  plot  as  compared  to chemical  fertilizers
treated  plots  and this  is  the  in general  opinion  from the  Dangour et al  year  2009,
nutritional quality of organic foods a systematic review. 
So here say that nitrogen contents if you see the N content conventional food has the
higher N  content  as  compared  to the organic foods; that means,  as  your  supplying
chemical fertilizers or nitrogen is quickly available easily available from the chemical
fertilizers, that increases contents of the food products as compared to organic farming
and  vitamin  C,  there  is  no  such  difference  and  also  they  have  reported  phenolic
compounds,  no  difference  magnesium,  no  difference  calcium,  no  difference  as
phosphorus the organic products contents, higher content of phosphorus as compared to
conventional products. 
The reason for this the phosphorus available in soil is higher in organic farming as
compared to chemical farming, because the microbial activity is higher in case of organic
farming and they do help in phosphorus solubilizing, in the soils and raising the pH
because one the phosphorus ability depends upon the pH of the soil and using organic
fertilizer  that  bring  the  pH  to  neutral  range  and  most  of  the  bacteria  phosphate
solubilizing bacteria, there active those pH range and the applying organic fertilizer also
that increases, the population of phosphate solubilizing bacteria and they do help in
release of phosphorus in the soils, bring the phosphorus insoluble form and making it
available for the crop plants and; that means, the reason for the having the noting, the
higher phosphorus  content  in the  crops  grown in  organic  as  compared  to chemical
farming.
And the potassium, see there is no such difference and zinc no difference, total soluble
solids no difference, say copper also no difference and titratable acidity also is in higher
in case of the organic products as compared to conventional product.(Refer Slide Time: 20:06)
So, similarly, as you see nutrients if you see the pesticide residue, but no doubt unlike
nutrients pesticide residue in the products so, there very low in organic products as
compared to conventional product. This is well established and everybody see this is this
is not unlike chemical fertilizers; this is proven and established information that all the
organic  product  will  have  the  lesser  and  lesser  pesticide  residue  as  compared  to
conventional products or the products grown under chemical fertilizers and the chemical
pesticides. 
As you see here the pesticides are used protect crops against insect, pests, diseases like a
the fungus and other weeds pesticides are potentially toxic to humans and can have both
acute and chronic health effects depending on the quantity and the ways in which a
person is exposed to pesticides applications are the use. To protect the food consumers
from adverse effect of pesticides World Health Organization’s reviews evidence and
develops, internationally accepted maximum residue limits in the foods. 
So, in the pesticide contents so, if you see the right-hand side figure here, that shows the
pesticide residue in the products of different management practices like either, you can
go for the conventional management like use of chemical fertilizers or the integrated pest
managements. Where the chemical and this the biological methods of pest management
are together, in conventional only chemical pesticides are used and the organic the way
of using organic growing organically using both fertilizer, pesticides through organicapproach or the bio pesticides are used in case of the organic management. So, if you see
the pesticide residue of fruits and vegetables.
So, this column shows the fruits and the next column shows the vegetables pesticide
residue. So, here this show the percentage of samples with residue, you can see the
conventional products 82 percent samples have the pesticide residue the above maximum
residue limits, see the m r l. So, there is a maximum residue limit. So, 82 percent of the
fruit  samples  diagnose  are  detect  analyzed  having  the  pesticide  residue  above  the
maximum  residue  limits.  Similarly,  in  that  conventional  products  61  percent  of
vegetables  have  been  detected  as  the  pesticide  above  maximum  residue  limit,  but;
however, where as you can see the organic products only 23 percent of fruits and 9
percent  vegetables  are  detected  with  pesticide  residue  and  the  integrated  pest
management there in between.
So, that indicate that engine in general the conventional products have the produced from
the conversion, the chemical fertilizers are chemical pesticides have the higher content of
the pesticides or they are detected as the having the pesticide residue is a very very high
or significant higher as compared to the organic products. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:23)
Similarly, there are some other evidence, we can see that organic produce less likely to
have detectable pesticide residue than conventionally grown produce, that is a Baker et al
2002  and  say  here,  they  have  also  reported  among  samples  with  any  residues,conventional foods are more likely to have multiple residues  in a given sample than
organic food; that means, the multi the several pesticides can be found in the produce of
the chemical pesticides as compared to the organic farming. When present residue in
organic foods are likely to be at lower level than those in non organic foods of course,
these are m r l the residue limit maximum residue limit, what you see that, you can
organic foods have the pest residues, may be lower than the m r l. The vast majority
around 94 to 100 percent  of organic  foods  does  not  contain  any pesticide  residue.
Organic vegetables contain markely less nitrate, because nitrates also not good for health
from the health point of view. 
So, that cause damaged in the body nitrates so, most of the organic products they have
the less nitrate contents and they do not content any pesticides with a very less the below
the less as compared to the conventional or the chemical products. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:50)
And, if you see this one the pesticide residue on organic and conventional fruits and
vegetables so, this is the organic fresh produce and the conventional fresh produce 65
percent of the organic produce, there free of pesticide residue and where as the only 8
percent of the conventional produce are free of residue. So, there is a huge difference
because; that means, the around 74 percent of the conventional produce are detected
around like having the pesticide residue. So, in case of the trace residue 30 percent here are 18 percent and mostly 74 percent of
the conventional produce have the pesticide residue and in case of organic only 5 percent
or less than 5 percent of the organic produce have the pesticide residue. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:48)
So, then the nutrient bioavailability sees this is very important for the what do you mean
by nutrient  bio  availability?  That  means,  as  you  consume  the  foods  that  that  food
materials should be utilized by the crop how the food material is utilized by the crop; that
means, the after digestions how the nutrients is usable or the used by the in the human
body.
So,  that  is  a  nutrient  bioavailability,  that  is  a  food  digestibility  and  nutrient  bio
availability at the are the heart of the nutrition, digestibility is a major is a major of how
much nutrition a food provides in a given volume. And second indicates, how much of
the food is observed by the gut into the bloodstream? That means, the amount of nutrient
present in the food the portion of nutrients is observed by the in the bloodstream, that is a
nutrient bioavailability. So, though you do not have the many say information about the
nutrient bioavailability for this specially for the organic foods and the conventional
foods. 
There few reports suggest that for leafy vegetables as well as the root vegetables and
tubers, a trend for higher dry matter content in organic foodstuffs has been found, whileno significant difference has been identified for fruits and vegetables, the fruit vegetables
and the fruit. 
So, higher dry matter content; that means, that indicate there is bio availability, there is a
fiber content that that the better digestibility and the better bioavailability but there are
there are some understanding, some that the organic produce the free from a pesticide
residue.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:36)
So, that there will be better the bioavailability of nutrients in the human body and the
storage quality, if you see the how we can shelf life of the storage as this is grown. 
So, without any growth hormones or without any chemical fertilizers or no chemical
pesticides, in this case the vegetables like potato and fruit from organic production, show
better storage quality or the keeping quality during winters. This possible reason is
connected with the higher content of dry matter organic foods and minerals and total
sugars in organic that that increases shelf life of the organic foods. (Refer Slide Time: 28:06)
And the sensory evaluations so, that you see that is a usually the taste, say taste of the
organic foods. The organic plant products have usually the better sensory quality, they
have the more distinct taste and they are sweeter and more compact, because of the
higher dry matter content. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 28:35)
So, there are some test conducted sensory evaluations, there are report that the organic
products have the taste have better taste as compared to the chemical products. So, thereare  some  comparison  of  weight  gain  and  reproductive  performance  in  rodents  and
rabbits, fed organic and conventionally grown food you can see the rodents for this.
So, there are many studies have conducted and some have reported in one case, greater
weight gain, some cases there is superior weight gain also there, shorter life span in one
case the Scheunert et al 1934. They are reported there is a shorter lifespan and worse
health in organic foods by consuming organic foods as compared to conventional food
and no difference in weight gain. 
In other they have reported better re-productions with organic feeds worst performance
with mixed organic and conventional feed. Similarly, there is no difference in this case,
rabbits  there  reported  greater  number  of  eggs,  higher  fertilization  rate,  beneficial
histological changes, in female genital organs due to the organic foods. No difference in
re-productive performance, lower mortality of the new born in organic foods, long term
fertility rate in case of the organic foods and younger born remain alive in organic food. 
So, these are the reports mixed reports, but most of the cases, they do evidence organic
foods have better health effects and have the between advantage in the animal as the as
the animal body so as compared to the conventionally grown foods.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:05)
And something that we concerned about that, you know the cadmium toxicity mostly
that use the chemical pesticides, they content the cadmium. So, this is there is a huge concern for the human health. Researchers found that much
higher levels of cadmium add toxic metals in conventional crops, pesticide residue found
on conventional crops 4 times more often than the organic foods. So, the cadmium
contents are higher in conventionally produce food as compared to the organic foods. 
According to Environmental Protection Agency of USA, it is estimated that, 90 percent
of fungicides, 60 percent of herbicides and 30 percent pesticide used in conventional
food crops are carcinogenic, they have the cadmium; that means, as cadmium contents
and due to high cadmium content, if you are consuming the foods having the higher
cadmium content, what will happen the health effects? It has a cardiovascular, a recent
study has linked it to breast cancer, cardiovascular disease then abstractive luminary
disease, the kidney loose functions, which can also cause Goth and a form of arthritis the
bones lose density and the bone (Refer Time: 31:17) fracture due to high cadmium
content. 
So, taking the foods of having higher cadmium contents as; that means, the foods having
high pesticide residue, they have the many heavy metals having heavy metals contents.
So, they have the effect, because many diseases like cancer, cardiovascular disease so,
that has a bad effect on human health.
(Refer Slide Time: 31:41)
 (Refer Slide Time: 31:45)So, these are the some of the references as we are discussing the reference are cited there
and  these  references  are  mentioned.  You  can  follow  these  references  as  you  have
explained earlier and you can get detailed information by going through the literature.
So, this lecture of by having you can gain have got the knowledge about the quality of
the organic foods and how the organic foods superior over the conventional foods; that
means, you have the main purpose is going to have organic foods to have the better
quality to have a better health. So, you have to feed the population, young population,
old population, every age of populations, they need the good quality foods to maintain
their health and to have a better health. 
As you see the cancer patient population is growing over the time, everyday you can find
the many cancer patient populations, adding in the nation and the world as well and to
minimize the deadly disease of cancers. We need to control our food because, food
regulates the disease to several to greater extents, how can have a better food. So, that we
can have a better health, with these I conclude this lecture.
Thank you very much. 