Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 36
Organic Food and Human Health
So, welcome to the next lecture 36, Organic Food and Human Health. So, by now we
have discussed the quality of the food materials irrespective of the organic farming or
chemical farming. So, based the ORSC value oxygen radical absorbance capacity of the
fruits and vegetables and we have discussed specifically the organic produce, the organic
farming by organic farming and that gives the higher ORSC value or the higher oxygen
radical absorbance capacity as compared to the producer the chemical farming.
So that means, the consuming the fruits or vegetables having high ORSC value, the daily
intake as a natural source of antioxidants; so, that can control many diseases in human
health. So, this lecture specially discusses the how the organic foods that can that can
helpful for combating or the controlling some chronic diseases in human health. So,
coming this one as you discussed earlier, so, only the free radicals. So, the mechanism
you also have discussed, but still a glimpse this one. So, as you see the free radicals so,
these are the unpair is the free radicals unpaired electrons.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:10)
So, they need, because these unpaired electrons so, they cause the cell damage, either
damage of DNA because this is very reactive species as unpaired electron so, reactive
one. So, they do cause cell damage they have scavenging activity. So, they can damage
the DNA. So, to make it the non-reactive so, it needs one electron that could that should
come from other sources. Antioxidant what they do they do provide the release the
electrons  so, that it can neutralize  these free radicals;  that means,  free radicals  are
unstable these are unstable atoms. So, to become them more stable they take electrons
from other atoms and they make so, in that process they cause damage.
So, this can be made stable by providing electron. So, antioxidant role is that donate
electrons so, that can neutralize the free radicals and that can scavenge the free radicals
the free radicals can become inactive. So, that the you can minimize the damage the
health problem. So, this is what the free radicals, free radicals are unstable atoms that can
damage cells causing illness and the aging also because, when the higher formation of
free radicals that can cause the aging. So, as the body ages it loses its ability to fight the
effects of radicals. So, the result is more, so more free radicals, so, more oxidative stress
and more damage to cells which leads to degenerative process as well as the normal
aging.
So, you can see so, the aging comes because of the more formation of free radicals in the
body so, that causes aging. So, usually we have to take the regular intake of the natural
antioxidants. So, you know the Japanese so, they have the higher longevity and you
cannot also the understand the age from Japanese people because, they take regular the
no green tea. Green tea is a good source of polyphenols as a regular intake of the green
tea that say polyphenols antioxidants. So, that we or any antioxidant see either the amla
or any natural sources of antioxidants can take regularly. So, that you can minimize the
formation of free radicals also these as aging problems. (Refer Slide Time: 03:31)
So, the free radicals and the what are the disease due to the free radicals we can say the
various studies and theories have connected to oxidative stress due to the free radicals to
what they have; what they in the effect of free radicals central nervous system disease
such as Alzheimer’s and other dementia that disease knows due to formation of the free
radicals. Then of course, the cardiovascular disease due to clogged arteries, say free
radicals because of free radicals. Then autoimmune and the inflammatory disorder such
as the rheumatoid arthritis and cancers, that is due to the formation of free radicals. And,
cataracts and the age-related vision declines.
Age related change in appearance, such as loss of skins elasticity, wrinkles, graying
hairs, hair loss and change in hair texture, diabetes then genetic degenerative disease
such as the Huntington’s disease or the Parkinson disease. So, these are some of the
disease, many other regions also there and free radical formation also one of the reasons
for this for this disease we cannot ruled out this free radical. So, these are the diseases
either  the  aging,  cancer,  heart  attack,  atherosclerosis,  trauma,  hypersia,  stroke,
cataractogenesis,  retinal  damage,  liver  injury,  sexual  disfunction,  periodontis,
vasospasm, dermatitis, asthma, arthritis.
So, these are the some of the disease that is due to the free radicals because having the
formation of free radicals in human body. So, the some of the disease can occur in the
human body, if there is a regular formation of free radicals and if those free radicals arenot neutralized means our body, we have the defense mechanism. So, this antioxidant the
enzymes are secret in body, but they may not be quite enough to fight the free radicals.
So, need the external sources and external sources that natural sources of free radicals
should be supplemented daily to fight against the free radicals.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:47)
So,  what  antioxidant  free  radicals  that  they  do  the  means  the  antioxidants  are  the
chemicals that lessens or prevent the effect of free radicals. So, they donate an electron
as you discuss the previous lectures. They donate an electron to the free radicals, thereby
reducing their act their reactivity.  What makes  antioxidants  unique is that they can
donate an electron without becoming reactive free radicals themselves. So, these free
radicals after donating electron they do not become reactive. So, that is a beauty of the
antioxidant. So, they do not free radicals.
They neutralize the free radicals and they do not make because the same time they do not
become also reacting, they become reactive free. So, no single antioxidants can combat
the effect of every free radicals. Just as free radicals have different effects in different
areas of the body, every antioxidant behaves differently due to its chemical properties.
So, the so as you see the antioxidant is a healthy cell and antioxidants, they do neutralize
these are the free radicals. So, the free radicals are damaging free radicals. So, the they
make  damage  nucleus.  So, having  anti  regular  intake  of  the  antioxidants,  they  can
neutralize the free radicals and they protect the human cell from the damage. (Refer Slide Time: 07:05)
And there the we will discuss some of the antioxidants and for the disease control. So,
what are the antioxidants can be can be antioxidants can be used for controlling some
diseases. So, cancer is you know a very deadly disease. Now, you can see the cancer
patients  the populations that increasing day by day.  Even if the earlier  we had the
diagnose of cancer only from the cities, you say there is pollution, no quality of the airs
and the food. Now, we can say cancer person also growing in a village area, in village,
everywhere many families we are seeing the cancer patient as it is growing. So, because
cancer  the  damage  where the cancer  damages  the  cell  caused  by the free radicals,
especially the damage to DNA, may play role in the development of cancer and the other
health related conditions.
Antioxidants are chemicals that interact with and neutralizing free radicals thus prevent
from causing damage. So, regular intake antioxidants not that after the detection of the
cancer it may very difficult after control but, to avoid to have such disease we should
have a regular intake from the usually from the childhood, from the young age we should
take regular intake of the antioxidants in your daily diet. So, that you can neutralize body
can neutralize the free radicals; so, avoid such disease. The body makes some of the
antioxidants that it uses to neutralize free radicals. Of course, this is the natural defense
mechanism  within  the  body.  So,  these  antioxidants  are  called  the  endogenous
antioxidants those are secreted from the body.However, the body relies on external or the exogenous sources primarily the diet to
obtain  the  rest  of  the  antioxidant  it  needs.  So,  these  exogenous  antioxidants  are
commonly called dietary antioxidants. So, the as you see that body has own defense
mechanisms. So, there is a secretion of the glutathione peroxides, many antioxidants are
there, but they are not enough to fight against these free radicals. So, you need the
external supply. So, external supply best source the natural sources, we can take the daily
intake of the fruit and vegetable they can supply the natural antioxidants.
So, that is a fruits, vegetables and grains are rich source of dietary antioxidants. So, some
dietary antioxidants are also available as a dietary supplement. So, those can be taken
regularly to fight against the deadly at the free radicals and to protect the human being
from different disease like cancer. So, examples of dietary and antioxidants are including
the beta carotene, lycopene and vitamin A, C and E that is a tocopherol. So, these are the
secondary metabolites  that  can be taken from different  sources. We have discussed
already the sources of this the secondary metabolites. So, you can the regular diets this
can be included so, that they can fight the formation of the free radicals. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:54)
So, another disease that say the cardiovascular disease. So, this cardiovascular disease
heart  disease  you  can  say.  So,  this  is  the  even  though  supplements  did  not  prove
beneficial in avoiding heart problem, foods that are sources of antioxidants are still the
recommended; have the regular intake of the fruits. Natural sources of antioxidants tofight the free radicals and to avoid these cardiovascular diseases. Eating a diet rich in
antioxidants containing foods such as fruits, vegetables and whole grains is linked to a
reduced risk of the cardiovascular the heart and the blood vessel disease.
So, this is one of the studies that indicates that the body that say the enzyme, that say if
the body has low enzyme there is a glutathione peroxides and the low HDL cholesterol.
If you have the low enzyme glutathione peroxides and low LDL cholesterol and the
human being is a greater risk of the dying from cardiovascular disease. So, HDL high
density lipoprotein cholesterol that is a good cholesterol for the human being. LDL is a
bad  cholesterol  that  is  say  low  density  lipoprotein.  But  the  HDL  the  high-density
lipoprotein that is a good cholesterol. If there is a low amount and also the glutathione
peroxides  are  a  low  amount  so,  those  the  human  being  is  highly  prone  to  the
cardiovascular disease.
So, this study also says that combination of the low glutathione peroxides and the low
HDL cholesterol were up to six times more likely to die from cardiovascular disease than
patient with low levels of HDL and high levels of GP 3 activity. So, that means, having
the low levels of glutathione peroxides enzyme so, that causes this more risk for the
patients says six times the more risk to die from the cardiovascular disease as compared
to the high levels of glutathione peroxides; that means, these enzymes. So, those the
glutathione peroxides enzyme activity so, those things as a as a antioxidant they come
from this the natural sources having the natural the natural antioxidants.
So, foods and the say foods or the fruits vegetables and whole grains are discussed you
can take regular intake. So, they can fight the free radicals. So, they can protect from
such type of disease and asthma the that is say the symptomatic asthma that in adults is
associated with the low dietary intake of fruits, the antioxidant nutrients vitamin C and
manganese and low plasma vitamin C levels. So, this finding suggest that diet may be a
potentially modifiable risk for the fact of development of asthma. So, we can so, having
the diets; that means, the whatever disease you see so, most of them are they regulated
by the daily food intake what type food you are taking.
So, food is very important whatever food you are taking and more over also the fresh
foods and the processed foods and the junk foods know. If so, daily intake daily if the
now the obesity also is the great problem. In many developed countries they want tocome down the obesity by having the by reducing the junk foods and have been taking
fresh foods. So, fresh food in organic farming also the food processing also we do not
prefer  to  have  the  processed  food.  Fresh  fruits  are  the  better  they  have  the  high
antioxidants  as  compared  to  the  processed  foods.  And,  also  the  foods  from  the
organically produced crops have the less residue of pesticides and that is the good for
health  as  compared  the  foods  from  the  conventional  or  the  chemically  produced
pesticides. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:25)
So, we will discuss the antioxidants and the effect on the human health. So, like the
polyphenols so, that inhibit the oxidation of LDL there is a low density lipoproteins and
inhibit the platelet aggregations, improve the endothelial dysfunctions, also the lower
risk of the myocardial infractions, then effect on the anticarcinogenic that can avoid the
cancers and prevent the neurodegenerative diseases, protected against the neurotoxic
drugs.
Also, treatment for the diabetes and treatment to prevent the osteoporosis and inhibited
the non-heme the iron absorption. So, this is the function of polyphenols. So, by having
the polyphenols the from natural sources we can avoid the you can take care of this
health  problems.  Also,  these  are  the  copper,  zinc,  manganese,  selenium  other
carotenoids. So, that the cofactor of antioxidant enzymes. So, protection against theoxidation of the lipid, proteins and DNA and abductions and the free radicals scavenging
activity.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:29)
So, other antioxidants like the vitamin C that is say protect against the cancers and also
protect from the heart disease, improvement of the health of the cartilage joints and
skins.  And,  maintaining  a  healthy  immune  system,  improvement  in  the  antibody
productions and increase in the absorption of nutrients having the vitamin C. Similarly,
the vitamin A that prevents the coronary heart disease, prevent the formation of blood
clots, decrease the incidence of breast and the prostate cancers, brain protections, reduce
long term risk of dementia, decrease risk of Parkinson’s disease.
So,  these  are  the  secondary  metabolites  or  the  polyphenols  or  the  vitamins  or  the
coenzymes. So, those are required in the daily intake of the foods regular intake of the
foods required. So, to protect or to have a healthier because now, healthy bodies and to
keep the body for the better work and the feed the body make healthy body. So, that
needs the diet control so, diet should have the fruits and vegetables and mostly the fruits
and vegetables should be free from the pesticide residues. (Refer Slide Time: 15:35)
And how the organic foods we have some reports why the organic foods are the healthy
foods and they have the better health benefits as compared to conventional foods. So, we
will discuss some of the study this is in the in the Monastery studies that is a from this
reference you can see Fuchs et al., 2005 improvement of physiological parameters was
found among seventeen nuns they eating bio dynamic foods for one months. That means,
so from the one month of study found the so, bio dynamic it is a organic the components
of the organic farming having the bio dynamic foods, they have the improvement in the
physiological parameters that is nuns on biodynamic diet had lower blood pressure and
better immune systems.
So, they also evaluated they are the physical fitness, intellectual activity and the overall
well being a much better in these periods having the biodynamic food. Moreover, they
declared  the less headache  and presented better  ability to handle  stress; having the
organic or the bio dynamic food as when compared to the nuns from the conventionally
produced.  They  are  consuming  the  conventionally  produced  foods.  Another  study
according to PARSIFAL study 14,000 children’s in 5 European countries they found
children  representing  antrophosophic  the  lifestyle;  that  means,  the  spiritual  lifestyle
including the biodynamic and the organic foods were found to have less allergies. And
the lower body weight in comparison to group of the children they are consuming the
from the market as a conventionally produced food.And, also at the same time the results of another study the KOALA Birth Cohort Study
in Netherlands they also reported that consumption of organic dairy products with that
has the lower eczema risk in children. So; that means, so these are the some of the study
the reported reference also given. So, you can go through these references and this
indicates  that  organic  foods  have  the  better  health  benefits  as  compared  to  the
conventional foods and also, another study the pesticide residue.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:36)
The pesticide residue belongs to the that the dangerous food contaminants. Now, they
can have the they exert the carcinogenic, genotoxic, neuro destructive, endocrine and
allergenic effects and found usually in higher continent in conventionally produced plant
foods. So, these are the pesticide effects. So, those are the most of the pesticide residue
are higher in conventionally produced food as compared to the organic food.
So, there is a scientific evidence that dietary exposure of children to organophosphorus
pesticides,  measured  on the basis  of the  label  of pesticide  metabolites  in  the urine
samples, is much lower in organics than on conventional diet. So, these compounds are
found that say organic the people are taking organic diets had the much lower content of
the in the urine samples are analyzed, organophosphorus pesticides as compared to the
people from the conventional diet. It can be concluded that consumption of organic foods
provides  a  protective  effect  against  the  exposure  to  organophosphorus  pesticide
commonly used in agricultural productions.And, for also another study better repair of a bacterial DNA and the disease of cancer
cells proliferations on organic versus the conventional plant materials. Animal studies
indicated that better fertility index and increased immune parameters in organically fed
animals. So that means, that indicates the organic produced food. So, they have the less
pesticide residue and the low pesticide residue. So, that can cause a better health benefits
and that can minimize many of the chronic diseases.
The adverse effect of the pesticide residue because conventional foods have the pesticide
residue the above the maximum MRL maximum residue limit levels. So, those causes
several the chronic health problems. So, having the regular organic foods; that means,
you can see organic foods are free from pesticides. So, that we can we can avoid many of
the health-related issues. So, will give some examples of the pesticide residue in the food
(Refer Time: 19:42) in the human body.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:44)
As  you  see one of the  studies  here you  can  see  the  comparison  of the  residue  of
organochlorine pesticides in blood of lactating mother from different category. You see
the organochlorine pesticide means the DDT or the dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane or
the DD group of pesticides those are these are the organochlorine pesticides. And, these
are extensively used in India and also all over the world they are used. And, if you see
the if the comparison  of the residue of the in this organochlorine pesticides  in thelactating  mothers  in the blood of the lactating  mothers, you  can find that different
categories of the mother you can find the from the urban and the rural populations.
So, this residue has a higher in the women in the rural populations as compared urban
population thoroughly, they are the more exposed to the pesticides in rural areas in
agricultural  applications.  So,  the  woman  in  rural  area  there  they  are  the  highly
vulnerable. So, detected are the more pesticides in the rural woman and the other cases
non addicted and addicted means either the tobacco or the beetle leaves. So, in that cases
also so, those who are the women are addicted to this they have the higher level of the
pesticide residue in their blood as compared to the non-addicted women.
And, also  if you  compare  it  from the  general  category to labor  category the labor
categories of extensive sufficiently higher than the significantly higher pesticide residue
in their blood as compared to the general category. Especially the labor category means,
they are exposed to the farm fields and exposed to the pesticide applications and the
spray in the air and also in their activity that the. So, that say they have the higher
content of the pesticide residue in the blood of the laborer has compared general category
and if see the vegetarian non vegetarian. So, non vegetarians have the higher content of
the pesticide residue as compared to the vegetarians.
So, as go on these food chain from one stage to another stage; so, as they consume on the
suppose the either the poultry or the cattle. So, they do consume the pesticide residue
from the residue also this is in chain that also transfers to the human body have being
vegetarians and non vegetarians of the more pesticide residue as compared to vegetarian.
So, these are the some of the example we can say that the women’s, they are exposed and
the lactating mothers. So that means, the milk also contaminated that as the blood is
contaminated milk is also contaminated with the pesticides and also that goes to the
young born baby.(Refer Slide Time: 22:27)
So, this example also you can say in another study if you see how the pesticides are very
harmful and that caused the human health problems. The study in the pesticide residue in
food chain in India; if you see the percentage composition of the pesticide in human
breast milk, you can see here that around this is the Indian study you can see in the. So,
here around 63 percent of the DDE that is the organochlorine pesticides groups that is a
higher around 60 percent in the human breast milk. There is dry chloro diphenyl ethane
so, this is around 63 percent.
So, there are others HCH and HCH and also hexachloro hypochloro hexane compound
or the DDT the 9 percent and others means the endosulfans, endosulfan sulfate, endrine,
cypermethrin  chlorpyrifos  this is around 15 percent’s and this DDD. So, these that
means, the organochlorines pesticide the DDE that is a maximum amount 63 percentage
is found in the human breast milk. Also, that see compare the national and international
comparison of HCH and DDT the hexane group and the organochlorine group residue
levels as nano gram per gram of lipid weight in human breast milk. You can see different
countries see Canada, Australia, US.
And this year of study in 1996, 2003 in Australia, 2004 in US, see the hexane groups you
can see the Canada it is 23 and DDT around 470 nano gram per gram of lipid weight in
the human milk. And, in case of Australia this is around 80.3 and 319.6 of DDT and
USA HCH is around 19 and DDT around 65. But, come to Indian figure if you see ascompared to the abroad as you see are all developed country Canada, Australia and US.
So, their figure of the action group and the organochlorine pesticide groups, if you come
to Indian figure the Nagaon just say this located in the northeast part probably some parts
Assam.
In that case you can 2010 study shows HCH amount 2717 nanogram per gram of the
lipid and in case of the DDT 3206 nano gram per gram of. So, it is very high as
compared to the developed country, in India what are the pesticide that is found in the
human  milk  much  has  significantly  higher  as  compared  to  the  developed  country.
Similarly, you can see in (Refer Time: 25:04) the Delhi it is around 340, in case of HCH
and 1500 in case of the DDT. And, in Kolkata this around 670 in case of HCH and DDT
it is around 1100. Ludhiana where there is a rampant of the excessive use of pesticide as
Punjab and Ludhiana, their figures are highly alarming. You can see here Ludhiana it is
around 5290 in case of the be HCH and 17910 in case of the for the DDT.
Punjab interestingly confined, Punjab in case of the 1998 its DDT was 8609 and it came
down to one 199 in 2012. Because so, there is a control measures, after that they have
taken control measure applications from 8609 nano gram per gram of the lipid weight it
came  down to 199 points  or 1 and two 200 nano  gram per  gram of lipid  weight.
Similarly, the you can find the DDT that the chlorinated the organ chlorine pesticides, it
was in 1998 18211. And, came down to 1914 in 2012, though it has it has come down
still it is very higher as compared to the figure we have seen from the developed world
its very higher in India.
So, this gives a highly alarming because, this type of pesticides in the human milk that
goes that in the food chain that goes to young baby also, this study that is reported by the
Bedi et al in the Science of the Total Environment in 2013. They have also reported
because, of the human milk that goes transmitted, because they are feeding of the baby as
a breast feeded baby. What I mean this pesticide goes to the children newborn baby.
And, if see the provisional daily intake of the pesticide in case of the children, if you if
you take infant of the 5 kg weight. And, he can take the 700 gram of the milk per day.
If you  calculate the concentration of this pesticides, either the hexane group or the
chlorinated  hydrocarbon  chlorine  group  pesticide,  the  estimated  daily  intake  of  the
pesticide in the in the baby.  And, the provisional the tolerable  daily intake, if youcompare that one the specially for the DDT the in daily intake in the here the young baby
is around 12 times higher than the provisional daily intake. So, those this report also they
have reported say around 3 to 12 times higher than the threshold level, you can say or the
provisional daily intake of this baby whatever the recommend or the minimum  the
maximum level. And, it is around 12 times higher DDT into in this Indian regions.
Similarly, the hexane group also, but that is very this around 1.2 or maximum 2 times
higher as compared  to the provisional total  daily intake.  So, this  indicates  that the
newborn baby; so, they are also taking they are also carrying these pesticides from the
mother. And, that has a because now having the pesticide in the food chain because of
the  chemical  farming  because,  of  chemical  farming  if.  As  we  discussed  earlier  82
percent, the producer of the chemical farming they are contaminated and the residue is
the above maximum residue limit. So, having the chemical produced in the daily in your
dining tables  or on the tables; that means, you  are taking the poisons and also the
pregnant woman.
So, they are also consuming that one and those transmit the newborn baby and you can
find now cancer disease or many diseases from the young age also; children because who
has only seen the earth may be 4 months, 5 months they are also diagnosed or detected as
cancer because of the food chain. So, this gives a signal or this indication that we need to
very careful our food habit or the daily food habit daily food intake; we should be as
much careful very careful because of food habit. So, that they can take a good food, fresh
food and healthy foods and mostly the foods free from pesticide residue. And, that can be
possible it can go for the organic foods. Daily intake of organic foods we can remain free
from pesticides and for a better health and for a better environment for a healthy child.
With this I thank you all.
Thank you.