Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 03
Organic Farming and Its Components
So, welcome to the third lecture Organic Farming and Its Components. So, first two
lectures we have discussed about the status of organic farming and what is organic
farming in general. So, this lecture we will discuss the different components of this
organic farming.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46)
So, as we have discussed this organic farming. So, I do not want to repeat same thing
because this is a biodiversity, biological cycle and soil biological activity, means organic
farmings as a largely exclude the use of synthetic inputs that is fertilizers pesticides
hormones or the feed additives.
And the maximum  extents  feasible  rely on crop rotations  I discussed, crop residue
recycling and animal manure because cow or the cattle there is a integral part of organic
farming. So, for organic farmers they must have cattle. So, that they can make their own
farm organic waste recycling and converting organic waste to valuable manures and
fertilizer.(Refer Slide Time: 01:53)
This is how you can say the organic farming, so if you see the components. So, is a
vermicompost  is  an  components  of  organic  farming  manures,  bio  fertilizer,  animal
husbandry and green leaf manuring crop rotations and biological management.
So, these are the major components of organic farming. So, green leaf manures are the
crop rotations or the biological management. So, these are the management practices we
follow  go  for  the  organic  farming,  but  we  have  the  components  to  keep  the
vermicompost, the manures bio fertilizers and animal husbandry are the integral part of
organic agriculture or the organic farming systems. So, when you go for the organic the
agricultural system that works a harmonic nature we want to work with nature few
organic farming.
So, starting from you are the land managements you need the right cell cultivation or
right time. So, this is equally applicable for the conventional farmers too because you
need the soil managements. The cultivation there are different type cultivation you can
go for the conventional tillage, we can go for the minimum tillage, we can go for the
mulch; the mulching. Usually when you go for the organic farming we do avoid to go for
the conventional tillage. The reason that if you go for the conventional tillage it because
of the exposure of the soil particles to the atmosphere.
So, there is a loss of carbon as carbon dioxide, so minimum tillage or we can say the
mulch organic the crop residue mulch delays where the stubble mulch tillage you can saythe crop residues should be leftover and the soil surface. So, there is a special type of
tillage implements where the crop residue can be left over in soil surface. So, they have
the multiple advantages like increasing infiltration of rainwater into the soil and that
helps  in minimizing  evaporation  loss  of water from  the soil that  increases  the  soil
erosions, soil porosity.
At the same time because at the interoperation of the crop residue it resist the fertility
status of the soil. And also increases the microbial population of the soil because of the
less tillage operations. And once you have the good tillage then you go for the water
management the water management they also one this farming system in the integral part
we want to minimize the use of water as minimum as possible. I you see the rice crop,
rice crop we have a notional understanding that rice needs standing water it is not true
rice does not require standing water.
It can grow well under saturation and it can produce well better yield under a saturation
as compared to standing water. So, the water management has a role in organic farming
so, use the precise water optimum water as need and the time of the need. Then as you
discuss the good animal husbandry that is also that is a integral part of this a organic
farming using natural pesticides. So, that will be discussing in classes in a other in a
electro  class  classes  how  we can  prepare natural  pesticides,  because we in organic
farming we avoid the use of these synthetic pesticides.
So, using the cow manure or the in the outputs of the byproduct of the cow how this can
be used for this a pesticide productions, then recycled crop wastes. So, that is very
important in case of a organic farming we do not want to take out the crop waste from
the after harvest from the field. Because this is a we can take out the only green portions
and the rest portions straw materials should be given back the field the recycling crop
waste green manures and legumes.
So, this is one of the important aspects of the cropping systems when you go for the
organic farming or the organic cropping systems. So, legumes should be there crops in
case of cropping system because by interoperating legumes or by having a legume crops
in a cropping system it can enhance the biological nitrogen fixation in the soil. It can
enhance the fertility of the soils and it also can minimize the nutrient requirement of the
subsequent raft crops. So, that is why we should go for rice crops as a cereal crops theyneed more amount of nitrogen. In that case if you go for the green manuring crops you
can minimize the n requirement of the cereal crops to the extent of 50 percent or even
more than 50 percent nutrient requirement can be minimized.
Then increasing genetic diversity that we are discussing previously because we in case
organic farming we do not want a mono cropping systems or a single crop, we can have
a different crops many crops at a time. So, that we can minimize the population of the
pest and diseases in the field then of course, the use of resistant crops. So, we need to
have the  (Refer Time: 07:36) by the genetic improvement or the varieties which can
have a resistance to many type of the insect pest and disease. So, these are the some of
the components of this organic farming, we discussed the components as you say the
crop rotations.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:54)
So, crop rotations so because we do not want to go same crop year after year. So, grow
crops of different families like it is a systematic arrangement of the growing different
crops in a more or less regular sequence. On the same land covering a period of two
years  or more as you go on growing, because this has a effect on the soil fertility
management; weed, insect and disease control.
If you  grow  same  crafts  than the same  crops  the similar  pest and disease they do
multiply. To avoid the, reduce the pest pressures or the disease pressures, pressures on
the field we need to change the crops after every seasons. Then as you discussed legumesare essential in any rotations we must keep on legume crops if you are going for the
organic farming. So, in the rotations there should be one legume crops. So, that the it can
build the soil fertility and it can minimize the nutrient requirement of any cereal crops or
any crops taking especially nitrogen as you see for we are concern in the yield, how we
can maintain the yield.
And if you see for the yield are the production or the quantity that is driven by mainly
nitrogen followed by phosphorous and potash your macronutrients. And to protect the
yield or the crop we have to supply the required amount of nitrogen, phosphorous and
potash and to meet the nitrogen requirement, if you take legume crops. So, legume crops
do help in building the soil fertility and increasing the available nitrogen status in the
soils. So, that we can protect the yield or we can we can attain the target yield of the
crops and that can be farming having legumes and (Refer Time: 09:40) rotations.
And the crop residue; so as you say so there are the given tech methods so, as you are
growing the crops as we I am growing the crop in the field. So, this soil has given some
output that output is your crop as a straw materials and the grains we can take the grains
for a own conjunction, but this straw are the crop residues they should be turned back
into the soil they should be given back in the soil. So, that it restores the soil fertility it
improves the soil biota the living organisms. So, then like wheat and rice trusses or this
can be some straws they need some fungal species inoculation so, that they can be
decomposed faster having the high CN ratio those straw materials having a low CN ratio
like legume residues.
So, the they decompose very quickly but this straw residues CN ratio is 80 or a higher in
that case we have to inoculate with some fungal species so that the decomposition
becomes faster. So, that helps in improvement in physiochemical chemical properties of
soil.(Refer Slide Time: 10:47)
Then I have the organic manures as the part of this organic integral part of the organic
farming because we need to have the own manures. You have the bulky organic manures
like you are farm yard manures. So, that is a well decomposed mixture of the cow dung,
urine and farm litter and leftover are the used crop materials from roughages or the
fodder fed to the cattles. So, this we usually farmers earlier I have discussed. So, they are
using only farm yard manures.
And then later on you are using compost decomposed any the kitchen waste from the
built to refuse or the farm litters weeds and the crop waste. They can be sewage sludge
also they can be made composting by the anaerobic decomposition process we can make
the compost. And the green manuring as we are discussing now so, that is one of the
important aspects of organic farming specially if you are going for the cereal crops they
require the huge amount of nitrogen specially organic farming organic rice productions.
So, before having the rice you are going for the organics we should go for the green
manure crops Dhaincha by growing dhaincha like you are the dhanicha sunhemp or the
Cowpea Berseem these are green manuring crops. So, they have the root and also stem
nodulating dhaincha as there. So, their nodulations that by the way the after 45 to 60
days they can be plod back into the soil by the way they can are nutrient specially
nitrogen  requirement  of  the  crop  can  be  minimized  by  growing  a  dhaincha  green
manuring crops.(Refer Slide Time: 12:29)
Concentrated organic manure so as we as we are going for the organic way, we need to
meet the nutrient requirement the crops to protect the yield. So, to meet the nutrient
requirement of the crops, so we have we have to make the enriched organic manures like
you are the oil cakes jatropha oil cakes, pongamia oil cakes or the cottonseed oil cakes.
The oil cakes can be they have the rich in nitrogen, phosphorus, potash and the many
other nutrients or the. So, organic matter containing a higher percentage of essential plant
nutrient such as nitrogen, phosphorus, potash as compared to bulky organic manures is a
concentrated one made from raw materials of the animals or the plant origins.
So, these are the plant origins are the oilcakes or the animal origins are the blood meals
or the bone meals are the hoof meals. So, they are rich in the blood meal, blood meal are
rich in chlorine nitrogen contents which can meet the then requirement of the crop to
large extent, bone meals or the hoof meals so, these are the rich in your phosphorus
calcium and the magnesium contents. So, for the permitting the require requirement of
the crop. So, these are the concentrated manures can be produced.(Refer Slide Time: 13:43)
And vermicompost we will be dealing largest number vermicompost production. So, this
is one of the integral part of the organic farming whereby the earthworms that play major
roles in decomposing the waste materials. So, they do earthworm they do live, eat and
excrete, so they live in the soil also they eat the biomass they in the biomass and they are
excrete is rich in humus. And the excrete of the earthworms the humusand many of the
antibiotics as a inside the act as a insecticides and the pesticides and also they have
provide the many harmones that required for the growth and development of the crops.
And also the rich in many enzymes they are used in the crop production process. So, the
common earthworm species there you see the eisinia foetida or the dendrobaenae spp
with there are many of the species are there where eisinia foetida is a very common. This
can be used in a wide range of temperature specially for tropical climates, used a eisinia
foetida you can survive from temperature around from 5 degree celsius to 45 degrees
celsius.(Refer Slide Time: 14:49)
And bio fertilizer as this bio fertilizer these are the living microorganisms their life or the
or maybe a cells of the nitrogen fixing phosphate cellulizing and the cellulitic micro
organisms.
So, when they are applied to soils they colonize the rhizosphere or the interior of the
plants and promotes growth by increasing the supply of availability of primary nutrients
to the host plants. So, they have the advantages means the bio fertilizer they help in
establishing. And the growth of the crop plants they also the large trees they enhanced
biomass production on grain yield by 10 to 20, because these are the this the we are
using the organisms like the nitrogen fixing organisms phosphor cellulizings and the
cellulitic microorganisms are there in bio fertilizer.
So,  they  help  in  the  nutrient  release  pattern  from  the  soil  some.  So,  they  help  in
increasing the available nutrients because there may soil maybe high nitrogen, but there
may be less available. Similarly phosphorus also more phosphorus in many soils they are
rich in phosphorus. If you go for a available phosphorus are very low because of the less
microbial populations they help in the releasing the total converting to the phosphorus to
mineralizing phosphorus.(Refer Slide Time: 16:23)
So, they are useful for in say sustainable agriculture they are suitable they are most take
part in organic farming they play an important role in agroforestry or the silvi pastoral
systems. So, there are different type of bio fertilizer we can say the symbiotic and non-
symbiotic  or  the  asymbiotic  n  fixations  was  symbiotic  bio  fertilizer  these  are  the
rhizobium and the mycorrhizae. So, rhizobium it colonizes the roots of specific legumes
to form tumors like growth called the root nodules the form the like the root nodules.
And the rhizobium legume the association symbiotic association with the legume plants
they fix the atmospheric nitrogen; the nitrogen is converted to ammonia, and the fixation
can be up to a 100 kg or (Refer Time: 17:00) 300 kg nitrogen per hectare from one crop
seasons depending upon the rhizobium on the legume association. Mycorrhizae also
mycorrhizae are the symbiotic association of fungi with roots of the large trees vascular
plants they can have the; they can solubilize the phosphorus availability for the crops
mycorrhizae vascular or vascular mycorrhizae.
Then asymboitic the free living bacteria; so they do not depend upon the host plants for
there the food so these are the they can live in the free environments and they can add a
significant amount of nitrogen into the soil. So, they grow on decomposing soil organic
matter and produce nitrogen compounds for their growth. And the developments and
they leave behind the significant amount of nitrogen in the soils. So, those are three
living the azotobacter, azospirillum (Refer Time: 17:53) also blue green algae and aswell as. Because those free living microbes they are; they used for this especially cereal
crops or rice or the wheat post crops who use this free living bacteria. So, that they can
fix they can help in fix some of the atmospheric nitrogen.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:18)
See the bio pesticides, so these are the bio pesticides as you see the are natural plant
products that belong to the so, called a secondary metabolize because see I it will discuss
the how the pesticide formations how you can make pesticide from the naturals plant of
plant origins. So, these are the alkyl which includes the thousands alkaloids terpenoids,
phenolics and minor secondary chemicals.
So, they are used for the manufacture of the bio pesticides also use the a meterials like
your the cow dung, cow urine also for making the bio pesticides. So, they the botanical
insecticides  are  ecologically  and  environmentally  safers  like  some  examples  like
nicotine,  pyrethrum,  rotenone,  subabilla,  ryanin  and  quassia.  So,  these  are  the
compounds they are present in the plants and they are dragons the pest and diseases.
The thing that we want to propose here; so, these are the some of the components of
these organic farmings the question; at the end I want to say why organic farming is say
that organic farming is a better quality the food quality of a organic produce that the
better as compared to chemical produce; if you see the nutrient release pattern of the
soils or nutrient uptake pattern from the soil.If you see this one whether you apply the organic fertilizers or this chemical fertilizer
suppose you take the example of the nitrogen, the nitrogen the farm of a nitrogen taken
of the crops either the ammonium farm or nitrate farm.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:10)
Most of the crops they do prefer to have the nitrate farm ammonium farm only by rice.
So, many crop plants they do take the nitrate farm. So, you apply your organic fertilizer
that is converted to after the mineralization process it is converted to nitrate, if I apply
the urea that is a chemical fertilizers.
So, after a hydrolysis and nitrification this is also converted to nitrate. So, the nitrate is
the farm of nutrients that is taken up by the crops it can come from the organic source it
can come from the non-organic. So, this is one the, you can say as in organic or a non-
organic or chemical. The question is the question is so, the question is the plant test
nitrate from the soil whether we apply organic fertilizer or the in inorganic fertilizer.
Then how does the quality of the organic produce are better as compared to chemical
produce.
So, the see if you go for the yield improvement for the production improvement nitrogen
has a major role. If you think of the quality of the crops like your secondary metabolites,
we can say one is the antioxidants like ascorbic acids or the phenols, phenolic acids you
can say. So, they come not the so, what are the elements responsible the secondarymetabolites formations in the plant body of course, the micronutrients play some major
roles for the formation of a secondary metabolites or the quality of products.
So, in addition to that there is another mechanism which is a responsible for the for
increasing the quality of the production that is a called as a nutrient release pattern. In
case of chemical fertilizer there is a instant release of nutrient and we are applying in
specific intervals the regular intervals. So, that the crop gets nutrients suppose rice crops
we are apply three or three splits of nitrogen are critical grow stages.
So, plant gets nutrients at the time of requirement, so gives a good productions. So, plan
does not go for any stress does not suffer from any stress, but the same rice crop if we
use the inorganic fertilizers like compost usually apply a compost as a (Refer Time:
23:03) one time, but; however, we have seen that we can apply split those are true, but
think that for the organic fertilizers I compost. So, nutrient glitch pattern is a very, very
slow as compared to inorganic urea. So, it may not meet the requirement of the crops,
exact requirement of crops at the critical stages.
When the organic fertilizer is not able to meet the requirement of the crops at the critical
stages the plant grows under stress. So this stress physiology, when the plant grows
under stress due diffusivity of nutrients because of this stress so, there is more formation
of secondary metabolites which does not happen in case of inorganic fertilizers. So, like
the  phenolic  compounds  the  secondary  metabolites  that  is  phenolic  compounds
formations.
So, these are a higher in case of the organic farming if we are going for the organic way
of input managements. The yield may be slightly lower, but the quality is better because
there are the phenolic compounds or the polyphenols formations are higher in case of the
organic nutrient managements are the plant grows under stress. So, there is a secondary,
secondary metabolites that leads to quality the better quality of the productions as you
see the antioxidants or the ascorbic acids so many fruits, vegetables, real crops they have
the all the bitamines or the minerals, so those are higher in organic products.
So, that is why the products of a organic farming. So, they are the more in so if you go
for the tomato like. So, there are different lycopene its content is higher if you grow
tomato organically as compared to in organic or the chemical farming. So, a lycopene
formations or the ascorbic acids in case of the corn or the polyphenols in case of the tea.So, those things say a organic tea has a higher polyphenol contents as compared to
conventional tea.
So, that way the organic farming or the produced from the organic way of managements
has a better quality having higher secondary metabolites. So, that does because having
polyphenols if you take the more polyphenols they has a they have a anti-aging effects.
And also they do not allow the formation of free radicals in the plant in the human body,
because in case of human body there is a formation of free radicals either due to stress or
the food habit.
But taking the regular antioxidants they can neutralize the formation of free radicals and
free radicals mainly they cause cell damage and cancer. So, those chronic disease can be
avoided if you take the regular antioxidants. The body also secretes some antioxidants,
but they may not be enough we have to take natural antioxidants. And if you take a
organic foods they are rich in a antioxidants as compared to your the chemical foods.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:52)
So this organic farmings as you as you say we can. In case of the organic farming we can
have the better produce and the better quality of the crops and with the better with the
better environment.
Thank you all.