Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 04
Organic Farming Concepts and Principles
So, I welcome you all for the lecture 4 , Organic Farming Concepts and Principles. So,
we  have  discussed  earlier  regarding  the  introduction  to  organic  farming  and
components  of  organic  farming.  So,  in  this  lecture , we  will  discuss  the
fundamental concepts of organic farming and principles of organic farming.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:50)
If you think; the why you go for organic farming , the organic farming provides long term
benefit to people and the environment . It involves the steps of using the factor of
going green by using the fertilizers that are bio based to develop the crops , grow
the crops in a green environment.
In general, organic farming aims to increase long term soil fertility . As you know soil
fertility that decides the growth and development of the crops. So, maintenance of
soil fertility on long term basis very essential to have a better production through
increased productions in a sustainable environment. And  the  organic  farming  aims  to  control  pests  and  diseases  without  harming
environments as  we discussed last class because the yield effect of the chemical
pesticides; how that affects human health ? How the organic farming can be helpful
in  minimizing  the  pest  residue  in  crops  and  without  minimizing  or  without
affecting the crop yield ? 
Thirdly organic farming ensures that water stays clean and safe. So, you know , we the
we want a good air to breath at the same time, we want a good quality of water
drink, through organic farming as we minimize or we eradicate the use of chemical
pesticides or fertilizers. So, it can ensure a good quality water and clean water for
drinking. 
Fourth one, it produces nutritious food , feed for animals and a high quality crops to sell
at good price. Organic farming as we discussed  so the quality of the foods are
better as we discussed last class ; because of the balanced nutritions , supplying both
macro and micro nutrients . At the same time the stress physiology that increases
the quality of the crops through the increase in a concentration of polyphenols in
the plant. And finally, this aims at use of existing resources.
 So, the farmers needs less money to buy farm to buy the farm imports because if you
recycle the resource available in the farm that can minimize the external use of
inputs. So, this is we are aiming for this say organic farmings.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:29)
So, in earths in grew , you see the objectives ; the number 1- produced food with higher
nutritional quality, this is the main objective of the organic farming. So, better
quality of the produced healthy foods , healthy diets that can be achieved through
organic farming. And secondly, we work closely with the natural systems . We do
we work in a harmony with the natures that is a work with natural systems . 
Number 3- maintain and increase soil fertility. So, as you discussed , this is because soil
fertility to be maintained on long term basis.  Because soil provides the physical
support of the plants and also that helps in the nutrient release part in the soils in
the that can be available for the crops for its proper growth and development .
Number 4; use the renewable resources as far as possible. So, that is your one of
the components of organic farming.
So, we natural resources are use the renewable resources in this through for the nutrients
managements in organic farming. So, this avoids all sorts of pollutions at the air
pollutions, soil pollutions and the water pollutions that is avoided through organic
farming. 
Number  6- wider social and ecological  impact of farming system  .Through organic
farming, we say the nature farming. So, this is socially acceptables and it has a
ecological harmony the farming community . And number 7 allows satisfaction to
agricultural producers. So, farmers friendly. So, farmers gets own satisfactions by
using organic farming.  So, this is in brief, say this is the objectives organic farming
and  these  are  the  each  objectives  that  is  based  on  the  concept  that  give  the
concepts. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:36)So, this is the concepts you say the in describing the concepts work as closely as possible
in closed cycle and use local resources ; the twins as you discussed in last class too. 
So, this is a zero emission concept, integrated farming system concept where there is no
waste in organic farming . The output of one component that becomes input of
another components. So, that is a in a closed cycle , the closed chain say as a
organic farming integrated farming systems  and use the local resources or natural
resources as far as possible . We avoid the use of off farm or the external inputs
should be reduced in the organic farming . 
Then preserve the natural fertility of soil. So, the soil fertility has to be maintained or that
may  be  improved  through  this  the  concept  of  the  organic  farming  where  we
maintain the fertility and improve the soil fertility on long term basis or diseases.
There is a concept of organic farming avoid all forms of pollution that arise from farming
and this either air pollutions , water pollutions or the soil pollutions . Then promote
tillage practices that show most concern for the environment and nature. So, in
other countries, I can say the developed country like a US, their tillage practices
has been changed from the conventional through minimum tillage practices.
 So, that we can minimize the emission of greenhouse gases. So, called the carbon
dioxide from the soil that atmosphere because by rapid opening or the opening of
the soils  through conventional  tillage.  So, more  that causes more  emission of
carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. So, in organic farming , we need to go for the
minimum tillage; so that we should minimize the global warming potentials . 
Then produce foods for of an optimal nutritional value ; of course, there is a discussed ah.
So, in organic farming that ensures high quality or the better quality of fruits.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:53)And reduce the use of nonrenewable resource in agriculture include the fossil fuels. So,
by doing the; so, organic  farming  we can  minimize  the  use  of nonrenewable
resources. We  can  encourage  the  use  of  the  renewable  resources  in  organic
farming. Then work to ensure that the waste products from towns and the food
industries achieve a quality that allows their re -use as fertilizers in agriculture. So,
when eco organic farming. So, the food industry waste or the industrial waste that
can be converted to bio fertilizers that can be converted to useful manures
and that can be used in organic farming . 
Provide all animals with living conditions that satisfy their natural behaviour pattern and
needs because as animal is an integral component of organic farming. So, we must
provide the animals with living conditions that satisfy their natural behaviour and
pattern. 
Then do a breathing possible to ensure that all living organisms  that farmers works with
are allies; that means, both microorganisms plants and animals. So, they are the
components of the organic farming in the Bezier circles. So, they should be proper
harmony between all the components , all the living organisms . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:21)
So, now if you go for the organic farming in the concept came that say we want to avoid
the use of the off farm inputs. So, you want to use the in farm on farm inputs that  is
a called low external input technology. So, what is low external input technology ?
This technology that concerns collection of crop management inputs and technique
for  soil  conservation , soil  fertility  enhancement , crop  establishment ,  and  pest
control. The  delineation  of  the  technology  may  serve  either  a  restrictive  or
integrative purpose.
So, a low external input technology where use only the inputs of the farms , they are
recycled back the organic farming. So, minimum are the no use of farm inputs in
organic  farmings.  So,  the  for  the  practices , we  can  use  low  external  input
technology soil conservation , soil fertility enhancement , crop establishment , pest
control; this was the components.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:36)
We  had link for soil conservation ; soil conservation, soil fertility enhancement , soil
fertility crop establishment , pest control. So, low external input technology for soil
conservations, we can go for reduced  tillage  or you say as conservation tillage
mulches or cover crops.  So, physical measures as a contour planting. So, when a purpose is soil conservations
either for the to protect the soil from wind or water erosions , then you go you go
for the contour planting is a physical method as we plant the crops across the
slopes. So, that the soil loss can be minimized through contour planting.
And reduced tillage or conservation tillage , this is also one of the method of  the  the
tillage practices that can minimize soil loss es. So, through minimum tillage the less
opening of the soils , there is arows on tillage that tillage care ] operation can be
performed only in the row zones where the crop has to be a planted. So, the in that
case we can build the soil fertility on long term basis.
We can minimize the emission of carbon dioxide atmosphere also we can increase the
soil  microbial  populations  through  minimum  tillage  and  the  say  conservation
tillage ah. So, this has one the minimum tillage or you can have a stubble mulch
tillage where these stubbles can be left on the soil surface. So, it can add thus
fertility value to the soils  and also it can increase the water in filtrations the water
holding capacity of the soil . Then mulches and the cover crops ; so, you can have
the bio mulches and the cover crops like short growing crops can be growns and
the legume crops can be growns and also they can be that the straw that the left or
materials can be incorporated in the soil.  So, it is your soil conservation where you
for where are the techniques for the LEIT; the low external input technology . 
Similarly, soil fertility enhancement ; it can be either the green manures green manuring
or compost; that means, we can go for the green manuring and the compost of
applications. So, that we can maintain soil fertility on in long term basis.
 And the crop establishment; that means, how we can establish crop in the  seedbed; so,
either the planting for example, I can give you r if you go for the planting in case of
rice example that is SRI; System of Rice Intensification; that means, the planting
technique the plant population of seedbeds and the water management. 
So, in case of SRI. So, you are using only one seedling  and you are the wider spacing
around 25 centimeter and 25 centimeter ; row to row and plant to plant spacing
wider spacing; with the wider spacing of social in the centers. So, spacing is o 25
centimeter and one seedling per heal and only shallow water saturations in that
case, it enhances the more healer formationsand the better uptake of the nutrient by the crop less competitions among the seedlings
and that is one of the component that leads to higher productivity. 
So, crop establishment by providing the proper space , optimum spacing, crop geometry;
their spacing must be maintained during planting or the swing of the crops and the
proper  conditions  soil  moisture  should  be  maintained.  So,  that  the  initial
establishment of the crop can be well performed . 
Then the pest controls ; so, as  you discuss  pest controls, inter crops intercrop or crop
rotation  or bio pesticide.  So, these are the ah pest control inter crop or crop
rotation. So, that we can minimize the pest populations and the bio pesticides as a
ah bio control agents those can be used for minimizing the  pest and disease and the
weed population  of  course,  in  the  field.  So,  these  are  the  some  of  the  soil
conservation, soil fertility enhancement , crop establishment  or pest control low
external input technology. 
So, this low external input technology , those can be as a as part of the organic farming ;
as you say these are the two purposes : one is called the LEIT as you say, L low
external input technology.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:23)
 So, either it is a restrictive or integrative or this may be integrative. So, low external
input technology restrictive means , it insulates farmers from use of any insecticides
or chemical pesticides or chemical fertilizers . That is a fully organic farming that is
a branded as organic agriculture . 
In case of integrative  So, here so, the farmers usually use the part of the some parts of
chemical fertilizer or the chemical pesticides are allowed. So, it is known as the
integrated management that includes the use of the both chemical and organic
sources that is integrative and restrictive means ; so, there is no use of any chemical
fertilizersor the chemical pesticides that is complete purely branded as a organic
agriculture or integrative purposes means the of the total nutrients some parts may
be organic and some parts may be chemicals or the integrate pest management also
that  includes  different  methods  of  pest  management  that  integrative  pest
management.
So, these are the low this is in restrictive  known as low external  input sustainable
agriculture is a restrictive one, there is no use of any chemical fertilizer pesticides .
There is no  low external input sustainable agriculture. So, this  is a  low external
input technology. So, the restrictive purpose  and the integrity purpose . 
The restrictive interpretation promotes LEIT as a way of insulating farmers from use of
external inputs in the service of socio economic and environmentally ends . This
promotes  environmental sustainables , small  scale farming that emphasizes  low
external input sustainable agriculture or it promotes active participation in the
market by offering a distinctive environmentally friendly brand  such as organic
agriculture.
So, as we discussed this is a low external input technology , small scale farming where
the it completely insulating farmers from use of external inputs. So, only on farm
inputs and organic inputs are used that is low external input sustainable agriculture.The integrative interpretation since LEIT as an essential element in broad strategies of
agricultural development , it incorporates low external input technology along with
appropriate external inputs in strategies such as integrated  nutrient management,
integrate pest management . In cases so, there is an issues when  the some crops we
need to go for the integrated managements.  Specially the cereals where the crop
nutrient requirement is very on the specific growth stages in that case . ah You want
to supply nutrients in a particular amount at the particular growth stages and some
crops like non deterrent crops like legumes crops where they require nutrients as a
at the continuous.
So, depend upon the crop type.  So, what type  of management  should be there  the
purpose is not to minimize the  loss in crop yield to maintain the crop yield using
the through the organic farming.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:43)
So, the social criteria for the low external input sustainable agriculture is widespread and
equitable  adoption  potential  especially  among  the  small  farmers  reduced
dependency  on  external  institution ,  enhanced  food security  at the  family  and
national level, respecting and building on indigenous knowledge beliefs and value
systems, then  contribution  to  employment  generation.  So,  usually  a  organic
farming as you discuss  the ecological farming the traditional farming. So, farmers
they have their traditional knowledge say before the use of the insecticides or the
pesticides, the farmers use to control use to take care of the crops against the insect
pest and disease and they used to grow the crops as a normal practice form using
only farm and  manures. So, there are some the indigenous knowledge. So, that
should we considered toward the knowledge in the agricultural field. So, they have
also some scientific findings.  So, linkage of indigenous knowledge to  scientific
finding that should be looked into too.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:57)
So, there are different concepts of organic farming , I have say the USDA concept; that
means, organic farming is a system which avoids or largely exclude the use of
synthetic inputs and to the maximum extent feasible rely upon crop rotations , crop
residues, animal manures of farm organic wastes , mineral grade rock additives  
and biological  systems  of  nutrient mobilizations  and plant protections  the food and
agricultural organization concept .
Organic agriculture is a unique production management system which promotes an d
enhance agro ecosystem health including biodiversity , biological cycle and soil
biological activity and this is accomplished by using on farm agronomic biological
 and  mechanical  methods  in  exclusion  of  all  synthetic  off  farm  inputs . Then
philosophical concept organic farming in spirit of organic relationship that is in
this system everything is connected with everything else. So, you can say these and
the different concept also will be discussing the other class continuing classes the
how this different type of organic farmings  
 and  then  the  principles  of  organic  farmings  based  on  the  concepts . We  have  the
principles ,we have we will discuss different type of organic farming based on this
concept ecological farming , biodynamic farmings and how the  HOMA farming
also that is as discussing the indigenous knowledge . They are link to the scientific
understanding.
So, as farmers we are doing their the cultivations in the primitive ages when there was no
pesticides, no fertilizers. So, we look into this and the continued class  we  will
discuss in detail this farming concept and also these principles of organic farming.
Thank you. 