Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 40
Marketing of Organic Products
So, welcome to the last lecture of this course that is Marketing of Organic Products so, is
the final. So, as we have discussed earlier the production practices, how we can make the
inputs we can enrich the inputs for specific crops or the group of crops and how you can
take care of the insect, pest management doing organics, using the cow dung, cow urine.
And also, you discussed about the homa farming as a parallel to the organic farming.
And we discussed the health benefits of the organic products, antioxidants capacity of
the organic products and why organic products has a better quality as compared to
conventional  products and, we discussed these standards  organic  standards, national
standards for organic productions and the accreditation policy and the programmes. And
this all do help for the marketing of this organic products.
So, marketing  is  a challenge  and if the market  rose by the market  for the organic
products, then the farmers will be interested for converting their lands to organic. So,
how you can make the marketing very lucrative, very attractive and so that many and
many farms can join for this organic production 
 (Refer Slide Time: 01:59)
So, we will discuss here the some of the purpose of the marketing of the organic products
and the providing quality food to the populations. So, that as we discussed the quality
assurance can; we have discussed in details in the beginning lectures, the disadvantages
of this chemical farming, because of the not only the food quality is deteriorating, but
also the environmental pollutions that also the water pollutions, air pollutions and the
food pollutions that creates the human, because that has a concern for the human being,
because we are exposed to as a poor quality of environment at the same time is a poor
food quality.
So, by having proper marketing of the organic foods, that providing the quality food to
the  consumers  to  the  population,  then  encouraging  growing  of  organic  foods,  then
encouraging  more  growers  to  grow  organics,  encouraging  less  use  of  chemicals  in
agriculture;  that  means,  having  the  marketing  strategy,  we  can  decrease  the
environmental pollutions, the water pollutions and the air pollutions at the same time, we
can increase the quality of the foods, because most of the disease are the chronic disease,
you can see like a cancer as a becoming very common nowadays.
So, this comes from the quality of the food we take, because most of the foods are rich in
insecticides specially the chlorinated hydro carbon groups of pesticides. So, they are
highly  persistent  they  remain  in  the  food  chains  recently  government  of  India  has
banned. So, many pesticides a good move by the governments and I hope that many of
the toxicant pesticides should be banned and we should depend more on more and more
on the organic way of managing the crops, the organic way of protections by using some
of the natural creators, or the bio agents or the bio pesticides, they are produced from the
plant origins. As we discussed in details those can be formulated can be used for protect
the crop from many pests and diseases.  (Refer Slide Time: 04:14)
And the challenges to marketing of organic products consumer levels; so, consumers
lack information  about organic  products and lack of consumer  awareness therefore,
much  effort  needed  for  the  consumer  educations  regarding  organic  foods,  organic
products unable to competes with the conventional products as the most consumers are
known to organic products are unknowns, they are ignorant about the health benefits of
the organic products.
So, they just compare the prices only; then constant communications to customers should
be ideal, but of course is time consuming number of organic consumers is very small and
the  operators  are  competing  for this  small  people.  So, so we  have  to  increase  the
consumer  levels.  So,  more  and  more  consumers  should  be  organic  should  buy  the
organic products. (Refer Slide Time: 05:09)
Then another challenge the market development you know so, this linked to consumers
so, if there is a consumer. So, there is a good market. So, that is limited expertise in
marketing the super market is a challenge, because know the pricing and also appearance
also matters for a super market and labeling of course so, this challenge for a super
market how to how to sell the organic products in the super market.
Organic suppliers being smaller than conventional ones the whole wholesale trend tend
to discontinue, or the slow-moving item the continuous disruptive supply means a this a
problem super market, super market needs the regular supply of this produce and the
bulk  amount  should  be  there.  And  for  the  organic  producers  they  don’t  meet  the
regularity, because there may be the disruption in the supply so, super market it is a
challenge to sell the produce in super market. 
So, no labeling laws exist in the country; proper labeling of the organic produce that is
very important as you discuss. So, it should be labeled well if this organic that can be
labeled as organic, or certified organic or made with organic ingredients. So, influx of
pseudo organics or the organic claims that also challenge for the market development
and lack of regulation from the government produced to checking the organic and the
conventional products. Product quality development lack of confidence in organic farming on the part of the
farm so, the farmers so, the conference building has to be generated for the regarding the
quality of the organic produce.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:48)
So, as per the marketing usage channel if you go productions the site of the productions
collections and go with collections and transports, then goes for the packaging and the
storing, then if there is a processed products, then go for the processing of the products,
then distribution to retailers, home delivery or the direct sales then compile demand
quantity and inform farmers producers accordingly so, depending upon the supply and
demands. 
So, as if there is a demand is higher; then production has to be increased that to meet the
demand.  So,  there  should  be  a  regular  supply  sometime  the  consumer  gets  know
frustrated because they (Refer Time: 07:32) do not want to buy the when there is the
supply is disrupted. So, regularity is very important to supplying to the market regular
supply should be there. So, that can be possible by having the grower groups so, different
groups are contracted. So, they can meet the demand of the market. (Refer Slide Time: 07:48)
So, what we can do is the set of considerations, we can see the scope and structure of the
operations how it can for the marketing, a local organic marketing setups and operating
strategies should match its scopes. This adapted (Refer Time: 08:06) choice will depends
upon  the  country,  the  locations  nature  and  availability  of  product  ranges  scale  of
intended operations and prevailing market sector and conditions. So, depending upon the
demand  so,  that  is  way  initiate  local  and  regional  initiative  require  for  the  better
marketing, marketing network of this organic products.
So, that establishes the direct contact with producers and reduce the intermediaries. So,
that has to be though should balance the intermediate persons. So, we have so, that the
producers  get  the  benefit  the  most  benefit  from  these  consumers  by  avoiding  the
mediators or the intermediate persons. Work with a producers or setup their own farms
so, by having so you can have a better control of the quality and the quantity and the
variety control. Then decide an appropriate business setup, because build the initiative
around one or the few key products thus depending upon the demand of the market or the
consumers.
At start focus on organic or sell the natural products, then you can the focusing only few
items not so, many items depending upon the market demand, we can start one or two
items can be focused and can be sent to the market. (Refer Slide Time: 09:28)
The locations so, say where the marketing locations as important criteria for selection of
the locations mainly include the accessibility for customers and the minimization logistic
bottlenecks and the delivery of the produce; that means, the locations should ideally have
the following characteristics; that means, accessible by private, commercial and public
transportations.
And the parking should be available, visible passers-by, available the year around, close
proximity to commercial or office areas will increase the potential customers, sufficient
space for current needs as well as to allow for future expansion of the markets; that
means, know this location is very important as a marketing point of view. So, regular
supply market should regular and the locations should be available year rounds for the
marketing. And it should be close accessible to the customers and also this should be the
close proximity to commercial area, or the official areas that can increase the marketing
of this products. (Refer Slide Time: 10:40)
Then  say  marketing  strategy  see  the  interpersonal  contacts  are  important  for  this
marketing. So, that helps in getting the feedbacks know about the products; then also
work with the grassroots for the farm visit means of the association community clubs and
schools. So, so you have to go to the field sites and work with the farmers in association
with the farmers. So, that there should be the quality should be maintained that is the
quality assurance in the product that is very important having a good marketing. So, use
the mass media internet or the interest of the mass media or the publicity or the publicize
the new trends and issues in the organic farming. 
So, base marketing strategy on knowledge of the culture and habit of the consumers, use
logo for communicating the products and the company, then focus on both local and
export market. So, as a local market and the export markets should be taken care so,
export market as the money generator for the local market. So, usually the marketing
strategy, if you see there is a the personality, message, promise and vision that should be
taken into account personality means the customers who hold core value on health care
about  the  importance  of  the  natural  and  the  organic  product  should  be  quality
maintenance that is increasing the awareness among the consumers regarding the quality
of the organic foods, message means quality and loyalty in store experience convenience
and convenience, promise means healthy and quality organic foods, delivery and online
shopping and whole indoor experience.The visions of this marketing should be seeking out the finest natural and organic food
available and maintain the strictest quality the quality should be assured that should be
vision,  because  at  any  cost  we  should  not  compromise  the  quality  of  this  organic
products.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:48)
So, this you can say the marketing and sale management promotions. So, by further
proper marketing so, be pro active with certifications, because that is must because when
we go for the organic food marketing it should be properly certified. So, organization
certification is must it is expensive, but essential to build the consumer trust. 
Good packaging with clear identity and labeling. So, the packaging should be attractive
the package should be attractive. So, that should follow the organic norms and also the
labeling should be very proper as discussed; whether it is organic food or the certified
organics or made with organic ingredients. So, labeling should be proper, then use the
media at the TV, radio, newspaper, etc. for publicity of organic food quality.
So, product development in mature market consumer has more and more products should
come.  And  strategies  benefit  of  organic  agriculture  and  that  should  be  publicized,
collaboration with other inorganic sectors for generations of promotion of activities just
doing the publicity and about the organic food health benefitted organic foods consumer
awareness, that is should be promoted for the better marketing of the organic foods. (Refer Slide Time: 14:06)
So, I will give examples from that is we are seeing from niche to mainstream, how the
organic food can gain the market in India, because this has gained market in developed
countries like, you know Europe and Australia, US even Asia some other country like
Japan also. They are so, organic market is well developed and the consumers are well
aware about the organic foods. So, in India it is now niche at how you can bring the
organic market to mainstream.
I can give in Europe how the organic market could develop in Europe from 1920 to 1970
the organic market in Europe was mostly know the supply induced market there is more
of supply, but less of the consumer. And if you see from 1970 to early 1980 this was
mostly the demand induced market; that means, there has more demand by the publics,
by the consumers for the organic foods, because of the health concerns and the quality of
the foods.
So, people become more and more awareness about the health to have a better health and
to live in a better society in a good environment better environment. So, that help the for
the organic producer to produce more and more organic food, because there was demand
and after 1980 there was a policy induced market; that means, it took initiative from the
government, government took initiative to promote the growers or the farmers to convert
their land to more and more organic products.So, the premium price because the compensation was paid by the government to the
farmers for the conversion, that could happen because in Europe or Europe so, that there
is a big jump there is a good jump in the organic food market in Europe. So, there is
because the consumers have the awareness about organic foods and there is a demand by
the consumers. And there is a support from the government levels that is why so, organic
market is reaching in the top stage in the Europe.
So, how this how by learning from their experience and their organic food market how
this can be implemented in Indian conditions. So, that so organic market should grow
once there is a demand increases, then price may also come down for this organic food.
So, what you say is the first (Refer Time: 16:29) price policy so, what should be the price
policy.
So, that there should be better marketing of the organic foods. So, price policy often a
high price policy is a desirable, because a high price is closely associated with the image
of the product and an indicator of quality. So, if you see if you have the two products
side  by sides  you  know,  because  one  is  of  the  lower  price  other  the  higher  price
definitely the as a consumer the higher price means that may be of better quality.
So, price gives a quality tag more over of course, it is very obvious that organic farming
that production cost is higher as compared to chemical farming, because the if you
consider the yield and the input you are using and the labor also you are you are using
now. So, that increases the cost of productions  of organic produce as compared  to
conventional produce. As cost of production is higher definitely you should get a higher
price tag and moreover, there should be limit, because for gaining the market how much
price tag should be there, how much organic produce should be higher as compared to
the conventional produce.
So, this has been from the study it is shown that the price of the organic products about
20 to 30 percent higher than conventional products may increase the demand. So, you
should keep the limit actually if excessive the increase in the price may not attract the
consumers, at the same time keeping in the same level of price he may not give a quality
tag. So, to have a better quality tag among the consumers so, the price may be around 20
to  30  percent  higher  than  this  conventional  products,  then  come  the  educations,
educations  means  know  as  supply  expands  and  the  consumer  becomes  more  priceconscious education becomes the key to expanding the consumer (Refer Time: 18:20),
because know when there is a increase in supply, because people becomes more price
concerns, they do not think of the future health benefit.
Because you know what you say the as you say example, I am seeing the cancer or may
be the heart attack, heart disease. So, many of the cancer diseases know sometimes know
this is not detected at the earlier stages know at because, when it is the accumulations of
the insecticides of the toxicant in your body. And as you know the free radicals there is a
regular formation of free radicals in a body and the body does not get the antioxidant to
neutralize the free radicals (Refer Time: 19:05), we need external supply and we are not
getting the proper external supply of the antioxidants.
So, so free radicals they cause the damage of the DNA and slowly there is accumulations
of the effect of the free radicals. And finally, when they increases piles, then there is a
toxic and the adverse effect, we see as a cancer or may be the many cardiovascular
diseases.
So, this comes with time as time progress and the you do not take care of the health’s and
initially the consumers may not be aware about the health at that moment, but we have to
educate them need the proper educations  to the specially for the group of peoples,
educated peoples for the health benefits of the organic foods.
And so, that is what the mainstream consumer; you see the mainstream consumers is
often  unaware  of  the  problems  and  extra  costs  involved  in  the  organic  production
techniques. So, now, do they fully recognize the various external benefits of organic
agricultures and the intrinsic value of the organic foods. So, how the organic food is,
important the importance of organic foods has to be properly conveyed to the consumers
and the so, that we can grow the market. 
So, this periodically the awareness; consumer awareness has to done, every even if the
school level also the children has to be must educated about these organic foods, because
sometimes parents do learn from the children also. So, you need to educate the farmers
and also the consumers and children also. So, this type of the approach should be taken.
So, that the more and more people should be attracted towards the organic foods, if the
there is demand in the market. So, more and more farm can be converted to organic farm
in slowly and slowly.So, this requires a communication to present the organic food as a value for money,
alternative even with the premium. So, even though we are paying the higher price so,
you should keep a premium very small margin with that margins. So, that is value for
money for paying the money then we are getting the return the quality. So, that is
assurance of the quality you are paying the price tags the price tag, that indicate the
quality the quality you are getting that should be assurance among this consumer.
And there should be educations at the school levels the children must be educated about
the food quality the organic foods. And the consumers also public awareness has to be
increased about the quality of this organic foods and, health benefits of the organic foods
not only health benefit the environmental benefits as you are going for organics, the way
you are living with the organic production systems. So, there is a less pollutions the
environments and as water pollutions or the air pollution can be minimized by having
organic way of productions. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:55)
Then the farmers can be encouraged, either they can convert their lands to organic, if
there is a assurance that their product will be sold with a premium price at the good
price. So, that means the forward contracting; that means, to increase the supply the
producer needs to be confident about long term future of the market, forward contracting
between the producers and the processors or the industry is a way to do this.So, it demonstrates the commitment and provides a secure market for the producer; that
means, the industry, if suppose some industry is going for the organic products from the
field level to the processing, then usually industry comes to the farmers the group of
farmers the contract group of farmers. And that is an agreement between the producers
and this the processors, that whatever produce can be taken up by the industry.
So, accordingly the price also agreement is fixed the price policy also fixed and the
farmers can get a assured market; the market fluctuates market price may go very high,
or may fall down in that case farmers get a comfortable price, and also for the processor
the industry that is also beneficially the market price goes up. So, he gets the produce
with the as a negotiated price.
So, that way mutual benefit for the producers and the processors for processors in that
way the you can go ahead with the organic production, because farmers gets confidence,
because assured about the market of this produce, then you can go for the cooperative
marketing.
So,  you  see  the  cooperative  marketing  means  the  group  marketing  by  producer
cooperatives  is  a  means  of  coordinating  supply  and  overcoming  the  problems  of
fragmentation or the discontinuity of the supply. So, as you discussing earlier because
having  the  cooperatives  so,  that  you  can  have  a  continuity  of  the  supply  can  be
maintained the market. So, that is a advantage having the cooperative the producer
cooperatives. 
And by cooperation, producers are not only able to endure adequate and reliable supply,
but also of course, greater variety and strengthen their bargaining positions. So, this is
particularly important  for the supermarket  as discussion supermarket,  they need the
regular supply of a particular produce. So, they do not like to have a discontinuity of
particular  items.  So,  that  should  be  possible  by  having  (Refer  Time:  24:32)  the
cooperative systems they produce cooperative can be formed and, they can meet the
demand of the markets like know example of supermarkets. (Refer Slide Time: 24:42)
Then another is the product presentation in supermarket. So, that is a very important, if
for the organic produce is sold in supermarket how the product can be presented in the
supermarket. So, if careful attention is paid to appropriate presentations and packaging
organic food can be distinguished more clearly from the conventional produce. And
consumers are attracted for buying the organic produce.
So, that is the presentation the product presentations so, well packaged of the organic
foods that can be nicely presented. So, that it can attract the consumers for this organic,
the other is the introducing shop in shop systems in supermarket, where the organic food
is displayed separately. So, this has the advantage that the produce does not suffer from
direct comparisons of price or the; that means, know if you are selling if you go to
supermarket, because suppose example potato the same place, if you keep the organic
and conventional potato.
And the conventional potato may be 20 rupees a kilo and the organic potato, you are
selling 30 rupees a kilo probably consumer may not be interested to spend 30 rupees 10
rupees extra, in case of the organic potato while the conventional potato available the
lesser price and there is no change in appearance may be looks same. So, it is obvious
that they will be tempted to buy the conventional products not these organic products. 
So, that is why to so, this organic product should be displayed in a separate stall this
inside supermarket, there should be a separate space only for the organic products. So,that can be named as organic. So, there so the only all the products not only potato
whatever the products are organic origin, they can be placed there so, that way also that
is a shop in shop.
So, inside supermarket there is a separate corner the separate place a marked place only
the organic product can be sold. So, that way so the marketing can be better because
consumer can be attracted, because this only organic maybe the higher price, but still the
consumer can buy this ones, because of they do understand, they have the idea of the
because high price means definitely there is a quality so, assurance of the quality and
should have better as per the from the health those are the health concerns. And also, we
have to be bringing the awareness among the consumers. So, it can a better marketing
approach. 
Then local and regional initiatives so, as say though so, this is as we discuss is very
important to local levels local shops or the farm shops or the food cooperatives, with the
strong commitments to direct marketing should be encouraged encourage to promote the
regional marketing network. So, this can be done as a local basis to have the organic
farming.
So, you know so, by these doing this I can give another example in German and UK. So,
there is a no beginning of the organic food marketing in Germany it was very successful,
but UK it was quite unsuccessful, because in German. So, there is like in a supermarket
so, your shop in shop systems. So, you are having organic produce in a particular the
space or the particular locations, but in a inside supermarket a special shop, where you
have the only organic shops only organic produce.
In there was not there because if you mix the organic produce with the conventional
produce. So, the consumers may or may not be attracted towards the organic produce.
So, having a distinguishable having a separate space for the organics. So, that helped in
marketing this was introduced in the German what they are doing and also, they have a
branded shop for the organic. So, only the shop is organic (Refer Time: 28:40) not only
vegetables, whatever the organically heath products everything organic produced that
can be available in that nature shops nature organic shops. So, that branding was done. 
So, they are most successful but in (Refer Time: 28:54) UK there is a supermarket they
are displaying the product a supermarket only and the because the farmers they were notable to supply continuously the product to the supermarket. So, there was a failure in the
as a centralized market system, but we go for decentralized market. So, there is a special
branch branded as organic products and this can be displayed as a particular name for the
organic products.
This can be displayed  and can be organic products can be marketed in a particular
location, in a together at a particular area. So, consumers will be attracted and it should
not be mixed with the conventional produce, by mixing with the conventional produce
the consumers are attracted towards conventional produce, because of the price because
of the lower price.
 So, by doing so by following these methods either by the price policy, or by having the
proper educations to the consumers and increasing awareness among the consumers. And
the product presentation especially in the supermarket the shop in shop systems and the
having the cooperative marketing system cooperative producers. So, it can they regular
supply of the produce to the markets. And the local and the regional network so, you can
have a better marketing of the organic produce. So, having the better market that is a link
is the output  is  more;  then more  and more  farmers  can join hands for the organic
productions.
So, this is how so, I am concluding the last lectures as a for this subject organic farming,
for sustainable agriculture productions I hope we have delivered as per your expectations
and this course will be helpful specially those who are the students  in agricultural
engineering, or the agricultural science graduate final year graduates, or those who are
doing the post graduation programmes in this discipline even the entrepreneurs.
So, those who want to become entrepreneur in organic farming. So, this will help them
the how to think or how to plan for this the organic production system, if you are going
for the business for if going for the production of vermicompost even. Now, there is a
huge demand for the vermicompost if you want to go for the organic farming. So, there
is a demand of the inputs of the vermicompost organic the bio pesticides. So, those we
can have a good industry good entrepreneur and you can grow up in that one. 
So, like know like conventional fertilizers, you can come up the organic fertilizers,
because the now the farmers are also interested by having a good market by giving the
proper price to the farmers or the producers. So, this market has a potential this there is agrowth potential of this organic foods by having. So, those entrepreneurs they want to
enter the fields to have a business.
They can be very successful and with some dedications and with some sincerity in their
work with hard work and with good, if the with the sincere efforts I do not think there
will be any failure they must achieve the success in organic farming. And regarding this
know certification programme as a so, they will be appearing for the exams as for the or
also assignments as you are going through different assignments.
And we are also giving you some of the numericals as for the input managements I hope
you will be comfortable and if you are attending the subjects very sincerely. And if you
are going through the lecture you will be able to make it and you will definitely, I am
sure you will qualify as per the certification course so, with this I wish you all the best
and hope that you have enjoyed the lectures and also I wish you all the best for a
successful and the brighter future.
Thank you very much. 