Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dilip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 05
Organic Farming Concepts and Principles (Contd.)
 So, welcome  for the next  lecture  Organic  Farming  concepts  and Principles  as  we
discuss.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:27)
 So, we will discuss so, different organic farming and finally the principles of organic
farming. So, what is a organic farming systems? It is the ecological agriculture; that
means, this encompasses the entire complex of physical, economic, social and cultural
conditions which affect the growth and development of organic system, it matches the
crop soil and climate of a regions for gaining economy and efficiency of inputs.
So, next says it reduces the pressure on land water and biodiversity without adverse
effect on agricultural production and nutritive value of food and maximizing ecological
production  efficiency.  Ecological  balance  is  attained  by  use  of  organic  inputs  like
compost, vermicompost. Botanical, microbial pesticides and beneficial organisms; that
means, ecological agriculture, say nature, we work in harmony with natures so, that we
are discussing earlier also.So, in a close nature; so, as is a no waste concept. So, this a complex of physical at
atmosphere economic, social, cultural condition in integrated manner; that is here the
ecological agriculture and our the purpose is to maintain the productions to have the
productions  as  of  the  conventional  farming  and  with  a  better  quality  and  without
affecting or deteriorating the environmental quality.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:05)
So, biodynamic, the different type of organic farming, biodynamic is one type of organic
farming. So, this is a method of farming that emphasizes the holistic development and
interrelationship of the soil, plants, animals as a self-sustaining systems, it is based on
systematic and synergistic harnessing energies from cosmos, mother earth, plants and
cows.
So, in this biodynamic farming, as one of the organic farming concepts where the cow
horn and inside the cow horn; so, different the cow dung, urines and manures, plant
based manures also there kept insides and incubated in soils for several months and this
can be used, this can this can has a tremendous effect and crops specially supplying the
nutrients and supplying the increasing the hormones, growth hormones and also protect
the crop from pest and diseases, this is what we will be dealing in the classes, the detail
in biodynamic farming.(Refer Slide Time: 03:20)
The next;  Panchagavya  farming;  here it  is  a special  bio enhancer  prepared  from 5
products obtained from cow, these are the dung, urine, milk, curd and ghee. So, these are
the 5 product from the cow, very very useful as if the for the human being the milk, curd,
ghee, the urine and the dung, because the dung is highly energetic and urine is a control
of many pest and diseases. So, they are mixed together suitably mixed and incubated and
used and used for the crop production in organic farming.
The preparation is rich in nutrients, auxins, gibberellins and microbial fauna and acts as
tonic to enrich the soil induce plant vigour with quality production. So, this is the
Panchagavya farming where the 5 component, 5 product from the cows. So, dung, urine,
milk, curd, ghee, they are mixed in suitable proportions, incubated. And then this can be
sprayed on the crop and the over the crop canopy and can be used in the soil also as a
fertilizers and as pest as a control against pest and diseases and it has a tremendous effect
and enhancing the soil fertility and also providing the growth hormones enzymes for the
crops for proper growth and development and to have a better quality of the produce.(Refer Slide Time: 04:59)
Similarly Rishi Krishi; so, in this system rhizosphere soils beneath banyan tree is spread
over the area and the amritpani especially bioinoculants prepared from cow dung, cow
ghee and honey is utilized for the seed and seedling treatment enrichment of soil by
overhead sprinkling and through irrigation water.
So, this is also from the other soils that is it from the root rhizosphere; the rhizosphere
area of the banyan tree; so, this has a tremendous effects on crop vigor and developing a
better growth and development of the crop. So, that is a spread over the crop field and
also if the amritpani that is special bio inoculants prepared from the cow dung cow ghee
and the honey, it utilized for the seed treatment and seedling treatment.
So, the purpose is to minimize the disease and pest infestations at the same time that is as
a energetic that can as a boosting for the crop growth and development.
Natural farming this is coming in big way. So, that is say it consists of say Bijamrut; that
is a cow dung, urine, lime, virgin soil; that means, a non cultivated soil from lands not
barren land. So, virgin soil for seed and sett that is seedling treatment followed by
regular use of Jivamrut; that is a composition of cow dung, urine, jaggery, pulse flour
and virgins soil through that can be applied regularly in irrigation water and coupled with
mulching and proper soil aeration.So, this also the natural farming Government of India probably some asked sorry asked,
Government of Andhra Pradesh probably; it is trying to establish a university of natural
farming as came in use. So, here they are you can use the; I like a traditional way of
farming and by maintaining the productions levels say. So, the in situ the residues are left
in the field and the organic sources are applied in the field so, using the cow as an
integral part of the farming systems.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:23)
Homa organic farming; so, this you say as a Agnihotra farming or the homa organic
farming as you know the “homa”; homa that is a used in every home in occasions the
puja, celebrations we do home.
So, this is has a tremendous effect on crops because this is also this, you can say the
concept of Indian origins how the homa, doing a homa in a crop field the practice to be
followed like a copper and the pyramid copper plate in this city there science of healing
the atmosphere through pyramid fires to eliminate pollution and contamination and it
should be practiced exactly at sunrise and sun sunset time only.
This farming neutralizes the negative energies and positive energies in the atmosphere it
is powerful bio food for the plants that are rich in macro, micronutrients and rich in
microbial population; that means, doing homa. So, what you can do in a copper pyramid
type of pots that as you have seen in the figure here we put the dried cow dung cake andthe raw rice small amount of raw rice and ghee putting this you make could the make the
fire and chanting the slogan exactly at the time of suns sunrise and the sunset.
So, that makes vibrations in the atmosphere. So, that gives a through this it is a physical
phenomenon in the atmosphere. So, that helps in increasing the solar radiation receptive
capacity of the plants and keeping the air free from many pests and diseases and say that
one homa can cover the area of around 140 acres of land and the effects shoots up to the
vertical direction up to 12 kilometers in the atmosphere and it gives a nutrition to all life
the plants animals and human beings those in the earth.
So, doing a homa because it has a tremendous effects and some of the research is as been
done in India and abroad in Germany. So, they have seen the effect that doing homa
farming it increases the solar radiation absorbance capacity of the farmers sorry of the
crops and also that eliminates that reduced the insect pest and disease infestation that;
that means, there is a less use of any pesticides for controlling pest and disease and
moreover due to increasing interception of solar radiation by the crop plants due to homa
farming as it purifies the atmosphere and increases the absorption of the solar radiation
by the crops it enhances the crop field.
So, this is also homa farming concept this one of the organic farming where we do not
use any chemical pesticides or the two control the pest and diseases and doing so, homa
farming; it can increase the productions  and also it can improve  the quality of the
produce.(Refer Slide Time: 10:58)
And will go for the principles of organic farming. So, there are three basic principles of
organic farming say cyclical principles, precautionary principle and nearness principle.
So, cyclical principle number one discuss is a close recycling or the crop cycle. So, we
have to grow the one crop after another from the different groups the same crops should
not be repeated season after season. So, if so, by changing the crops one crop after
another in different seasons we can minimize the pest and disease population in the field
at the same time we can maintain the soil fertility and we can improve the soil fertility
long term basis.
So, this the cyclical principles as you say the biodiversity. So, changing crops same
group of crops should not be rotated in the same field, different crops should be taken to
maintain the soil fertility.
The second principle is precautionary principles; that means the better safe than sorry;
that means, prevention is better than cure. So, we should not use anything, any materials
that is not allowed in organic farming. So, it precaution, better to have a very safe, better
to avoid the use of any chemical insecticides and pesticides that is the precautionary
principles and third one, if the nearness principles; that means, is a transparency trust
building. So, that is also very important in organic farming.So, when you say product is organic it should be really organic, we should be honest in
your approach the farmers they are producing organic that should be clearly organic
there is no ambiguity on this so that say health, knowledge, market, culture transparency
should be develop. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:04)
So,  this  three  are  the  main  principles;  as  you  discuss  the  cyclical;  that  means,
collaboration with nature should be promoted through the establishment and buildup of a
cyclical principle that ensure versatility, diversity and harmony the recycling and use of
renewable resources that comes the cyclical principles.
Precautionary, known and well functioning technologies are better than risky technology,
it is better to prevent damage than to depend on our ability to cure the damage; that
means, we should not use the materials which are not allow in organic farming.
So, not to take the risk, we must we should use only those materials which are allow only
organic fertilizers, only organic pesticides those things are allow; those things can be
used in organic farming nearness transparency and cooperation in food productions can
be improved by nearness; that means, for example, using experience based knowledge
and local interest concerning the development of cultural and social value.
So, nearness principle the transparency close association producers and the consumer
this should be a close association there should be the trust building among the producersand the consumers. So, there should be very transparent if it is a organic that is a organic;
if it is not organic that is a non organic. So, this type of the trust building among the
producers and the consumers should be develop and there should be in very close low for
the successful of this organic farming.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:55)
And if you see the other principles that say IFOAM International Federation of Organic
Agricultural Movement; so, this started in 1972; February in that add up a seen and
German and Germany. So, this their principles of organic agricultures are say, principle
one health, to sustain and enhance the health of soil plant animal humans and planet as
one and indivisible.
So, the health means not only soil health we are seeing. So, we will maintain the health
of soil and the soil is delivering the plants is giving supplying nutrient plants the plant
health and the animal health and finally, the human health that is from farm to plate as
you said the human being consumes. So, everything the system chain farm to plate
should be well defined organic systems that systems and that causes that increase the
healthy diet, healthy soil, healthy plants and healthy animal.
Now, you say the even if the animals organic fish and organic beef productions. So, the
see you need the organic poultry. So, if it was complete organic systems; the poultry feed
materials they are produced as organic origin; so, the meat can be marketed as a organic
poultry.Similarly, the organic beef the cattle feeding materials of the cattle that is also made up
organic and also the management of cattle how do you rear the cattle; the way you cattle
As you say there is no harm to cattle. So, that it has a different physiological activity
among the cattle or the cow. So, the beef is also marketed as a organic beef as you see in
the abroad country they have the organic beef and that say very premium high premium
price as compared to the conventional beef.
So, this is the principle one, that is a health; then comes ecology, to base organic farming
on living ecological systems and cycle, work with them, emulate them and help sustain
them; that means, a harmony with nature we are living with nature we are living in
harmony with natures. So, no harm to environment, no harm to any living organism the
environment that you say as ecology.
So, all that as you discussed earlier all the as animals; so, bio microbial organisms plants
they all live in harmony in case of the organic farm is ecology. And principle three
fairness as you discuss this fairness,  the transparency; that means, organic agriculture
should  build  an  relationship  that  ensures  fairness  with  regard  to  the  common
environment and life opportunity. So, there should be by trust building the producer and
this say consumer mark they should be in close loop for developing fairness in organic
farming.
Then care organic agriculture should be managed in a precautionary and responsible
manner to protect the health and wellbeing of current and future generations and the
environment. So, we are all concerned about the health and the environment we need a
good food, we need the quality; quality water to drink and the same time we need the
quality air to breath to live a good environment sustainable environment.
So, that we will remains the resist free and we can have a better life in a through and this
a as organic farming systems as I will discuss also volume the latter classes how it can
minimize the global warming potentials and also if the  in addition to the better food and
providing a better quality water drink and good air to breathe.(Refer Slide Time: 18:39)
So, this in the principles that is a conversion of land from conventional management to
organic management, then management  of the entire surrounding systems  to ensure
biodiversity and sustainability of the system crop production with the use of alternative
source of nutrients such as crop rotations residue management organic manures and
biological inputs. Better plant protections practice by physical cultural and biological
control systems maintenance of live stock with organic concepts and make them an
integral part of entire system.
So, once you go for the even if organic farming. So, live stock is must and they are the
integral part of the organic farming because they provide the major inputs as a nutrients
or the pesticides for the crop protections and the crop growth and development. So,
maintenance live stock and harmony with the live stock will living of the live stock that
is very very important in case of organic farming.(Refer Slide Time: 19:45)
So, main issues of organic farming if you go for as a principles. So, uses the standards,
inspection certifications, accreditation, inputs, market that is a export domestic market.
So, these are the some of the major issues are there. So, we will discuss some of in that
process.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:05)
 And say brief has in this the standard means globally there are many standards available
for  their  organic  farming  as  from  the  IFOAM  international  federation  of  organicagriculture moment then European standards, Japanese in India, we have the national
program for organ in production.
APEDA; Agricultural and Process Food Products Export Development Authority; so,
they have some standards of the organic farming also we have the certification agencies.
So, there are many numbers we can say Ecocert and Skal IMO, SGS say Gurgaon,
Naturland, Lacon, Indocert, APOF Bangalore, ISCOP Indian Society for Certification of
Organic Products; Coimbatore, Bioinspectra cochin, IRFT Mumbai. So, these are the
some of the certification agency there involve in certification of the organic products
accreditation.
So, this is a national accreditation boards there responsible for this say accreditation of
the organic  products, then  we have some  limitations  because  if the  high cost poor
inspection performance also there.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:20)
And see the conversion for go for the conversion from conventional to organic farming.
So, this conversion from convince organic product include all crop production and all
animal husbandry to be converted to organic management over a period of time.
So, we cannot convert the whole land to organic at a stage; so, we must follow the
principles; that means, the conversion periods provides a time frame to start establishing
organic management  building soil fertility and developing  a viable sustainable  agroecosystem;  so, when you  go for the  conversion of land at conventional  farming  to
organic farming.
So, you must follow this one the conversion time period specific time periods when we
start  on  establishing  our  organic  input  management,  build  the  soil  fertility  and
developing a viable and the sustainable agro ecosystems.
The  recommended  is  the  whole  farm  including  all  crop  production  and  all  animal
husbandry has to be converted to organic management over a period of time. Depending
on level of farm enterprise knowledge and expertise of the farmers and ecological and
financial situations so, they have converted is.
So,  with  the  time;  that  means,  the  required  timeframe  shape  poor  for  full  organic
certifications a conversion period of 36 months which 24 months as transition and last 12
months as organic is required with a approval by certification body and the product can
be  sold  with  organic  description  because  when you  go for the  a conversion  needs
minimum 36 months; that means, the first 2 years  were the 2 and 24 months as a
transition periods.
Where we do not use any chemical fertilizers or chemical pesticides, but the product
cannot be sold as organic the product can be sold as a transition to organic not as
organic. So, afirst 24 months you should follow all organics standards for the crop
production, managements if you are going for the field crops the seasonal crops or the
plantation crops say horticultural crops that case all the cases we need the conversion
period of 36 months where 24 months will be as a transition and last 12 months as can be
sold as organic.
So, in this case; when you go for the total or the farm conversion to organic, we can
divide will destroyed that on the whole farm divided into sub plots and. So, when only
one section of the plot can be taken care for the organics and the rest 3 can be continued
as a conventional farming and when you go for the organic and the conventional they
have should be certain distance should be maintained because minimum distance should
be around 8 to 10 meters from organic plot to conventional plot.
So, that there should not be any leaching or any nutrient movement for between the
organic and the conventional plots and the slowly every year the plot on the crop theterm can be converted to organic and also there are some principles when you go for the
organic conversion the crop selection what type of crop you are choosing.
So, if you are going for the conversion to organic from the conventional farming. So,
first  year  we  must  choose  a  crop  that  required  less  nutrient  less  nitrogen  less
macronutrients those type of crop should be chosen in the initial year of conversion.
So, as we move after first year. then you can choose the high nutrients demanding crops.
Specially in case of conversion the initial period first year conversion we should use the
crops like a leguminous crops like the pulse crops like your green gram, soybean this
should be chosen. So, that they their yields should not be affected if you go for the
organic nutrients management because these are the less nitrogen requiring crops and the
second as more about these say legumes they do build and soil fertility they do add
nutrients.
So, after the first year if you take some other crops the high nitrogen requiring crops then
they yield may not be affected, but initial periods when the crop when the crop requires
if you take a crops initial are going periods high nutrient requiring crops then the yield
may  be  drastically  reduced.  So  for  that  reason  when  you  go  for  the  rules  are  the
conversion organic farming so, there will discuss of course, the cropping patterns; what
type of crop is choose when you go for conversions.
Especially for a the initial period of the organic farming when the transition phase we
must choose a crops that require less nitrogen less nitrogen fertilizer or less nutrient
adjust the crops. So, after that towards third year when you go for the adjust layer or the
organic products you are certain a organic products in those years though you can use the
crops of high nutrients requiring crops.
Then prohibited means a once the land has been converted to organic production its
conversion should not be reversed. So, we should go for the organic, it should not be
reversed to again conventional.(Refer Slide Time: 27:27)
So, the there should be government initiatives as a facilitator for the organic farming. So,
there is a national NPOP program then national standards accreditation certifications. So,
organic export through ministry of commerce APEDA and some facilitator as a organic
farming  development  of  organic  farming  technology  organics  already stand  organic
farming  by  the  Indian  council  of  agricultural  research,  setting  up  for  vermiculture
hatchery biofertilizer plant, fruits, vegetables and compost plants. So, that we can we can
provide  the  regular  regularly  the  organic  nutrients  and  the  organic  pesticides
biopesticides for this a crop productions.
Human  resource  development  through  training  and  field  demonstration;  so  high
essential; so, regular training should be given to human resource how to developed by
fertilize  by  fertilizer  unit  or  the  vermicomposting  if  the  people  can  become  the
entrepreneur also in vermicomposting and in organic farming and developing the organic
foods.
Then quality testing and input production technology so that is also a part of the farming;
how can go for the irregular quality testing and if how the fertilized organic fertilizers or
the organic pesticides can be can be produced for their use then market development and
publicity.
So, these are also the part of the organic farming. So, as farmers can be now the farmers
are showing interest for conversion of land to organics, but they need profit it should beprofitables they should get the higher human reasons unless inflict they so, profitable so,
farmers may not come forward. So, to her to motivate the farmers their produce should
be sold in a good price and they should get a good returns in organic farming.
So, as a for this lecture as a organic farming conception and principles. So, this deals
with the basic concepts for different type of organic farming and the principles means
what are the principles in work in organic farming. So, once you know this then when
you  move  to  the  future  class  also  one  class  will  be  taking  about  the  sustainable
agriculture. So, organic farming means that leads to sustainable agricultures and will
discuss the indicators of sustainable agriculture.
And based on that we will move to the next class further class is; that means, how we can
go for the organic farming technology; that means, the input productions how we can
produce the organic fertilizers, organic pesticides and the management in the field; how
can apply in the field and these standards and the principles it should be maintained
when you go for the organic farming whole.
So, these are the some of the basic understanding before we move for the main subjects
as a input productions and input management technology in the organic farming ok.
Thank you all. 