Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dilip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 06
SWOT Analysis of Organic Farming
 So, I welcome you for the class; the second week for the subject Organic Farming for
Sustainable Agricultural Productions. So, the lecture number 6 here, we will discuss
about  the  SWOT  Analysis  of  Organic  Farming  and  the  next  lecture,  we  will  be
concentrating on sustainable agriculture. 
So, SWOT analysis for organic farming here, we will be explaining what is the strength
weakness opportunities and threats involved in organic farming.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:59)
So, if you go for this strength, see the strength is the sustainability, quality products, high
social value, better animal welfare. So, these are the strength, weakness, inadequate
technology, expensive product less awareness among the farmers low yield. 
The strength and weakness are the internal factors, these opportunities and threats, these
are  the  external  factors,  the  opportunities  are  increasing  market,  breakthrough
technological innovation, government subsidy and environmental sustainability. So, if
we look at the weakness the opportunities take care of the weakness; weakness can beconverted toward the opportunity in threat, cheap imports, tantalizing cure from chemical
farming and the FUD that is Fear, Uncertainty and Doubt in organic farming. 
So, this analysis is required to basic concepts basic understanding how we are moving
forward organic production. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:39)
So, we will discuss about the strength means your sustainability we will discuss detail in
the later lecture, but in a brief the sustainability the, satisfy human need and make the
most  efficient  use  of  non-renewable  resources  and  on  farm  resources.  So,  as  you
discussed the organic farming concepts for the sustainability we need to use on-farm
biological  resources and crop the residue recycling  for building soil fertility that is
through organic farming. 
And second is enhance environmental quality and natural resource base upon which the
agricultural economy depend. So, we have to because organic farming that leads a better
environmental quality. So, it is a less emission of greenhouse gases the atmosphere and
less pollutions to the air and also the ground water. So, that way that maintains a better
environmental quality. 
Then sustain the economic viability of farm resources. So, through organic farming as
you  discussed  as  the  strength.  So,  this  should  be  economically  profitable  and  theeconomic the viability of the farm operations. So, any if the farmers, they will interested,
if they get the return at the good returns of their produce. 
Then enhance the quality of life of farmers and society as a whole so because this is a
eco friendly agriculture. So, this is a better quality of life the farmers and the society as a
whole organic community shares information; so, informations on technologies. So, this
is a good thing to organic community they do make a group. So, in that group so, there is
the  proper  determination  of  the  technological  informations  among  the  farming
communities in organic farmers. 
This is the sustainability the strength and quality of the products. So, this is one of the
strength of organic farming say we get the products are free from any insecticides and
the pesticides and this contains high antioxidants and also that was the high nutritive
value of organic products and as you discussed earlier classes because of the nutrients
because organic products because organic nutrients organic fertilizers.
They contains many nutrients they including macro and micronutrients at the same time
the application schedules and the release part on the soil that makes the higher content of
polyphenols in the food products. So, that makes the rich in the quality of the products in
terms of secondary metabolites. 
Then branding and integrity that is one of the component of the organic farming organic
products  are  the  branded  and  the  integrity  of  these  producers  also;  that  is  a  very
importance of strength. So, it is a branding integrity and transparency. So, that is where
the strength of the organic farming. (Refer Slide Time: 06:00)
And the other strength are high social value the as you are discussing the volunteerism
self help and self determinations the organic farmers are self motivated we can say
motivated and the remaining the groups the community. So, that is one of the good
aspects  of  the  organic  farming  and  the  address  consumer’s  interests  in  health  and
wellness.
So, are the produce of organics are the better quality high nutritive value. So, it leads to a
better health and the welfares of the human beings then healthy society of course, then
the health  benefits  because organic farmings. So, the products  of good quality and
environments we can say clean environments less pollutions either air pollution or water
pollutions is minimum. 
So, to live a healthy environments and the healthy foods. And animal welfares as animals
are the integral part of organic farming so, this is a good animal welfare is good animal
health quality, animal products, harmony with the environment. So, as we are having the
cows in organic farming systems because I discussed earlier classes so, different the
products from the cow you are using the cow urine, cow milk, cow ghee. So, these are
combine and these are combine cow dung.
So, these  are  combined  and in  organic  farming  to  produce  different  fertilizers  and
pesticides and if you take a system as a whole as bring cow as a integral part of organic
farming. So, whole system as a organic integrated farming system concepts. So, that isthe harmony with environment we are living with nature, we are living the harmony with
the environment that is one of the strength or integral components of organic farming.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:13)
So, these  are  the  strength  of organic  farming  if  you  come  to weakness  of organic
farming. So, the weakness are the technological weakness what you see the organic
farming the organic production is a emerging state in India. So, in view of this the sector
lacks an adequate production knowledge base.
So, we need to go further we need to work very hard because most of the research
information and research is required to strengthen organic farming; that means, the we
are lacking in production knowledge base for organic farming limited supply of seeds
manures  and pesticides  for organic farming because you see. So, if you go for the
organic standards the production standards. So, it is better to have seeds of organic origin
the seed materials; so, in addition to inputs. 
So, the availability of good quality seeds even for conventional farming is a question. So,
now, we think about organic farming. So, it is that is a limited supply or you can say no
supply of the seeds especially seeds for the organic farmer also. So, that is; so, this is so,
this bring some type of opportunity for the institutes and the research organizations to
jump forwards and to take a detailed research in depth research how to bridge the gap,
how to meet the requirement of the organic farmers and how to take the organic farmers
way forward.  Then plant and animal breeding has not focused on characteristics suited for the organic
productions because you know the breeding technique. So, that can suit the; that can be
compatible the organic farming practices that has to come up. So, as we see because
many of the crops you can say like the cereal crops they have a very less response to
organic input managements. 
So, in that context; so, we need to have a proper breeding technology. So, that we can get
a better response of the crops from the organic input management and next is a labor
intensive process organic farming because say if you go for the we are not using any
chemical insecticides and pesticides, we go for the suppose pest control or the weed
control either manually or mechanical means or use some organic methods. 
So, in that way, it takes some time to usually to protect the crops from the pests and
diseases  and  the  knowledge  base  of  for  organic  processing  is  also  limited.  So,
productions and processing this should be linked when you brand a product as organic
not only in productions. So, in the storage, transportation and process in postharvest
processing those should be as  organic.  So, that  of knowledge base  for the organic
processing that is also limited. 
Organic  storage  packing  and  transfer  facilities  also  are  lacking.  So,  these  are  the
weakness technological weakness in a organic farming. So, this so, that means, there is a
good scope to how to bridge the gap how to come forwards. So, that there will be rapid
expansion of the organic production or the organic farm area. 
And the next weakness is the expensive products of course, the as the yield is low. So,
low we can say the lower than the chemical fertilizers somehow; we can in some cases,
we will able to maintain the yield as of the chemical fertilizer to the farmers; they have to
quote  the  higher  price  for  their  product  in  order  to  compensate  their  the  cost  of
production. So, this is one of the weakness of the organic farming. (Refer Slide Time: 11:45)
And as the other weakness is less awareness among the farmers because there is a lack of
research and extension support for organic farmers moreover, it is very difficult for a
traditional farmers to adapt and learn the technology and practice of organic farming and
the process of transition also can take time. 
The transition phase are 24 months and the organic the 12 months. So, for a traditional
farmers to get the knowledge he has to be properly trained or from the well trained
organic farmers or from the research institutions to have to spread the awareness among
the farming communities about the organic for organic productions. 
And the low yield as we have discussing because of the low yield as compared to
conventional farming the high cost for unit productions and immature market. So, that is
one of the weakness because no immature market, I can say in the sense on even market.
So, the farmers has to get their premium price for this organic produce they have to get
the  higher;  because  of  the  low  productions  less  than  productions  they  should
compensated with the economy that high price. 
So, this is a market growth that says somehow with farmers will be take interest if there
is a good market and the people should be interested to pay the premium price for this
organic produce. So, these are the some of the weakness, but; however, we can say the
farmers are quite interested now farmers are getting awareness the in general they want
to go for the organics, but at the same time; they it is very essential.But I can say very important for us to see that they are the production the yield level is
protected because we cannot satisfy we cannot we cannot sacrifice the yield in the of the
quality yield has to be maintained at the same time the quality improvement is necessary.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:49)
So, there are opportunity as you discuss. So, looking at the weakness; so, weakness gives
opportunity for the organic farming. So, there is a increasing market. So, there is a great
opportunity for the organic food market in India and the world as a whole that we have
discussed is a booming market the organic market is growing. So, that is organic farming
is one of the fastest growing segments in agricultural sector I say. So, this is because of
the  increasing  health  awareness  and  increasing  concerns  towards  adverse  effect  of
chemical farming and environment and health. 
So, that gives a market did that brings the market demand for organic product is very
strong because now I can see as we have discussing the previous class also because of
the  chemical  farming,  there  may  be several  reasons, but the  your  health  is  mostly
regulated by what food you take regularly.  
So, food the controls your health because most of the foods we see now because of the
chemical high use of chemical fertilizer and especially chemically pesticides. So, those
causes many type of business like your cancer stomach related problems. So, to so, the
farmers  are  getting  the  local  consumers  are  awareness  among  the  consumers  are
increasing. So, that brings a great demand for organic foods.More entrepreneurs they are also entering in the field, you can of the many farms you
need the many educated youths, there may be some different backgrounds they are also
entering to agricultural field and many company you can say I can say Reliance or the
Tata; there are also entering to agricultural field to have a better quality of produce,
organic produce. 
Then there is an emerging pattern of social consciousness among the consumer as you
are discussing the consumer is focusing more on the procurement of locally grown food
and associate locals with organic. So, they do believe transparency so, that is say if there
is easily accessibles local organic market and local organic foods, they are also more
interested. 
Then the public sentiment against genetically modified crops so that is one of the debate
whether say because whether we can use for the GM crops or no is inorganic farming the
GM  crops  are  not  allowed.  So,  that  means,  the  health  professionals  and  the
environmental groups they are in support of the organic principles and practices and the
organic sector is well suited to marketing system that allows direct producer to consumer
contact. So, that is what we say so, you go for the organic farming.
So, the producer and consumer contact and many aspects, I have discussed why there is a
market there is a market because now we do not want GM foods; GM foods are not
allowed. So, there is a debate say GM food can increase the production to meet the need
of the food demand we have to increase the production. So, you have to go for the GM
food. So, because we do not know scientifically is yet to be whether that can how the
health is affected due to GM foods. (Refer Slide Time: 19:19)
So, in organic farming; so, we do not GM foods use a GM foods is not allowed and like
any chemical fertilizers and pesticides. So, there is opportunity for this the market then
you can have the breakthrough technological innovation. 
So, because we need the more and more research that is the opportunity for the detail in
depth research in organic farming the producer lack of organic inputs such as satisfied
organic seeds and transplants plant and animal breeds appropriate for organic production.
So, those the seed materials input materials are not available to the organic farmer. 
So, it needs to be taken into a considerations. So, many of the research input should be
diverse are to be focused for the organic productions; how we can provide the seeds or
the input materials timely to the farmers and there should be of organic origins. 
Then bridge the gap of time effectiveness between the conventionals and the organic
farming as you say sometimes the organic farming takes some time suppose you go for
the pest control because if you use chemical it is a very quick effect right. So, that can
control the pest very quickly but in organic farming.
So, we can reduce the time, we will discuss in the organic go for the input management;
how the time effectiveness can be maintained the organic framings; as compare to the
chemical farming how it can be quicker actions how we can control the pest and diseasesvery quickly and we can take care the crops in organic farming systems the pest, diseases
and weeds. 
Then as you discuss in depth research is necessary because we are lacking we are in the
primitive stages of the research and organic farmings we need to have research on inputs
and  product  development.  So  specially  for  the  we  can  vermicompost  or  organic
fertilizers. 
So, you need to have a more and more research. So, that the inputs can be used in the for
the organic production productions and in terms of evaluation efficiency how efficiently
the input can be how the; that means, the crop response to input applications how we can
increase  the  response  of  the  crops  to  input  applications;  that  means,  a  input  use
efficiency; that means, a nutrient release pattern in the after application soils handlings
and how we can enhance the crop productions as we see in the chemical fertilizer. 
So, that is a in depth research needs in a product development and what now we can see
the  vermicompost,  there  are  many  types  of  vermicomposts  are  coming  normal
vermicompost,  enriched  vermicompost;  vermicompst  can  suit  or  can  meet  the
requirement of specific group of crops suppose a crop needs high amount of phosphorus,
we need to have vermicompost or bio fertilizer that is rich in phosphorus. 
Similarly, how we can maintain the nutrient per long term in their products like you have
many country they are coming at the granulation of vermicompost. So, that the nutrient
can remain intact and when you are applying the field the huge efficiency available to the
crops also can be better for the longer term. 
So, this type of research in organic farming how you can increase the efficiency of the
inputs through the crop production that type of research has to come up in large scale.
Then  the  reduced  cost  of  production,  once  we  increase  the  efficiency  of  inputs
technically, we can apply less inputs and we have the same production of the higher
productions that we can minimize the production cost. 
Then conversion of waste lands or the barren lands to organic farming system because
you know many lands because of the soil erosion; lands becoming waste lands. So, waste
lands we need to convert to organic initially as a through perennial crops using organic
way  the  waste  lands  can  be  converted  to  organic  farming  system,  then  anotheropportunity government subsidy. So, the better government coherent policy government
should provide some type of incentives to organic farmers. So, that the more and more
farmers can come under organic farming, they can they can convert their land to organic
farming. 
Then increase in government that is a subsidy for the organic farming. So, that the
farmers can be interested this was this happened in Europe because initially the when
there is there is a policy induced organic market because see the government from
government side, they did they proposed the floated scheme where the farmers those
who are converting to organic they are giving some incentive.
So, similar type of some type of policy has to come. So, that the more and more farmers
they can come under organic farming.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:05)
And the other opportunity for organic farming is the environmental opportunity the
biggest opportunity where there is a opportunity for organic farming are you see the
IPCC International Panel on Climate Change. So, that was outlined the need to reduce
greenhouse gas emission such as carbon dioxides, methane and nitrous oxide from the
agricultural production systems and to do that one organic farming is the right, because
through organic farming we can minimize the emission of all the greenhouse gas at
atmosphere.So, as compared to the chemical farming compared to the conventional farming, the
organic farming stores more carbon. So, that increases the carbon sequestration in the
soil and it does not require the input of synthetic  nitrogen and pesticides  that way
eliminate the non biological nitrous oxides emission and consumes less water because no
in case of the chemical farming the nitrogen.
So, that is converted to nitrous oxide due to yield management practice especially in the
rice crops you can see and this nitrous oxide due to improper water managements. So,
that get reduced to and that comes to the atmosphere release those atmosphere and
nitrous oxide has higher global warming potential around 300 times global warming
potential as compared to carbon dioxide. 
So, in case of the organic farming, we do not use the synthetic nutrient fertilizers. So,
there is no the quicker realize of nitrogen from the biological materials. So, there is the
nutrient realized as per the need of the crops; that means, the synchrony the requirement
of the crops. So, there is a less  loss and less emission  of the  greenhouse gases  at
atmosphere.  So,  organic  farming  is  a  key  indicator  key  candidate,  we  can  say  for
minimizing there are greenhouse gas emissions and protecting the environments. 
Then organic farming system uses 60 percent of for less energy than conventional as you
see because no. So, there is we are using only on-farming foods, we do not depend upon
synthetic fertilizers or the pesticides that way and also organic farming requires less
water because of the high carbons that increases water holding capacity of the soils. So,
in that way organic farming minimizes the energy use as compared to your chemical
farming. 
Next the organic systems have more active soil micro flora and greater assimilation of
carbon dioxide compared to conventional systems. So, as you say because of the organic
farming. So, there is increased population of microbes and so, because microbes more
micro  flora.  So,   greater  assimilation  of  carbon  dioxide  compared  to  conventional
systems that increases the carbon sequestration in the soils.
So, that also increases the soil fertility in the long term; that is why the organic farming
as you say are the candidate for the sustainable agricultural productions and from the
environmental  point  of  view  that  is  a  right  candidate  to  minimize  environmentalpollutions and to make a healthy environments in addition to a healthy foods for the
human being. 
Then the longer rotation with legumes, if in organic farming with the legume crops in
rotations longer rotations with legumes plants in organic system produce greater organic
carbon sequestration, improve soil physical properties, reduce a nitrogen loss by 50
percent compared conventional systems and lower global warming potential there is
what we are discussing because if go for organic farming and you have using legumes in
a rotations, they fix atmosphere atmospheric nitrogen. 
So, that way we can minimize the use of synthetic fertilizers and that that is through
biological nitrogen fixations the neutral soil fertility and by a neutral soil fertility that
minimize a the specially nitrogen fertilizers used and we can minimize the nitrous oxide
emissions to the atmosphere and moreover through this biological n fixation that is the
sequestration of carbon as organic farming also we go for the conservation tillage or the
(Refer Time: 26:15) tillage. 
So, that carbon sequestration we go for the building of the soil fertility in that way, we
can reduce the n loss by 50 n loss is reduced because of reduced and also global warming
potential less emission of greenhouse gases. So, there is a less global warming potential
due to organic farming. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:38)
Then what are the threats in organic farming. So, the strength, weakness, opportunity,
threat opportunity, external factor that we can take the opportunity do that one and threat
means the (Refer Time: 26:49) components this is cheap imports we are getting the
cheap  import  of  agro  products  the  cheaper  conventional  farming  product  they  do
compete. So, usually the consumers they have some basinets to have the produce of the
less price.
So, they do not mind of they do not see their health at the time of when they are they are
spending money from their pockets. So, that is one of the reasons why I said threat
somehow, but we can say that is especially organic farming may not get into threat, but
we should keep mind they are maybe some threat, if we want to bring the production
level same as chemical farming and it can minimize the cost of production through
organic farming and hopefully that can get a good market. So, this is say the threat from
the cheaper convectional product may not may not be so much applicable here. 
Then next is tantalizing cure from chemical farming are you say chemical farming have
the tantalized farmers with quick fixation are problems because if there is a pest attack or
the disease attack or woods problem. So, farmers usually they know that the, they are
applying only at the chemical pesticides or the chemical herbicides and they do get a
quicker response. So, that is what are the, that creates a maybe that is one of the threat
for the organic farming.
So, as a result chemical farming has become more alluring than the organic because of
the quicker actions, but not a, but in spite of all this never the less organic farming is
gaining popularity and it now with the awareness among the farming community is
increasing to have the organic products. 
So, the other is the fear the part that is the fear uncertainty and doubt. So, as you say this
is one of the threat we can say to organic farming the fear means the perception that
organic farming methods will not provide enough food to feed the world. So, this is how
we the threat this we can take care if there is a technological interventions that is say
breakthrough technical innovation I will discussing. So, we should have the innovative
technology. 
So, this type of the threat among the framing community should be not there if your
come technology now organic farming can have the same productions they can producethe same amount as of the chemical farming that can be possible through research in
organic farming how the input management, input productions, the product development
you can have.
So, that we can have a better efficiency of products while they applied in the crops and
the crops specific products not that all the compost you can see all the chemical farming
you are applying the rice, urea works better and if you go for potato urea does not work
better for potato people use the calcium ammonium nitrate when the fertilizer of the
nitrate fertilizer was better for the potato. 
Similarly, in organic farming; so, we can compensate you can come out and we can meet
the  requirement  of  the  productions  by  technological  innovations  by  breakthrough
technology; so, coming out the products. So, that can give same yield as of the chemical
farming. 
Then the uncertainty or you say uncertainty means the perception that organic farming
food is not as safe as conventionally produced food; that is one of the because comes
because this is sometimes with the transparency or believe transfer living, they organic
sometimes you know organic food may not be good because we have seen from research
organic food definitely higher qualitative as compared to chemically fruits. 
In terms of the less pesticide residue and in terms of the nutritive value as the secondary
metabolites and the last one doubt means the integrity the integrity of organic producers
and the misinformation  generated by those of ignorant  organic producer or organic
producer or the organic sector. So, this type of the doubt about the organic products the
integrity of the organic producers and the misinformation generated by those ignorant
organic producer that has to be taken care. 
So, these are the some of the threats bought in general I can say organic farming may not
face n type of threats we if you have come out weakness if you tackled weakness if you
come out the technological innovations breakthrough technology good innovations and
we can meet the requirement of the organic farmers, we can supply the seeds inputs the
quality inputs organic farmers, we can meet the production demands, we can have the
productions as good or the chemical fertilizer in addition to the quality improvement.So, this is about in brief; the SWOT analysis the strength weakness opportunity and
threat in organic farming and this gives give the analysis of the organic farming. 
Thank you very much. 