Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dillip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 07
Sustainable Agriculture
Ok so, now, we will come to the lecture 7 that is Sustainable Agriculture; so, as Organic
Farming and Sustainable Agriculture. So, definitely organic farming leads to sustainable
agriculture. So, in this lecture, we will discuss; what is sustainable agriculture and what
are the approaches towards the sustainable agricultures.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:42)
So, if you see the different definitions of sustainable agricultures so, given by food and
agricultural organizations the management and conservation of natural resource base and
the orientation of technological and institutional change in such a manner as to ensure
the  attainment  and  continued  satisfaction  of  human  needs  of  present  and  future
generation such development conserves land, water, plant and animal genetic resources
is  environmentally  non  degrading  technically  appropriates,  economically  viable  and
socially acceptable.
So, this definition given by FAO; so, the purpose of sustainable agriculture means you
were the agricultural production practices should be such there it should meet the need of
the present generation without degrading the resource base of the future generations; thatmeans, so, the practices that should meet the demand and also; how are the management
practices should not degrade the natural resource base for the future generation. So, that
is the definitions given by the FAO.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:03)
The other definition the center for integrated agricultural systems as for them sustainable
agriculture is defined as the farming system and government policies that develop long
term positive impacts on the followings like agricultural profitability,  environmental
quality,  food  sufficiency  quality  and  affordability  and  rural  family  and  community
vitality.
So;  that  means,  the  you  should  meet  harmony  with  that  should  be  the  profitable
productions  and  healthy  environments  and  food  should  be  available  in  sufficient
quantity, quality and every people should have the access to the food there is a food
affordability every people can have the access to the foods and there is a rural family and
community, there should be a nurturing the healthy rural family. 
So, that is say the a farm is sustainable, if it is able to maintain high level of production,
preserve and enhance the natural capital, provide a livelihood for a farm family, sustain a
rural culture that is what you say sustainability and the other definitions.(Refer Slide Time: 03:24)
You see the board of international food and agricultural development as for then the
successful management of resource for agriculture to satisfy the changing human needs
while maintaining and enhancing the natural resource base and avoiding environmental
degradations so, that is what you say.
So, that the resource space that should meet the need of the present generations and the
future  generation  too,  then  the  next  definition  ability  of  an  agricultural  system  to
maintain production over time, in the face of social and economic pressure as you will be
discussing  because  population  is  growing.  Food  demand  is  also  growing  with  the
increasing populations and there is a huge economic pressure; that means, there is a
economic development.
So, I can maintaining the sustainability at the same time economic development. So, we
are going the developing further this economic development has to go on at the same
time we need to maintain sustainability. So, there is a challenge so, that is where the
ability upon agricultural system if that can maintain the productions over time; that
means, in future as per the need of the populations, it can maintain the populations in the
face of social and economic pressures without harming the environment that we can say
the sustainable agriculture.
And the last one say one that should conserve and protect natural resource and allow for
long term economic growth by managing all exploited resources for sustainable yield.So, these are the sustainable agriculture; there is a even sustainable development goals.
So,  there  are  these  17  so,  that  includes  from  every  aspects  energy  productions,
consumptions, climates. So, what are the below water, above water poverties or social
aspects economic aspects and all aspects are taken by the sustainable development goals
7 aspects for the sustainability.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:38)
If you go for the goal of sustainable agriculture we can say 3 components let us say
environmental health economic profitability and social equity.
So, these are the 3 components, if you want to achieve sustainable in agriculture, it
should give a the agriculture impact on an environment. So, agricultural activity should
protect the environment, should ensure a healthy environments and that that must give
the economic profitable and the social equity. 
So, what is say the 3 things are very important because when you when you say. So,
many things to a general consumer or  the public person it makes a confusions because
environments, economy and social equity. So, the should be taken care when you go for
the sustainable agriculture environment means if you only environments or the economic
integration sustainable economic development.
If you got economics and social integrations does a equitable social environments look
for environments and the social integration sustainable natural environments and to 3integration;  3  intersections  are  3  that  is  a  sustainable  development  where  the
environment economic and social equity plays a combined role, if say this environment
how the environmental health environment society and economy.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:13)
The environmental is sustainable agriculture should aim discuss minimizing greenhouse
gas emission as we discussing how because, the organic farm is a key for minimizing
greenhouse gas emission to the atmosphere. So, that is a environmentally sustainable
agriculture less emission less harm to environment and conservation of ecosystems. So,
sustainable agricultures there should conserve ecosystem in soil now you see that is a
soil depletion soil erosion soil lost year by year how to protect this soil because soil is
that provides the crop growth that support a crop growth that helps a neutron glitch part
on that helps nutrient uptake and the crop production systems.
So, the conservation of ecosystem how we can protect this soil how we can protect this,
soil fertility, how we can maintain the soil moisture; that is the one of the issues and
there should be maintained through the sustainable agriculture then finally, the protection
of public  health  human  health.  So, this  you  should  provide the  food quality better
product in the produce the best quality of food for the consumer nurture the environment
and preserve energy; that means, sustainable agriculture that consumes less energy as
compared to conventional agriculture.(Refer Slide Time: 08:44)
So,  this  is  the  environment  then  economic  profitability  see  economic  profitable
sustainable agriculture should ensure that the farm families as well as the society as a
whole should benefit from the agricultural practice keeping in view this sustainability
approach. And economic viability is a necessary conditions for sustainable agriculturals
and food system, but economic viability is about more than profitability. So, this should
be profitable and if you say economic viability is a long term the practice, it should give
profit and should be economically viable. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:28)
Social equity; if we see the Adam Smith; the father of contemporary economics said no
society can surely be flourishing and happy of which the far greater part of members as
poor and miserable hence for an approach to be literally sustainable it should look into
the feasibility and social justice first. Because every peoples should have equal access to
food they where access to food they should live have social equity they have this see
education equal education for all, this may be a difficult, but this is social equity every
child must get the same educations.
So, this social equity this can be achieved by supporting farmers who are committed to
protecting the natural environment and helping to make ecologically sound food and
fiber  systems  and  economical  viables.  Our  responsibility  to  help  build  food  and  a
farming systems that they are socially acceptable then generating employment equity for
farmers farm workers and other employed in the systems then ensuring adequate food
clothing and shelter for all people.
So, that type of the social equity is also integral part of the sustainable agricultural
development; so, organic for you go for sustainable. So, it should give the definitely the
environmental impact, they should have protect the environment at the same time they
should be profitable and they should have the social equity and should be acceptable. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:26)
So, now we will discuss with factors affecting agricultural sustainability if you say; what
are  the  factors  that  leads  to  sustainable  agriculture.  So,  you  have  3  factors  as  atechnological point of view that say land and soil related problems. That means, the as
you  discussing  the  soil  degradations,  soil  erosions,  deforestations  and  siltation  of
reserves so, that is we say. So, that makes the soil quality degrades soil health degraded
because soil health should be protected  soil fertility should be enhanced  should be
maintain long term basis. So, that it can provide nutrients to the crops as per the need to
give the proper yield to have a better yield.
And second indicator is irrigation related problems. So, that that leads to sustainability
means the rise in groundwater and water logging that is say sea water inclusion also that
makes  the  soil  salinity  and  also  there  is  a  problem  soil  alkalizations  then  over-
exploitation of groundwater. So, due to because now as due to climate change the apply
to water for the agricultural production is going to limited.
So, it should use the water very efficiently and economically and third  one this  is
indiscriminate  use  of  agro  chemicals  that  causes  pollutions  that  is  environmental
pollutions either use to fertilizers and pesticides and the greenhouse effect because of the
agricultural activity the intensive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides.
So, there is a greenhouse gas emissions high CO2 content or they can say the tillage
operations if you go for the conventional tillage more opening of this has more carbon
dioxide  emission  to  atmospheres.  So,  that  causes  greenhouse  effect  and  the  global
warming  and  the  agriculture  also  contribute  to  the  global  warming  due  to  this  the
activities as a conventional farming.(Refer Slide Time: 13:37)
Then you; what are the factors determining the sustainability if see considering the
population pressure and availability of arable land the world is classified under four
categories the class I; region having low population pressure and abundant per capita
arable land that is a North America and Oceania and the class II regions having low
population pressure, but shortage of per capita arable land; that is Europe; class III
regions having high population pressure and high per capita arable land that is a Africa
and South America and IV ones where these South Asian continents where do belong
regions having high population pressure, but low per capita arable land.
So,  you  look  for  the  sustainable  agricultural  production  for  the  four  regions  the
approaches towards sustainability may not be same for all cases the approach for class I
having the low population pressure, but high per capita arable land and see a class IV
having high population pressure, but low per capita arable land, they are different. We
can have  a same  approach for class  I and  class  IV  in order to have  a sustainable
agricultural production.(Refer Slide Time: 15:06)
So, how sustainable agriculture how can achieve because there is a big, but a question
before us how can the world adequately feed more than 9 billion people by 2050 in a
manner  that  advances  economic  development  and  reduce  are  the  pressure  on  the
environment. So, we want the economic development should go on, we should have the
progress  through  economic  development  at  the  same  time  we  want  to  protect  the
environments.
So, there is a big question how to achieve this, how to increase the production to meet
the demand of the growing populations in a sustainable environments without degrading
environments so, that is a questions before us. So, answering it requires a great balancing
act of the 3 needs which must be made simultaneously.
So, what are these the first act is the world needs to close the yield gap or the production
gap between the food available today and that needed by 2050. So, if we want to meet
the 9 billion populations by 2050. So, we must see what is what is the gap of food
productions what is a available today and what is needed by 2050 and how we can close
the gap and second the world needs agriculture to contribute to inclusive economic and
social  development  agriculture  because  contribution  agriculture  to  economic
development and social development is a must.
And third one the world needs to reduce agricultural impact on the environment; that
means, the 3 the balancing act you know. So, in order to have a sustainable agriculturalproduction; that means, to feed the growing populations by 2050 you can say nine billion
population 2050 and in a sustainable agricultural production sustainable way. So, this 3
approach  that  should  be  parallely  go  ahead;  that  means  we  have  to  increase  the
productions in order to meet the growing demand of the ever increasing populations at
the same time.
So, agriculture  should grow; that  means,  more  production you  should contribute  to
economic development this should give employment generations and economic and the
social  development  at the  same  time,  we will say that,  no, it should not harm the
environments,  it  should  protect  the  environments;  that  means,  we  need  to  increase
productions in a sustainable environments. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:59)
So, if we give some case studies of sustainable agricultures there is a as Rodale Institute
so, that in US; so, as per the project that the planets 3.5 billion the arrival area the tillable
acres could sequester nearly 40 percent of current carbon dioxide emission if they were
converted to organic agricultural practice. So, that means, as you saying if you go for
organic farming and the proper tillage operations, proper input managements then the
carbon it needs a increasing carbon dioxide sequestrations.
So, the carbon dioxide release from the practices should be minimized by this organic
farming  approach  a  case  study  from  the  Rodale  Institute  and  the  Rothamsted
experimentations  they  have  reported  that  use  of  FYM  farm  a  manure  that  greatlyincreased yields of all crops, but responses were less when fertilizers were also given
because if you if you apply the chemical fertilizers and the organic togethers, so, we may
not get a good response of the organics with chemical fertilizers that is for the same.
And the same sites Rothamsted a long term experiment the option that organic fertilizer
applications have been reported a number of cases to cause increase in water stable
aggregations porosity, infiltration capacity and hydraulic conductivity and decrease in
bulk density of soil. So, due to organic farming there is a water stable aggregates means
that  if  there  is  more  water  the  better  aggregates  of  soils  increasing  water  stable
aggregates that increases the water holding capacity of the soil and infiltration capacity
of water means the storage capacity of water hydraulic conductivity and decrease bulk
density means which of organic fertilizer organic manures say porous materials.
So, that decreases bulk density soil becomes porous and it facilitate better root growth
better nutrient release fertilizer soils and so, also the better uptake of nutrients efficiency
of nutrient class will be better in case of the organic input management by changing the
soil physical properties.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:35)
And in India, to see some strategy, they have shown that organic farming shows increase
in carbon absorptions by up to 55 percent and water holding capacity of soil by 10
percent  as.  So, there  are  also  several  research  can  say because  with  using organic
fertilizers or the organic manures it changes the soil rises peers because it increases themicrobial populations, it increases the root growth of the soils better root ramifications
and as the rises where environment changes and nutrient release of the soils and that
makes the soil activity the porous that increases the water holding capacity because
organic materials have the very low bulk density of course. 
And if we are adding to soils and that makes some changes chemical and the physical
changes in the soil structures, soil properties and that increases that only capacity so; that
means, if you are using organic you can minimize the water requirement or the water
application to crops can be minimized through organic farming.
And increase for the other research of the Pillai; 1994 reported that increased fertilizer
consumption does not necessarily lead to higher productivity in pulses because they say
the pulses are the they are less responsive to nitrogen fertilizer applications they are
somehow responsive to prosperity fertilizers. So, like the pulse crops high application of
the chemical fertilizer he may not get the more response the yield response may not be
high the fertilizer inputs.
So, that is I discussing were little discuss also when you go for the conversions or the
two organic farms. So, the initial years the beginning years we need to go for the crops
they are the less nutrient demanding like less nutrient demanding like pulse crops are
better suited if we go for the initial the beginning year of organic farming.
So,  the  another  research  reported  from  this  application  of  vermicompost  increased
ascorbic acid, beta carotene, total soluble solids and color value of tomato as compared
to chemical fertilizer product. So, this is from our finding. So, one of my research class
from through his PhD research. So, if we are applying vermicompost increase of sweet
corns and the tomato cropping systems.
So, use of vermicompost the yield is as good are the chemical fertilizer you are using the
vermicompost to lead the nitrogen fertilizer demand of the crops as in chemical fertilizer.
So, you are applying the high quantity of vermicompost. So, in that case; so, though
yield is maintained at the same time we see the better quality of the produce as the
tomato. So, there is a increase in ascorbic acids that is a antioxidants contains and also
beta carotenes total soluble solids and color value of tomato is higher in case of the
vermicompost treated plots as compared to chemical fertilizer products.(Refer Slide Time: 23:45)
And the other research see the protein vitamins and minerals are appreciable greater in
organically produced crops as reported by Srivastava et al 1982 and one more research
from our group that is a split application of organic fertilizer in rice achieved synchrony
of soil n supply with crop n demand thereby, I improved the grain productions which
was comparable with the chemical fertilizer. So, you know as I discussing some crops
are less responsive to organic input managements.
So, rice is one of the examples as say because no these are the serial crops as you say
none  this  is  a  determinant  crops; that  means,  they are  the  growth  phases  are  very
sequence very specific, if we want to increase the productions get a higher production
from rice crop. So, nutrient management was very specific far most usually apply the
urea fertilizer as you say nitrogen fertilizers at particular growth stages, we do not apply
all nitrogen at the very beginning at the basal.
The split applications to meet the specific requirement are the specific growth stages of
the crops we apply at the time of showing at the planting of the crops and also we
applied at the critical stages like pillaring stage and the panicle incision stage and some
cases also sometimes you go on application flowering stage. So, in this case in for that
regions the rice crop is highly responsive to n fertilizer because. So, as you are applying
the nutrients are specific growth stages.So, specific growth components are promoted are specific growth stages, if you apply
nutrient of the tillering there is more clear formations that is one of the components for
the higher yield if you apply are the panicle incisions that that increases more number of
grain formations and. So, that is why say gets higher yield in case of the what we did
whether we can attain or maintain same yield as of chemical farming through organic
farming we did split application of organic fertilizers. We applied a basal 50 percent and
rest 50 percent.
So, during panicle initiations; so, through that applications what you see as compared to
one time applications or two time applications of same those of organic fertilizers that
has a better output as compared to one time. So, this is one of the that also published one
of the  field  crop is  general  that  also you  have  seen in case of the  rice  there is  a
improvement in the quality the nutrient value also higher in case of the organic fertilizer
as compared to chemical fertilizer.
And the nutritional quality with respect to micro nutrients that is iron, manganese, zinc
and protein content in rice grain and cooking quality in terms of amylose content can be
improved by organic nutrient management as compared to inorganic fertilizers. So, this
is a research from the Keawpeng and the Meenune 2012. So, other researchers; they have
also reported with organic farming. So, there is a better micro nutrients content rice and
also. So, cooking quality is higher amylose contents can be improved in organic nutrient
management as compared to inorganic fertilizer. 
So, what you say if go for the sustainable agricultures as we are we are looking for the
productions  we  want  to  attain  productions  as  of  chemical  fertilizer  or  we  want  to
improve the productions as per the demand and at the same times we have we want to
have a better quality the crop should be free from are the produced may be free from
insecticides pesticides it should have higher secondary metabolites quality products like
your ascorbic acids poly phenols and many carotenes are there.
So, should be rich in secondary metabolites at the same time we want to say that it
should protect the environments, it should not harm the environments; that means, the
agricultural practice that leading to higher productions that leading to better quality of
the produce should not harm the environment at the same time you will see that the
minimum damage or no damage to environments; that means, no emission of or lessemission of greenhouse gases we can say no emissions quarreling the greenhouse gases
from the atmosphere at the same times higher sequestration of carbon dioxide in the soils
building the soil fertility for the land from basics.
So, that is what you say sustainable agricultures. So, this is a great challenge as you
discussed challenge for us how we can meet the food demand of the future; that means,
the increasing food demands with a better quality food in a sustainable environments ok.
Thank you very much. 