Organic Farming for Sustainable Agricultural Production
Prof. Dilip Kumar Swain
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 08
Key Indicators of Sustainable Agriculture
So, welcome for lecture 8, it is a Key Indicators of Sustainable Agriculture. So, last
lecture we have discussed and discussed about to what is sustainable agriculture. So, this
lecture we will be focusing what are the key indicators of sustainable agricultures and
how we can evaluate the sustainability based on the key indicators.
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:47)
So, coming to this one key indicator, what are the key indicators? If you see so this is the
as a man’s health is judged by his a physical and mental attributes, similarly the well
being of the ecosystem is primarily estimated by some parameters.
These parameters are called key indicators or knowing the indicators what happens once
you know the indicators, then this enables the policy makers, farmers, business and civil
society to better understand the current conditions, identify trends, set targets, monitor
progress and compare performances among regions and countries what you say. So the
key indicators of sustainable agriculture once we know we want to achieve sustainability,
we must know what are the indicator sustainability. And if you know the indicators, then we look forward how to achieve the sustainability
knowing the indicators; that means, we have to know the indicators and we have to work
accordingly  how  we  can  achieve  and  how  we  can  increase  the  efficiency  of  our
production systems, so that this sustainability is maintained.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:09)
So, coming to the indicators; these are the 5 main indictors for agricultural sustainability;
so water, soil health, land conversion, pollution and climate change. So, if you look at
the 5 indicators, once you know the indicators and they are used their importance in
agricultural production systems; so we should know how to protect them, how to protect
water, how to economize the use of water and how to maintain and improve the soil
health.  And  land  conversion  how  to  minimize  land  conversions;  that  means,  the
deforestations how to check the deforestations. 
And the pollutions mean the agricultural activity that is say fertilizers and pesticides,
how we can increase the efficiency of inputs. So, that the fertilizer or the application
methods so that the pollutions due to the input managements. These are fertilizers and
pesticides should be kept as minimum as possibles or no.
Then finally, climate change as you as you are discussing just last previous class, so how
the agricultural activity doing the management practices. They can minimize the climate
then (Refer Time: 03:54) activity as you say that can minimize the climate change meansminimize the greenhouse gas emission to the atmosphere. So, we will we will discuss the
indicator one by one.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:46)
So, let us come to the water. If you see the water the agriculture accounts for 70 percent
of  world’s  freshwater  withdrawal  and  for  80  to  90  percent  of  its  freshwater
consumptions. 
Moreover the water availability in future climate is going to be limited. So it should be
very careful in using water and we should think of the technologies; how we can improve
the production of the crops with less and less water. 
Then this is soil health second indictors. Soil plays a key role in maintaining a balanced
ecosystems and producing quality agricultural products. However, say soil erosion and
degradations continue to threaten the availability and productivity of land. So the soil
which say play a key roles and the soil productive to maintain the soil productivities. So,
our activity likewise the minimum tillage or conservation tillage or the soil comes in
practices should be focused how to minimize the soil erosions or the soil degradations. 
Also soil is being lost 10 to 40 times faster than it is being replenished, so which pose a
threat to long term human food security. In that case, so, in a many places soils capacity
to retain nutrients, retain moistures and maintain a healthy ph is also declining. So that is
a question so how to maintain the soil health long term as an indicator.(Refer Slide Time: 05:34)
So, next one is a land conversion. Since, the dawn of the 1st agricultural revolutions
8000 to 10000 years ago, growing crops and raising livestocks have been the primary
cause of loss and degradation  of natural ecosystems.  That  means,  today around 37
percent of the planets landmass is dedicated to growing food of which 12 percent is for
the crop lands and rest 25 percent for the grazing lands. 
The majority of current land use change in the world is forest, wetland, grassland are
being converted into farms and grazing pastures. So, in that way the land conversation
are the deforestations  that is also contributes  to climate  change how can check the
deforestation maintain the natural ecosystems.(Refer Slide Time: 06:34)
And the 4th one the pollution:  the nutrient  pollutions  and the pesticides  pollutions.
Nutrients means maintain a balanced soil nutrient levels is critical to both production and
environmental health. If you there is a deficiency of nutrients can reduce the soil fertility
and limit productions while excess nutrients can lead to ecosystem degradations, if they
are lost either to water and air. So that that causes the pollutions air pollutions and water
pollutions eutrophications also. (Refer Time: 07:11).
And impacts of excess nutrients on the environments in include the eutrophications of
surface water, impairment of groundwater, and emission of a harmful greenhouse gases
particularly  nitrous  oxide  I  will  discuss.  So,  the  nutrient  management  is  very  very
important and scientific and efficient nutrient management is very very important for
sustainable agricultural production. If there is less inputs, less input application, less
nutrient that reduces the crop field which you do not want, which we do not want to
sacrifices the yield of the crop. 
And if you applying excess, so the surplus the nutrients either they are lost to the as a
leaching loss goes the groundwater contaminations or they go to reverse and they make
eutrophication of the surface waters or they may release the atmospheres as a greenhouse
gas emission- as a nitrous oxides and cause as a contribute to the global warming. 
So,  nutrient  management  that  should  be  very  scientific  and  very  efficient  way  to
minimize the pollutions levels. And next is pesticides. If we are discussing also a lot ourpesticides because of the insect chemical pesticides while beneficial may be for the
protecting the crops from the insects pest or the diseases, but can have the detrimental
effects on human health. That is how wildlifes or the water quality due to the pesticide
contamination. So that is say that is say environmental impacts toxicity of the constituent
chemicals. So, the pollutions that is say either the nutrients or the pesticide pollutions
that should be kept in mind while attaining your sustainable agricultural productions.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:25)
So, last one indicator that is the climate change: this is the climate change say the un
through the agricultural activity that contributes to greenhouse gas emissions. About 13
percent of global anthropogenic greenhouse gas emission come came from agricultural
productions.
And they are from ruminants, of the livestocks, manures, fertilizer, rice and energy use.
And land use changes, mostly which triggered by agriculture, contributes to because
conversion of the deforestation forest lands to agricultural land so that contribute to
another 11 percent of global greenhouse gas emission. 
And if you keep example of right hand sides how the nutrient management practices; that
can cause greenhouse gas emissions. So the nitrous especially nitrous oxide emissions
from the rice field; so as you know the rice loves standing water you can say we go on
their  water  allowed  condition  sometimes  though  the  production  wise  rice  does  not
require the standing water to have a higher productions and because of the rice growsunder standing water conditions none of the other crops may fail to grow under the water
logged conditions. 
So, under that when there is standing water, when you go for the fertilizer applications
especially the nitrogen fertilizers where should apply N fertilizers. If you apply in the
surface water, so there is a less efficiency because most of the fertilizers that is converted
that is a lost as a soluble in water and runoff loss. 
If you apply in the oxidized zones that are the surface soils, the what will happen the
urea as a nitrogen’s fertilizer discussed this under hydrolysis, converted to ammonium
and the oxidized layers  as oxygen is presents that is oxidize to nitrate. And nitrate
because of the concentration gradient that goes to the bottom layer that the reduced layer.
And  in  the  reduced  layers  as  there  is  no  oxygen  and  the  nitrogen  gets  lost  as  a
denitrification loss as a nitrous gets reduced, the nitrate gets reduced to nitrous oxide in
the  reduced  layers  as  there  is  no  oxygens  and  this  N  2  O  nitrous  oxide  lost  the
atmosphere as nitrous oxide emission. 
On the other hand if you go on applying fertilizer at the reduced layers to the bottom
layer you can say, where there is no oxygen the fertilizer remain their because urea under
hydrolysis that is converted to ammonium. And as there is no oxygens so ammonium
may not be converted to nitrate. So, as ammonium the it is a form which that is a rice can
take  as  a  ammonium  form  for  the  nitrogen  fertilizers  and  you  can  have  a  better
productions and you can have better efficiency. 
So, if you see the 3 layers if you apply flood water so that is say the fertilizer is a lost
through runoff and that contaminants your reverse flows reverse and that effect the fish
population in the river and make the eutrophication of the surface water. If you apply in
the  oxidize  zone,  so  there  is  a  less  efficiency  because  no  the  nitrate  the  after  the
nitrification process the nitrate as a concentration gradients or the leaching come to the
reduced layer and there is a less efficiency and that is lost to the atmosphere as that
causes global warming. And if you apply the reduced layers so, there is a efficiency is
the higher the; that means, the crop gets this nutrients and the production gets increased
that is what the example of the yield management improper application of the fertilizer
can cause the global warming and can cause the greenhouse gas emissions from the
agricultural field. And management practices should be proper, we should change themanagement practices we should know the scientific management practices to apply
fertilizer and right type of fertilizer. So that we can minimize the emission of greenhouse
gases and minimize the climate change.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:52)
And if you see the indicators; that is: policy, practice and performance. When you go for
the performance evaluation of indicators, then there should be policy government let us
say this comes from the government label policy and somebody should the see and
observe and whether there is a policy comes in practice one there is a practice policy,
then practice policy comes practice and then there is performance evaluations. 
So, if you take up indicator water, climate change and we will go for the others. So,
water so the policy level you say whether there is a existence of policy requiring the
measurement of agricultural water withdrawal. So, if you want the farmer should make
efficient use of water and economic use of water as one of the indicator of sustainable
agriculture.
So, they has been policy once policy is in force, then farmer should be very causes to
withdraw ground water. If there is only measurement nothing to say only there is a
measurement  how  much  water  the  farmers  to  drink  to  drink.  If  that  system  that
mechanism is there, then farmers will be very causes and he can only withdraw the
amount of water that is required for his productions. And the practice at the same time we should know, the share of the agricultural land that
is under a fishnet water management practices. If that practice the if you know the
percent  is  how  much  percentage  of  agricultural  land  is  under  the  efficient  water
management that efficient means we are talking about the limited irrigations as your drip
irrigations, sprinklers or obvert irrigations or we can say as a not exactly flood irrigations
of the region for alternate for irrigations.
So, those things so the share of land area under the efficient water management practices
in percentage that has to be accounted. Then we can go for the performance evaluations.
So, if you have the policy, then there is a practice you have economic or the efficient use
of water; then you can for the performance evaluation of water use that means the water
productivity or the water use efficiency and water stress ratio. Water product means the
amount of crops per unit drop of water per unit amount of water that can be calculated
and also water stress ratio water demand and water supply. So, we can compare region to
regions the performance evaluations can be done. 
Similarly, if you go for the climate change indicators so the policy for the climate change
to know the where there is a greenhouse gas emission from the agricultural operations.
So, whether there is a existence of policy promoting low greenhouse gas emission from
agricultural activities or agricultural development. 
If there is a policy yes, then farmers should do know the then we should know the share
of farm land of the farm area with agricultural greenhouse gas emission management
practice percentages of land under greenhouse gas emission management. That means,
the percent a land that is taken care to minimize greenhouse gas emission as we know the
activities, they can the management practices; that ensures less greenhouse gas emission
like minimum (Refer Time: 11:17) or the stubble mulch practice. Or we can say the
organic farming, organic nutrient management say crop rotations with legumes less use
of synthetic fertilizers. 
So, share of the agricultural land under greenhouse gas emission management and the
water management; if you go for the flooding like rice, if you go for the flooded rice,
there will be more emission or mittens and aerobic decomposition of carbon organic
carbon compounds that cause methane emissions. On the other hand, if you go for the
saturations, there will be less or no methane emissions. So, if you know the there is a policy whether there is a greenhouse gas emissions
management practices are followed then farmers will because of then we shown a how
much farm area that is under the greenhouse gas emissions managements. And then we
can we can calculate there is a performance evaluations: that is say food productions for
unit greenhouse gas emissions; that means, the global warming potential of agricultural
productions amount of greenhouse gas emitted per ton of the agricultural per unit weight
of the agricultural produced tons of the food per ton of the C O 2 equivalent that is a
global warming potential can be calculated.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:33)
This is for the water climate change. Similarly, if we evaluate the policy practice and
performance analysis for other indicators like land conversion and soil health. In land
conversions,  we  can  have  the  existence  of  policy  limiting  conversion  of  natural
ecosystem to agriculture Yes or No. If so then share of agricultural land enrolled in
agricultural preserve program, then we can have the performance evaluations like the
conversion of natural ecosystems like the forest lands to agricultural land and or you can
sub share of agricultural land over the X years that was table and share that shifted to
natural land and share that grew from natural land conversions. 
So, this type of performance analysis that indicates to check the how can check the
conversions of the forest lands to agricultural lands or the deforestation can come in to
you can check the activities of deforestations. Then you see the other indicator, the soil health. So as a discussing if there is a policy
existence of policy that promote agricultural soil conversation practice; if there is a so
yes or no. So, the practice means the soil conservation practices so you have you have
discuss the earlier classes say control planting how we can do the control planting, the
growing the crops across this loss and the minimum clays operations and we have the
broad bed and the furrow systems of cultivations. So that the erosion soil erosion can be
checked. 
So, this type of the practice are the soil erosions or the stubble mulch tillage how can
minimize the water and wind erosions, whether there is a policy that is say existence of
the policy to promote the agricultural soil conservations practice. If so, then share of
arable land under soil conservation practices that should be in percentage. This is a so 1st
one is a qualitative measure that is a yes or no. The 2nd one is a percentage, this is a
quantity. We can quantify how much area under the soil conservation practices any type
of conservation we can say either the management to ergonomic managements or as a
engineering approaches, ergonomic approaches or the biological approaches, what the
soil  conservation  practices  are  followed.  So  it  is  a  percentage  of  area  under  soil
conservations. 
Then we can have performance evaluations like the share of agricultural land affected by
soil  erosions  and  also  we  can  have  this  soil  organic  matter  content;  if  there  is  a
conservation practices over the years, then that helps in buildup of soil organic carbon.
If you compare the lands where the conservation practices are not followed and the land
where the conservation agricultural practices are followed so we can evaluate change in
soil organic carbon over the years. So that give indications of the sustainability.(Refer Slide Time: 21:46)
And the other one we can saw the pollution this indicator as a policy, practice and
performance analysis  for pollutions  so policy for the nutrients. Existence  of policy,
promoting nutrient, management practices yes  or no. So as we discuss, so, nutrient
means what type of nutrients we are using that is say the type of fertilizers and the source
of fertilizers the application method. 
So, just discuss now the N fertilizer management, if you apply nitrogen fertilizer at the
oxidized one; that means, surface layer so that will give that that will in decrease the
efficiency of N fertilizer for the crop use and also that can cause the global warming, that
cause  the  groundwater  pollutions  by  leaching  the  nitrate  to  the  groundwater,
contamination of groundwater, nitrate contaminations. And also that can cause global
warming through denitrification through reduction of the nitrate to nitrous oxides and
release the atmosphere. 
So, that is say existence of policy promoting the efficient nutrient management whether
the proper nutrient management; whether if nitrogen fertilizer is applied whether applied
as a proper depth special in case of rice or we are using organics. So, the in case of if we
are using the synthetic fertilizer special in case of the aerobic crops also, so that is the so
because ammonium the nitrate fertilizer so that that gets converted to nitrous oxide too to
through some soil. There is some denitrifying bacteria present in the soil even though
there is a aerobic conditions. If you are applying synthetic fertilizer that is see first release of nutrient, it is converted
to nitrate and this nitrate is denitrified by the bacteria they are present in soil under
aerobic conditions. 
If you are using the organic fertilizers, just slow release and the as release is slow, then
loss will be less. It is taken by the crops and there will be whatever last loss is very low
as compared to the chemical fertilizers. 
So, that is what the policy. If there is a policy promoting nutrient management and the
practice,  then  we  can  have  the  share  of  agricultural  land  under  efficient  nutrient
management practices the percentage. Then we evaluate the performance; performance
means the nutrient input balance on agricultural land. 
And fertilizer applied per unit of arable land input balance means how much fertilizers
are so nitrogen or prosperous how much in nutrients applied to the crops, then last the
output the crop removals the loss; loss may be to the groundwater contaminations or loss
to the atmospheres the emissions to the greenhouse gases or the amount remaining the
soil how much.
 So, that input balance per the nutrient input balance and the fertilizer applied per unit of
arable  land.  So  that  type  performance  evaluations  for  the  nutrients  if  you  go  for
pesticides, so the policy action to ban or restrict pesticide and toxic chemicals for use in
agriculture. So, like there in India we have we have so there is a B H C Benzene Hexa
Chloride D D T Dichloro Diphenyl Trichloroethane.
So, those pesticides are banned, we have the policy. So, there is so; that means, the
policy is there so, it is action to ban the pesticides use. The practice that means, we have
to say share of crop land under integrated pest managements; that means, the portion of
land they use less and less pesticides.
So, if you have the policy, the farmers become conscious and you have a practice there is
a monitoring amount of land under the less insecticides or minimum insecticides and pest
management, then you can go for the performance evaluations that is pesticide used for
unit of the crop lands that is say tons of active ingredients applied per hectare. So, these are the indicators they if you go to indicators then the policy; the policy from
the government sites and the practice and the performance analysis can minimize and can
make economic use of the resources natural resources like the water. So water or we can
say soil health or the pollutions as you say fertilizer pollutions or the pesticide pollution
pollutions as you say. 
So, this can be controlled by the policy and looking at the practice and the performance
evaluations. So for this lecture as you say, so this is a approaches to achieve sustainable
agricultural productions; that means, so this indicators this is the 5 measure indicators
(Refer Time: 27:11) water or the climate change or the soil health at the pollutions either
though through nutrients or the pesticides and the land conversions. 
So,  if  you  consider  the  5  key  indicators  and  if  you  go  for  the  real  evaluations
performance evaluations, then we will be able to achieve sustainability in agricultural
productions; that means, so our practice should be done to maintain the food productions
as per the need to meet the requirement high amount of productions. At the same time we
should see the less water use of the less water, less energy, and less inputs like fertilizers
or in integrated way. So, that we can achieve sustainability in agricultural productions
looking at the indicators and making the best use of the resources in integrated manner
ok.
Thank you all. 