Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering
Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Lecture 10
Module 2
Application of Navier Stokes equation for finding out viscosity (Part 1)
Good morning. You remember that we had derived equation of motion, i.e., Navier-Stokes
Equations, and we had given you a problem, not only we had given a problem, we had given
the problem and solved also, right. We said that the Navier-Stokes Equations so useful that in
many cases they are used and used in the sense, you see that, there is a velocity term, there is
a viscosity term, so, shear stress term. All these, whenever it was required, or it is required,
you can use them.
(Refer Slide Time: 1:23) 
And you remember, we had solved the problem like this that, two coaxial cylinders, right,
two coaxial cylinders one is like that and another one is like this. They were there, and a fluid
within this is there, and we said that inner cylinder, this is the inner cylinder, is rotating, is
fixed, and the outer cylinder is rotating, outer cylinder is rotating with an angular velocity of
omega, right, and we said, the velocity profile is like this v theta, right, is the velocity profile.
So, for this we had done the solution right.
Now, if the same problem, if we say in a different way, the problem remains explicitly same
language  wise, that,  if  an incompressible  fluid  is  flowing  between  two vertical  coaxial
cylinders, and the outer one is rotating with an angular velocity of omega, determine the
velocity for the tangential laminar flow.
So, there is no change in the language, no change in the problem, only if we were asked now
that, you if you remember, we have said that this was R and this was kR, right that was our
problem given earlier.(Refer Slide Time: 3:54) 
Now, if we do the same problem, like this, right, where, you see here, instead of R at the
boundary at the inner one and kR at the outer one. If we just interchange that kR is in the
inner one and R is in the outer one, right.
So, we say now say that we have these two coaxial cylinders, right, and the radii, R like this
is kR and this is R, right. All other remains same that velocity profile is like this, v theta right.
Here, we have seen that outer cylinder is rotating with an angular velocity of omega, inner
cylinder is fixed right. So, the same problem, we just changed the radii.(Refer Slide Time: 5:50) 
Then, if you remember, what was our earlier solution, that, let me show you first, our earlier
solution was like this, v theta was omega k square into R square minus r square divided by 1
minus k square into r, this was our earlier solution, i.e., under this situation, this was our
solution, right.
Now, we have changed, we have said, only all other things remain same, only, we are
changing the radii, inner radius and outer radius, so, we made inner radius kr and outer radius
R, right. In this case outer radius was multiple of k, which is more than 1. In this case, inner
radius is a multiple of kR, rather, which is less than 1, right, because, here, in this case, as it is
appearing, R is greater than kR. In this case, it is appearing, R is less than kR. So, it is
multiple of kR, where the constant is greater than R or 1, rather in this case it is less than 1,
right. All other things remains same.(Refer Slide Time: 7:34) 
If this be the case, then let us see, how we can proceed right. You see, we have studied here
with that from the given problem, v r is equal to vz is equals to 0. del v theta del theta is 0, same.
From Navier-Stokes Equations, we got the first equation, rho v theta square by r is equal to
minus del P del r minus rho v theta square r is equal to minus del P del r. This was obtained from
the first equation. From the second equation, we got 0 is equal to del del r of 1 by r del del r
of rvtheta. This was from the second equation. And from the third equation we got 0 is equal
to minus del P del z plus rho g z.(Refer Slide Time: 8:23) 
So,  all  these  three  equations  remain  identical.  So,  we  can  write  from  the  physical
understanding of the given problem, v r is equal to vz is equal to 0 and del v theta del theta isequal to 0. It is a steady, laminar and incompressible fluid right. This was all given. So, this
two remain same. So, then, from the Navier-Stokes Equations, we can write number 1
equation, minus rho v theta square by r is equal to minus of del P del r right. Then, we also can
write that second equation, we can write, 0 is equal to del del r of 1 by r of del del r of r v theta,
right.
And third one from the Navier-Stokes Equations, we can write 0 is equal to minus del P del z
plus rho gz right. So, obviously, that this is R and this is theta and z will be this right. z will be
this one is there, another is this so this is the z, right. The same is here true, ok. If that be true,
then, here, we have one unknown v theta because we have been asked what the velocity, right is.
So, that tangential velocity, if we want to find out, i.e., v theta, then, this solution is good
enough. 0 is equal to, we can take del del r, because, here, v theta is there, here also v theta is there,
but here at least the equation is, from here also we can solve. From here, it is difficult
because, obviously, you will take the one where your solution is feasible.
So, if we take this 0 del del r 1 by r del del r of r v theta, right if we take this as solving equation
then, on first integration, as we found out earlier, 0 is equal to, or, this was ok, constant,
integral constant. Let us write here A is equal to 1 by r of del del r of r v theta, right. This was on
first integration. So, which we could write on simplification, as Ar is equal to del del r of r
vtheta, right. 
So, on second integration, we can write, that r v theta is equal to Ar square by 2 plus B right. Ar
square by 2 plus B. Up to this the solution is exactly identical. Now, where the change
between the two problems, that is again I am showing that, this was already solved problem,
and this is the problem which we are now handling, right.
So, here it was rotating, If it is constant, here also, it is rotating, this is constant, here the outer
radius was kr, inner radius was R, here outer radius is R and inner radius is kr. This is the
difference,  right.  So, up  to  this  we  have  the  same  solution.  Now, when,  we apply  the
boundary condition, the boundary condition, what is the first boundary condition? We can
write boundary condition one is that here right.
So, this is constant and this is rotating. So this v theta is equal to 0 at r is equal to kR, right. This
is boundary one and boundary condition two, we can write v theta is equal to omega R, right, at
r is equal to capital R, right. So, omega R at r is equal to capital R. So, if that be true by
applying the first boundary v theta is equal to 0 at r is equal to kR, right, we have, these two,
one A and B, ok. This was A and this is B.
Now, if we put first boundary here, that r is equal to kR v theta is equal to 0 that means this is 0.
0 is equal to Ar square by 2, or, in this case r is equal to 0. So, this also becomes 0. Then, Bbecomes equal to 0 at r, v theta is equal to 0, r is equal to kR, sorry, v theta is equal to 0 at r is
equal to kR. So, vtheta is 0. So, this becomes 0 at r is equal to kR.
So, this is becoming A k square R square by 2 plus B. This is say, equation number 1, right,
and the second equation is v theta is equal to omega R at r is equal to capital R. So, instead of
this, we write vtheta is equal to omega R at r is equal to capital R. So, second one, we can write
R square omega, or, omega R square is equal to A into R square divided by 2 plus B right.
So, from these two equations, by solving we can say that, B becomes equal to 0, right. So, if
we subtract this 2 minus 1, if we do 2 minus 1, then, B becomes equal to 0. Then R square
omega, this is equal to A by 2. If we take common, then, it becomes R square into R square
minus k square R square, or, if we take, R square common, then omega is equal to, or, R
square omega is equal to AR square by 2, 1 minus k square, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:55) 
So, from there, we can also write this is that ok. Let us write here once again, R square omega
is equal to AR square by 2 into 1 minus k square, or, A is equal to this R square goes out, so,
2  omega over 1 minus k square right. So, we had B is equal to 0 and we had the original
equation vtheta r vtheta is equal to AR square by 2 plus B. In this equation, if we substitute the
value of A and B right. If we substitute the value of A and B, then rv theta is equal to A is 2
omega over 1 minus k square divided by 2, right, plus B is equal to 0 into r square right, or,
we can write vtheta is equal to this r square and r goes out, so 2 omega, this 2 and this 2 goes
out, omega by omega r by 1 minus k square. So, v theta is rather is equal to omega by 1 minus k
square into r, right. So, v theta is that.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:08) So, let us also check whether we have the same thing, ok. Here in this, of course, we will try
to, because, this will be with you. So boundary condition we change v theta against 0, if you
remember that vtheta is equal to 0, right at r is equal to kR.
So, let us substitute here, v theta is equal to 0 at r is equal to kR, this is one, and v theta is equal to,
let us take it to that side and v theta is equal to second omega R at r is equal to R, not omega kR,
omega R at r is equal to R, right. So, if that be true, then, by putting the first boundary i.e.,
vtheta is equal to 0 at r is equal to kR, we can write this was rv theta. Ar square by 2 plus B, that
was our integration, right.
So, we write here that in this case we do not need this, right. So, we can write then that v theta is
0 at r is equal to kR, and v theta is equal to omega R at r is equal to R. So, if we put this
boundary, i.e., vtheta is 0 at r is equal to kR. So, v theta is equal to 0 at r is equal to kR, then we
get here, this is kR square, right, kR square. We can write it here, if we have that thing, ok, itwill be 2 square, right and obviously, this will bring down to normal, ok, kR square this also
has to come to normal only so this is out.
So, kR square by 2 and this was B plus B only right. Boundary condition first one if we have
put here, so, this is 0 right, and then this r is equal to kR, is kR square and no let us skip that
thing, this one, vtheta then only because, we cannot put r is 0, so it is Ar by 2 plus Br, here we
have to apply that v theta is equal to omega R at r is equal to R.
So, from the first boundary v theta is equal to 0, at r is equal to kR, if we put that, it is equal to 0
so, here it is kR square, here it is then kR square, ok, so it is kR square by 2, right plus here it
is B by kR, right, because r, we have first v theta is equal to 0 at r is equal to kR, so, plus B by
kR and the second boundary condition was v theta is equal to omega R at r is equal to R. So,
vtheta is omega R at r is equal to R. So, in that case, this will be AR by 2 plus this is B by R,
right.(Refer Slide Time: 25:51) 
So, that, which we did a little here something difficult, here, now, let us rewrite here, so, we
have 0 is equal to AkR square by 2 plus B by kR and we also have omega R is equal to AR by
2 plus B by R right. So, if we take instead of B, so, B is equal to, from here, we can write B is
equal to minus AkR whole square by 2, right, divided by kR. So, this is kR minus AkR square
by 2 by 2 kR, i.e., B. If we take this equation and if we substitute here, then, omega R is equal
to AR by 2 plus B is minus A kR square by 2 kR, right, 2 kR, and we also have 1 kR here
right.
So, on simplification, we can write that this is equal to, if A is common R by 2 minus k
square R square divided by kR into 2kR, right. So, this kR, this k square R square k square R
square goes out, then, this becomes R by 2 minus half, right. So, this is equal to, into A, of
course, right. So, omega R is there. Therefore, A is equal to omega R. Of course this we can
further simplify, as if we take R common right, 1 by 2 minus 1 by 2 R, right. From there, ifwe take out this R, if we write again, omega R is equal to AR into 1 by 2 minus 1 by 2R,
right.
So, this R goes out, so A is equal to omega by by 2R, and here, it is 2R minus 2 right, is equal
to 2 omega R divided by 2 R minus 1. So, this goes out this omega R by R minus 1, so, if, it
is A then, B can be written as from here, we can write that omega R is equal to AR by 2 plus
B by R. From there, we can write, substituting A omega R square by 2 into R minus 1 plus
by R, right.
So, from there, if we take this omega R, so, B by R is equal to omega R minus omega R
square by 2 R minus 1. So, if we take omega R common, then, 1 minus 1 by 2 R minus 1,
right. So, B is equal to omega R square into 1 minus 1 by 2 R minus 1, right. So, we know A,
we know B.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:43) 
Then, we can substitute and by doing that we get this, ok. We get this & are the solution ok.
vtheta is omega R into kR by R to R minus kR by k minus 1 by k and of course, in all the cases,
we have missed that one k, yes. We have missed that one k, in these cases. So, this is the
ultimate solution, which we get that v theta is equal to omega R into kR by r r by kR by k minus
1 by k and shear stress is minus mu r del v theta del r del vtheta by r del del r vtheta by r plus 1 by r
del vr del theta. So, that is minus mu 2 omega square into 1 minus r square into k square by 1
minus k square. So, you do the changes in the slide accordingly and converting into this, ok
thank you.