Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering 
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 15
Module 3 
Fanning friction factor 
Hello, dear boys and girls, hopefully you have gone through till now that we have done, pipe
flow, both  with  the  help  of shell  momentum  balance,  and  with  the  help  of  Navier-Stokes
equations. We have also shown how the Navier-Stokes equations are helpful in solving this type
of  Problems,  right?  Rather, Navier-Stokes  equations  are  known  as  the  mother  of  the  flow
behavior characteristic of fluids. So, if you are accustomed with that you can solve many
problems in future wherever you can apply them. 
(Refer Slide Time: 1:34) 
Now, we will go to another main thing, which I had told you that during the first rather last class.
I had said that you are looking into the flow through pipe. If this is a pipe, if this is inlet, if this is
outlet, then the layers of the liquid or the fluids, they are, while there is a P inlet and Poutlet, why this
Pinlet is more than Poutlet or, where there has to be, right? You know in this connection, another
thing I tell you which you can obviously look into that whenever you are generating electricity at
any  point,  right?  And  there  you  are  generating  at  a  definite  voltage  and  when  you  are
transmitting it and when it is reaching you are getting a voltage drop, why?
Because, the  medium  through  which  it  is  coming,  that  is  offering  a  lot  of resistance.  So,
depending on whether your medium is offering a distance for the flow or not, that will dictatewhether whatever you are giving at the inlet that thing will be same at the outlet or not, and in
this selection, I would like to mention that yes till now people have developed some or other kind
of devices by which you can go even up to minus 100 degree centigrade while there is no
resistance of such transit, right? 
But, here also, in the fluid flow, a similar thing we will now discuss where, why, this factor, i.e.,
inlet to outlet, why the pressure is getting dropped, right? That means, when you are running, if
somebody is holding you then you cannot run. When you are swimming, if somebody is not
allowing you to swim, then, you would have swim faster? The same thing happens here also.
When the fluid is flowing, some or other factors, which are pulling the fluid, not to go and this
pulling is known as the friction factor, right?
(Refer Slide Time: 4:47) 
So, we will now go to that friction factor, and that we will do yeah, that we will do like this,
right? This frictional factor let us define it to be “f”, right? And this is nothing but the drag force
per unit wetted surface area, which is known as fanning friction factor “f”, which is nothing but
drag force per unit wetted surface area, or, shear stress Tau s at the surface divided by the product
of density times velocity head, which is known as rho v square by 2, right? (Refer Slide Time: 5:46) 
So, let me repeat, we define a new term, called fanning friction factor or simply this denoted by
“f”. This in many books, you may get as lambda or some other whatever at least this word should
be there that is called fanning, right? Fanning’s friction factor, right? So, this fanning friction
factor commonly, or generally, it is denoted by small “f”, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 6:23) 
This is defined as the drag force per unit wetted surface area, or shear stress Tau s at the surface
divided by the product of density times velocity head or density is rho and velocity as is v square
by 2.
So, this definition, if we follow then you will say that what is the drag force per unit wetted
surface area, right? Then what is the drag force? Drag force is delta P f, i.e., delta P, pressure dueto the friction factor. So, delta P f times cross sectional area, i.e., pi R square and wetted surface
area is known as 2 pi R L, right? So, drag force is that, pressure force times sectional area, i.e., pi
R square and wetted surface area is 2 pi R L. If it is known, then, the relation between the
pressure drop and friction factor that can be related as “f”, is equal to Tau s over rho v square by
2, right?
(Refer Slide Time: 7:38) 
So, this we can write as Tau s as delta Pf times pi R square, right, divided by 2 pi R L, divided by
rho v square by 2, right? So, by definition we have said that fanning friction factor is the shear
stress Taus, right? And this shear stress is nothing but drag force or pressure drop due to friction
factor times sectional area, i.e, pi R square divided by the wetted surface area, i.e., 2 pi R L
divided by the rho times velocity, here that is v square by 2, right? 
So, we then, if this is true, we can also write this as delta P f times R, right, divided by L rho into
v square, right? Because, this 2 and this 2 goes off, this pi and this pi goes off, this R and this
square goes off, right? Then, remains delta P R over L, that remains, right? This rho that remains
this square that remains, so, delta P f R by L rho v square, which you can also write as delta P f this
R as D divided by 2, right? L rho v square, right? So, now, this L rho v square delta P f D, this can
also be written as, now this we can write, delta P f, fanning friction factor, as 2 f L rho v square,
right, by D, right? 
Which also we can write in terms of easy remembrance 4 f L rho v square by 2 D, right? This we
have written in terms of “f” and delta P. So, the relation between delta P and “f” is that delta P f is
2 f L rho v square by D or 4 f L rho v square by 2D. This is why? This 4 f we can remember. L isthe characteristic length, rho is the density, D is the diameter, L by D is this length dimension,
non dimensional length, rho and v square by 2, i.e., the velocity head, right? That is why in this
form it is written that 4 f rho L by D or L by D rho v square by 2, right? 
Now, this we can also equate. We know that delta P f is 32 mu v L by D square. This we obtained
from the Previous class that, this is known as Hagen–Poiseuille’s equation. So, from that Hagen–
Poiseuille’s equation, if we relate this with 4 f rho L by D v square by 2, right? If we relate them
then, from here we can write “f” is equal to 32 by 4, right, mu okay, by rho, right, v by v square,
okay, 2 that 2 goes there, right? 
So, this D by L, right? Here, we have L by D square. I think we have covered everything. “f” is
32 by 4 4, so mu remains mu and rho comes down mu by rho then v by v square yes this v square
this 2 goes up, then D by L which was already there L by D as D by L and this is L by D square,
right? Then by simply eliminating, we can say so, this makes 8, so, 8 times 2 is 16 this is mu,
okay, so, v v goes out mu by rho, so 1 v remains, right? This 2 also 8 into we have taken 16 mu
by rho v and this D and this square this goes out so 1 D remains L and L cancels out.
So, 16 mu by rho v D, which, we easily say 16 over D v rho by mu. Now, D v rho by mu is
nothing but NRe, right, Reynolds number. So, we can simply say that this fanning friction factor is
this is true because when we have taken this, this was for laminar flow, right? So, for laminar
flow the fanning friction factor that can be said to be equal to 16 by N Re because NRe is nothing
but D v rho by mu, right? (Refer Slide Time: 15:11) 
So, if this is known, then we can say, for laminar flow this “f”, fanning friction factor is nothing
but 16 over NRe, right? Done. Whereas, the relation between the fanning friction factor and delta
P, we can write this is 4 f rho L by D v square by 2, right? This is the fanning friction factor and
this is true whether it is flow is laminar or turbulent. This is delta P f for turbulent, we can say this
can be utilized, right? So, once we know the fanning friction factor then we can find out what is
the relation between fanning friction factor and your pressure drop, right? 
So, pressure drop and fanning friction factor, this relation, we can say for laminar flow is very
easy 16 by NRe.(Refer Slide Time: 16:32) 
Whereas, the relation general relation for delta P f is 4 f rho L by D v square by 2, right?
(Refer Slide Time: 16:46) 
Now, if we look into a problem, that a small capillary with an inside diameter of 2.54 into 10 to
the power minus 3 meter and a length of 0.4 meter is being used to measure the flow rate of a
liquid having density of 870 kg per meter cube and viscosity of 1.15 into 10 to the power minus
3 Pascal seconds, then calculate the flow rate, if pressure drop across the capillary is 0.07 meter
of water having a density of 990.24 kg per meter cube and also calculate the pressure drop using
fanning friction factor or frictional coefficient or fanning friction factor, whichever you call,
right? So, these two are asked to be done. So, though this is easy problem, but we can check how much
the difference is, if we use fanning friction factor, and if we do not use that, straight way if you
find out, then what is the delta P, right? So, I repeat the problem, A small capillary with an inside
diameter of 2.54 into 10 to the power minus 3 meter and a length of 0.4 meter is being used to
measure the flow rate of a liquid having density of 870 kg per meter cube and viscosity of 1.15
into 10 to the power minus 3 Pascal seconds, then calculate the flow rate if pressure drop across
the capillary is 0.07 meter of water having density of 990.24 kg per meter cube and also calculate
the pressure drop using fanning friction factor, right?
(Refer Slide Time: 19:15) 
So, in the first case, when we are asked that calculate the flow rate if the pressure drop across
capillary is 0.07 meter of water having density of 990.24 kg per meter cube, right? In that case,
delta Pf, this can be written as h rho into g, right? So, h rho g, if we know: h is 0.07, rho is 990.24
and g is 9.81, right? So, if you multiply them, then, it becomes roughly equal to say, 679.99,
Newton per meter square or, roughly, we can say 680 Newton per meter square. So, this is the
normal h rho g pressure drop, right? 
Now, let us look into what it happens when we are taking the other one. Also, we know that delta
Pf is equal to 32 mu vL over D square from the Hagen–Poiseuille’s equation. So, 32 into mu, that
is given as 1.15, right? 1.15 10 to the power minus 3 Pascal seconds into v into 0.4 over D
square. D is given 2.54 into 10 to the power minus 3, so much meter, right, D square. So, this
from there already delta P we know 680, right? So, from there we can go this is equals to 680.So, from there we can find out the value of v velocity as 2.54 into 10 to the power minus 3 this
square times 680 over 2.54 and 10 to the power minus 3 whole square, this becomes equal to
0.01472, so, this is 0.298, so much of meter per second, right? So, v becomes equal to 0.298
meter per second, right? So, then the flow rate can be written equal to v into pi D square by 4,
that is equal to 0.298 into 2.54 into 10 to the power minus 3 whole square into pi divided by 4.
So, this is equals to 1.50998 10 to the power minus 6. 
So, much of meter cube per second, therefore we can write, N Re is equal to D v rho by mu is
equal to 2.54 into 10 to the power minus 3 into 0.298 into 870 divided 1.15 10 to the power
minus 3, so, that becomes equal to 572.6, right? So, N Re is so much. Now, next, it comes that how
much fanning friction factor, right? So, N Re we got 572.6, why did you do N Re? Because, from
there what we were asked to find out is that calculate the flow rate if pressure drop across the
capillary, so, you have to find out the flow rate, now to find out the flow rate, we had used the
Hagen–Poiseuille’s equation.
Now, Hagen-Poiseuille’s equation is true for laminar flow, so, since again Hagen–Poiseuille’s
equation is true for laminar flow, so, then you have to also show that the flow is laminar, that is
why we have found out the Reynolds number and this has become equal to 572.6 which is in the
laminar range, right?(Refer Slide Time: 24:52) 
So, we know that laminar range is 200 to 2100 up to that normal fluid say water, it is up to 2100,
and if it is a Newtonian fluid, then 2100 as well. This is the lower and the turbulence is more
than 4000. So, within this range, that it is intermediate, so, if it is less than 2100, then it is under
laminar flow, so, you have established that it is under laminar flow.
So, using Hagen–Poiseuille’s equation was okay. Now, second part, we have to do that is the
pressure drop using the fanning friction factor, right?(Refer Slide Time: 25:43) 
Pressure drop using fanning friction factor, delta P f is h rho g, right, is equal to 0.07 into 990.24
into yeah, so, we have to find out this, okay, this we have already found out, now the second, the
fanning friction factor is 16 by N Re, so, 16 by NRe means 16 by, we have already found out, N Re as
572.6. So, this is nothing but 0.0279, right? If it is 0.0279, then delta P f fanning friction factor,
using, we know this is 4 f rho L by D into v square by 2, right? v square by 2 that is equal to 4
times 0.0279 into 890 870, sorry, 870 into 0.4 into 298 square over, it was 298 square into 10 to
the power minus 3 square, right, over 2 times 2.54 into 10 to the power minus 3, right? 
So, L by D, so, this was to this, now this is, if you calculate, that becomes 678.9 Newton per
meter square, that is roughly, again, we can say, closer to 680 Newton per meter square, right?
That means if we look at, with the help of h rho g, what we have gotten for the laminar flow and
with the help of fanning friction factor, what that relation delta P f is 4 f rho L by D v square by 2,
that relation, we also got almost similar, of course, earlier one was a little more, if you remember,
it was around 680 that is 679.99 is very close to 680(Refer Slide Time: 29:00) 
Whereas, it is 678.9, so, it a little less than the earlier but, this is also closer to that, right? So,
with this we close, we end today’s lecture and next, we will try to see, what is the same for if the
flow is turbulent, right? Thank you. 