Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering 
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 14
Module 3 
Hagen–poiseuille equation from Navier stokes equation
Yeah, so, we have seen that Hagen–Poiseuille equation, how we have developed in a pipe for a
fluid which is incompressible, and under steady state, and laminar flow, and there is no end
effect, there is no velocity development along the flow of the fluid, that we have seen, right?
Velocity profile was normal, so, developed in the flow of the fluid along the pipe, so, this we
have already found out. Now, one more thing, we had said earlier that you can utilize the
equations of motion which we developed, known as the  Navier-Stokes equations. From the
Navier-Stokes equation also this you can find out and develop. So, we will do this today also,
right? So, for that let us let us go to that situation that we have taken.
(Refer slide time 1:34) 
This fluid, we have taken, the shell momentum balance. We have done, right? So, here, we will
do with the Navier-Stokes equations. If you remember, the Navier-Stokes equations with the r
theta and z components, r theta z component equations, we had used, so, similar to that we will
use also here r theta z components, right? (Refer Slide Time: 2:09) 
So, let us take in that case, we know that, v r is equal to vtheta is equal to 0, and del v z del z is equal
to 0, right? vr vtheta vz since that was r theta z, right? So, here, also we take r theta instead of x, z,
right? Instead of x as z, so, r theta z. If you take, so, v r is equal to vtheta is equal to 0, because what
we are supposed to do? We are supposed to find out that v is flowing like this, right? v is flowing
like that so it is vz which is flowing like that and v r is this.
So, this vr and vtheta is that which is like that, so, v theta will be taking, since, the flow, we assumed
is laminar, we assume steady state, we assume no end effect, we assume flow is fully developed
and also we assume there is no velocity profile along the flow of the fluid. So, we assumed all
these, so, in this case, knowing these conditions, the conditions of the flow, this is called the
problem description. So, from the problem description, we can tell v r is equal to vtheta is equal to
0, i.e., vr is 0 and vtheta is 0. There is no velocity component, right, in the r direction, there is no
theta component, v theta in the theta direction, this is 0, and del v z del z there is no flow in the in the
direction of the flow. There is no velocity profile so that del v z del z is also 0.
So, in this case if we assume all these three, then we can write from the Navier-Stokes equation,
if you remember that the first equation, second equation and third equation, if we take this
equation that mu into 1 by r del del r into r del v z del r, right? This is minus del p del z this is
equal to 0, right? Since, it is horizontal, so, rho g z, we can tell to be equal to 0, right? So, we can
write 1 by r, this is the from the Navier-Stokes equation, right? In the z that r theta z this is the z
one del del r of r del v z del r, right?So, 1 by r then, 1 by r del del r of r r del v z del r, right? This is equal to 1 by mu del p del z. So,
this we have taken to the other side, this del p del z, this is equal to, we can write del del r of r del
vz del r, right? This is equal to r by mu into del p del z, right? So, on first integration, we can
write, r del vz del r is equal to 1 by mu del p del z into r square by 2 plus C 1. Why you have not
taken in del p del z in the integral part, because, del p and del z, they can be said to be given,
right? 
So, del p means pin minus pout, i.e., del p and del z is nothing but the length, so, once we know the
length that is for a given length, right? For a given flow, we know del p, we know del z, so, del p
del z is known. So, that is why it is not going into the integration. So, we can write r del v z del r
is equal to on the first integration, 1 by mu del p del z r square by 2, right, plus C 1, right? So, this
on first integration and we can also say, on the rearrangement of this as del v z del r is equal to del
vz del r is equal to 1 by mu del p del z, right?
This r goes there, so, it is r by 2 plus C 1, C1 by r, right? At r is equal to, now, the boundary
condition, which we can apply, at r is equal to 0, del v z del r is also equal to 0, right? At r is equal
to 0, i.e., this point, right? at r is equal to 0, del v z del r, that is also equal to 0. Therefore, we can
write C1 is nothing but, is equal to 0 at r is equal to 0, del v z del r is 0, so C1 is also equal to 0, r is
equal to 0, this goes out, right? (Refer Slide Time: 10:09) 
So, that also goes there, so, we can write that C 1 is equal to 0, and then, we can also say that del
vz del z is equal to 1 by mu del p del z into r by 2 since, C 1 was equal to 0. On second integration,
we can write vz is equal to 1 by mu del p, 1 by mu del p del z, i.e., constant into r square by 4
plus C2. Now, we can put this second boundary condition. Second boundary condition is what?
At r is equal to capital R, v z is equal to 0, right? If that be true, at r is equal to capital R, v z
becomes equal to 0, then C 2 becomes equal to minus 1 by mu into del p del z, right, into R square
by 4, right? 
Therefore, we can write v z is equal to 1 by 4 mu, right, into del p del z, right, into R square minus
small r square, capital R square minus small r square, right? C 2 is this, right? 1 by 4 is, this is
with a negative, right? Because, that is negative, so, this can be written 1 by 4 mu del p del z,
right, into r square minus capital R square, right? So, at r is equal to 0, we can write v z is equal to
minus 1 by 4 mu del p del z into R square, at r is equal to 0, right? This minus remains; v z is
equals to minus 1 by 4 mu del p del z R square, right? 
Now, we can say that v z is equal to nothing but p in minus pout, right, into R square by 4 mu into L,
right? Which is nothing but, v max. So, vz is pin, how we have taken this minus in? minus in has
become this delta p, again any delta p is generally, out minus in, right? Anything delta is higher
minus lower, but that is the (out) exit minus inlet. So, in this case, since, we are taking p in minus
pout as the delta p, so, this negative goes in there, and this becomes p in minus pout by 4 mu L into R
square, i.e., nothing but v max, right? Or, we can write, v z is equal to vmax, right? These terms, times, rather, 1 minus r by R whole
square, right? vz is nothing but vmax by 1 minus r by R square, this is what we have done in the in
the flow of fluid in pipe, right? This we have done earlier, and with the help of Navier-Stokes
equations, we have seen that you can also do the same thing for the pipe flow and you can find
out the velocity distribution in the pipe, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:57) 
Then, vz is vmax. So, how the velocity distribution comes in? This is the pipe, right? This is r, so
velocity is 0 at the pipe, and v z is maximum at r is equal to 0. So, if this is the maximum, so,
then, this will have a velocity profile like this, right? So, this will be the velocity profile in the
pipe, right? So, now, here you see, in the previous class, we had done with the shell momentum
balance. But, in this present class we have also done the same thing with the help of the Navier-
Stokes equation. Keep in mind, Navier-Stokes equations, if properly the terms can be identified,
if properly you can substitute the values of the terms, then you can easily come to the solution
and for the flow of pipe we have done it carefully, right? (Refer Slide Time: 16:17) 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:27) 
So, we can say that like this. So, v average, then, can also be written as this is 1 by pi r square, i.e.,
the area into 2 pi r into dr v z, right? That is equal to minus R square by 8 mu delta p over delta z,
right? That is R square by 8 mu delta p by delta z, right? So, v then, v z average into dz is equal to
minus R square by 8 mu into dp, right? Or, v z average into L is equal to p in minus pout, i.e., delta p
R square by 8 mu, or, v z average is equal to p in minus pout, right, into D square by 32 mu L and
this  is  Hagen–Poiseuille equation, right? So, this  is Hagen–Poiseuille equation. So Hagen–
Poiseuille equation we have found out with both flow through pipe with the shell momentum
balance as well with the Navier-Stokes equation, right? Then, Navier-Stokes equations again and
again I am forcing on that, Navier-Stokes equations you do not have to remember. The entire setof equations is not possible to remember. The entire equations, all the components, r component,
theta component and z component are not possible to remember.
When, you are solving, you must take that this Navier-Stokes equations and all the r component,
theta component and z component, they are with you in the right form, and then, you understand
them in the proper way and the moment you understand them in the proper way you can figure
out, in most of the cases, you will see that from the given problem you will figure out what are
the velocity components over there, all three of them are active or, some of them are nullified or,
it can be taken as 0.
So, if you can identify them, if you can put them, then, you do accordingly and then find out
whether these Navier-Stokes equations are applicable there or not. How it can be applied, what
are the terms, which are like in this case, we have seen that v r and vtheta is 0 and we also have
found out that del v z del z, that is also 0. But, these terms, we have said in setting the problem,
you remember, while setting the problem, we have said that the velocity component in the flow
of the direction of the fluid does not have any velocity profile.
That means, it is not having any velocity profile in the direction of the flow, that means del v z del
z is 0, right? We also said and when you are integrating, finding out the integral constants, there,
what you were putting, you are putting the boundary conditions. Now, here we have put the
boundary condition at r is equal to 0, i.e., the central point at r is equal to 0, you have v z, which
you have found out, right? v z is equal to vmax, right? And at r is capital R that is at the surface or,
at the inner surface of the cylinder, right? 
Where, the fluid is clinging, if this is the surface and if this is the layer of the fluid, so, it is
clinging to that as if the surface is moving, it is also moving, but if the surface is fixed, it is not
also moving, right? So, that is called clinging, it is clinging to the surface and that means the
surface has the velocity 0. So there r at capital R, we have taken to be constant at capital R,
velocity to be 0, and we have shown how the velocity profile has changed, right, along the
radius, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:00) So, that we have shown that. So, that we have shown that if this is the pipe, and if this was the
axis, then velocity, here, it was 0, it became maximum, and then this is nothing but a mirror
image of this half. This half is the mirror image of this half. So, whatever was there the same
thing came out to be here, right? In many cases that is why, subsequently, you will see, once, if
for a symmetrical thing, if you do half of it, the rest of the things can be assumed to be the same,
right? 
So, let us then, the next we will do when we will have other things, right? Most probably next we
will be going for finding out, another thing as if from here it is appearing that this is clinging,
right? (Refer Slide Time: 23:01) 
The surface which is clinging to the wall is not moving, right? So, this is known as friction,
right? So one layer with the other layer, with the other layer, there having some friction, other is
why pout and pin there will be some difference, why, p in and pout, there will be some difference,
who is taking in this is taken by that frictional force which is dragging or, drag force one other,
this we will do in the subsequent class, okay thank you.                             
                                           