Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering 
Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Module 3
Lecture No 11
Application on Navier-Stokes Equation for finding out viscosity (Part 2)
So, in the previous problem, we have seen that this is nothing but a jugglery of the boundary
conditions, the original equation remaining similar. Now, in the 2 cases we have seen that
outer cylinder was rotating and inner cylinder was fixed, right? And that can give you way of
finding out the velocity profile also the way of finding out the viscosity in many instruments.
We had  earlier  said  that  Brookfield  viscometer  uses  the  similar  situation.  Now, if  the
condition is little different that, if, instead of outer cylinder rotating and inner one fixed and
we played with the radii, right?  
We made the outer cylinder one radius, inner cylinder another radius. Of course, the velocity
expression that becomes different right. So, if we do the other one, then, the outer one is fixed
and the inner one is rotating, right. In that case you take the former equation i.e., the first one
like that, and then let us see how it happens? Okay. 
(Refer Slide Time: 1:56) 
So, here the same problem, if an incompressible fluid is flowing between 2 vertical coaxial
cylinders,  and the  inner  one is  rotating  with an  angular  velocity  omega,  determine  the
velocity for the tangential laminar flow, right? Now, the inner one is rotating and the outer
one is fixed, so this outer cylinder is stationary and inner one is rotating rather with an
angular velocity of omega, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 2:59) 
And, we kept that R and KR as in the 1st case that, this is R and this is kR, right. If you keep
them like that then, we can say that, the problem can be defined like this. We have one inner
cylinder, we have one outer cylinder, and this is the center, right. This outer cylinder is fixed
and the inner cylinder is rotating with an angular velocity of omega, right. And we get as
earlier the same, this is R and this is kR that is k is multiple of more than one, right. So, thatkR is greater than R right? So, we take this problem and then solve. So, like the previous one,
on earlier cases, if we use the Navier-Stokes Equation, right. 
So, we can write, and here also we have number 1 steady state number, number 2, laminar
flow, number 3, incompressible fluid, and of course, others like flow is fully developed.
There is no end effect. All these are also there, right. So, we can write from the Navier-Stokes
Equation, right, the same as earlier, right. From the given problem, by physical understanding
of the problem, we can write, v r is equal to vz is equal to 0 and del v theta del theta is also 0.
That means, this is not changing with the theta, right. 
So, if that be true, then, this is the understanding of the problem. We can write and from the
Navier-Stokes Equations we can write, rho v theta square by r, this is equal to minus del p del r,
right? This was our 1st equation, 2nd equation, we can write that, 0 is equal to del del r of one
by r del del r of r v theta right. So, this was our 2nd equation and the 3rd equation, we can write, 0
is equal to minus del p del z plus rho g z, right. Now, from these 3 questions, since we need the
solution of vtheta. 
(Refer Slide Time: 7:17) 
So, this equation we take, then we can lead to the solution, and that equation, if we rewrite,
we can write, del del r of one by r del del r of r v theta, this is equal to 0, right, and we also
wrote that on first integration, we write that on first integration, we write, 1 by r del del r of r
Vtheta, right. This is equal to A. On simplification, we write del del r of r V theta is equal to A r,
right. On 2nd integration we will write, again integrating, on 2nd integration we can write that r
Vtheta is equal to A r square by 2 plus b or Vtheta is equal to A r square or r square goes out A
by 2 r plus B by r. 
So, again up to this i.e., the equation A, the solution remains identical. Where, we are seeing
the  change?  The  changes  are  in  the  boundary  conditions,  because  our  boundaries  are
changing,  right,  either  with  the  diameter  or radii  or with the  physical  condition  of the
problem. They are changing, so, boundary conditions are changing. So, this is again nothing
but a change of the boundary conditions, right. 
So, we write the boundary condition 1, what is given, we have been given, said that the inner
cylinder is rotating and the outer cylinder is fixed right. So, we have that R is equal to R and
that R is equal to kR, two different conditions. So, what are those 2 different conditions? One,
if we write that r is equal to kR v theta is equal to 0, because this outer cylinder is fixed, right.
Outer cylinder is fixed, so, V theta is equal to 0 and r is equal to kR, right. So, r is equal to kR
vtheta is equal 0. This is boundary one, and boundary 2 is r is equal to, sorry, that is v theta is
omega r, vtheta is omega r at r is equal to, sorry, at r is equal capital R, right, so, these are the 2
boundaries we have to substitute, right? 
These other 2 boundaries, we have to substitute and when we are substituting them then we
see that the first one at r is equal to kR, v theta is equal to 0, we put this in equation 1, or A, ifwe put vtheta is equal to 0 at r is equal to kR, we get what, so, v theta is 0, r is kR. So, it is AkR by
2 plus B by kR right. So, this is say equation B and second equation is v theta is omega R at r is
equal to kR, so, we right here again from equation A we get that v theta is equal to omega R
right at r is equal to capital R so it is AR divided by 2 plus B by R, right. So, again by
substituting one this is C. So, by substituting one i.e., B. From B we can write, B by kR is
equal to minus AkR by 2, or we can write B by r is equal to minus A K square R by 2. 
So, if we substitute this B by R, right. If we substitute this B by R into C, we can write, from
equation C that omega R is equal to AR by 2 plus B by R has become minus A k square R by
2, right, or, we can write omega R is equal to AR by 2 minus Ak square R by 2, right. So, this
on simplification, we can write, A. If we take out, or, AR also, if we take out, then we can
write this is 1 by 2 minus this is k square by 2 is equal to AR into 1 minus k square by 2,
right. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:05) 
So, we can write from there that omega R is equal to AR into 1 minus k square by 2 or A is
equal to omega or, 2 omega by 1 minus k square. So if A is equal 2 omega 1 minus K square.
So, this is relation E, we can write from the other one relation B. From equation B we can
write, B by R is equal to minus A k square R by 2, right, is equal to, if we write, k value, so, it
is B by R is equal to A, is minus 2 omega by 1 minus k square. This is one into k square R by
2, right. So, vtheta equals to minus 2 omega k square this R into R goes R square by 2 into 1
minus k square right. So, if you substitute A and B in the original equation i.e., either B or C
right. 
So, if we substitute them in B, we have 0 is equal to AkR by 2 plus B by kR right. So, this is
equal to value of A. We know, this is 2 omega by 1 minus k square, right, and kR by 2, right,
This is minus, we are substituting B by kR right, so, this is 1 by kR, we will write afterwards.
So, B is equal to minus 2 omega k square R square divided by 2 into 1 minus k square. So,
this is of course, 2 2, goes out. So, we could write it, minus omega k square R square by 1
minus k square, this is for B, So, we substitute this 2, and we can re-write, This is equal to 2
omega kR omega kR, So this 2 and this 2 goes out, So this 2 also was not there so 1 minus k
square right, omega kR by 1 minus k square this is minus so this is omega k square R square
by 1 minus k square right. 
So, if that is true we can write this substitution we should have done not here at we should
have done at this equation A from equation A sorry this should not have been otherwise v theta
is not coming. vtheta is AR by 2 plus B by R, right. So, here we are substituting A as 2 omega
by 1 minus K square into 2. So, this 2 this 2 goes out, This is the AR by 2 plus b or 1 by r intominus 2 omega k square R square divided by 2 this 2. Of course, goes out, So, one minus k
square right. 
So, we can write now that omega by 1 minus k square minus 1 by r right. AR by 2. So, it was
2, omega into R right, So, omega R by 1 minus k square 1 by r minus and this is omega k
square R square by 1 minus k square right. So, this is the v theta which of course, we can further
simplify, as omega if we take common then 1 r by 1 minus k square minus omega is out so k
square R square divided by R into 1 minus k square, right. So, this is the solution right, so, if
we look at then this should be the solution. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:40) 
Let us look into in the final solution, which, we have gotten on the same way on the same
thing, we have done, you see boundary condition, was v theta is equal to 0 with v theta is equal to
0 at r is equal kR, right and v theta is omega R at r is equal to R right v theta is omega R at r is
equal to R, this was our v theta is 0 at r is equal to kR and v theta is equal to omega R at r is equal
to R, right. So, if we do that we got A is equal to C. We got A is equal to here, we got A is
equal to 2 omega by 1 minus k square right, and B, we got is equal to minus omega kR square
omega k square R square by 1 minus k square. 
That is true and we got v theta is equal to ultimately this omega divided by omega, okay, omega.
We can also write in this form, this is equal to omega by k square minus 1 if we take common
from here, then, k square minus 1. So, 1 negative, we have taken inside right, so, that,
becomes equal to this, into first term is this one, So, kR square divided by this R remains
there right and this R, then, goes there, minus R, So, omega by k square minus 1 into k square
kR whole square by R minus r. (Refer Slide Time: 24:18) 
This, from and this form are same. So, we can say we have done the right thing. Only the
thing which is required, which you need to do here in between, if you look at the solutions,
the same solution, original, which we have started with, we have done up to this the same
right, then we have changed the boundary, right. So, boundary was originally your v theta is 0 at
r is equal to R and v theta is equal to omega kR at r is equal to kR. Here, it is getting changed
that vtheta is zero at r is equal to kR and v theta is equal to omega R at r is equal to capital R, So,
this change. We have to do and then as we have shown the solutions here, so, in that way if
you go and solve I hope you will get the same. 
Please do the required changes please do the required changes in the in the in the in the
slides, okay. Let us also, since, we can do it, let us look into this, and do that boundary
condition was vtheta was equal to 0 at r is equal to kR and we can write v theta is equal to omega
R at r is equal to R right. In our new system, here as we have seen this is omega R and kR,
right, so at r is equal to R this v theta is equal to this is fixed. 
So, at r is equal to R this is v theta is omega R and at r is equal to kR, v theta is 0 and this now if
we substitute them, then we can write that in the 1st one 0 is equal to here right 0 is equal to A
into R by 2 plus B by r. This v theta goes to 0 at r is equal to kR, then this should be 0 is equal to
A kR by 2 and this is B by kR right, and in the second case omega R is equal to AR by 2 and
B by R, right. So from there the same, this of course repeat so hopefully we can delete this. 
Okay, so from there, we on simplification we do not write on these because we have shown
you there we can write simply that what is A, so A has come 2 omega by 1 minus k square 2
omega by 1 minus k square. This is 1 minus k square, right. So, we put here A square 1 minus
k square right, and B is equal to but, it is also required, and B is equal to we have A obtained
here as you see that v was this minus omega k square minus omega into k into R whole square
that is much easier and better. (Refer Slide Time: 26:29) 
k into omega square right, and this divided by, it was 1 minus k square, right, so that k square
is this 1 minus k square, yeah. So, if that be true and then the final equation which we got for
vtheta was this vtheta was omega by k square minus 1 omega by k square minus 1 k square minus
1 right, times if it take this times kR square by r, kR square square by r minus r, right. 
So, this was our solution, so we got it so we have corrected also, so, as we requested, in the
previous class in the previous problem that we have done on the paper but corresponding
slides were not properly corrected, and we requested you that if you go through it to that slide
get that thing connected and because we have done on the paper. Here, we have done both on
the paper as well as on the slides. So, this is the final vtheta expression that vtheta is equal to
omega by k square minus 1 into kR square by 2 by R square by r minus r. So, hopefully we
have seen it and that is the final. Thank you. 