Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering 
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 19
Module 4
Flow of film or film flow
Yeah, so, in continuity to the last class or previous class, where, we were discussing about the
shell momentum balance of the of the film flowing over an inclined surface and this application
also we had said, say, like concentration of say, food material in from low concentration to high
concentration, over the heating surface, and this heating surface, also we said, can be totally
vertical, or also can be horizontal, but we have started, we have taken, an angle of beta, right?
With the reason that what is the angle beta, and then, we have developed the basic, we assumed
something and then, on those assumptions, we have developed the equations for momentum in
and momentum out, both by convective transfer as well as the molecular transport mode, right? 
So, let us start then from there, and then, since, we also said, it is the steady state so, the
convective momentum that comes out because it is a steady state, so at the surface, we both the
in and out will become same, and in that cas,e that cancels out, so only the molecular transport
will remain. 
(Refer Slide Time: 2:06) 
So, let us look into that, so, then, it becomes L w, from the previous equation, L w Tau xz at the
face x, minus L w Tau xz at the face x plus delta x plus rho g x cos beta into del x L w, this is equal
to 0, that becomes by putting the individual into the governing equation, right? That governing equation, we said, the rate of momentum in minus rate of momentum out plus
sum of the forces acting is equal to rate of momentum accumulation, right? So, we have taken
that steady state, so accumulation is not there, and also we have stated that steady state, so,
momentum in by convection, momentum out by convection becomes identical, and so, that also
goes out. So, now, if we divide, dividing with delta x L w, both the sides, right? And we make
that Tauxz at x plus delta x minus Tau xz at x over delta x. This is equal to rho g x, because, this
minus this divided by delta x will make it a differential, so, that is why, there is a negative sign
and this negative sign on this side will make that both thing on the other side.
So, this negative will go to that, this remains, so, this rho g x becomes positive and this is also
positive. Now, if we put limit delta x tends to 0, from the definition of the derivative, we can tell
that Tauxz del del x of Tauxz is equal to rho gx, right, into Cos beta, right? rho del del x of Tau xz is
equal to rho gx Cos beta, right, So, on integrating this, we can say that Tau xz that becomes equal
to rho gx Cos beta into x plus C 1, right, rho gx into Cos beta into x plus C 1, integration constant.
Now, to find out the integration constant, we can now say, at boundary condition, at x is equal to
0 Tauxz is equal to 0, so that C 1 becomes equals to 0; at x equals to 0, tau xz is 0. Now, you
remember, we had taken this to horizontal solid board, or solid material, on which, the film was
there, we have taken the volume element like that, and we said this was the surface, this was the
liquid, which was on the solid surface, and this was the open surface which was the liquid gas
interface, right? 
This was the liquid solid interface, this was liquid gas interface, and we took our coordinate to be
here, that, this is x, this is y, and this is z, whatever, right? So, we are concerned with this, then,
Tauxz is like that. So, we can write that at x equals to 0, so here that Tau xz equals to 0, and that is
why it is C1 equals to 0, right? So, we can write then Tau xz equals to rho gx into x Cos beta, right?
Or, similarly, Tauxz equals to minus mu del v z del x equals to rho g x x Cos beta, right? Or, we can
write, this term Tou xz is del  del x of vz, so, we can say that del del x of v z, so we can say that del
vz del x equals to minus rho g x x Cos beta by mu, right? 
So, this on integration, we can write v z is equal to minus rho g x Cos beta into x square by 2 mu
plus C2, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 8:23) So, if that be true, then we can say that by putting the boundary conditions, that at x is equal to
delta, right, vz is equal to 0, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 8:45) 
Now at x is equal to delta means, if you remember, we had said that the thickness of this film is
delta. So, we started from here this is the coordinate point, so at x is equal to delta this is the
open liquid gas interface, right? So, at x is equal to delta, v z is equal to 0, why? 
(Refer Slide Time: 9:22) That was liquid solid interface, and this was liquid gas interface, this is liquid solid interface, so,
our point was liquid gas interface. It is the 0th, so, delta is this, so, delta means we have liquid
solid interface. So, at the liquid solid interface, solid liquid is clinging to the surface so v z
becomes equal to 0. So, if that be true, we can write C 2 is equal to rho gx delta square Cos beta
over 2 mu, right? Or, v z is equal to rho gx Cos beta into delta square minus x square by 2 mu
right? Or, vz we can write, is equal to rho g x into x into rho gx into delta square into x Cos beta by
2 mu into 1 minus x by delta whole square, right? 
Now, vmax or v equals to vmax, that can be, when x is equal to 0, right? When x is equal to 0 for
understanding, this was the open surface, this was a solid surface, we started our x this way so
this is 0, x is equal to 0, this is another, this is third direction, so, in that case that x is equal to 0
means this is the open, that is the gas liquid interface. So, v becomes v max at x is equal to 0,
therefore, vmax can be written as rho g x delta square Cos beta by 2 mu. This is the maximum
velocity.
So, average velocity or v average, this can be written as, again we write that between 0 to w between
0 to delta, right? vz dx dy over integral of 0 to w, 0 to delta dx dy, right? This means this is equal
to 1 by delta, right? 0 to delta, 0 to delta v z dx, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:47) vz, already we have found out, and this can be written as equal to rho g x delta square Cos beta by
2 mu into 0 to 1, 1 minus x by delta whole square d of x by delta, right? So, that is equal to rho g x
delta square Cos beta by 3 mu.
So, average velocity is rho g x delta square into Cos beta by 3 mu, right? So, this is v average. So, vmax
we have seen, vaverage we have seen. Now, volumetric flow rate, so, volumetric flow rate or Q, this
can be written as 0 to w 0 to delta v z into area dx dy, this is equal to w delta v z average, that is
equal to rho w gx rather, delta w delta square Cos beta over 3 mu, right? This is the volumetric
flow rate, i.e., either w delta v z average, or rho gx w delta cube Cos beta by 3 mu, right? 
So, vaverage was rho gx delta square Cos beta by 3 mu, volumetric flow rate is rho g x w delta cube
Cos beta by 3 mu, then the film thickness delta, this can be found out from the volumetric flow
rate or average velocity, whatever, the way we want. So, this can be written as cube root of 3 mu
vz average over rho g x Cos beta, right? 
So, under cube root of 3 mu Q, is the volumetric flow rate by rho g x w Cos beta, right? This also
can be written, in terms of cube root of 3 mu m dot over rho square g x Cos beta, right? So, this is
the film thickness, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:10) Then, we also look into what is the force that is, z component of the force F of the fluid on the
surface, or it can be written as F z is equal to 0 to L, 0 to w Tau xz at x is equal to delta dy dz. This
is 0 to L, 0 to w minus mu dv z dx at x is equal to delta dy dz. This can be written is equal to L w
into minus mu into minus rho g x Cos beta into delta over mu, so, this on simplification can be
written, rho gx delta L w Cos beta, right? This is known as the z component of the weight of the
entire fluid in the film, right? So, this is the z component of the entire film, right? So, some more
things which we need to know are like this Reynolds number.
So, Reynolds number for the film flow, we can write, N Re film that is equal to 4 delta v average into
rho by mu; 4 delta v average rho by mu, right? Instead of D v average rho by mu, that is for the pipe
flow; D vaverage rho by mu, here we can say it is 4 delta v average rho by mu, that is the film Reynolds
number. Now, for films Reynolds number there is one good thing that, unlike the pipe flow
Reynolds number, where it was 2100, and 2100 and 10 to the power 4, that is, at 2100 and 4000
above.
So, this can be very smaller in terms of film because, for film, you have different thing, which is
having low Reynolds number for both laminar and the turbulent. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:58)For  laminar  flow  without  rippling,  now, for  this,  rippling  means,  what  we  understand  by
rippling? I give you a simple example that, during your childhood, you must have played with
this, that you stayed on the bank of may be a river or a pound or whatever, right? 
So, say, on the bank of a pound, on the side of the pound, you threw a stone, right? Inside the
pond, there was water, right? After that, there was a wave kind of thing which was generated,
right? This kind of situation is known as the rippling, right? There is no turbulence, we have
thrown a simple stone, and the stone created a wavy pattern in the fluid, and this is you known as
rippling and this is very useful, when it is used in the falling film or similar to that.
So, this you have to keep in mind that rippling, without rippling, and with rippling, means there
is a wavy form in the flow and then that can be said as to be equal to the rippling. (Refer Slide Time: 22:51) 
So, laminar flow without rippling in that case, Reynolds number becomes less than 4 to 25. So,
laminar flow without rippling is Reynolds number without rippling is less than between 4 to 25.
Then, laminar flow with rippling, that can be, between 4 to 25 less tan Reynolds number less
than 1000 to 2000. It is quite big number 1000 to 2000, and turbulent flow can be between or
greater than 1000 to 2000, right? 
So,  you  see  that  film  Reynolds  number,  film  Reynolds  number,  your  definition,  or  your
expression is different than that of the flow through pipe, right? So, subsequently, you will also
see this is also different, when it is flowing through a very small orifice, right? The one which we
had shown as the two plates, similar to that, if you have a small hole, a small opening through
that when it is being flown then it is called that flow through the slit, right? 
And there you will see that this is not so easy, this is not, what I say, not so easy means, this is
difficult, different than that of the falling film, and the flow through the pipe. So, Reynolds
number expressions are quite different, for three types of this kind of flow, one is for the pipe
flow, and another is for the film flow, and third is for the flow though the slit. Of course, flow
through the slit, we have not done, but Reynolds number through the pipe flow we have done
that is D v rho by mu, right? 
Whereas, the Reynolds number through this film, we have shown that to be equal to 4 delta
vaverage rho by mu, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:47)4 delta vaverage rho by mu, and the values are also quite different, and our nature is also different.
In this case, we have seen that, it has rippling, and we have also said the meaning of the rippling
is the similar one which you have experienced during your childhood, throwing a stone on to the
pound that created a wave, this kind of wave formation is known as the ripple formation, right? (Refer Slide Time: 26:31)
So, rippling, like this, right? So this is like that, and when it is like this, then we call it to be
rippling, so without rippling between 4 to 25, with rippling it is between 4 to 25 and 1000 to
2000, and if it is with rippling other than turbulent flow then it is between 4 to 25 and 1000 to
2000. So, film flow, that is also very important, in terms of processing, in terms of heat transfer,
in terms of fluid flow, because this is really a commercial aspect, which it has wide application.
So, falling film, we have to also develop very accurately, or these expressions, you have to
develop and here we have assumed that this fluid was clinging to the surface and the free flow or
rather free end that was the interface between the gas and liquid or gas and fluid, that was also
where the Tau was 0 and we found out the expressions for them, right? So, keep in mind and do
this practice with derivation of the film flow, thank you. 
 
 