Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering 
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 18
Module 4
Flow through flat and parallel plates
Okay, if we remember that in the previous class we had given a problem, and we asked that you
try, and if you cannot do this, then, we will do that in this class. So, let us see whether you are
able to solve that or not, okay. 
(Refer Slide Time: 0:57)
So, yeah, this was the problem, which we had given you that A fluid of constant density is
flowing in laminar flow at steady state in the horizontal x direction and between two flat and
parallel plates, the distance between the two plates in the vertical z direction is said 2 z 0. Using
shell momentum balance, derive the equation for the profile within this fluid, right? 
So, that means, say, a fluid of constant density is flowing in laminar flow at steady state in the
horizontal x direction, so if we have the plates like this, if we have the plates like this, right? 2
plates like this, if we have, then, these two plates, right? One over the other, these two plates the
fluid is flowing within this, and we have to find out the profile, right? Derive the equation for the
profile within this fluid, this we have to get it. (Refer Slide Time: 2:18) 
Now, this if we draw this that as we showed you  on paper like this, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 2:43) 
And the other one, as said like this okay, and if we have say, this is y direction, this is x direction
and this is z direction, right? So x, y and z, and the flow is taking place like this, the flow is
taking place like this, the distance between these two plates are say 2 z 0. So, this was our
problem, which we had asked to solve. So, it is flowing along like this, right? Between these two
plates, now, these two plates as small as we can think of. That means, there are the two plates and
say one over other like this, and the fluid is flowing below this in this direction. So, this we had
taken x as this y as this direction and z is the gap between the two, right? So, if we take this kind of solution, then, we assume here again number 1, the flow is steady;
number 2, the flow is laminar, right? So, this assumptions we make that flow is steady, flow is
laminar, if that be true, then from the physical understanding of the problem, we can then say
that vy is equal to vz is equal to 0 because, flow is taking only in the x direction, right? So, there
is no flow in the y direction, there is no flow in the vertical z direction.
If that be true, if there is no flow in the horizontal y and vertical z direction, only in the x
direction, because, it is steady, because it is laminar, right? So, if that be true, then v y is equal to
vz is equal to 0, and there is no del v x del x present, i.e., del v x del x is equal to 0, and we simply
for all practical purposes, say, that g x is equal to 0, because that is in the x direction is the flow.
So, gx also we can assume to be equal to 0. So, we can write, del del P del x, that is equal to rho
gx plus mu del 2 vx del x square, right? 
And since gx is equal to 0, we can write, del P del x is equal to mu del 2 v x del x square, right?
Because, gx we have assumed to be equal to 0, right? And we said in the beginning that this
distance, as small as we can think, if that be true, then also, no, there is a proper definition of the
physical problem, is that, this distance is as small as we can think of, right? It being very small,
is 2 z0, we can say that it is so. Then, we can say del P del x is mu del 2 v x del x square which is
nothing but a constant, right? 
So, we can now integrate it and say, del v x del x, this is equal to 0, right? Because, del P del x is
constant, so del vx del x is equal to 0 and this is true at z is equal to 0. For the symmetry, del v x
del x is 0 at z is equal to 0, because this is 2 z 0, so, you can tell that, it is 1 z 0 and another is
another z0, from the center, right? So, this we can say that 1 is z 0 and the other is another z 0 from
the symmetry. So, del v x del x is equal to 0 at z is equal to 0, right? So, then, we can also write
del vx del z, it was del 2v x del z square, right? del 2 v x del z square, then del v x del z, this is equal
to 1 by mu del P del x into z, right? (Refer Slide Time: 9:57) 
So, on integration we can say that v x is equal to 1 by 2 mu del P del x z square plus C, that is
constant. So, we can now put the boundary condition that is v x is equal to 0 at z is equal to plus
minus z0, right? So you can write C is equal to minus 1 by 2 mu del p del x z 0 square or, you can
say vx is equal to 1 by 2 mu del P del x z square minus z 0 square, right? 
So, this way we can easily find out some or other problem, which we come across and say this is
the velocity profile for v x 1 by 2 mu del P del x z square minus z 0 square, right? Then, now, let us
move to some other situation, other situation in the sense, other problem. In this manner, we have
problem, now, let us say a vertical or horizontal calandria, you know calandria? Calandria is
normally said for heat transfer where evaporators or in heat exchangers, liquid films are being
concentrated, right? 
So, you have a concentration of one say, food material, or, a chemical solution, whatever, so, one
solution  you have  which  has  one concentration  and  you  want  to  concentrate  it  to  another
concentrated one, right? So, say, from 60 percent to 80 percent you want to concentrate, or 60
percent to 90 percent you want to concentrate in a film. So, what you will do, this a one side, say,
if you take this as a heat exchanger, so one side you will make this, like this one is the film,
which is flowing and in another side is your heating medium.
So, if that be done, that one side is film and another side is the heating medium, then while this
fluid is falling from here to here, by the time it falls from there to there, it will get concentrated,
right? Now, for that as far as heat transfer is concerned, you have to consider heat transfer, but,
for the flow of the fluid, how the fluid will behave, what is the velocity profile, what is the stressprofile, shear stress profile, that if we want to know then, you have to consider it, right, from the
beginning, it may be a vertical film, or vertical fall or vertical heating medium or it can be an
inclined one.
So, depending on or, which can be made, depending on the inclination angle, it can be made
vertical or horizontal, right? So, let us now talk about that. It may take, it may not be possible to
complete in one class, but okay, if required, we can carry over to the next class, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:35) 
So, let us now take here one such situation, say, we have one film we have one solid heating
surface, or solid heating surface like this on which a film is there. Now, this film, we are
assuming it to be a little expanded or in a microscopic view or enlarged view, rather, if we look
into an enlarged view, then, so, we take a volume element, here also we will do the mass balance
or momentum balance, rather, that momentum balance on the volume element. This volume
element, what we are looking into that, we have here say x, y and z, three coordinates if we are
talking about, right? 
And if this is the length, right? And if we say that okay, from here, from here, right? So, this is
the end effect, without the end effect, we have, so, you remember earlier, we had said the end
effect, right? We take the liquid where there is no end effect, right? And fluid is flowing this way
and we do the momentum balance, right? So, here momentum flows by convection, this is out,
similarly momentum flow by convection this is in, right? 
So, in minus out is like that, and momentum flow by molecular transport, so, momentum flow by
molecular transport, that we can say this is working here, okay, on the fluid, right? Okay, and sayafterwards, when we will look at momentum flux distribution, how it is, it will look this, right? It
will look like this momentum flux distribution and if we look how the velocity would like, so, it
will look like this. This is the solid surface, this is the open surface that this is the film, this is the
film, which is there or this is the film which is there, right? 
So, this film is moving from this angle, right? Let, the angle be beta. Let the angle be beta like
this, right? So, we can do and this length we have said, okay, now, the volume element, which we
are taking is this, as delta x, right? And this, we have taken, and if the thickness of the film is del,
right? So, we have del x as 1 and the other one del, other one is taken as L, and third one may be
w, right? So, in this, then some assumptions, are there, which we must know. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:11) 
So, this is a typical such kind of thing is actual. You see that fluid is flowing, this is absolutely, of
course, vertical, so, a film is falling here and this film, by that time it comes to the other end is
getting evaporated and getting concentrated, right? So, one is heating medium and the other is
the film, which is to be concentrated, right? So, this type of things are called calandria and
through which we are getting things evaporated, okay.
Now, we will do the shell momentum balance, and for that, we need the assumptions to be also
kept in mind. Now, these assumptions obviously are very pertinent, such that we can we actually
visualize the problem described. Now, the problem described is that we have a vertical plane, we
have a vertical heating medium and this is inclined, the inclination angle is beta, and we have
taken a volume element, where it is delta x, is the thickness, right? Of the film, which we are
doing the shell momentum balance, that shell thickness is delta x, right? We have shown that thelength is L, and the other third z direction, that can be, as may be w or width, or, whatever
corresponding side, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:01) 
So, we need certain assumptions to be kept in mind, and those assumptions are like this that a
solid fluid interface, and fluid velocity is at the solid fluid interface, fluid velocity is the velocity
with which the surface itself is moving, right? This, we have said earlier also that the surface on
which the fluid is moving, if the surface is the surface, is stick or surface is fixed, then this fluid
surface is also sticking or clinging to the surface of the solid, so that solid fluid interface, this
fluid is clinging and this is called that it is attaining the velocity of the solid since the solid is not
moving, so we can say that, the fluid is clinging to the solid, and that is what we have assumed
first, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:09)(Refer Slide Time: 23:15)
Then, at liquid gas interface, now liquid gas interface is this one, right? Liquid gas interface is
this one, this is the liquid and above which is the gas, this is the solid we said, right? This is the
fluid or liquid, which is getting heated or concentrated. (Refer Slide Time: 23:33) 
So, at liquid gas interface, velocity gradient, that is the momentum flux, in the liquid face is
assumed to be 0, at this point the velocity, the velocity gradient at this point, i.e., momentum flux
in this face is liquid face is assumed to be 0. And at the liquid-liquid interface, momentum flux,
perpendicular to the interface and the velocity are continuous across the interface. So, these three
assumptions, we are setting in the beginning so that subsequently, when we will do the analysis,
that time, we have no problem. 
So, I repeat the assumptions once more. That, for the shell momentum balance for falling film we
assume at solid fluid interface fluid velocity is the velocity with which the surface itself is
moving. This means the fluid clings to the surface, solid surface with which it is in contact. At
liquid gas interface, velocity gradient, i.e., momentum flux, in the liquid face is assumed to be 0,
and at liquid-liquid interface, momentum flux is perpendicular to the interface, and the velocity
are continuous across the interface, right? (Refer Slide Time: 25:36) 
Now, as earlier, we have seen, we have done the shell momentum balance, for doing such kind of
momentum analysis, and here also, we will do the shell momentum balance, and in that we can
say the governing equation is, rate of momentum in minus rate of momentum out plus sum of the
forces acting on the volume element, this is equal to rate of momentum accumulation, right? 
So, this general governing equation is applicable for momentum balance applications, right? So,
in that case we can say that rate of z momentum in by convection is equal to w times delta x
times vz into rho vz at z is equal to 0, rate of z momentum in by convection is equal to w times
delta x times vz into rho vz at z is equal to L, right? This is out not in was there this is momentum
out and rate of momentum in by molecular transport, this is equal to L into w into Tau xz at the
face x and rate of momentum out by molecular transport that is equal to L w Tau xz at the face x
plus delta x, right? 
And some more, gravity acting on the fluid is equal to L w delta x times rho g Cos beta, right? L
w delta x that is the volume element, into rho, whose, volume is g Cos beta, right, is the gravity
acting on this, right?(Refer Slide Time: 29:27)
Now, if this is understood, I hope with this beginning, we will move for what to do the next but,
before that, let us also have a look, so that in the next time we do not have to do so. This is the
actual, which we have taken the volume element like this, thickness we have taken delta x, z
direction is this perpendicular, this direction is y which we have taken as w, right? 
So, our volume element has become w into L into delta x, right? So, this our volume element has
become and we are doing shell momentum balance, across this volume element, right? So, we
stop it today here. Next class we will do, but keep in mind that this thing we are not going to do
again, right? So, next time we will do the subsequent, we have already done, what is momentum
out, molecular momentum and convective momentum in and out and the gravitational force
acting on it, that we have shown, right? And, we have also assumed it to be a steady flow, steady
state, so that part we will keep in mind, thank you. 