Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering 
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 12
Module 3
Application of Navier Stoke’s equation for finding out viscosity (Part 3) 
You remember that, we have been doing this combination of boundary conditions, and also the
implication of the different conditions of the cylinders. We have two cylinders, one is fixed, and
other is rotating, right? So, under that situation, what will happen, that we are observing, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 1:04)
And,  you  can  also  try  with  this,  that,  let  us  see  the  problem  was  like  this  that,  in  an
incompressible fluid is flowing between two vertical coaxial cylinders and the inner one is
rotating with an angular velocity omega, determine the velocity for the tangential laminar flow.
So, repeat, if an incompressible fluid is flowing between two vertical coaxial cylinders and the
inner one is rotating with an angular velocity omega, determine the velocity for the tangential
laminar flow, right? (Refer Slide Time: 1:46)
So, as usual, we have seen that the flow is steady, then the flow is laminar and the fluid is
incompressible. These are the three given conditions, of course, the others like that flow is fully
developed. There is no end effect. All these are also there, right? Then, we said that, we have two
coaxial cylinders like this, right? And the inner cylinder is rotating with an angular velocity
omega, right? Of course, since, doing it on the computer online, omega writing is little difficult,
in many cases earlier also we have replaced this omega with w, right? 
So that, you change or you keep in your mind and the outer one is fixed or not rotating, right? (Refer Slide Time: 3:57)
So, outer cylinder is fixed, or, we can say that, this is fixed, okay. So, like this that outer cylinder
is stationary and inner cylinder is rotating and there is a velocity profile within as it is v theta is a
function of r, right? And, in earlier case, if you remember, we have done this problem with inner
one is R and outer one is kR. Now, if we do the reverse, that the inner one is kR and the outer
one is R, so, what will be the change in the expression, right? So, that is our fundamental thing
which we are repeatedly showing you. So, there you have all sort of problem solved.
So, it can have, four combinations, one inner cylinder fixed, outer cylinder rotating in two
conditions  inner cylinder  fixed outer cylinder  rotating,  there  inner  cylinder  is  R  and outer
cylinder is kR or inner cylinder is kR and outer cylinder is R, or inner cylinder is rotating and
outer cylinder is stationary. Again, there with inner cylinder R and outer cylinder kR, or, inner
cylinder kR, and outer cylinder R. In all the four cases, you can see the expression for the
velocity is all to be the different, right? That thing we have to do.
So, of course, this thing I am doing it online, because earlier I have also not checked it, what will
be the final expression, hopefully, we will not do anything wrong, and if there be then you please
bring to my notice, when you will go through and we will also have it counter checked. But,
hopefully, we will proceed in the right way as we are proceeding, and this we will be doing
online. So, when, we are doing  it, then  from the  Navier-Stokes  equations,  from the  given
problem, again we can write that v r is equal to vz is equals to 0, this is 1, and del v theta del theta is
equal to 0, that is there is no velocity component in the theta direction, there is no change invelocity vtheta in the theta direction, that is why del v theta del theta 0. Why we kept it like that?
Because, we said that the velocity is laminar, right? 
So, flow is laminar, so, if the flow is laminar, so, there will be no rippling, there will be no
mixing, all these will not be there. So, there will be no velocity component in the theta direction
in the z direction also, right? So, v theta is a function of r only like this, right? v theta is a function of r.
So, if that be true, if this is be true, then as usual, as we have done in earlier cases, so, from the
first equation of Navier-Stokes equations, first we can write minus rho v theta square by r this is
equal to minus del p del r, right? 
This is equation number 1, then similarly we can write on the other, i.e., 0 is equal to del del r of
1 by r del del r of r v theta, right? So, this, we have done earlier also, second, and the third one are 0
is equal to del p del z with negative plus rho g z, right? And, as usual we have done in the earlier
cases  also  that,  we  need  one  unknown that  is  v theta, so,  one  equation  is  good enough  and
obviously, we also said that the equation, out of the three, which one you will pick up.
So, depending on which variable you were solving, in this case it is the tangential velocity, so the
velocity component, we will be taking. Had it been that pressure, then we would have taken
some other, we would have taken some other variable. So, in this case, it is said that we have to
find out the tangential laminar velocity, what it is, right? So, one unknown so one equation is
good enough to solve this, out of these three equations. So, which, what, we pick up? The one,
which will obviously lead to the solution, that, in this case, as you see, out of all these three
equations, the second one has the velocity component.
So, vtheta in the first one is also there, but there pressure terms are also there. So, the equation is
little complicated and obviously with that, we until some other conditions are same, we are not
able to find out, because del p del r, until we know, we cannot say what is the v theta and del p del r
is not spelt out here, right? So, in cases when del p del r will be spelt out, that, this is that, then,
you can also try with that, or, if you have to find out, given the velocity profile, what is the del p
del r, you can also find out from there. So, depending on the problem, which you are solving or,
which you are handling, right? (Refer Slide Time: 11:21)
So, here we, then, again, take this second sub equation, and that second equation is 0 is equal to
del del r of 1 by r del del r of r v theta and this, if we solve, we get on first integration, we get 1 by r
del del r of r vtheta, right? And, this is equal to integral constant A, which on rearrangement, we
can write del del r of r v theta is equal to A r, and on second integration we can write this as, r v theta
is equal to A r square by 2 plus new integration constant B. So, which on simplification we can
write, vtheta is equal to A r by 2 plus B by r, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:57)
So, this we take as equation “A”, right? So we are then taking as equation “A” as v theta is equal to
A r by 2 plus B by r, right? Now, the boundary condition is required. So, this is the outer, this is
the inner, this is the center, so, we said that the inner radius is kR and the outer radius is R, right?
If, inner radius is kR, and outer radius is R, and we said that, this inner one is rotating with an
angular velocity of omega and outer one is stationary, right? Then, sorry, then, the boundary
condition we can write that, boundary condition 1 is the outer one is fixed, right? 
So, that means, vtheta is equal to 0, right? That, you remember, we said that, the fluid which is
clinging to the surface, if the surface is moving then the fluid is also moving. But, if the surface
is at rest, or in stationary condition, then the velocity at that surface is 0, right? So, this is what
we said during clinging, right? It is called clinging on the stationary surface. So, the velocity
component there also is stationary.
So, that is why vtheta is 0 and vtheta  is 0, when at r is equal to capital R, right? This is boundary 1,
and boundary 2, we can write v theta is equal to omega kR, right? Omega kR at r is equal to kR,
right? So, if these are, the two boundaries then, we can substitute them in this equation which we
wrote as to be equal to say A. Then, from equation “A”, we can write that v theta is equal to 0. So, 0
is equal to at R. So, AR by 2 plus B by r, right? From there, we can simplify, AR by 2 is equal to
B by r, right? With a negative or we can write A is equal to minus 2 B divided by r square, right?
A is equal to minus 2 B by r square. 
So, this is A, we write it to be equation “B”, right? Then, from the second boundary this was
probably first boundary, so, from the second boundary, we write v theta is omega kR at r is equal to
kR. So, vtheta is omega kR at r is equal to kR.  So, A kR by 2 plus B by kR. Now, A we havealready found out is to be minus 2 B by r square. So, we can write, this to be A equal to minus 2
B by r square. So, 2 B by r square into kR by 2 plus B by kR is equal to omega kR.
So, this we can simplify by taking B as common. So, B, if we take common, then we get this r
square this r that goes out. So, this 2 and this 2 goes out. So, we get k by r, right? Now, is there
any negative problem? Yes, A is equal to minus of that, so, it was A minus, right? So, minus there
was in “A”. This A is minus 2 B by r square so when you substitute A, so, it is minus 2 B by r
square into kR. So, this we write with the second bracket, then, it becomes confusion less or no
confusion, rather.
So, B if we take common then r square r goes out, 2, 2 goes out, then it remains B,  k by r minus
plus B has been taken out, 1 by kR, right? So, this on simplification, we can write B into 1 by kR
minus k by r, right? So, this on again further simplification, we can write, this kR. So, 1 minus
this is k, so, k square, right? Therefore, B becomes equal to omega kR into kR by 1 minus k
square, right? So, that we can write, this is equal to omega kR whole square over 1 minus k
square, right?
(Refer Slide Time: 20:10)
So, this on substitution, we can write that v theta, which was here, v theta is equal to A R by 2 plus B
by r. Now, substituting the values of A and B, now, of course B has become this, then, so, this is
“C”. Then, we should also find out what is the value of A. A becomes equal to minus 2 by r
square into this omega kR whole square divided by 1 minus k square, right? So, this, again we
can write that this r square this r square goes out, right? This 2 remains, so, 2 omega k square
divided by instead of 1 minus k square we can write k square minus 1.
So, A is 2 omega k square by k square minus 1. So, here if we substitute, we can write, this to be
2 omega k square divided by k square minus 1. Here, it was 2 into r plus B. We found out to be
omega kR square kR whole square divided by 1 minus k square, right? And this divided by r,
right? So this is what we got, right? Now, on further simplification, we can write this 2 this 2
goes out, as omega k square r divided by k square minus 1, right? Minus this, we can write
omega k square R square, right? Divided by k square minus 1 into r, right?
Which, on further simplification, if we want to simplify, we can write, in the denominator k
square minus 1 into r, right? So, this becomes omega k square r square minus this becomes
omega k square R square, right? So this on simplification, can be written omega k square
common, then r square minus R square divided by k square minus 1 into r. So, v theta is equal to
omega k square r square minus R square divided by k square minus 1 into r, right? 
So, this, we can do, right? So, v theta, we have done. Now let us look into that what changes we
need on this. Now, here, if we look at that boundary condition is a little different because here we
have done the boundary condition that v theta is equal to 0 at r is equal to R, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:40)So, instead of that, we write here v theta is equal to 0 at r is equal to R and v theta is omega kR. So,
here, it is omega kR, right? And at r is equal to there it is kR, right? Then, we can write that in
the first case 0 is equal to AR by 2, so, AR by 2 is equal to minus B by r, that is AR by 2, right?
Minus AR by 2, sorry, this is, let it remain, plus so undo B by R, right? 
This is for first case, second case we have written omega kR is equal to AkR by 2 plus B by kR,
right? So, we have done this one correct. Then it becomes, how much? I think this we should
remove and say, okay. Since, A is there, so, we can say that A is equal to minus 2B by r square.
So, let us re-write minus 2 capital B by R square. So, instead of this, let us write it to be R
square, right? So minus 2B, so, let us make one bracket here and hopefully, no, this is not taken.
So, let us make it normal so A is equal to minus 2B by R square, right?And also we got B is equal to omega kR whole square by 1 minus k square. But, there is no
negative in this, right? So, if that be true, then ultimately we got v theta is equal to let us re-write
this, this became equal to v theta, then became equal to, hopefully, yeah, here, it is omega k square,
so, omega we are writing as we said that small w. If, for easy doing it, omega k square so that we
have done omega k square into r square minus R into r square, not, r square minus capital R
square. So, we write it like this, capital R square divided by, so, this bracket closed divided by k
square minus r square.
So, to write it, we write it this, like this k, k square, right? k square minus 1 into r. So, this we
write in third bracket, here also in third bracket, so v theta is omega k square into r square minus
capital R square by k square minus 1 into r. So, we have done all the four cases, that all r’s are
changing or inner and outer radii are changing and also inner and outer cylinder conditions are
also changing, either outer cylinder is fixed, inner is moving or rotating, or inner is fixed and
outer is rotating or moving, right? 
So, this way you try to solve as many problems you come across and then find out the solution,
okay. So this way, we then complete, rest of the things, of course, we are not required. So, we
close it here today, thank you. 
 
 