Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture 24
Module 5
Flow through flat plates or slits
Yeah, today we will do on flow through flat planes, right? Flow through slit or flat plates, those,
as  we mentioned in the previous class that the flow  through the homogenizing valve, this
homogenizing valve can be assumed to be say, slit, right? A very small hole through which it is
moving and during that process, as we said earlier that the fat globules get homogenized or the
bigger fat particles becomes smaller according to the size, which you have given, according to
the space through which the flow is occurring, that will indicate that at what ultimate size of the
fat globules you will get, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 1:32)
So, let us look into that today. So, now, we have drawn one similar thing as it is here, flow
through slit or flat plates, right? So, we have taken this to be enlarged figure of the slit, right?
This is the enlarged view in which, we have taken a small volume element, right? We have taken
a small volume element, and this volume element has the dimensions of delta x, delta y and delta
z, right? Or, say if the third dimension be, delta z or H, and this width or one dimension could be
2 delta, so that the center is at plus minus delta, right? 0 plus delta minus delta, and this is say, L
and this is L, right? So, we will do the similar force balances as we have done earlier, and we will find out what is
the velocity profile, and what is the stress profile in the volume element and then integrate over
the entire range right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 2:54)
So, again, this we had taken as 2 delta so the axis is at the center. So, this is plus delta and minus
delta, this is L length and height H, right? So, what is acting, P, pressure inside our inlet at P at x
and at the outlet at the face, x plus delta x. It is P at x plus delta x, right? So, let us look into that
so similar to the flow problems earlier we have done, right? (Refer Slide Time: 3:42)
Here also, we assume some of the things that one is the flow is steady, then the flow is laminar,
there is no end effect, rather it is fully developed, right? Fully developed flow and we will take a
small volume and that small volume is having del x del y del z, right? This del x del y and del z,
right? Where, we have shown this is the small volume, and the entire slit, we had shown to be
equal to 2 del then L, 2 del in this way L in this way and H in this way, right? 
That was the entire slit, right? Now, since, we are saying that it is a steady state, then, from the
general equation, which we start with, that the general equation, or governing equation, that
some of the forces acting on to it is equal to 0, right? And that also we will do here, but, since we
said that the momentum transfer takes place in two ways, one by the bulk molecule, and one by
the molecular transport, so this bulk force, bulk fluid, that term goes off, right? 
Then, we are neglecting that, so unnecessarily we again writing everything momentum in minus
momentum out for the bulk fluid that we are skipping. (Refer Slide Time: 5:55) 
So, we are starting with that the momentum flux, right? Due to molecular transport momentum
flux that we take as Tau yx at the face y plus delta y minus this is okay instead of flux we call it to
be out minus in, right? Tau yx at the face y, Tauyx at the face y plus delta y, times the area that or
rather, Tauyx at the face y times the area, i.e., del x into w, right?
So this is area del x into w, this is acting, flow is occurring through this, right? We said, the flow
is occurring like that, okay. So, there is the area del x into width, i.e., w or H. Ultimately it will
come, right? This is the momentum flux, so pressure drop or pressure force acting on this volume
element, net is P at the face x plus delta x, right, minus P at the face x, right, times the area, i.e.,
del y times w, right? So, if this be true, then, some of the forces acting, we can write Tau yx at y
plus delta y minus Tau yx at y, right? Plus P at x plus delta x minus P at x, this times delta y w, this
times delta x w, right? 
So, now if we divide, this is equal to 0, if we divide both sides with del x w and y, then next
stage, we can write Tau yx at y plus delta y minus Tau yx at y over this, we can say delta y, minus P
at x plus delta x minus P at x over, or, this is of course, plus divided by delta x is equal to 0,
dividing by del x del y w, right? Then, we get this, and now if put that limit condition, limit delta
y tends to 0, right? And the limit delta x tends to 0, if we put and then, from the definition of
derivative, we can write that del del y of Tau yx plus del del x of P, del P del x, rather is equal to 0,
right? 
So, we can write del del y of Tau yx is equal to minus del P del x, right? So, this del P del x, you
can write delta P over del x, i.e., delta P actually, this should have been written del y this shouldhave been written del x, right? So, this is del y this is del x exactly, so yeah this is del y this is del
x, otherwise this is not coming, okay, del x del y, this area okay. So, this is 2 delta, which we
ultimately said, so, delta P over this is del x, if it is written like that, so, minus delta P over L is
del del y of Tauyx, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:58) 
Then, we can now say that, this negative sign or del del y of Tau yx, this is equal to minus del P
del x, is equal to minus delta P over L, this indicates  that x is increasing, right? As x is
increasing, value of delta P is decreasing, the negative sign says that, alright. As L is increasing
delta P is decreasing, right? So, we can write that del Tau yx, again, that del Tau yx, then we can say
that, d Tauyx dy is equal to delta P over L. This delta P takes care of P in minus Pout, right, over L.
So, this negative sign is taken into delta P, right? Now if we integrate, then, what we get that
Tauyx is equal to, right, delta P over L into y plus C 1, right? So, what we can write at boundary
conditions, if we put boundary condition, i.e., what, at y is equal to 0, if you remember, our thing
like this, right? And this was like this, right? We said that this is 2 delta, okay. del y, it was, this
was del x, and this was H, or del z, whatever you call, right? 
So, at y is equal to 0, that means, this point, at y is equal to 0, Tau yx i.e., the centre, right? Not the
one the center. So, tau at y is equal to 0, Tau yx is equal to 0, right? Then, we can write C 1 is also
equal to 0, or Tauyx is equal to delta P over L into y, that is the stress profile, right? If you plot
this stress profile, that as y is increasing Tau yx is also increasing, right? So, under limiting
condition, i.e., when y is delta, then Tau yx will have one plus delta, when y is equal to minusdelta, Tauyx will have another, because, this we have told ultimately the bigger one is 2 delta, i.e.,
the thickness, or width, or whatever we call, right? 
Where, the axis is at the center. So, it is minus delta plus delta, say, this point and minus delta
this point, right? So, here, it is 0, so, we write, this as y is increasing Tau yx is increasing true, but,
it is putting to the limit, when, it is plus del then Tau yx is plus and, where is minus delta Tau yx is
also some minus. That means, some, if this is the point, and if this is the point, this is 0, so, one
will have one, and another will have this, right? This is the stress profile, if we take this to be the
stress profile, okay fine.
Then, substituting Tau yx as minus Tauyx is equal to minus mu del v x del y, right? We can write
that, this is equal to delta P over L into y, right? And, if this is true, then again putting the second
boundary, or, now, if we re-write this, del v x del y is equal to minus delta P over L, right? Or, L
into y rather, okay, or we on integration, you can write that v x is equal to this minus delta P over
L into C2, or rather, y, y square by 2, right? y square by 2 plus C 2, y square by 2 plus C 2.
So, if we put that boundary, what is the boundary? Boundary is, at plus delta or, minus delta v is
equal to 0 or vx is equal to 0, at plus delta or minus delta, because, plus delta is at the valve and
this minus delta is also at the valve, right? So, in that case, we can say that this plus delta or
minus delta, at plus minus delta, this is equal to 0, v x. So, we can write, 0 is equal to minus, say
plus minus delta. We have taken, so we can write delta P over 2 mu L, this mu comes here, or,
here, it should have been 2 mu.
So, 2 mu L, right? 0 is equal to, this is plus C 2. So, if we take minus then C 2 is equal to delta P
over 2 mu L, right? And we can write v x is equal to delta P by 2 mu L, if we take it to be
common, right? Then, we have said delta P, this was y C 2 and of course y square. So it is delta
square, right? This was delta square, so, C 2 is equal to this into delta square, right? So, if we take
delta square common, or delta square minus y square is the v x, right? So, we can also write this is
also equal to delta P delta square over 2 mu L into 1 minus y by delta whole square, right? 
So, this is the vx at any instant, velocity is like that. At any instant, velocity v x that is delta P delta
square by 2 mu L into 1 minus y by delta whole square, okay. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:27)Now, to understand for the next one that is now at y is equal to 0, what is the value of v x? vx
should become vmax, right? I say again for understanding, put this, we had this, we had this, delta
x, we had this delta y, right? We had this as H, or height, or delta z, whatever we call, right? 
Then v at y is equal to 0 that is this, right? At y is equal to 0 we can say v x is vmax, right? What we
had this one equation v x is equal to delta P by 2 L 2 mu L into 1 minus y by delta whole square,
right? delta square, right? This is nothing but, parabolic equation, right? That is why the profile,
we always observe to be parabolic like that, right? If we see the profile of velocity, it is always
parabolic like this, right? So, this is also parabolic in nature, so, at y is equal to 0, then v max, vx
becomes vmax and that it becomes equal to delta P into del square by 2 mu L because this becomes
0, 1 minus this so that is 1.
So, delta p delta square by 2 mu L is the v max, right? Next, we go to the other one that is the
average velocity. (Refer Slide Time: 24:13) 
So, vmax you have found out v we have found out, then, from there we have found out v max, you
have also seen the Tau and now Tau, i.e., the momentum flux. Now, let us go to find out average
velocity. So, average velocity v average that can be said to be equal to integration of 1 by A, 0 to l, 0
to delta, or plus delta to minus delta, or 0 to delta half of that v x dx dy, right? So, this is nothing
but L over delta L, right? Because, one integration of dv x dx, so that goes into this delta.
So, equal to L, right? 0 to L, 0 to delta, y is there, so, v x dy, we have L by delta L, right? 0 to
delta vx dy, we have and this we can write L by delta L, right? And v x, if we substitute with this
delta P delta square by 2 mu L into 1 minus y by delta whole square, right? This was between 0
to delta, right? This into dy, right? So, this on simplification, and integration, and simplification,
we can write to be delta P, we missed out, delta P is there, so, that comes out delta P into delta by
L, L goes out 2 mu L, this comes there, and on integration, dy is y, putting, the limit is delta
minus this becomes delta cube by 3 delta square, right? 
Delta cube by 3 delta square or this is becoming nothing but equal to delta P delta square, delta P
delta square by 3 mu L, because this delta cube, this delta square goes out, it becomes delta by 3.
So, 3 delta minus delta, i.e., 2 delta by 3, right? 2 delta this 2 and this 2 goes out, this delta
becomes delta square and this 3 remains, right? So, this is 3 mu L delta P delta square by 3 mu L,
right? And this, if you remember, we had made v max. vmax was delta P delta square by 2 mu L.
Then, what is the relation between v average and vmax?vaverage and vmax that relation becomes equal to v average is equal to 2 third of v max, right? 2 third of
vmax is the vaverage, right? So, this way, if we can find out that, what is the average velocity in terms
of maximum velocity, it is 2 third. 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:08)
Now, if you remember, what it was, for the pipe flow, average velocity with maximum velocity,
what it was, for the flow through ,or for film flow, and this is the slit flow, then this 3, you put
together, and see that there will be a distinct difference between the three, right? 
In one case, it is pipe flow, in other case it is film flow, in third case it is annular flow, and in the
fourth case, it is that slit flow. So, all these four cases, you just see, what is the relation between
vaverage and vmax, in all 4 cases, you will see that, they are distinctly different, and I tell you that
you find out and make a tabular form, so that you remember them for future activities, right? For
future work, or, in future, so that, you can memorize it. If required that, what is the velocity, and
maximum velocity relation, in pipe, or in annulus, or in film, or maybe in case of slit, right? 
Then you will see they are not same, they are different, okay. (Refer Slide Time: 30:40)
Now, let us look into that H, we have said to be the height. Again, we draw that, H to be equal to
the height, right? This was our H, and this H is quite bigger, right? H is much greater than that of
delta, right? So, in that case, we can say that, the hydraulic diameter for the slit, that becomes
equal to 4 delta, right? So, we can say, N Re, this becomes 4, because, we have taken, hydraulic
diameter to be 4 delta, because H is much greater than 2 delta. So, hydraulic diameter becomes
equal to 4 delta.
So, we can write 4 v average del rho, sorry, delta rho divided by mu to be the Reynolds number. 4
vaverage delta rho by mu, right? And fanning friction factor, “f”, we can write that is, Tau at valve w
over rho into v by 2, right? Or, Tau at valve is equal to delta P delta by L, right? That is equal to 3
mu L vaverage by delta square into delta by L, right? That is equal to 3 mu v average by delta, right?
Therefore, “f” we can write, delta P delta over L over rho v average square by 2, so, this is 2 delta P
delta by L rho vaverage square.
Therefore, delta P can be written, 4 rho L by 2 delta v average square, right? So, this can be also
written 2 f rho L by 2 delta into v average square by 2, right? So, if you, here, it is 2 delta, here it is
2, right? So, if we remember, for the pipe flow, what was delta P, right? That with “f”, that was 4
f rho L by D v square by 2, right? So, that was for the pipe flow, so this is also analogous, so, that
is why these four, as I said that if you find out, all 4, you will find it to be so different and then
you should have all these together in one page and then it will be easy for you to remember, okay
thank you.  
 