Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture 20
Module 4
Problems and solution of falling film
Hello, let us now do some problems on the falling film. We have done this falling film. So, let us
do some problems on that and in that case, we will be able to know, and you will be able to find
out this much better that this we have done say,
(Refer Slide Time: 0:44)
Oil is flowing down a vertical wall as a film 1.7 millimeter thick the oil density is 820 kg per
meter cube and the viscosity is 0.2 Pascal seconds. Calculate the mass flow rate per unit width of
wall Reynolds number and average velocity. So, this is then a pure case of falling film where we
are saying that an oil is flowing down a vertical wall as a film 1.7 millimeter thick, so, thickness
of the film is also given, (Refer Slide Time: 1:39) 
That means, we have a vertical wall, and down this wall, a film is travelling like this, right?
Obviously, as we said earlier that when it is happening, then there is some heating source also
there, so that this concentration of the oil that can go up or film can go up.
(Refer Slide Time: 2:12)
Density of the oil is 820 kg per meter cube and the viscosity is 0.2 Pascal second. Now, calculate
the mass flow rate per unit width of the wall, Reynolds number and average velocity, right? (Refer Slide Time: 2:41) 
So, if this is the case, then we can say that mass flow rate, as you remember, it was m dot and we
could find out from two relations we had. So, one such relation, if we use, then it becomes delta
cube rho gx over 3 nu, right? 
So this nu is equal to mu by rho, right, because, whatever we had given earlier, or we developed
it was like that, and if you see the unit then it comes also like that. Let us see this is millimeter or
say, meter cube and say this is kg per meter cube. This is meter per Second Square so this is 3
and nu is viscosity by rho, i.e., we can say, kg per kg meter per second and density is kg per
meter cube.
So, this density goes out, kg per meter cube, right? So, meter per second this is meter cube this is
meter, so, it becomes per unit mass, right? So, we can say, this second this square goes out and
this meter okay. So, it comes, this kg should go up, right? This was kg per meter cube, right? So,
then, it does not go out, so, I made the mistake. So, meter cube, right? So, kg per meter cube and
this is meter per Second Square. Then, this is kg meter per second divided by kg per meter cube.
So, that means, this is meter cube and this is kg per meter cube square, right? kg per meter cube
square and this is meter per second square and this is kg meter per second. So, one second goes
out this 1 kg square goes out, 1 meter cube this goes out, right? And, this meter and this meter
goes out, so, it is kg per second, that is the flow rate, right? So, if we then substitute this values
or there thickness is 1.7 millimeter, so that we can write 1.7 into 10 to the power minus 3 meter,
right? We are also given density, rho as 820 kg per meter cube. We are given viscosity mu is equal to
0.2 Pascal second. So, if that is true, then we substitute m dot is equal to delta cube, i.e., 1.7 into
10 to the power minus 3 whole cube, rho, 820 and g x, 9.81 and 3 into 0.2 Pascal second by 820,
right? So, this on simplification, should give you 0.054, right, kg per meter per second per unit
width, right? kg per meter per second. So, kg meter square by second also this was that kg meter
square per second, so, this was out so kg per meter second it remains, yes. 
So, 0.054 kg per meter per second is the mass flow rate. Then, Reynolds number we can say, this
to be equal to NRe. So, that is 4 m dot by mu, so, this Reynolds number, also we had given in
different forms. One such is 4 m dot by mu, right? So, that is 4 into 0.054 divided by mu is 0.2
Pascal second is equal to 1.08, right? So, that means, it is laminar flow only, right? If you
remember it, we said that with ripple and without ripple, right? We said with ripple and without
ripple the Reynolds number if it is without ripple, then that is less than between 4 and 25. So far I
remember, less than 25 was the Reynolds number.
So, Reynolds number, if it is less than 25, than, we get a okay, N Re less than 25, it should be and
then, we can get that this is laminar flow. Third one was asked that what the average velocity is.
What is the average velocity or v average? If you remember that we had said that this average
velocity, we had given into three forms. So, 1 was rho g x delta square by 3 mu, right? 
So, it was 820, right, into g x is 9.81, right? And delta is 1.7 into 10 to the power minus 3 meter
whole square divided by 3 into 0.2 Pascal second. So, this on simplification, gives 0.037 meter
per second, right? So, this way, we can find out, what is the Reynolds number, what is the
velocity, what is the mass flow rate, given the different things, right? So, and if you remember,
with this we had given in all different forms, that mass flow rate also, that was volumetric flow
rate, that was also determined. Then mass flow rate that was also determined. So, if we look at
this, then we can say that this was like that, okay. (Refer Slide Time: 12:57) 
And Reynolds number also we had given in different forms and different forms like Reynolds
number we had also given as 4 delta v average rho by mu, this was also one form of Reynolds
number, right? And we also gave that in that thickness delta is equal to, in different forms; one
was under root 3 mu v z average, right, by rho g x Cos beta, right? And this was also under root 3
mu Q by rho gx w Cos beta.
So, here it is said unit width, so w will go out and this was also given as, if you remember Q root
3 mu m dot by rho, this was this was rho cube, right? This was rho cube root square g x Cos beta,
right? So, this was for Reynolds number given, right? And if you remember that this Q was also
given as, rho gx w delta square Cos beta by 3 mu, right? (Refer Slide Time: 15:22) 
So, that was like that and we also gave that this to be average velocity, that we had also given
that vaverage, this average velocity, we also had given as rho g x Cos beta delta square by 3 mu.
So, all these given and we could find out corresponding values, right? So, this is what we want to
make that when you have been given a given problem, so, depending on the requirement, you
find out the relation, and then from that relation, you can give whatever has been asked for,
right? So, for example, here we had given all the necessary things, but if normally the density of
this thing, oil is very important to know in many cases, right? (Refer Slide Time: 16:45) 
Suppose, if we have other values, so, we can say, like that if the oil has, the same problem, 1.7
into 10 to the power minus 3 meter thickness of the film, right? And if we say the viscosity of the
oil was say 0.2 Pascal second, and if you say that the Reynolds number for the flow was say 16,
right, then how can we find out v average. It has said average velocity, yeah average velocity say,
around, 0.03 meter per second, right? 
Then, find out that what the density of the oil is. So, in that case, first from the Reynolds number
value, you can find out 4 delta v average, right, rho divided by mu, right? So, from this we can find
out, what is the value of density. So, Reynolds number given is 16. Delta given is 1.7 into 10 to
the power minus 3 meter, right? Average velocity is given, 0.03 meter per second, right? So, rho
we found out and viscosity 0.2 Pascal per Pascal second.
So, in that case, if we say, then, the rho becomes equal to 16 into 0.2 over 4 into 1.7 into 10 to
the power minus 3 into 0.03. So much is your density. So, let us let us just use this is a problem
for which we need a calculator, right? So, we have 16 into 0.2 divided by 4 into 1.7 into 0.03,
right? So this becomes this, and so this is, this times 100, no this time 1000, right? This times
1000, so much kg per meter cube, then somewhere something wrong might have been done,
right? (Refer Slide Time: 21:03)
So, what we have done wrong? Let us look into: 4 into 1.7 into 10 to the power minus 3, right? 4
into 1.7 into 10 to the power minus 3, average velocity is given as 0.03, that is what we saw
meter per second, density is so much, right? And this viscosity is yes 0.4, so it becomes it
becomes 16 into 0.23. Let us look into that into 0.23, right?
(Refer Slide Time: 22:10) 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:20)
 4 delta vaverage rho by mu, so, that is 16 given. 4 1.7 into 10 to the power minus 3, 0.03 rho by 0.2.
So, 16 into 0.2 by 4 into 1.7 into 10 to the power minus 3 into 0.03. We have not done anything
wrong. So, let us check the calculations once again that the where it has gone wrong, whether at
all, so, it was 16 into 0.2, right? This is so much divided by it was 4 into 1.7 into 0.03, right, into
0.03, so, it becomes this much, that is coming 15 and 10 to the power 3, that goes up then it is
15000 though, then where did we do anything wrong. So v average Reynolds number is so much,
right? And vaverage we found out is given 0.3, 0.03 N Re is given that then where did we make the
thing wrong, right? 
So, Reynolds number is 4 delta v average rho by mu that is true, so, if you do the other way round, if
you find out, say Reynolds number to be found out like the previous one. (Refer Slide Time: 24:30) 
So, 4 into 1.7 into 10 to the power minus 3, right? Say, here we had taken 820, and here we had
taken 0.2, so, under that situation, it becomes equal to, let us look into that, 4 into 1.7, right? 6.8
into 820, right? Divided by 0.2, right? So this divided by 1000 so 27.88. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:42) 
So, that means there is some turbulence with this value, right? There is some turbulence with this
value and because turbulence, not turbulence there is some rippling, like this as we said that
some rippling like this may happen, right? 
And after that when we, if we take this that, Reynolds number to be okay, 27.88 and 4 this is 1.7
into 10 to the power minus 5, 1.7 into 10 to the power minus 5, right? And average velocity we
had taken, how come this we had missed one, how come this we should have, okay, we hadmissed one, so here the viscosity. velocity also should have been taken which we did not take, so,
that is why it was coming so.  So, it was 0.03 so in 0.03 0.83, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:03)
So this value is 0.83 and 4 into 1.7, right, into 10 to the power minus 3 into 820 into 0.03, right,
divided by 0.2. So, this was that divided by 1000, so, values coming 0.8364 that is too low,
however so what is needed is that generally, for this kind of problem, this density is a physical
property. So, that to be measured somewhere with some other devices not with this kind of
relations. With this kind of relations, we can easily find out like velocity, like Reynolds number,
like thickness, this things can be easily found out, because other physical parameters, they are
normally determined with the devices which are known, like density as you have seen, find out
from the specific gravity what will. 
So, that value will be more accurate, and from there this physical properties are normally known,
similarly, viscosity also can be determined as we have done in some class that how can you
predict the viscosity with certain situations, right? May be, in future also similar thing we will do
and but these are based on the relations exactly, right? So, try as much problems you can handle
and let us stop it today here, good, thank you. 