Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture 22
Module 4
Flow through annulus (Part 2)
Okay, then we had developed the flow characteristics, flow behavior when we had seen that the 
flow is taking place in a annular space right 
(Refer Slide Time: 0:45)
So, that annular space, if we remember that, we had developed the equation that momentum flux
Taurz is equal to delta P over 2 L R into r over R minus 1 minus k square by 2 ln of 1 by k in this
times r over R that was for the Tau rz or momentum flux, right? When we had the two annular
spaces, this was our central, this was our kR, and this was our R, right? In addition, we assumed
one imaginary one, which was lamda R, right? In addition, there we assumed that Tau rz is equal
to zero, that was one imaginary axis, where this Tau rz was zero. We found out this value of lamda
and then we substitute those values to the momentum flux.Similarly, the velocity profile can be, this can be written as, delta P or say P in minus Pout and if
you remember that we had said, this was our r, this was our z, right? And so we said the total P is
P flow plus rho g z, right? So, this was total, which was acting against the gravity, right? This we
said and now that means this P in, Pout, it includes this total, P plus P rho g z, right? Alternatively,
the gravity term also, so, this divided by 2 this divided by 4 mu L, right. 4 mu L was our this
times R square times 1 minus r over R whole square plus 1 minus k square divided by ln of 1 by
k and this times ln of r by R. This was our velocity profile or the velocity distribution, right?
And we saw in the annular space, see if it is the annular space, right? Okay, to avoid, this is our
central axis, right? We saw this velocity profile was like this, where this is corresponding to
lamda, right? This is corresponding to lamda, the imaginary plane, right? And we had said some
value here, right? So, this is some other value, at this point, okay. Then, we can say that if this is
true, we also said that, there are some ways by which, whether this derivation is correct or not we
can determine, how?
Now, imagine that if this inner, if this inner one, inner pipe, or inner tube is taken out, then this
becomes only R, right? Then instead of this full, we have this, instead of that full one, this entire
R that becomes. So, then instead of annulus, if we take out this one, then we have one pipe so
then this under that situation, constitute, correspond to the pipe flow, right? So, this we have to
check whether this is really happening or not. If it is happening then, we can say that, yes, the
limiting condition is also coming correct.
Now, limiting condition, then, it can come what?
(Refer Slide Time: 6:17)
That, here, we had taken kR if you remember, here we had taken, here it was kR and here it was
R, right? So if your, if your k becomes equal to 0, then, this whole thing vanishes, this goes out
this goes out, then it becomes one single R. So, under this situation if we substitute the value of k
is equal to 0, then that must correspond to the equation for the pipe flow. So, let us look into thatTaurz is equal to delta P by 2 L into R, right? And this k is 0, and this becomes r divided R, right?
This becomes r divided R and here this is k is 0, right?
The entire thing goes out and we can write that this is delta P over 2 L R, sorry, this delta P over
2 L into R for the pipe flow, right? And the velocity profile, that we had, this was v z is equal to
the same thing, right? This entire thing goes out and we get delta P divided by 4 mu L, this R
square into 1 minus r by R whole square. So, this corresponds to the velocity profile for the pipe
flow, right?
(Refer Slide Time: 9:05)
So, another thing which is needed that that under that limiting condition, then we have said,
okay, this has come, k is equal to 0 is the limiting condition, k is equal to 0 is the limiting
condition. So, under limiting condition, then we will see that this was flow through annulus, so,
flow through annulus is becoming the flow through the pipe, right? Under limiting condition.
(Refer Slide Time: 9:44)So, for the annular flow one, more thing we must also find out, what is the value of v zmax, right?
So, vzmax should be equal to v z at lamda is equal R is equals to lamda r is equal to lamda R. If, r is
equal to lamda R, in the v z expression, earlier, we can write that v zmax, this becomes equal to delta
P or Pin minus Pout, that is much better, P in minus Pout, right, times R square divided by 4 mu L,
right, times 1 minus k square divided by 2 ln of 1 by k, right.
So, this becomes equal to this, right? So, v zmax is like that. Now, again, under limiting condition
when we have k is equal to 0, i.e., our this annulus will become 1, right? This annulus will
become 1 and in that case, this was our kR and in this case this was our R, right?
Now, it will become 1 R, right? When k is equal to 0. So, this limiting condition, if you put it
here, then, you see, what is the value, which is coming. So, we have, we can write, this is equal
to this is equal to delta P or P in minus Pout, right, times R square divided by 4 mu L, right? So, all
these terms goes, so, it remains only 1. So delta P R square by 4 mu L, that is the v zmax for pipe
flow, right? So, this matching with the limiting condition that means we have shown that under
limiting condition, i.e., when k becomes equal to 0 this flow through the annular space that is
becoming equal to the flow through the pipe, right?
So, this we have seen, okay now, another thing remains, for the laminar flow, what is the average
velocity or vzaverage, what is the average velocity.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:21)So, average velocity, as we know v zaverage, this was integral of 0 to 2 pi, or kR to R, right? In this
case, kR to R vz into r dr into d theta r dr is one arc and d theta is the other. So, this is the total
area through which it is flowing and this time, the total area through which it is flowing, 0 to pi 2
pi kR to R, right, r dr d theta, right?
So, if now if we substitute the value of v z and then integrate them with respect to both r and d
theta, then, 0 to 2 pi will go out, and for r, so it will be between kR and R, after putting the
integration, and the limit. So, this limit kR and R by substituting that we can write that this
becomes equal to P in minus Pout into R square divided by 8 mu L times 1 minus k to the power 4
divided by 1 minus k square minus 1 minus k square divided by ln of 1 by k, right? This over
this, so, vzaverage is like that.
Now, here also if you put the limiting condition, now, what was again limiting condition?
Repeatedly, I am showing the same, so that you, right, remember it. This was our boundary for
imaginary, and this was our kR, this was our R, right? And, this was our lamda R, right? So, we
said that, if k becomes equal to 0, then, this inner one goes off, then the entire thing becomes R,
right? So, entire thing becomes R. So, that means, when k is the limiting condition, k is equal to
zero, so, the entire thing goes off and it becomes equal to one, right.
And, we can write this v zaverage is equal to Pin minus Pout into R square by 8 mu L, so that is the
vzaverage for pipe flow, right? Therefore, that means this limiting condition is valid. So, if it is the
limiting condition, and valid, then, we can say that, our derivations were correct. So, this is how
we normally find out that if the limiting condition is existing, and if it is valid, that means thederivation, which you have done is also valid. Subsequently, also in many other cases, you will
see that similar conditions you can apply limiting conditions and then we can say that if this
limiting condition is valid, that means, we have rightly followed, and we derived the equations
correctly, right?
So these we have to keep in mind, okay.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:25)
Now, let us find out some other part, that is, now let us also see that what is the volumetric flow
rate, what is the volumetric flow rate? So, volumetric flow rate Q is equal to pi R square, i.e., the
area into 1 minus k square. This is the area through which it is flowing is v zaverage, right? So, if we
multiply, then final term comes to delta P, pi into delta P that is P in minus Pout, right, over 8 mu L
into R square into 1 minus k to the power 4 minus 1 minus k square divided by ln k square whole
square divided by ln of 1 by k, right?
So, this another expression, for the volumetric flow, now, if we remember that for limiting
condition, then this is pi R square, okay, that is the area, right? pi R square that is the area and
this R square and from here this will become R to the power 4, right? This will become R to the
power 4, this is pi R square already there, and from v z 1 R square will get, so, you will get pi R to
the power 4, right? So, for similar volumetric flow rate for k is limiting condition, limit is k is
equal to 0, if we put there, then this term becomes equal to 1 and then you can write that this is
also equivalent to that, okay.Then, we have to also find out some other properties, other parameters, like how much force is
associated with that, as we have done also in the case of flow through this, flow through that film
or film flow also we have also said that yes, this is what the force is acting on it.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:35)
So, if we look at that forces, and if we do the force analysis, then we can find out that the force
exerted by the fluid on the solid that is equal to the sum of the forces acting on the inner cylinder
and the outer cylinder.
So, inner plus outer cylinder, the sum of the forces acting on the inner and outer cylinder is the
forces acting on it. This is F z. So, then, we can write F z is equal to minus Tau rz at r is equal to kR
into 2 pi R L plus Tau rz at r is equal to capital R 2 pi R L, right? So, this on simplification gives pi
R square into 1 minus k square into delta P, i.e., P in minus Pout, right? So, this is the total force,
which is acting on that, and once we determine this, then, we can say that this is the total force
acting on the cylinder, on the annular space, right?
Where, both the inner and outer cylinders, this is the center and this is your imaginary boundary,
right? It was our kR, it was our R and this was our lamda R, right? Lamda was the imaginary
point or imaginary vertical axis where we can say that it was acting on the plane, where the Tau rz,
i.e., your shear stress, that is becoming equal to 0, right? So, we also found out the limiting
conditions and once the limiting conditions are also proved that, yes, this is the one which wehave developed in under similar conditions, then this derivations are absolutely okay, for the pipe
flow.
For example, here that limiting condition, example of limiting condition is k, that is equal to 0,
right? So, k that is equal to zero means, this pipe has now become one pipe and that is R, right?
And the moment, it is so, from here also, we see that, the total force acting on that, F z is equal to
pi R square, k is 0, so, it is 1, so, into P in minus Pout, right?
So, this is the area through which it is flowing and this is the pressure force. So, this total force,
which is acting on the pipe is same, when we put the limiting condition. So, under limiting
condition, k is equal to 0, we have come to this condition that, sorry, that, this is F z that is equal
to the limiting condition of the force acting on the pipe, right?
So, that means, if we look at the flow through annular space, that is nothing but the flow though,
we cannot say that this annular space, this flow, if we take out that inner pipe, and the outer pipe
also will be behaving like the inner one, or single, it is not so, it is always that, the outer pipe and
the inner pipe they together, because, we do not know the actual place, where, in the inner pipe
or single pipe, when it is a single pipe, then we know that, the boundaries, which are available,
like, for example, that for a single pipe, we know that, at the wall, at the other wall, which are
fixed, so, there, the velocities are 0, right?
And the shear stress is maximum, right?
(Refer Slide Time: 28:11)And that the center of the single pipe, the velocity is maximum, and shear stress is 0, that is what
we know and in that case, we have shown that the velocity profile would have been for this like
that, right? This was the velocity profile, right? And the stress profile, or momentum flux profile
would have been like this, that, this is maximum, at this point, and this is minimum, at this point,
so, this was our velocity, stress profile, so, this is a velocity profile, and this was stress profile for
the single pipe and we also have shown that for this is the imaginary one, so, the velocity profile
was like this, and, the stress profile was 0 here the maximum there like this, right?
So, this, we have to keep in mind that when we had removed the inner pipe, then this pipe
became equal to the one pipe through which the flow is occurring and that limiting condition
should prevail and you must be able to substantiate that the derivation which you have made is
equal to the one under limiting condition becoming similar, right?
So, this, still you attain to, you can confirm, you will not be able to find out that thing, okay, if
you will not be able to become confident or become say, that, yes, the derivation done was
correct, right? Okay, thank you.