Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering 
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 2
Module 1
Equation of continuity expression and their interpretations 
So, as we finished in the last class that we will be dealing now with the equation of continuity,
right?
(Refer Slide Time: 0:49)
Continuity equation that we will do now. So, we will start with, as we said in the previous class,
that, finite volume element we will take and there will be inlet and there will be outlet, right? So,the inlet and outlet, depending on that we will say, we have taken a volume element like this,
right (refer Video)? Say, like this, right? We have here the conservation, this we will do equation
of continuity based on the conservation of mass, right. So, equation of continuity is totally on the
conservation of mass, right?
And, we say that rho into v into A (ρvA), right? This rho (ρ) into v into A, rho (ρ) is what? kg per
meter cube (kg m-3), v is meter per second (m s-1) and A is meter square (m2), then what it means?
kg per meter square per second (kg (m2s)-1, right? So kg per meter square per second (kg (m2s)-1
that is anything which is per unit area per unit time that is called a flux that is called to be the
flux or we call it to be mass flux, right? Per unit area per unit time of any parameter that is
known as to be flux.
So, in this case we can call it to be mass flux, right? Rho (ρ) into v into A. What is coming in and
that is going out as rho (ρ) v A out, right? And from the law of conservation of mass we can say
that nether we can create mass nor we can destroy mass. This is known. So, conservation of mass
says that neither we can create nor we can destroy. So, whatever will come, total mass, whatever
will go that total mass. If there be any accumulation, this all put together, will remain same,
otherwise, we will be generating some mass, not possible from the conservation of mass.
If there is some mass going out, no accounting, then that is also not possible because we cannot
destroy the mass. So, from the conservation of mass, we can say that whatever is coming in that
is to be going out if there is no accumulation, right? (Refer Slide Time: 3:51)
So, here, that is what we are saying. Now, if we tell to be total mass aim, so, that is equal to say
at different points rho 1 (ρ 1) into velocity at that point in, at the inlet v 1 into area of the inlet at
that point Ai1 plus similarly rho i (ρ 2) this is at the point 2, v at the point 2 and area at the point 2. 
So, all these plus all so many (refer video), this must be equal to the rho (ρ) at the point outlet at
point 1 times v velocity at the point outlet at point 1 times area at point outlet at point 1 plus rho
(ρ) outlet 2 into velocity outlet at the point 2 and area at the point 2 plus as many points we
consider. So, this must be equal to the total mass in, right? So, this, if we tell, then we can say
this to be say equation number 1 (refer video) where all the points are added in terms of rho (ρ)
times v times A. This is the mass flux, kg per meter square per second (kg (m2 s)-1), right? 
How it came? Rho (ρ) is kg per meter cube (kg m-3), v is meter per second (m s-1), A is meter
square (m2). So, this makes this meter square and this meter cube, rather sorry, this is  meter
square into meter, that is meter cube, and this meter cube it comes kg per second, or sorry mass
flux, mass only, that is the mass flow rate, right? This is the mass flow rate, right? Yes, as we said
that if the meter square is in the denominator, then it becomes, that you need per unit area per
unit time, then that becomes the flux, then it becomes the mass flux, we will come again. 
So, this is only mass flow rate that is kg per second meter square meter so meter cube over meter
cube (refer video). So, it goes out. So, it is, kg per second. That is the mass flow rate with time so
much kg is flowing, and if that is constant, this much of mass m is going, so that is equivalent to
that inlet, as many point we consider rho (ρ) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 as many. Similarly, outlet rho (ρ) 1, 2, 3,4, 5, so many points addition of these three. So, we will give you that multiplication of these
three will give you that mass flow rate of that system, okay.
Now, let us look into, okay, as we said it is kg per meter, my aim is kg per meter second kg per
second. Rho (ρ) is the density kg per meter cube (kg m-3) gives us velocity or speed. Of course,
velocity and speed, we know the difference, velocity we say to be having a definite direction,
but, when the same thing is said without any direction, then it is called to be speed, right? So the
train has this much of speed 60 kilometer per hour. So, we never say that it is going from one
place to the other place. So, the moment we say that it is going from this place to the other place
then it becomes velocity, because, then it is directed from this place to that place it is going,
right?
So, that is why, we are also, we have taken to be speed because we have not said how we know,
which direction it is going. So, meter per second. Then, area, as meter square (m2), right? Now,
if, we assume that in all these, inlet and outlet, the density is not changing, right? And we
remember in the first class, we said that, if the density is not changing, that means, it is having
constant density, and if that is a constant density, then we also say it is to be incompressible fluid,
right (refer video)?
(Refer Slide Time: 9:20)
So, here, it is applying that, if it is to be incompressible fluid, i.e., if the density is not changing,
that is density is constant, if density is constant, then we say it to be all rho (ρ), right? So then,
this rho (ρ) and this row (ρ), then we say this rho (ρ) is equal to rho (ρ) into v i 1 Ai 1 plus vi 2 Ai 2
plus as many is equal to this rho into v o 1  Ao 1 plus vo 2 Ao 2 plus as many, right? So, this is true.So, that means, again we can write m is equals to v i 1 Ai 1 plus dot dot dot dot  (….) is equal to vo 1
Ao 1 plus dot dot dot dot (….), right?
So, here, now, we can say that if this rho (ρ) we divide by m, right? So, we have, m by rho (m /
ρ) is equal to q, if we say this q to be the volumetric flow rate that was mass flow rate, right?
How? This was kg per second (k s-1) and this is kg per meter cube (k m-3). So, it becomes meter
cube per second (m3 s-1). So, meter cube per second (m3 s-1) means the volumetric flow. If you
take that to be volumetric flow, then m this rho (ρ) we divide it here, so m by rho (m / ρ) is equal
to this v1 A1 v2 A2 plus all v is equal to v o 1 A0 1 vo 2 A0 2 all these points, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:04)
Then, we can say that by adding this we can come to this level of equation of continuity. In
general, we can write that del rho del t ( ρ / δt), this is to be equal to minus del del x of rho v x
(∂
∂x(ρvx))plus del del y of rho v y (∂
∂y(ρvy)¿plus del del z of rho v z (∂
∂z(ρvz)), right?
So, this is one form of equation of continuity del rho del t ∂ρ
∂tchange of density with time that
is equal to minus del del x of rho v x plus del del y of rho v y plus del del z of rho v z, right?
∂ρ
∂t=−(∂
∂x(ρvx))+(∂
∂y(ρvy))+(∂
∂z(ρvz)). You know. here you say. rho (ρ) is kg per meter
cube (kg m-3) and v is meter per second (m s-1). Here, it becomes mass flux. So, earlier by
mistake, we said that, without noticing it to be that, it was kg per meter cube meter per secondmeter square (refer video) kg
m3m
sm2 , so we said by mistake, that it was kg per meter square
per second that is a flux mass flux but it is not so, it is so here now as kg per meter square per
second that is the mass flux kg
sm2.
So, in this case kg is the mass. So, area is the meter square (m2), second (s) is the time. So,
anything any parameter per unit area per unit time is called to be flux of that particular variable.
This variable, here, is the mass. So, we call to be mass flux, right? So, this is one form of writing
equation of continuity that del rho del t del is minus del del x of rho v x plus del del y of rho v y
plus del del z of rho v z.  ∂ρ
∂t=−(∂
∂x(ρvx))+(∂
∂y(ρvy))+(∂
∂z(ρvz)).Do not worry, we will
derive this subsequently, that how this is true. Why, how this is true, in what way we are saying it
to be there. This, of course, is in Cartesian coordinate. How we are saying that, this is the
equation of continuity. That we will come and derive subsequently, right? 
Now, if the significance of this is that the rate of change of density at a fix point results from the
changes in the mass velocity vector rho v (ρ ´v) or in other words results from the changes in
mass flux in all directions because this is the mass flux of the z direction, this is the mass flux of
the y direction, this is the mass flux of the x direction. So, changes, so, what is the change with
respect to that position del x (δx) that mass flux, sum of all these put together is coming to the
rate of change of the density at a fixed point, so that fixed point in the Cartesian coordinate is x,
y and z, right?
So, with that x, y and z, del rho del t (∂ρ
∂t),this obviously we do not normally write x, y, z,
right? But, it is so that del rho del t (∂ρ
∂t),this rho (ρ) is at a point x, y, z, is nothing but the
changes in the mass flux or mass velocity, that, whatever it be called, this is mass velocity, is
normally  said.  So,  mass  velocity, that  mass  times  velocity, right?  At  that  fixed  point  this
summation of all these results of all these changes in that direction, okay and it is coming from
all the directions of x, y and z.This is one form of saying equation of continuity, right? So, in the vector term also this can also
be said in that way that del rho del t (∂ρ
∂t),is equal to minus this vector rho v vector, (-(ρ ´v
)), right? So, this also has significance. This is the, say, in second form of equation of continuity.
This normally we call to be second form of equation of continuity and in that case, that is said,
the significance of this can be re-written, can be said that the vector rho v (ρ ´v), this rho v (ρ
´v) vector is the mass flux and its divergence has a simple significance. It is the net rate, this
the net rate of mass flux per unit volume, right? 
So, like here also it was the net, because, this was the net of all that whatever in all directions x,
y, z changes are occurring, mass flux here also that rho v vector (ρ ´v). The net flux per unit
volume is the rate mass flux, right? It can also be said in the other way that the fact remains like
this, the rate of increase of density with a small volume element which is fixed in a particular
space, that the rate of increase of density, or, this can be, increase of density or decrease either
way, depending on the case, increase or decrease of the density with a small volume element,
fixed in a particular space, that is equal to the net rate of mass eflux to the element that is divided
by its volume, right? 
So, this is another way of stating the equation of continuity, right? So, this way we can say
equation of continuity in different ways. We have said, the two ways express in two ways.
Similarly, we can also express it in another way, right? That is called that equation of continuity
in terms of partial, substantial time derivative no, equation of continuity in terms of substantial
time derivative. If we look into that, then we can say, that is D rho capital then substantial time
derivative, the operand is different, that is, the capital D, so D rho Dt (Dρ
Dt)is equal to del rho
del t plus vx, that is the velocity components in the x direction, v x del rho del x plus v y del rho del
y plus vz del rho del z, right? Dρ
Dt=∂ρ
∂t+vx∂ρ
∂x+vy∂ρ
∂y+vz∂ρ
∂z.. 
So, we said, if you remember in the substantial time derivative, when we defined it, there, we
said that, when you are moving in the canoe, right? On a canoe you are moving and that is in the
direction of the stream only, right? So in that case, that substantial time derivative can be written
in this way capital D operand, so D rho Dt capital D rho Dt that is equals to the change in density
with time del rho del t plus the velocity component in the x direction v x into change of thedensity in that position del rho del x plus velocity component in the y direction v y into the change
of density in that y direction del rho del y plus velocity component in the z direction that is v z del
rho del z, right? Dρ
Dt=∂ρ
∂t+vx∂ρ
∂x+vy∂ρ
∂y+vz∂ρ
∂z.
Obviously, why it is coming? Because when you are moving in the canoe, if you are flowing say
in the x direction, right? You have some more velocity effect on that, whereas, the other two
direction, if it is stream line, if it is not turbulence, there is no storm and other things happening,
if it is normal, so other two directions, they will have not that significant effect on that, but, you
have to consider. So how we are considering? We are taking the velocity component of the
velocity v, right? 
And in that case this is v x vy and vz which are taken to account for this equation, right? So, this
we can significantly say, the significance of this equation, we can say that capital D rho Dt
(Dρ
Dt), right? Which, is nothing, but the entire substantial time derivative of the density. So, it
says that this is for a path following the stream of the flow, flow of the stream. So this is
following the flow of the stream which we are repeatedly saying, right? 
So, I am repeatedly saying that this is nothing but the stream of the flow through which we are
calculating and that is the substantial time derivative and this can in another way also be said that
the rate of change of density that can be seen by an observer when floating along the stream of
the fluid, right? So, this substantial time derivative we can say this is nothing but that the rate of
change of density, when you are flowing along the stream of the flow, right? Okay.
Then, this is of course in terms of vector in that can also be said that D rho Dt (Dρ
Dt), the
vector operand that minus vector operand rho v [ −(ρ´v)¿. So, this has also a meaning that this
can be said in the rate of change of density as seen by the observer flowing with the direction of
the fluid, right? So, if we now, we have said the different forms of the equation of continuity both
in the normal coordinate forms and also in the vector form. So, in that case, we will, next class,
we will be definitely deriving that based on the Cartesian coordinate, or, may be, in cases, in
cylindrical coordinate also, in cases we can derive and then bring to this equation that how the
equation was developed, right? We just wanted to tell the significance, because, we have said the definition of derivatives and
now how those derivatives also getting impact on the different term that we have said, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:35)
Now, if we take this to be a special case, that we have said, the different forms of equation of
continuity, right? Now, if we take a special case, that is if the density is not changing, i.e., if the
density is constant, if density is constant, then we can say that capital D rho capital Dt (Dρ
Dt),
this is nothing but equal to 0, if we take this capital D rho capital Dt (Dρ
Dt),this is nothing but
equal to 0, right? So, if that be the situation, that is under constant density condition, under constant density means
density is not changing, in that case, we can say that the fluid is incompressible and if the fluid is
incompressible then capital D rho Dt is 0 ,(Dρ
Dt)=0and the equation which wrote earlier, that
can be written as del v x del x plus del vy del y plus del vz del z equals to 0, ∂vx
∂x+∂vy
∂y+∂vz
∂z=0
, because this D rho Dt (Dρ
Dt),has become 0. So, if this has become 0, right? Then, del rho del
t (∂ρ
∂t),also has become 0, (∂ρ
∂t)=0. Then, this individual components, because, this is
incompressible. So, in that case, we can write that del rho del v x del x that first equation del v x
del x plus del vy del y plus del vz del z this is equal to 0,  ∂vx
∂x+∂vy
∂y+∂vz
∂z=0, right (refer
video)? 
So, that, if we see that, yeah, so here we have right? del v x del x del vy del y and del vz del z this
becomes equals to 0, ∂vx
∂x+∂vy
∂y+∂vz
∂z=0, okay. So, this is a special situation where the fluid
is incompressible, and D rho Dt is equal to 0, right? That means if the fluid is incompressible that
is the density is not changing it is constant then we can write that D rho Dt is 0 ,(Dρ
Dt)=0and
that implies the equation of continuity to be equal to del v x del x plus del vy del y plus del vz del z
equals to 0 ∂vx
∂x+∂vy
∂y+∂vz
∂z=0. Mind it, these relations will further be utilized subsequently,
may be, for developing the equation of motion, right? 
The entire flow regime is primarily depending on the sets of equations known as Navier-Stokes
equation, which we will subsequently develop. Obviously and there these relations of equation of
continuity will be really helpful and you will see, that is why, giving so much emphasis on this,
that you must also keep in mind that this under special condition that D rho Dt is 0 ,(Dρ
Dt)=0,and then del vx del x plus del vy del y plus del vz del z is 0 ∂vx
∂x+∂vy
∂y+∂vz
∂z=0, at, when the
density  is  constant.  This  you  keep  in  mind  and  subsequently  we  will  do  it  when  we  are
developing the Navier-Stokes equation or that is called equation of motion, right? 
So, from the equation of continuity, with the help of equation of continuity, equation of motion is
also developed. So, utilizing these relations, so, keep in mind, we will keep these relations
utilized developing the equation of motion, right? And so, next class we will do the derivation of
equation of continuity in both Cartesian coordinate and in cylindrical coordinate. So, obviously
in Cartesian coordinate it will be x, y, z and in the cylindrical coordinate it will be r, theta, z (r, θ,
z), right? But basic thing will remain in both the cases same that the basic equation based on
which, as we have done here, is conservation of mass.
So, that will remain same. So, in that case, it will not be changing. So, whatever is coming on
that must be equal to whatever is going out and if there is any accumulation, so, that we will
keep in mind and do in the next class, right? So, we now finish it here. So, thank you for this
class.  
 