Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 39  
Module 8  
Non Newtonian fluid flow part -1 
So, we have done some problem s on pneumatic conveying , which you perhaps, have seen and 
done at your home also. Now , let us go to another very important aspect , that is called 
Newtonian , we have seen till now all fluid s were Newtonian, but , if the fluid becomes Non -
Newtonian, right , then how to o about it ?  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:13)  
 
Then, we call it to be non -Newtonian fluid flow, right? So , we call it to be non -Newtonian fluid 
flow, right? Now, to do that, let us recapitulate a little in the sense , we had said that shear stress, 
right? If you remember , in many classes earlier , we had said , shear stress and in this non -
Newtonian flow , when we define , what is the non -Newtonian  fluid , why we call it to be Non -
Newtonian etc.  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:03)  
 
Before we go into that, let us also  look into this aspect that a little recapitulation that you 
remember , we had said that if we take a bunch of cards like this, this is one card this is another 
card playing cards , I am referring to , this is another card , these are all , I mean , enlarged pic tures, 
right? In reality , by this term , the whole card bunch will come up, right? But , if we assume that 
these kinds of cards are there , and then if we apply a force , in here , force at the bottom of the 
card, then , what will happen? This card will move a l ittle, right?  
Then, the next card will move a  little,  it should have been a little more so that we understand it 
easily, then the third one would have moved , even a less , and the fourth one would have moved , 
might not have moved at all, right? So , we get a distribution of these cards , it looks like this, 
right? Whereas, originally , it was like that. So , movement of it has occurred , the main card that 
remained actually , if you would have done it right below , then it could have been more easily 
understandabl e, that the first card moved like this, the second card moved a little , or the top most 
card, this did not move at all and next to that moved a little , next to that moved , even like this, 
right?  
So, there would have been a movement like this which we call this, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 5:02)  
 
This is because , we gave the force F, this card movement is the right example of giving the shear  
force , where the layers , by definition , you see that shear  stress is a force that causes layers or  
parts to slide , often each other in opposite directions, right? An example of shearing stress is a 
force of two connecting rocks rubbing in opposite directions, right? As we said the best example 
could have been the  cards playing cards example, right?  
Now , when we are saying it, we remember that in couple of months , or years there , where many 
earthquake  happened  all over the world, right? There , also the same thing happened,  the two 
plates of the earth , there , where , one over the other, suddenly , there is a movement, right? This 
kind of friction movement is there and one plate is trying to hold the other, other plate is trying to 
go out because of the force applied and that made the whole earth shaking, where this pla ce, it 
happened , that place quake or which we know as , which we know as earthquake, right?  
So, similar to that , or if two stones are like this, they are one over the other , getting rather some 
force , you are applying like this , that is called the shear  force, right? The best example we have 
given with the card, right? So , this card example is the best one , which we can easily understand 
because playing cards , you may have in all the houses , so, you take that bunch, put a little force 
with another very t hin one , give a sudden force to the bottom most , and you will see that there 
will be a distribution like that, right?  
So, the distribution of cards will be like that , the bottom most , which one , you have given the 
force , it has moved a little , and then , the next, then the next one , like that , and maybe the top one 
did not move at all , because , by that time it reached  to the top , the force was nullified , so, it 
could not move. So , this kind of thing happens in liquids also , both in liquid as well as in gase s, 
or more prevalent in gases than that of the liquid, but still it is in the fluid, right?  
So, by definition , we can say that , shear stress means , the component of stress that causes 
parallel layers of a material to move relative to each other in their o wn planes, right? So , this 
cards , if we consider them to be each one of them to be one of the plane s, right? Each one to be 
one of the planes, then these planes are again , this stress that causes parallel layers of the 
material to move relative to each other, right? With respect to the bottom most , the top most did 
not move at all , the next to that moved a little, next to that moved even a little , like that , it is 
happening , that is the layers are moving with the force given, right?  
So, this is a relative movement of the layers , when they are together, right? In different planes, 
so, keeping this in mind , keeping background in mind , we, now, move on to the Non -Newtonian 
fluid flow , through the Non -Newtonian fluid , it is also a big one, so , hopefully , may not be in 
one class , it will be over , maybe , several classes will be required, so , as an when , the time will 
permit , till that point , we will continue and maybe , in the foll owing class , or next class , we will 
do a little recapitulation and go on proceeding, right?  
Now , let us look , how the definition says, non -Newtonian fluid , this is this follows the power  law 
equation, right?  (Refer Slide Time: 10:16)  
 
So, Newton’s power law equation , that, which , we called Newtonian or non -Newtonian fluid , 
that relates that , shear stress Tau is equal to minus mu dv dr, right? So , this minus mu dv dr , this 
is the very simple relation of the fluid, right? That is given by th e Newton , and this , the liquid or 
fluid , which follows this relations , straight forward , they are known as Newtonian fluid, right? 
They are simply known as the Newtonian fluid , and they follow this simple relation of the power 
law, right?  
There are two ty pes of liquids like that, one where shear stress oblique that is rate of shear stress 
to rate of shear rate, this relation follow , is independent of time , this is one type of fluid , and 
most of the liquid s or foods are , they follow this type of relation , and the other , that shear stress 
to shear rate , this relationship is time dependent, right? So , when it is time dependent then 
another one type , for example , few sols, gels , they follow this type of relation, right? So , now 
this, or the two , that is shear s tress to shear rate , independent of time one type of fluid , and shear 
stress to shear rate is dependent o n time that  is another type of fluid. So , one is time independent 
and another is time dependent , means , time dependent means at 11 O’clock , if it is one value , 
maybe at 12 O’clock,  it will have another value , maybe at 1 O’clock , it will have another value.  
So, that is time dependent, but if it is time independent , then we will say , at 11 O’clock whatever 
value was there of the fluid , same val ue is there at 12 O’clock , or the same value is there at 1 
O’clock. So , this we have to keep in mind that time dependent and time independent meaning 
that shear stress to shear rate ratio , the value does not change with time , that is time independent , 
11 O’clock, 12 O’clock, 1 O’clock, 2 O’clock , all the time , the value remains same , then it is 
time independent , and if the value changes at 12 O’clock, or at 11 O’clock or at 1 O’clock , then, 
we call it to be time dependent , where shear stress, shear rate rat io varies, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:09)  
 
Now , shear stress is this , and shear rate is called this one , dv / dr is known as shear rate , and this 
shear stress shear rate ratio normally we call, why this negative? Because , as the shear stress 
goes up , the shear rate goes down that is why , that is indicating negative , exactly this says that 
mu minus dv  / dr, right? So , this rate constant  is known as the viscosity , which we call as mu, 
right? For the Newtonian fluid , we call it to be mu, right? So , let us go into those , where it is 
time independent fluids , and there are 3 types of such fluids, right?  
And these 3 types are known as Bingham plastic, right? Then the other one is known as Bingham 
plastic , then other one is known as Pseudo plastic, right? And  third one is known as Dilatants  
liquids, right? So , these are the 3 types , which are time independent fluids, right? And , all of 
them  follow the power law equation. So , let us go back to that power law equation , which we 
started with , i.e., Tau is minus m u dv / dr or mu minus dv / dr, right?  
So, we said , shear stress is proportional to shear rate, right? And this , we said to be equal to a 
proportionality constant mu , minus dv  / dr, right? And we also said that negative term implies 
that as the shear stress is increasing, shear rate is decreasing, right? So , and the proportionality 
constant , we said it to be mu , or that is normally denoted as the viscosity, right? So , now, as we 
said that Bingham plastic , this is unlike Newtonian fluid , if we plot shea r stress versus shear rate , 
Tau versus dv  / dr, if we plot, then unlike Newtonian fluid , it is, because , this is Newtonian we 
said, right?  
So, unlike this , where it is shear rate and shear stress is , as it is increasing, right? So , like this it is 
followin g 45 degree line, but , for the Bingham plastic , it is unlike that , this one , where it is 0 , 
starting from 0, then we  have  dv / dr, right? Dv / dr minus dv / dr, with increas e of r v is 
decreasing , i.e., the minus , negative with increas e of r, v is decreasing, right? So , if we take , this 
is the pipe, this is the center, if this is r, so , as r is increasing , rather , we write this way r is 
increasing , v is decreasing, right? So, we say that for the Bingham plastic , unlike this Newtonian 
fluid , you need a minimum threshold shear stress , which is required , once it is there , then it 
follows the similar way as it is in the Newtonian fluid, right? But , that means , you need a n initial 
push that let it start , then it will follow, right? Let start then it  will follow , one of the example is 
that, say your toothpaste , when it is there , so in the tube it is there , unless you put a press , it will 
not flow, right?  
So, give a thrust to that , so that it flows , and it starts flowing, so , that is what is required and this 
is similar to the Newtonian fluid , but, you need an initial stress that  has to be given , initial push 
has to be given so that it moves like that. Generally , we say , for many students , that okay , unless 
and until they are giving a jolt,  they do not  study, right? So , a similar behavior can be said, right? 
So, Bingham plastic , like that, then , here this we can relate in terms of shear stress as Tau, minus 
Tau, yield is equal to minus mu dv / dr, where this T auy is the yield stress, that is minimum , 
which you need to give to the fluid for the flow of the fluid . Once it starts flowing then it follows 
the Newtonian fluid, right?  
Example is chocolate mixtures , or margarine, margarine is similar like butter, a substitute of 
butter in many cases , it is s aid, right? So , that is the margarine, okay. Then grain -water 
suspension , as we said , toothpaste , or it could be sewage sludge etc. In sewage sludge also , you 
will see that , unless there is a push, unless there is a stress given, unless there is a force gi ven, 
that sewage sludge also does not move, right? Same , as we said for the toothpaste , so, in that 
toothpaste , you give a pressure , then it comes out from there, so , that is the yield stress , or Tauy 
which we are referring to, right?  Same is true with ch ocolate mixture;  same is true with margarine, grain -water suspension, 
sewage etc, right? So , it follows this relation , that Tau, minus , Tauy is minus mu dv / dr or this is 
called the shear stress versus shear rate relation for the Bingham plastic fluid, right? So next , we 
go to the second type that is called the P seudo plastic, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:17)  
 
For Pseudo plastic fluid , we write the relation as  Tau is equal to k dv  / dr with a negative, right , 
to the power n, right? Say , this is equation number (2), here n is less than 1, right?  
And, most of the Non -Newtonian fluid follows this relationship, right? So , there , the general 
power law equation can be written like this, right? And , this is commonly known as Ostwald -de-
waele equation, right? Where, k is the consistency coefficient or index , and n is flow behavior 
index, right? The unit of this k is , there it is Newton second to the power n by meter to  the meter 
square, right? And n is flow behavior index, right?  
Apparent viscosity can be obtained from this equation (1), and equation (2) as mu , apparent is 
equal to k into minus dv  / dr to the power n minus 1, right? This is called apparent viscosity, 
right? So / today we have then discussed about the types of Non -Newtonian fluids or even 
Newtonian fluid and the relation between this shear stress and shear rate . For this type of fluids , 
power law equation , Ostwald -de-waele equation, so , this we complete today here , and next day 
we will continue for the following aspects , following subject rather , I should say that it will take 
some more time , some time , rather , to cover up the entire Non -Newtonian fluid flow, okay thank 
you.  