Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture 32
Module 7
Sonic velocity-Mach number
In continuation to the previous class, where, we could not end up with the relation of the Mach
number and the velocity because, the time was out. So, we had to leave and recapitulation that
we had said that sonic velocity, right?
(Refer Slide Time: 0:55)
So, we had said that, sonic velocity, and from that sonic velocity, we have defined that Mach
number. So, Mach number was N Ma, right? And, that was the velocity of that to that velocity of
sound and ultimately, we bring in, we brought it to be rather, that tip velocity of the nozzle, right?
Tip velocity at the nozzle, v 0, p0, rho0 at the nozzle, right? Tip velocity at the nozzle, so, v 0, p0,
rho0 at the nozzle, right? From there, what I remember that, we had come to the level N Ma square
is equal to 2 by gamma minus 1 into p 0 by p to the power 1 minus gamma by gamma minus 1,
right? 
This, we had done in the previous class, right? Now, let us take, let us assume that Mach number
is NMa is equal to 1. What does Mach number is equal to 1 mean? That, Mach number is equal to
1, means that, from the definition of Mach number, N Ma was v by vs, right? Or, v0 at the tip by vs,
where, this is equal to 1, that means, v 0 is equal to vs, which means that, when Mach number is 1,the velocity at the tip is velocity of the sound, right? Velocity of the sound, that is what we get,
right? 
And if it is less than 1, if N Ma is less than 1, then, we call to be this is velocity of sound, and if we
say that Mach number is less than 1 that means, v 0 by vs is less than 1, that means, v 0 is less than
vs, right? That means, velocity at the tip is less than the velocity of sound. It is called sub sonic
velocity, and if NMa is greater than 1, then this means, v by, or, v 0 by vs; v0 by vs is equal to
greater than 1 that means, v 0 is greater than vs, i.e., velocity at the tip is greater than velocity of
sound, and this situation is called supersonic velocity, right? So, that is what you remember in
the previous class, which, I said that if you are staying in area where there are air force region
and you might have seen that lots of air force planes are moving at very high-speed, right?
And, when that speed is the speed of the sound, then we hear that, but if it is less than that or
greater than that, then we do not hear it, right? And I said also one thing that, sometimes it
makes, ”boom”, right? Some sound like a “Boom” and this booming and it is so, severe that
your, if you are staying there, that your windows and other things may shatter, or it may have
some vibrations, severe vibration, right? Depending on how close it is, then, when this change is
happening, that is supersonic to sonic or sonic to subsonic or vice versa, then, this booming takes
place, right? 
So, this is a very great example of this supersonic, subsonic and sonic velocity, right? So, we
have, now, assumed that, if the Mach number is 1, then what happens, so, if we take Mach
number here is equal to 1, i.e., N Ma square is 1, so this is equal to 2 by gamma minus 1, right, into
p0 by p to the power 1 minus gamma by gamma minus 1, right? Or, p 0 by p to the power 1 by
minus gamma by gamma, this is 1 minus gamma by gamma, this is equal to p 0 by p, this is equal
to, this 1 goes there, right? So, this is, that means, okay, p 0 let us write, let us write again, or, p 0
by p to the power 1 minus gamma by gamma minus 1, this is equal to gamma minus 1 by 2,
right?
So from this relation p 0 by p to the power 1 minus gamma by gamma 1 plus gamma minus 1 by 2
right, i.e., this is equal to gamma plus 1 by 2. (Refer Slide Time: 7:30)
So, we can rewrite that p 0 over p to the power 1 minus gamma by gamma is equal to gamma plus
1 by 2, right? Or, we can write p 0 by p to the power gamma minus 1 by gamma is equal to 2 by
gamma plus 1, right? This, we can write easily. So, we can also write, p 0 over p is equal to 2 by
gamma plus 1 to the power gamma minus 1. In this case, it will be inverse, so, it will be gamma
by gamma minus 1, right? This will be inverse, so, gamma by gamma minus 1.
So, p0 by p is equal to 2 by gamma plus 1 to the power gamma by gamma minus 1, right? That,
if, now, we assume that gamma is equal to 1.4 for a diatomic gases. For a diatomic gas if gamma
is 1.4, then we can write p 0 over p is equal to 2 by 1.4 plus 1 to the power 1.4 by 1.4 minus 1,
right? And let us see what it makes? So, we have 2 by 2.4 2 by 1.4 plus 1, so, this is 2.4, so, this
is this to the power 1.4 divided by 1.4 minus 1, right? So, this one is two and this three. 
So, this is equal to 0.528, so, this is equal to 0.582 that means, p 0 over p is equal to 0.528, which
is nothing but the critical velocity, right? So, this means, this is nothing but critical velocity, and
that tells that when the velocity is under critical condition that is p 0 by p becomes under critical
condition, then the ratio of tip velocity to the inside or inlet velocity that becomes equal to 0.528,
right? So, we have seen, that means, when Mach number is equal to 1, right? 
When, Mach number is equal to 1, then the pressure ratio becomes critical, and the value is
0.528. When this value becomes 0.528, we can say that this velocity has become the velocity of
the sound, right? Because, this is what we showed earlier, that, Mach number is equal to 1 is
equal to v0 by vs equal to 1, or v0 is equal to vs, right? Now, we have shown that p 0 by p becomescritical, when it is 0.528. So, corresponding velocity is v 0 and that becomes critical velocity,
v0critical, so, that becomes the velocity of sound.
So, under critical condition, the velocity at the tip, when it is 0.528, of the pressure ratio of the
outlet to inlet or tip velocity to inside velocity, that becomes 0.528, then, it becomes the velocity
of sound, right? This is great thing which was developed earlier by the greatest scientists like
Mach and others, right? So, we said that someday, we will try to bring their photographs, and
some biography of some of the people, who really contributed to this field, okay.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:36)
So, far recapitulation, let us look into that whole thing, for the sonic velocity, let us look into
that, we had started with this, that sonic velocity is v s, velocity of sound in air is under root K by
rho, where K is the bulk modulus of the medium. So, if it is air, than it is the bulk modulus of air,
right? And also we said that K is bulk modulus, i.e., by definition, can be said, del p over del V
by V, i.e., the change in volume per unit volume with respect to the change in pressure, right? 
Now, it has been seen that change in volume per unit volume is decreasing as the change in
pressure is increasing, right? So, as delta p is increasing the change in volume per unit volume
for air, i.e., the bulk modulus is decreasing. So, to account for this, the negative sign comes in
and that if we introduce, then we can say that, del p over del V by V is equal to minus del p over
del V by V, right? And this is equal to del p over, so, this V, 1 by V can be substituted as rho dV,
right? So, this we have substituted, and we have made minus dp over rho dv.
So, this is possible, because, V is nothing but 1 by rho, so, we can write from there that, if V is 1
by rho, therefore, dv over d rho, dv over d rho, or dv d rho, is equal to minus 1 by rho square,i.e., minus rho to the power minus 2. So, that means, minus 1 by rho square or dV can be written
as if we substitute that dv can be written as d rho, minus d rho over rho square, right? So,
therefore, that bulk modulus K can be substituted with minus dp over rho times minus d rho by
rho square, so, this minus this minus goes off, this rho this rho square, 1 rho goes off, so, this rho
comes to the top so i.e., rho dp over d rho.
So, K becomes equal to rho dp over d rho, or K by rho is equal to dp over d rho, right?
Therefore, we can write, from this definition v s, vs is under root K by rho, so, that can be written
as, under root dp over d rho, right? dp over d rho because, dp over d rho, that has come from this
K is this, so K by rho is dp over d rho, so v s is dp over d rho. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:14)
Now, we also said that, if the flow is taking place through adiabatic flow, i.e., there is no heat
loss or heat gain, right? There is no heat loss or heat gain if the flow is under adiabatic condition,
then, we can also write that, for adiabatic flow pV gamma is equal to constant, or, we can also
write that p is equal to CV to power minus gamma, i.e., equal to C rho to the power gamma,
right? C V to the power minus gamma or C rho to the power gamma, right? 
So, we can write that dp over d rho is equal to gamma C rho to the power gamma minus 1, i.e.,
equal to gamma p V to the power gamma, into rho to the power gamma minus 1, so, that is equal
to gamma p rho to the power gamma minus 1 by rho to the power gamma or this can be
simplified as gamma p by rho. So, we write v s as under root gamma p by rho, when, the flow is
under adiabatic condition, so, it is a must, that flows under adiabatic condition, i.e., there is no
heat gain or heat loss or, there is no heat flow into the medium.So, that condition pV gamma is constant. This we have to keep in mind, right? So, v s has
become under root gamma p by rho, right? Now, we define, a new number called, Mach
number. So, Mach number defined as if it is written as N Ma. So, this is a dimensionless
number and that is defined as the ratio of velocity over the sonic velocity, ratio of the
velocity of that point or of that system over the velocity of sound v s, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:03)
So, we wrote that Mach number N Ma is v by vs is v0 by vs, i.e., if the flow is also acquiring
through the nozzle, so, this we said repeatedly, but, again, that, if the flow is occurring through
the  nozzle,  and  if  the  tip  velocity  of  the  nozzle  is  v 0,  corresponding  pressure  is  p 0 and
corresponding density is rho.
Similarly, inside is p, v and rho, then, we can write that, for the nozzle velocity, N Ma is equal to v
over vs is equal to v0 over vs, right? So, from there, we also wrote that the velocity of the tip is v 0
equal to Mach number times under root gamma p 0 v0 assuming that the flow is occurring at the
tip of the nozzle, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:00)So, this we finished in the previous class, and i.e., a recapitulation, and then, we squared up this
v0 square is equal to N Ma square gamma p0 v0.
So, we can write, N Ma square gamma p0 v0, p0 and this should be v 0, right? Gamma p0 v0 is equal
to this v0 square v0, we had written many times, i.e., under root of this, so, n square is there so
that, under root goes out. So, gamma pV gamma minus 1, or, in many cases, we had written,
gamma p by gamma minus 1 into rho. So, that means, this rho goes out V comes on the top times
1 minus p0 by p to the power gamma minus 1 by gamma, right?
So, this on simplification, can be written that N Ma square is equal to 2 pV, right, by gamma minus
1 into p0 v0 times 1 minus p0 by p to the power gamma minus 1 by gamma, right? So, this on
simplification, we can write N Ma square is equal to 2 by gamma minus 1, this one into p 0 by p
into V by V0, which can be substituted as p 0 by p to the power 1 by gamma because pV gamma,
is equal to constant, so, pV is equal to p 0 pV gamma is equal to p 0 V0 gamma, right? From there,
we can write that p 0 by p is equal to v by v 0 is equal to p0 by p to the power 1 by gamma, right?
So, this we substituted and then the remaining one was 1 minus p 0 by p to the power gamma
minus 1 by gamma, right? 
So, since it is there, so, we can rewrite, or, we can rearrange as, 2 by gamma minus 1 times this
p0 by p, right? This is p by p 0, so, if we make it is 1 inverse, so, it becomes 1 by gamma minus 1
so p0 by p 1 by gamma minus 1, this can be written p 0 by p to the power minus 1, so, that minus 1
goes into there, so, this is 1 by gamma minus 1, p 0 by p to the power 1 by gamma minus 1. So,
into 1 minus p by p 0 to the power gamma minus 1 by gamma, so, then, Mach number square,this, we can write to be equal to 2 by gamma minus 1 into p 0 by p to the power 1 minus gamma
by gamma minus 1, right? 
So, this was also done in the previous class, for recapitulation we have taken it. Then, we said if
Mach number is equal to 1, right? When v 0 becomes equal to v s, then Mach number becomes
equal to 1, right? So, because, N Ma, we said it is v by v s, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:38)
v0 by vs, s,o when it is equal to 1 then v 0 is vs, i.e., the tip velocity becomes the velocity of sound,
right? So if velocity of sound, so, if it is that, when v 0 becomes the velocity of sound, then Mach
number becomes equal to 1.(Refer Slide Time: 25:15)
So, if Mach number becomes equal to 1, then, we can write that, N Ma is 1. So, NMa square, here it
was, so, it is 1 times 2 by gamma minus 1 times p 0 by p to the power 1 by gamma minus 1. If you
remember,r we had this, okay, p 0 by p to the power 1 minus gamma by gamma minus 1, 1 minus
gamma by gamma minus 1 minus 1, right? So, this is then, we can rearrange, right? So, we can
rearrange, that, this, we had shown today, that, this gamma minus 1 by 2, this, becomes, gamma
minus 1 by 2, right, minus 1, so, that means, gamma minus 1 plus 1, that becomes gamma plus 1
by 2, right? 
So that is what it has become, gamma plus 1 by 2 that is equal to p 0 by p to the power 1 minus
gamma by gamma. So, we can also write p 0 by p to the power gamma minus 1 by gamma, i.e.,
equal to 2 by gamma plus 1, so, p 0 by p equal to 2 by gamma plus 1, it will be inverse of this, so,gamma by gamma minus 1. So, 2 by gamma plus 1 to the power, gamma by gamma minus 1.
Now, if we say that, the fluid is diatomic gas, then the value of gamma, i.e., heat capacity ratio,
we can take as 1.4 and if we take 1.4, then, this ratio p 0 by p, that becomes equal to 0.528, right? 
Now, the implication of this is that the pressure ratio, when it becomes 0.528, earlier we also
have shown, and established that, at that situation, the pressure ratio is called critical pressure
ratio, and also we have established earlier that, at this pressure ratio of 0.528, the velocity
becomes maximum, i.e., v s is maximum, or rather v 0, i.e., tip velocity becomes maximum. And
we also have shown that when this pressure ratio critical becomes 0.528, then, the velocity of the
tip, that becomes a velocity of the sound, that means that velocity is equal to the velocity of
sound, and when it is, you can infer that when the pressure ratio becomes 0.528, then it becomes
the velocity of sound, and it attains the velocity, that velocity, at the tip attains the velocity of the
sound when the pressure ratio becomes critical, and we also have shown earlier, at this point the
discharge also become the maximum, right? 
So, when the velocity is maximum, when the discharge is maximum, then the velocity, which it
attains in air, then, it is the velocity of the sound. So, this we can infer that when the velocity is
maximum, when velocity becomes max, discharge becomes maximum, then the pressure ratio
becomes, pressure ratio means, outlet to inlet, or the tip velocity to the inlet velocity, that
becomes 0.528 and if this 0.528 pressure ratio is attained then all corresponding velocity or
discharge becomes maximum and the velocity attains the velocity of sound, and this is what is
the sonic velocity, right? So, this we have given the example with the aero plane also, right? So,
hope you have understood this, thank you.  