Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture 33
Module 7
Variable fluid flow
Hello, we were with sonic velocity, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 0:32) 
And we said that, there are many examples; we would like to show you also here that, this is one
such typical nozzle, right? So, it is coming from this end, so, this is the incoming and this is the
outgoing and this is called tip, right? So, this tip velocity, which we developed earlier, so, i.e., v 0,
right? Or, v0, whatever you call it to be, so that, or outlet, v outlet. So, from high pressure with a
lower velocity to low pressure with very high velocity, this will come out and we also showed
that the velocity corresponding to this at the tip is the velocity of the sound if that pressure ratio
is under critical condition, i.e., 0.528. This we said and that is what it is also being shown, this is
in a nozzle.(Refer Slide Time: 1:37) 
Typical flow throw through nozzle like this, this diagram, we had shown, this is another typical
function of nozzle, where air is going in and you see that, many nozzles are used, particularly, in
spray drying, if you see that spray dryer, where it is there. So, nozzles are there, which are
atomizing the inlet of the fluid and their behaviors also you can expect, to be similar right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 2:17)
So, these things are there, and this is a typical siren. I referred to earlier that typical siren, when it
is in the industrial area, you get that siren sound, or, we all, I also said that during war, which you
have not seen, but we have, and we have seen that during that period, to warn people, or alert
people this siren was ringing, and it was really a huge sound, from anywhere you can hear it,
right? So, this is another example of this nozzle flow, okay.(Refer Slide Time: 3:03)
Now, we come back to another, which is called variable flow, right? I give an example of it.
Every now and then you come across, nowadays; there is a go for celebrating birthday, or some
other kind of happy days, right? So, there, you have seen that many balloons are there, which is
decorative, and while you, I do not know how many of you have seen that, while you are
pumping balloon with your mouth, so, as sometimes you are pumping, it is blowing up and again
when you are stopping, that time it is again going down.
So,  this  process  of  pumping  and  getting  off from  the  balloon,  these  two  or  together, and
ultimately you come with a balloon. Now, with that balloon, if you had ever seen that, by chance
if it slips from your hand, it goes like a, I do not know whether you have seen that during your
childhood, you used to burn during Diwali, some fireworks, like where you put some fire and
then it moves like this, right? With a sound, and similar kind of thing, when you have the balloon
full with the volume of air, and suddenly if it slips, it goes from your end to, throughout the
space, where it is there, and you do not know, you have no control, it goes there, right? 
This is an example of this, and this, that you had the balloon full of air and now you allow it to or
rather, suddenly, you can do it purposefully, in many cases people do, or at least kids do play
with that, that they blow the balloon and then allow it to move, right? So, that purposefully, you
can do, or by mistake, or by slip, it may go out of your hand, the effect is same, and this kind of
flow is called the variable flow, means you had the volume of the balloon, now suddenly it is
dropping down and this flow is known as the variable flow, right? Now, today we will discuss on this variable flow, okay. So, variable flow, which occurs when
upstream pressure varies, important thing to be remember is that p 0 by p, i.e., the tip to the inside,
or, outlet to the inlet, so, p 0 by p will always be at critical level until pa by p, now what is that p a?
So, we said that you had the balloon, so, in that balloon whatever pressure is inside that is p, at
the tip of the balloon the pressure, which will come out is p 0, now where it will go? It will go to
the atmosphere, so, this is p a that is atmospheric pressure, right? 
So until pa by p increases p 0 by p will have critical value, right, at its critical level until p a by p
increases and this will happen only when p has dropped to a value of p equal to p a by 0.528, i.e.,
1.894 atmosphere. So, until it attains that 1.894 atmosphere, this p value, it drops. This will be
under critical condition, i.e., p 0 over p will be under critical condition that we have to keep in
mind, right? So, we said that p 0 by p will be under critical condition until the value of p by p a,
reaches 1,894, right? p is the inlet pressure and p a is the pressure of atmosphere where this p 0 is
delivering, right? 
So, this ratio p over p 0 until it reaches, it decreases, of course, and till the value p is equal to p a by
0.528, i.e., 1.894, until if the value of p comes down to p equal to 1.894 atmosphere, till that time
it will be under critical condition, i.e., critical pressure ratio p 0 by p will be under critical pressure
ratio condition i.e., 0.528. So, above 1.984 atmospheres, p 0 by p will always maintain at critical
value, right? (Refer Slide Time: 8:56)
If that be true, then, we can say that the discharge can be written w equals to Cd A 0 under root 2
gamma p rho by gamma minus 1 into p 0 by p to the power 2 by gamma under critical condition
minus  p0 by p to the power gamma plus 1 by gamma, again, under critical pressure ratio
condition.  This  is  valid this  equation  because,  we said that p 0 by p will be under critical
condition, at critical condition, till the pressure drops down to p a by p, i.e., this increasing, right?
Until this is increasing, that means this will happen till when p is equal to p a over 0.528, so, that
means, it is, if we take p at 1 atmosphere, so, then, it is 1.894 atmospheres, right? 
Until p comes down to 1.894 p 0 by p will be under critical condition. So, under that situation, the
discharge can be written as Cd A 0 2 gamma p rho gamma minus 1 gamma p rho by gamma
minus 1 into p0 by p to the power 2 by gamma under critical condition minus p 0 by p to the
power gamma plus 1 by gamma again under critical condition, right? 
Now, since p is dropping, so, we can say, w is equal to K 1, one constant, under root rho into p,
right? Under root rho into p, where, this K 1, this is equal to Cd A 0 under root 2 gamma by gamma
minus 1 into p0 by p to the power 2 by gamma under critical minus p 0 by p to the power gamma
plus 1 by gamma again under critical condition. So, this is K 1 because, these are constant 2
constant, gamma constant. So, this is constant, this is also having a definite value under critical
condition, this is also having a definite value, so, variable is only p and rho, rho and p are only
variables. So, that is why we can write, that, w, discharge is a coefficient K 1 under root p rho,
where, K1 is this Cd A0 under root 2 by gamma by gamma minus 1 into p 0 by p under criticalcondition to the power 2 by gamma minus p 0 by p to the power gamma plus 1 by gamma at
critical condition, right? 
So, if this be true, then, if we say that mass of gas in the container, if that is assumed to be m,
then, m can be written as v c into rho, right? Where, of course v c is the volume of the container,
volume of the container is the v c, right? Then, if m is v c, then, we can, from this gas relation, we
can write pv is equal to RT by M, or p by rho is equal to RT by M, right? So, p by rho is RT by
M, or we can write, rho is equal to PM by RT, right? Where, rho is a function (variable) of p. So,
we can write, this is nothing, K 2 into p because M, R and T are constants, right? 
If M, R and T are constants, then, we can write, rho is a function of p, rho is a function of p only,
where, M, R, T being constant is K 2 and this K2 is equal to M by RT, right? So, we know K 1, we
know K2, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:55)
Then, we can write that M is equal to v c into K2 p, right? And from there, if we differentiate, we
can write, dm is equal to v c K2 dp, because, this v c and K2 are constants. So, we, on a differential
of m is equal to this constant times differential of p, right? Therefore, we can write, from w is
equal to K1 under root p rho, which, we have seen earlier, is equal to K 1 under root K2 p square,
right? Because, we have seen K 2 is that rho is K2 p, right? rho is K2 p, so, K2 p square K1 under
root K2 p square, right? This is what we can say and that can be simplified as K 1 under root K2
into p because, p square from the root, it comes out, and it is p K 1 under root p, right?
Therefore, from this, we can write a small change in w, or small discharge w is dw, that is
nothing but K1 K2 under root and this is into p into dt, right? So, a small discharge dw, can bewritten as, K1 under root p K1 under root K2 into p times dividing that period of delta t, dt,
whatever change has been made, right? Now, if there is a discharge, we, our thing was like this,
if there is a discharge from there, right? So, if w be the discharge, then, corresponding m quantity
will be depleted from the container.
So, we can write, dw is equal to minus dm because when w will discharge, corresponding m
quantity from the container, will deplete. So, this depletion of the mass is equivalent to the
discharge,  but,  that  is  why, it  is  negative  because,  that  will  be  gradually  depleting,  so, to
incorporate that fact, this negative sign is introduced. So, dw is minus dm, right? So, we can
write that, dw, already we have seen, how, what it is. It is K 1 under root K2 into p into dt, this is
equal to minus vc into K2 into dp, that is from the dm, right? This is from dm, that v c K2 dp with a
negative, and here w was K 1 under root K2 into p and we said that small quantity dw is discharge
at the pressure p for a time, small quantity of time of dt. 
So, total quantity discharge is these K 1, K2 was constants. So, this was the total quantity, which is
discharged, right? And since, this discharge has to be equivalent to the depletion of the mass
from the container. So, dw is equal to minus dm, right? Now if this we rearrange and write in
terms of integral and integrate for a definite integration of say point 1 to 2, or time t 1 to time t2,
integral of dt, this can be written as minus v c is constant, then root K 2, right, over K1, because,
this comes out, right? K 2 okay, let us rewrite this.
Or, dt is equal to minus v c K2 over K1 root K2, right, over p, right? This into dp, right? So, v c, this
root K2 and K2 goes off, so, 1 root K 2 remains, so minus v c root K2 over K1, so, it is between
point 1 to 2 dp over p, right? Now, dp over p, if we integrate between the points 1 to 2, then dp
over p is, integral of this is, ln p with the domain of 1 to 2, right? So, we can write that, ln p 2 by
p1, so, this is equal to minus v c root K2 over K1, right, over K1 times this is ln p2 over p1, right? ln
p2 over p1 and this we can take like this, v c is equal to, so, this integration is t 2 minus t1 or delta t
or, whatever, we call it, delta t, t 2 minus t1 is equal to t, whatever, we call it, right, is equal to
delta t, anything we write that is equal to this minus, we are taking off v c under root K2 over K1,
right? ln of, since, we have taken there, so, it is p 1 over p2, right? So, ln of p1 over p2.
Therefore, the time required, time t is equal to v c under root K2 over K1 ln of p1 over p2. This tells
us that what is the time that is required for the pressure to drop from a pressure p 1 to a pressure
p2, right? Under critical condition, because we have taken, all this K 2, K1 everywhere, it is thispressure under critical condition, i.e., pressure ratio p 1 by p2, or p0 by p, whatever, we call it to
be, that is the pressure ratio is under critical condition.
So, this we can also write in that earlier in the same fashion that K under root K 2 K1 ln of p0 over
p, right? So, this is also there, okay. So, we can tell, what is the time that is required for the
pressure to deplete from a pressure p to a pressure p 0, right? From, a pressure p or this was of
course, no, this is in that case, p 1 to p to p1, 1 is lower and 2 is higher limit, so, when we have
given here this is one lower limit to a higher limit, okay. So, lower limit is p 0 and higher limit is
p2 okay p, right? 
So, much time it will require to deplete from a pressure p to p 0, or, from a pressure p 2 to p1,
whatever, we call, or from a pressure p outlet to p inlet that time required, we can find out, right?
This is how we can determine the time required, right? You remember, we had given the volume
of the balloon like this, right? And here you normally tie with something, right? Here we tie with
something, but, if you do not tie, or, if it is removed, then after some time, it is reduced by
volume, right? And then after some time, further reduces by volume and then it becomes a small
balloon like this, right? 
So, this pressure p, if it is reducing to the pressure p o, how much time it will take for this to
happen, the total time required t, how much it is, that we can also determine, only we have to
keep in mind, this is called variable flow, and whenever variable flow is there, that means we
assumed that p0 by p is under critical pressure ratio condition, right? And we also said this will
happen till the pressure increases from p, I mean, this ratio increases to p by p a, right? Where, pa
is the atmospheric pressure, right? 
And we also said this means that the pressure p is still it is coming to the number that is p
atmosphere, 1 atmosphere, if it is 1 by 0.528 that is 1.894. So, till the pressure comes to the 1.894
atmosphere this critical condition will remain, right? So, upto 1.894 atmosphere, right? This
pressure ratio will remain under critical condition and in that situation we can find out, what is
the time required for the pressure to drop from a pressure p 1 to a pressure, from a pressure p
rather, okay, if we tell, one to be the inlet, from a pressure p 1 or, in this case, since, we have
integrated, so, this is the lower value, this is the higher value, so, in that case, we say that p 1 to be
the outlet and p2 to be the inlet.
So, this is the higher, this is the lower, right? And in any case, we can say that p 1 is the say, if it is
inlet, then if p2 is the outlet, better to say that p o poutlet and p there is the inside pressure, so, untilthis pressure ratio is 1.894, the p by p 0 that is p by p0 it is coming p by p 0 by atmosphere p0 by p
is 1.894, till that p is 1.894. It is under critical pressure, and we can find out that the time
required for the pressure drop from an initial pressure to a final pressure, okay. Thank you. 
 