Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur   
Lecture 49  
Module 10  
Ergun’s equation -derivation (Part -2) 
Now in the previous class we had a little summing up of the previous class . We started with 
laminar flow and we started with the Hagen Poiseulle equation, right? And we ended up with 
equation number 1 and then we also used , that was for laminar for the turbulent flow , that is  
using the friction factor , and we had come up to another equation that was equation number 2, 
right? And in one equation , we called it to be Blake Kozeny equation , which was for the laminar 
flow, and another was for Burke Plummer and that was for the turb ulent flow, right?  
And in both the cases,  of course from those equations , ultimately we came to the derivation or 
relation , where we utilized the mass velocity G prime factor and then in terms of G prime , we 
have come to one point with equation 1 and equa tion 2, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:49)  
 
Now , let us start from there , what we can do, right? So , if we rewrite a little that delta P was 
equal to for equation 1 , delta P was equal to 150 G prime square into delta L by phi s Dp over phi s 
Dp rho v prime over 1 minus epsilon into mu into 1 minus epsilon by epsilon cube into 1 by rho . 
This was equation 1 , and another was delta P equals to 1.75 G prime square into delta L by phi s 
Dp into 1 minus epsilon over epsilon cube into 1 by rho . This we s aid to be equation 2.  
Now , if we add these two equations , by adding equation 1 and 2 , what we get? We get delta P is 
equal to 150 G prime square into delta L by phi s Dp over phi s Dp rho v prime over 1 minus 
epsilon into mu, right , into 1 minus epsilon by e psilon cube into 1 by rho plus 1.75 G prime 
square into delta L by phi s Dp into 1 minus epsilon by epsilon cube, right , into 1 by rho. So , these 
two by adding , we get th is equation, I mean the full form, right?  
Now , if we rewrite or rearrange this equatio n, then we can say that delta P , we can write this as 
delta P into this v goes up, right? So , delta P into rho by G prime square, right? So , into G prime 
square into phi s Dp over delta L into epsilon cube by 1 minus epsilon, right? This is equal to 150 
divided by N Re, right? Plus 1.75, how? This , here only one thing , if you remember that in N Re 
definition , we had said that , that was 4 by 6, now in 4 by 6 , if we neglect this term, then phi s Dp 
rho v prime by 1 minus epsilon into mu is the D  v rho by mu , for the packed bed N Re, right?  
For N Re in the packed bed , we had seen , it was 4 by 6, right? phi s Dp rho v prime over 1 minus 
epsilon into mu , this was for N Re. Now , if we assume or neglect this 4 by 6, then , this term , we 
can write to be equal to N Re, right? And this we have brought down to this side delta P, right? G 
prime square in the denominator , phi s Dp in the numerator , delta L , in the denominator , this 
epsilon cube by 1 minus epsilon here, right? So , this is equal to , and this was common , becau se 
G prime square , which we could have taken in , rather , we should show you , otherwise , it maybe , 
you have jumped the step.  (Refer Slide Time: 7:01)  
 
So, our original was 150 G prime square, right? G prime square into delta L by phi s Dp by phi s 
Dp rho v prime 1 minus epsilon into mu, right , 1 minus epsilon by epsilon cube into 1 by rho plus 
1.75 G prime square delta L by phi s Dp 1 minus epsilon by epsilon cube into 1 by rho, right? So , 
from there , if we take that common of G prime square , which is common in both the cases , delta 
L by phi s Dp, right , into 1 minus epsilon by epsilon cube, right , into 1 by rho up to this , it is 
common in both the cases, then it remains 150 over phi s Dp rho v prime divided by 1 minus 
epsilon into mu plus 1.75, right? This is there we have taken this portion as common, right? We 
have taken this portion as common like this, right? From this we have taken common, right? And 
that has come , G prime square del ta L phi s Dp 1 minus epsilon by epsilon cube into 1 by rho . So, 
remained 150 by phi s Dp rho v prime by 1 minus epsilon into mu plus here remained 1.75.  
Now , if we divide and rearrange, then only we can write that delta P into or G prime square , let 
us writ e this way G prime square, so , here it is phi s Dp by delta L , here it is epsilon cube by 1 
minus epsilon, right? So , here it was delta P and this rho went up, right? So , delta P rho by G 
prime square phi s Dp by delta L epsilon cube by 1 minus epsilon, so , this can be made equal to 
150 divided by , now, we said , NRe by definition , we had said 4 by 6 phi s Dp rho v prime divided 
by 1 minus epsilon into mu, right? If we just ignore that 4 by 6 , which  is roughly equal to 1, then , 
we can say that this is nothing but N Re, so, 150 over N Re plus 1.75 , this is the relation, right?  
So, in this relation what you see that one this side expression , this is epsilon cube one this side 
expression delta P rho by G prime square phi s Dp by delt a L epsilon cube by 1 minus epsilon this 
is equal to 150 by N Re plus 1.75, right? Now , you just think , this equation combination , when we 
have done , this was done by one scientist , called Ergun , and the equation is known as Ergun’s 
equation , this is known as Ergun’s equation . This was developed by adding that equation 1 and 
equation 2 . This was done by Ergun and according to his name this is named as Ergun’s 
equation , where both the equations 1 and 2 were added up.  
Now , we will see one good t hing here that we said that Blake Kozeny equation was valid for N Re 
less than 10 , and we also said that Burke Plummer equation is valid for N Re greater than 1000, 
so, what about if N Re is within , less 10 and greater than 1000. Now , you see this Ergun’s 
equation , when you are using both, right? The whole expression , you were using, right? Then 
between 10 and 1000 , anywhere it is applicable , or even less than 10 , greater than 1000 also it is 
applicable.  
Only , the thing why it is applicable , because , you see w hen N Re is very small , for laminar N Re is 
very small, so , if N Re is very small , less than 10, then , this value comes to be 15 , and this is 1.75. 
So, compare d to this value 150 , 1.75 can be neglected, right? So , we write for N Re less than 10, 
right? Delta P rho by G prime square into phi s Dp over delta L, right , epsilon cube over 1 minus 
epsilon this can be written as 150 over 10 , if it is less than 10 , maximum 10 , so, let us take it to 
be maximum , so, less than 10 , plus 1.75 , so, this is 15 plus 1.75.  
So, compared to 15 , 1.75 is negligible, right? So , for laminar flow we can neglect the second 
term 1.75 . So, this expression , then comes to be delta P rho by G prime square into phi s Dp by 
delta L into epsilon cube by 1 minus epsil on this is equal to 150 over N Re, and we neglect the 
term 1.75, right? Then , this is valid for N Re less than 10, right? Now , what about the other case?  (Refer Slide Time: 15:24)  
 
The other case is that when N Re is greater than 10 our expression , Ergun’s  equation was delta P 
rho by G prime square phi s Dp by delta L epsilon cube by 1 minus epsilon , this is equal to 150 
over N Re plus 1.75. So , we have already shown , when N Re is less than 10 , what is the effect . So, 
we can come back to the Blake Kozeny equat ion, from the Ergun’s equation, Ergun’s equation 
was that by neglecting the second term 1.75 , because , compare d to 150 by N Re, this value when 
NRe is very low , this 1.75 can be neglected because this term is high.  
So, our equation comes to delta P rho by G prime square phi s Dp by delta L epsilon cube by 1 
minus epsilon 150 by N Re, right? That was valid for N Re less than 10 , and this , we know as this 
equation to be Blake Kozeny, right? So , this is Blake Kozeny equation , which we have seen. 
Now , for the other one , when N Re is very high greater than 1000, right? If N Re, for N Re greater 
than 1000, what we can say? We can say that when N Re is greater than 1000, then delta P rho by 
G prime square phi s Dp by delta L, right , into epsilon cube by 1 minus epsilon, right? This is 
equal to 150 by 1000 plus 1.75.  
So, that means , this is 150 by 1000 that is 0.15 plus 1.75 . So, compare d to 1.75 0.15 is very low, 
is not it? So , it is 1 10th of that , it is compared to 1.75 , 0.15 is very  low, 0.15 or less than that as 
the N Re value will be 1000 or greater than that. So , when it is 1000 or greater than that , then it 
will be less than 0.15 or lower value and we can say that 1.75 is much , much , higher than that 
point 1 .75, when N Re value is greater than 1000. So , we can say that compared to 1.75 if we 
neglect this 0.15, then the equation comes down to delta P rho by G prime square into phi s Dp by 
delta L into epsilon cube by 1 minus epsilon, right? This is equal to 1.75, right? And this is , we 
have seen to be known as Burke Plummer equation, right? So , from our equation , which we have 
said to be Ergun’s equation , we can come down to Burke Plummer equation , or we can go back 
to Blake Kozeny equation, right?  
This fundamental thing , if we keep in mind, then keeping or remembering the equation , because 
this equation is very helpful , particularly that Ergun’s equation is very , very, helpful for finding 
out delta P , in any packed bed situation, right? So , for packed bed , we have seen an d we can 
establish that Ergun’s equation can predict both for less than 10 N Re or N Re greater than 1000 or 
if the N Re value lies in between 10 and 1000 , then also we can utilize that, right?  
This we have established and we have seen, right? So , Burke Plum mer and Blake Kozeny , these 
two equations , on combination gives us that Blake Kozeny , and rather Ergun’s equation and 
from Ergun’s equation , we can also find out the other one , that is by neglecting the two terms , 
we got, right? One expression equal to one  term, plus another , so, neglecting , one we get the one 
which is for less than 10 N Re or lower value , for laminar flow that we can see and we can neglect 
the other non significant  term, 1.75 compared to that , and compared  to the higher term , 1.75 was 
low for laminar flow , so, we neglect it , 1.75, and for turbulent flow , compared to 1.75 , this was 
very low , that is that factor by N Re 150 by N Re was very low , so, neglected that N Re term in that 
and we came back to the Burke Plummer equation, ri ght?                                              
So, if we remember this way that delta P rho by G square this is on e term and the non 
dimensional term is phi s Dp, delta L, so , phi s Dp by delta L another term and third one is the how 
much void fraction, r ight? So , epsilon cube by 1 minus epsilon is the third term , if we remember 
this way, right? So , this was equal to 150 over N Re in general for Ergun’s equation plus 1.75, 
right? So , this we ca n easily say that this 150 by N Re when we take this, then it is Blake Kozeny 
and when we neglect this 150 by N Re then it is Burke Plummer.  
And when we do not neglect both of them, then it becomes Ergun’s equation, right? So , if we 
have also shown that these three can be derived , this expr ession we have derived, right? So , we 
can say that from the very basic , that is the equation for , we have said that from the equation , 
which was for pipe flow , that is for that Hagen Poiseulle, right? From the Hagen Poiseulle’s equation we have derived tha t Blake Kozeny equation and we said that , this is valid for less than 
10 N Re, right? We also showed from the other that is when the flow is laminar , but the flow is 
turbulent, then we started with , not from Hagen Poiseulle , but from the frictional pressure  factor 
relation , that delta P 4 f, right?   
4 f rho L v square L by D , v square by 2 , that this relation , we had started with , and from there 
we came back to Burke Plummer , and that was valid for N Re greater than 1000. Then , the 
question came when N Re is less than 10 , we have an expression  for predicting delta P. When N Re 
is greater than 1000 , we have an expression , for predicting delta P, right? But , how to express the 
pressure drop relation , when N Re is between 10 and 1000 , i.e., neither it is laminar nor it is 
turbulent in between , i.e., in transition zone what can be done.  
So, there we have shown that this also can be done when N Re is less than 10, greater than 1000 , 
or in between , with the help of another equation , that was dev eloped by adding these two 
equations , and then rearranging , of course that rearrangement was done by them , and ultimately 
they landed up with these parameters , or these expressions , as delta P rho by G prime square this 
is one, phis s Dp by delta L this is another and epsilon cube by 1 minus epsilon, right?  
So, we have to keep in mind one , is pressure drop, density and mass velocity these three factor in  
one block  then, the sphericity then particle size and the length of the bed , and third one is the 
voids fraction. So , in this way these three terms , was connected with 150 by N Re plus 1.75 as the 
Ergun’s equation. So , when we neglected the second term we came to the first that is laminar and 
when we neglected the first we came bac k to the turbulent.  
So when it was in between, then the Ergun’s equation also can be used using both of them. Say 
NRe is greater than 10, but less than 1000 , say 500, so , in that 500 , it becomes 150 by 500 plus 
1.75, right? So , it is what? This goes down a nd this 15 , so, it is roughly , one third , i.e., 0.33. So , 
0.33 or 0.34 say, say , 0.4, roughly , so 0.4 , and 1.75 , they are not so big, it is three four times 
only, right? So , in that case it cannot be neglected, so , that is why these two lies between when 
NRe is less than 10 or greater than 1000 , both, or in between , that entire thing can be used by this 
Ergun’s equations, right? So , today let us stop it here, thank you.                                