Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 40  
Module 8  
Non Newtonian fluid flow part -2 
Yeah, so we said in the previous class that what is shear stress, how shear stress is related to 
shear rate for Newtonian or Non -Newtonian fluid, right? And we came up to the pseudo plastic 
fluid, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:46)  
 
Now, example of pseudo p lastic fluids is  starch suspension, mayonnaise, biological liquids, 
detergents slurries etcetera, right?  So this follow Non -Newtonian behavior , where n is less than 
1, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:00)  
 
So, we will plot all of them in one . So, now the third one is the D ilatant type, right? As we said , 
the third one is dilatant fluid, right? So , this is very much uncommon . This type of liquid exhibit s 
an increase in apparent viscosity with increase in shear rate, right? So , mu increases as shear rate 
incre ases, right? So , this is very uncommon , and the constant , n of the power law equation is not 
1, is not less than 1 , is greater than 1, right?  
So, example of this kind of liquid is corn flour, sugar solution , one starch in water etc . very 
uncommon kind of fluid , this is the dilatant one , where n is greater than 1 , in the power law 
equation . You remember , we had said , the power law equation was k into minus dv / dr to the 
power n , where k was consistency coefficient , and n was flow beh avior index, right? And the 
unit of this k was Newton second to the power n per meter square, right?  
So, this was the unit of k , and n is constant , it varies between less than 1, 1 and greater than 1, 
right? So , these three , so, this is when less than 1 , is pseudo plastic , is equal to 1 , is Newtonian , 
and greater than 1 is dilatant, right? So , if we now plot them and see that if we plot shear stress 
versus shear rate, th en dv / dr, of course , with a negative , is shear rate, right? For Newtonian 
fluid it fo llows like this if this be the 0, right?  
For Bingham plastic it is like that, so , this, we call to be Newtonian fluid , this is Bingham plastic, 
then for pseudo plastic , this is like this , for dilatant it is like this, right? So , if we plot shear rate 
versus shear stress , so, the Newtonian liquid is directly proportional to shear stress is 
proportional to shear rate and in that case , it follows , it passes through the origin also, right? 
Other two , that is pseudo plastic and dilata nt, they also pass through the origin, but dilatant , n is 
greater than 1 , so, it is, that is , shear rate is increasing as the n is shear rate is increasing when we 
said it to be, right?  
In the previous one , we had said that, yeah here we had said that as h ere, right? That r was 
increasing that is the rate, okay shear rate , and we also said that for dilatant, yes , that as mu , an 
apparent viscosity is increasing with the increase in the shear rate, it is very uncommon, right? 
So, this is the dilatant , and for  pseudo plastic , which is less than 1 , it fast increases and then 
decreases, right?  
So, this type of flow behavior is there for the time independent fluids, right? We also said , time 
independent fluid means , that the value say , viscosity , it do es not chan ge with time, at 11 
O’clock, 12 O’clock, 1 O’clock , all the three are  same, right? But , there are , we said , another 
type of fluid , which is time dependent , and when it is time dependent, then there are two types, 
okay.  
(Refer Slide Time: 9:28)  
 
So, one is called thixotropic and this thixotropic fluid , the shear stress is reversibly decreasing, 
right? With time , at a constant rate of shear, so , shear stress is reversibly decreasing with time at 
a constant rate of shear. Example is some polymer soluti on, some shortening,  and also maybe 
some paints, right? Why it is happening, i.e., shear stress is reversibly decreasing with time for a 
given or constant shear rate , this theory is not yet fully developed , or is not developed to that 
extent , which can be substantiated, right? So , that is why till now , this is not known , how it is 
and, why it is getting changed.  
So, this is still now , people are working on it , and maybe , sometime someday , the solution will 
come out, right? And , similar to this earlier , we a lso said , do you remember , I said that the 
kinetic theory is also , people are working on that , the way kinetic theory of gases is established, 
right? We , have seen , kinetic theory of gases , many people have worked , or are working also and 
it is substantially established that the kinetic theory, but , the same kinetic theory is not yet 
substantiated , or defined for liquids.  
So, we said then , most of the cases , the kinetic theory of liquid not being there, so , it is as sumed 
the similar expressions for gases will also hold good in the liquid , and the explanations have 
been given along with that , and in most of the cases , it is assumed , the deviations , were not very 
significant or very high, right? So , same is true for th is type of thixotropic type of fluids, where , 
till now people could not understand , why the shear stress , with increase of shear stress , or 
reversibly , the decrease of shear stress with the shear rate for a given shear rate , why it is shear 
stress is rever sibly decreasing , that is not known, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:36)  
 
So, another type , thixotropic and r heopectic fluid, right? And these are also quite , I mean , quite 
rare, these are also quite rare , and this exhibit , or reversible increase  in shear stress  with a 
constant shear rate with time. Example, again , certain sols , certain suspensions of clays , etc, 
right? So , in one case , for a given shear rate , shear stress is in reversibl y increasing with time and 
the other case , for a given shear rate , the shear stress is reversibly decreasing. So , these both , and 
both are rare , very rare occurrence in nature, but , still they are  there,  it is not that , even rare , but, 
it is not there, right?  
We have given example s, certain polymeric solutions , or shortenin gs or say , certain sols ; sols, of 
course , are, you have seen that , there are many types of sprays are available for different 
purposes, right? So , they are sols , and maybe some certain suspensions of say , clays they maybe 
there , which are examples of both thixotropic and rheopectic, right? So , with this let us now say 
that, or summarize that , there are two types of fluid s, one is time independent , and another is 
time dependent.  
Time independent fluids are of three types , and time dependent fluids are of two types, right? So , 
time independent fluids are , generally , of course , time independent fluids are not three types , it 
should be typically four types because Newtonian fluid is also time independent . So, there , it is 
one, pseudo plastic , then, another , Bing ham plastic , and third one , dilatant , and Newtonian, 
right? So , these are four types , which are time independent, but time dependent are also there . 
There are two types , one is thixotropic and another is rheopectic, right?  
And examples also we have given,  right? So , and we also said that time dependent fluids , the 
behavior is not yet known , maybe someday it will come up , and that time , obviously , we will 
discuss , or maybe in future , if it is coming up , you will come across , and discuss, right? So , we, 
for all practical purposes , for engineering purposes , let us keep aside , the time dependent fluids, 
right? So , we call , time independent fluid , we start with that, right?  (Refer Slide Time: 18:37)  
 
Now, as we said , for Bingham plastic fluids , we need i nitial stress , i.e., yield stress , Tauy that is  
why the relation was like that, right? Minus , this minus mu dv / dr, right? This was there for the 
Bingham plastic , and these are similar to the Newtonian fluid , only expectation is that this needs 
some yield stress , or initial thrust to put , so that it start s moving, right? And pseudo plastic , and 
dilatant , they were this , Tau is equal to k minus dv / dr to the power n . We said , k is the flow 
behavior index with the coefficient as Newton second to the power n per meter square , and n is 
the flow behavior index , and it is dimension less, right?  
For this , let us now say that , we said , while fluid flow , we, where we began , that time , said that , 
in many cases , we will  try, if the flow is through a pipe or conduit , when it is happening , that 
time, we may not be starting all the time , right , from the governing equation, right? Because , 
again , the same thing will come up , that flow is steady , there is no end effect, the f low is laminar , 
then, all these conditions , when we apply , then the momentum transfer due to the convictive 
flow, that, because of this steadiness of the fluid , it is going off , that terms are deleted , and the 
other one , i.e., the momentum transfer due to the molecular transport , that comes up, right?  
So, if we start from there, then , without going into the beginning , i.e., when a fluid is flowing , be 
it Newtonian or Non -Newtonian , the general governing equation remains same , that some of the 
forces acting on the volume element is equal to 0, right? So that all the forces , if we do that 
momentum balance on that , we said that momentum transfer takes place in two ways, one by the 
bulk flow of the fluid , another by the molecular t ransport of the fluid.  
So, since it is steady , bulk flow goes off , so, we have the terms due to the molecular transport , 
whatever momentum is being transferred.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:12)  
 
And from there , after the initial solutions , we came to this relat ion that Tau is equal to delta P  r 
by 2L, right? So , in the volume element , there are two types, one is shear stress , another is 
pressure, right? So , two types of forces acting on the volume element , if we take , and there , one 
is shear , and another is pressure.  
So, these two terms is there along with the length of the tube and the radius of the tube or pipe 
through which it is being flown, right? So , we come , del Tau is equal to delta P  r by 2L.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:30)  
 
So, we begin  with this, then , substituting the value of Tau; Tau, we have given Tau is equal to k 
minus dv  / dr to the power n, right? If we substitute this value to the relation , Tau is equal to 
delta P  r by 2L , in this if we substitute, then , we can write that delta  P r by 2L this is equal to k 
minus dv / dr to the power n, right? Or , we can write minus dv / dr is equal to delta P  r by 2kL 
whole to the power 1 by n, right?  
Minus dv / dr, so delta P by 2kL , whole to the power 1 by n, right? Or , we can write that , 
integrating , minus dv between 0 to v, right? This is equal to integrating between r is equal to 
capital R to small r, right? As , delta P  r by 2kL to the power 1 by n into dr, right? So , this is 
because , at, we know that v, if this is r , if this is r so at  r is equal  to r, v is equal to some value. 
Whereas, at r is equal to capital R, v becomes equal to 0. So , that is why , we have put this limit 
that when dv , that this velocity is 0 is corresponding to capital R , velocity is v corresponding to r 
is equals t o r, right?  
So, we can write further that this negative , we can take care of 0 to v, dv, and w e just change the , 
we just change this limit , and delta P by 2kL whole to the power 1 by n , delta P is constant , k is 
constant, 2 is constant, L is constant, n i s constant , independent of r. So , we can write , this to be r 
to R and this r to the power 1 by n dr, right? So , if this is true, we can write , or on integration , 
this is , v is equal to , that is , delta P by 2kL whole to the power 1 by n, right? And this we can 
write on integration r to the power 1 by n plus 1 by 1 by n plus 1 this , for r is equal  to r to capital 
R. 
So, this we can write to be equal to, right? This becomes , n by n plus 1, okay. Thi s becomes , n 
by n plus 1 , n plus 1 by n, okay , so n plus 1 n by n plus 1 times delta P by 2kL whole to the 
power 1 by n, right , times , if we put the boundary for r, it becomes , R to the power 1 by n plus 1 
minus r to the power 1 by n plus 1, right? So , this can be rewritten as , n by n plus 1 , this delta P 
by 2kL whole to the power 1 by n, right , times R to the power 1 by n plus 1 into 1 minus r by R 
whole to the power 1 by n plus 1 , means , this is equal to n by n plus 1 times delta P by 2kL to the 
power 1 b y n, R to the power n plus 1 by n times 1 minus r by R whole to the power n plus 1 by 
n, right?  
So this is the v, right? So , v means at any instance, v at any instance is related in the power law 
equation , as we have said that Tau is k minus dv / dr to th e power n , when we apply that , this 
relation comes into, okay. Now , today is out of time , so, let us stop it here today, thank you.                                          