Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering 
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 4
Module 1
Equation of continuity in cylindrical coordinate system
Hello, we you remember that in the last class we had said that we are doing with Cartesian
coordinate that is x, y, z. Now this time we will be doing with the cylindrical coordinate that is r,
theta, z, right (r, θ, z)?
(Refer Slide Time: 0:46)
With that, we will do. So, let us look into. So, unlike the previous one, where we had said that x,
y, z was the coordinate, here, we take some cylindrical coordinate, like this, right? And, okay, so,
this can be del theta, this can be del r and this is del z, (∆θ, ∆r, ∆z), right? So, in the coordinate
system, we have r theta z. So, this is z, this is theta and this is r.
So, if we take r theta z coordinate (r, θ, z), then, here, we are taking this point as the r theta z
coordinate (r, θ, z), right? And in the previous one, if you remember, where we had said, let me
just recapitulate, where we had said that we were taking a volume element at the center, right?
We said, if this is going like this and that is going like that, so, how much mass is coming here?
We took it as the balancing point. So, here in this case, if we take this balancing point to be at the
r theta z points (r, θ, z), right? 
Then, this is of course r plus delta r, this is theta plus del theta and this is z plus del z (r+∆r,
θ+∆θ, z+∆z). Only one thing, which is, we are taking that, area under this and area under this,
they are, though there is a difference, because, in all the cases, this will be all differences, and in
that case, we will take this is z plus delta z (z+∆z), right? And, this also will be different; this
also will be r plus del r (r+∆r). So, all the changes, whatever, since we have said, we are taking
the volume element very small as small as possible.
So, those changes will be ignoring, otherwise, this will become too complicated. So, just to avoid
the complication, we are assuming that this area under this and the area under this, they are more
or less same. So, the changes with that del quantity r plus del r (r+∆r), or, theta plus del theta
(θ+∆θ), or, z plus del z (z+∆z). This we are neglecting for the upper one, right? So, if the on the
similar fashion, as we have done in the Cartesian coordinate. So, if we do for the cylindrical
coordinate in the same way, then, we can write in, in the face r, right? In, in the face r that is m
dot r into del r or, del a rather area del a. So, which is m dot r into the area is which one in, if this
is r, right? 
So, r del theta del z is the area. So, del z is this, right? And this one will be r plus del r, but this is
theta plus del theta, right? So, the face which is having the area r del theta del z, r is this arc,
right? This arc r del theta, is that and we can say that here it is m dot r, r del theta del z, right? So,
now, m dot r was what? Rho v r into r del theta del z, right? So this was in. So, out r, or, r plus del
r. So, out r plus del r is at this point, or, at this point, in this plain, that will be equal to m dot r
plus del r, out m dot r, right, into the entire del r, right? del del r of m dot r into entire del r, right, into the area. Area is r plus del r into del theta into del
z, r plus del r del theta del z, right? So, this on simplification we can write that this is nothing but
rho vr r del theta del z plus rho v r del r del theta del z plus del del r of rho v r r del r del theta del z,
right? So, we can say that in, was like that. Earlier, and, in minus out, if, then, we can write, in
minus out to be equal to rho v r r del theta del z minus rho v r r del theta del z, right? Minus rho v r
del r del theta del z minus del del r of rho v r, right, into r del theta del z del r.
So, this on simplification gives us minus rho v r del r del theta del z minus del del r of rho v r r del
r del theta del z, right? So, this we can say, in the previous class, we had said that we expanded in
the (uv) method. We expanded, rho v, right? Keeping v constant, rho we varied, keeping rho
constant, we varied v. If you remember that del del r of rho v r that, how can we expand it? So,
here, also we can expand it, or, we have already expanded form, which, if we do the other way
then it we can make them, as the compact one like this, that this is equal to minus del del r of r
rho vr into del r del theta del z, how? 
If we expand this del del r of r rho v r if we expand this and take this rho v r and r as the uv
product, right? As the product, both r into rho v r, if we take this as product, then in one case, r is
constant, right? In one case r is constant, then, it is on expansion, it is coming r, right? Obviously,
in both the cases, a negative sign is there. So, in one case it will be r del r, right? rho v r del del r
of rho vr r del r del theta del z, right? 
And, in other case, this del del r of rho v r is differentiated, or, rather this is one uv expansion and
the other one if rho v r is constant, then del del r of r is one so in that case rho v r del r del theta del
z that becomes so on. So this is u and this is say v if we make uv that del del of something of uv
that expansion method if we apply here then that expanded form is like this which on which on
clubbing we get r rho v r as the variable and del del r of r rho v r del r del theta del z is the in minus
out of course with a negative, right? 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:47)So, similarly, we can say, for the other two cases, that, in minus out, for this, in minus out for r
coordinate, we can write that this is nothing but minus del del r of r rho v r into del r del theta del
z. So, exactly in a similar way, we can also write, in minus out, i.e., mass flow in minus mass
flow out, at the coordinate theta, then, we get, similar to that, okay. Let us do this way that in
minus out. This way in will be rho v theta r del r del z rho vtheta r del r del z, and out will be rho v theta
plus del or minus this is del del theta rho v theta del del theta of rho v theta into del r del z, right? 
So, that means this in minus out we can write to be equals to, say, this rho v theta into del r del z rho
vtheta into del r del z, this goes out, then, we can write this way, that minus del del theta of rho
vtheta, right? rho vtheta into del theta del r del z. This is that in minus out, minus del del theta of rhovtheta del theta del r del z, right? So in was, this was, for r coordinate, in the theta coordinate, in
was rho vtheta r del r del z r del r is the r del r is, this is, two del has come that is why.
So, r del r into del z, that was for in, and for the out, it was rho v theta plus del del theta of rho v theta
into del r del z, right? So, if we remove that, then, we can say that, this we can write del del theta
of rho vtheta into del theta del r del z, is the in minus out at the theta coordinate, okay. Similarly,
for z coordinate, in at the z we can write rho v z into the area r del theta into del r and out at the z
we can write rho v z plus del del z of rho v z, right? del del z of rho v z into del z times the area this
area is r del r into del theta, right? 
So, this we can then write in the z coordinate in minus out at z this is equals to minus del del z of
rho vz, right? Into r del z del r del theta, right? So, by adding, in minus out, in all the three
coordinates, we get, in all three coordinates, r theta and z, in all three coordinates if we add, then
in minus out, we get minus del del r of rho v r times r r rho vr, right, times the volume del r del
theta del z plus del del theta of rho v theta times the volume that is del theta del r del z plus del del z
of rho vz, right, times r del z del r del theta, right? 
So, this is on adding r theta z all three coordinates, right? Then, we have to also find out the
accumulation,  is  it?  We have  to  find  out  the  accumulation  and  in  that  case  what  is  the
accumulation that we have to find out, right? So, accumulation is, del rho del t in the entire
volume element, volume element r del r there is one side del theta another side and del z the third
side, right? So, this r del r is one arc, and del theta del z the other two, so this is the total volume,
okay. 
So, if we now, put that mass in minus mass out is equal to accumulation. This balance, mass
balance, if we do, then we can write r del rho del t that plus del del r of del del r of r rho v r plus
del del theta of rho v theta plus del del z of rho v z into r this is equals to 0, right? Because this r del r
del theta del z r del r del theta del z that goes out and we get this, okay. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:11)Then, we can write this to be equal to, del rho del t plus del del r of rho v r rho vr, right? del del r
of r rho vr plus del del theta of rho v theta, right? Plus del del z of rho v z, right?
So, this is equal to 0. So, on accumulation, we get this del rho del t plus del del r of r rho v r plus
del del theta of rho v theta plus del del z of rho v z, this is equal to 0, right? So, one thing we have to
keep in mind, of course this r, which was there, if we divide all the three terms, then here in the
del del theta of rho v theta, here, we should have 1 by r, is not it? That should come out there, and
that is equal to, because, in all the three out of this we had here, at 1 r and we had here at 1 r at 1
r here, right? 
So, in that case this r and this r, if we divide them, then they should be 1 by r del del r of r rho v r
and this should be 1 by r of del del theta of rho v theta and this is like that, right? Now, is the realexpansion? So, if we see that this is quite little, not little, quite different, than that of the x, y, z or
Cartesian coordinate, so, we can write that in the r theta z, or, cylindrical coordinate, the actual
term is del rho del t plus 1 by r del del r of r rho v r plus 1 by r del del theta of rho v theta plus del
del z of rho vz. This is the equal to 0 is the equation of continuity for the cylindrical coordinate
that is r theta z, right? 
So, this is quite different than that what we had done for the x, y, z, that is the Cartesian
coordinate. If you remember, that was absolutely different; then, these so many additional terms
have come. Now, this will be also useful when you are going for the equation of motion, that
derivation, these relations will be helpful, substituting for expanded or contracted form. So, in
that  case,  there  will  be,  using these  relations,  either  in  the  Cartesian  or  in  the  cylindrical
coordinate, right? 
So, we have done both x, y, z, i.e., the Cartesian coordinate, and r theta z, that is the cylindrical
coordinate. These two systems, we have shown how to derive the equation of continuity and
what is the form of equation of continuity, right? Now, this we will not derive but we can say for
the spherical coordinate. We can say that del rho del t, this is del rho del t this plus del del r of r
square rho vr r square rho vr, right? del del r of this into 1 by r square plus 1 by r sin phi if our
coordinate is, coordinate system is r theta phi, right? Then, we can write like this, 1 by r sin phi
into del del theta of rho v theta sin theta, right? Plus 1 by r of sin phi del del theta of rho v theta, right?
So, this is equal to 0 for the r theta phi coordinate, i.e., spherical coordinate. So spherical
coordinate, we are not deriving because r theta phi, that will be too much complicated and will
take really a good time, and to avoid that we are giving the final form of the r theta phi, i.e.,
spherical coordinate. The final equation is del rho del t plus 1 by r square del del r of r square rho
vr plus 1 by r sin phi del del theta of rho v theta sin theta, right? rho v theta sin theta and del del 1 by r
sin phi del del theta of rho v. This is, okay, this is, theta is there, so if you mix up this is phi rho
vtheta, right? rho v phi sin phi del del so, r phi theta then we should write in this form r phi theta,
right? 
Second, term we are writing in terms of phi, so, 1 by r sin phi, right? To del del phi of rho v phi
sin phi plus 1 by r sin phi del del theta of rho v theta is the spherical coordinate, right? So, we have
already seen that partial coordinate, that partial derivative was del rho del t, then, total time
derivative, that was d rho dt and we also had shown that, the substantial time derivative was
capital D rho Dt, right? So, these three and their respective expressions, also del rho del t is okay,but d rho dt. We had also shown, this will be required for when we were doing the equation of
motion, that time again, it will be required. 
So, d rho dt, we had shown this was del rho del t, right? plus del del x of rho, or, del rho del x
into del x del t plus del rho del y into del y del t plus del rho del z into del z del t. This was for
the partial derivative but this was for the total derivative and for the substantial time derivative
we had shown that this was d rho dt this is equal to del rho del t, right? Plus this will be again
required vx del rho del x plus v y del rho del y plus v z del rho del z, right? 
So, this will be requiring when we are going for the equation of motion that set of equations we
said earlier that this we call very useful equations, Navier-Stokes equation. So, when we will do
that, all these relations will be very much useful and they are required, right? So, in the next
class, we will do the equation of motion. Keeping in mind that continuity equation and in the all
three coordinates, i.e., Cartesian coordinate, or cylindrical coordinate, or spherical coordinate, in
all these three coordinates. We have, out of those two, two we have derived and one, we have
shown you the final form.
So, these forms will be utilized for equation of motion. But, again in equation of motion, you
will see that it is, as we have progressing, it is bigger and bigger. So, equation of motion will be
even bigger, right? So, in that case, it may not be possible that all the three coordinates, we will
be showing, but at least for the Cartesian coordinate, we will show, okay thank you.   