Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 42  
Module 9  
Average velocity for Non Newtonian fluid  
(Refer Slide Time: 0:25)  
 
So, we have done in the previous class that average velocity that came out to be n by 3 n plus 1 
into delta p by 2kL to the power 1 by n R to the power n plus 1 by n, right? This we saw, also we 
saw, vmax, right? vmax was equal to , just a minute , vmax was equal to n by n plus 1 into delta p by 
2kL to the power 1 by n and R to the power n plus 1 by n, right? This is true for any fluid 
following the power law equation, right? And we said for vmax that if we add a limiting condition 
v for vmax, we saw that when n becomes equal to 1 and k becomes equal to mu, then under 
limiting condition , this has become the same expression as we obtained for Newtonian fluid 
flowing through a conduit or pipe, right?  
Having radius r, this we had established. Now , let us  also look into that limiting situation . So, 
under limiting condition , when n becomes equal to 1 , and k becomes equal to mu , the average 
velocity is 1 by 3 plus 1, right , divided by delta p by 2 mu  L to the power 1 by n is 1 R to the 
power n plus 1 that is 1 plus 1 2 by 1 R square, right? So , this we can write is , delta p by 2 into 3 
plus 1 , 4, 8, 8 mu L R square, right? If you see , this is the same as that of the Newtonian fluid. 
So, this is true f or Newtonian fluid, right? So that means the thing which we have developed , 
which , we have derived is correct because , it is also having the same value when we are putting 
limiting condition, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:30)  
 
So, let us look into that our  slide also because , this you will get you can see online that v average  is 
1 by 2 pi R square , 0 to R, v into 2 pi r, we have done all in detail , we take every steps, but here 
we might have omitted some, so v into 2 pi r into dr , so that becomes 2 by R square, 0 to R, vr dr. 
Substituting the values of v, it becomes 2 by R square n by n plus 1 delta p by 2kL to the power 1 
by n, the integration between 0 to R to the power 1 by n plus 1 minus R to the power 1 by n plus 
1 times r dr , so this becomes 2 by R square into n by n plus 1 into delta p by 2kL to the power 1 
by n times capital R to the power 1 by n plus 1 times R square by 2 minus capital R to the power 
1 by n plus 1 times R square by 1 by n plus 3, right?  
So, this on simpli fication , becomes n by n plus 1 into delta p by 2kL to the power 1 by n into 1 
minus 2 n by 3 n plus 1 into R to the power 1 by n plus 1, so , that becomes n by 3 n plus 1 into 
delta p by 2kL whole to the power 1 by n, right , whole to the power 1 by n into R to the power n 
plus n by n, right? So , this is the average velocity, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 5:19)  
 
And we also have seen v is vmax, that was 1 minus r by R to the power n plus 1, v was v max, i.e., 
this vmax was n by n plus 1 delta p  l by 2kL, right ? And v we had shown that v was , one second , v 
was, yes v was this, right? n by n plus 1 delta p by 2kL or R to the power n plus 1 by n into 1 
minus r by R to the power n plus 1, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:10)  
 
 
If this is true, then we can write that v is equal to and vmax, we have shown that vmax was, this is 
the average , or this is the instantaneous velocity, this was , v is vmax, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:43)  
 
So, this is vmax, so we can now write that v is  equal to vmax, we can now write v is equal to vmax 
into 1 minus r by R to the power n plus 1 by n, right? And also we can write v average  is equal to n 
plus 1 by 3 n plus 1 into vmax, right? This we can write for any power law fluid, right? So , for 
power l aw fluid , we saw v is vmax into 1 minus r by R to the power n plus 1 and v average  is, n plus 
1 by 3 n plus 1 into vmax, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:46)  
 
Now , as we said that under limiting condition , here also , we put if n is equal to 1 , and k is equal 
to mu, right? That is that Newtonian fluid , it becomes Newtonian fluid form Non -Newtonian , n 
is equal to 1 and k is equal to mu, we can then write v is equal to n by n plus 1 into delta p by 
this, we have also shown 2kL to the power 1 by n into R to the power n plus 1 by n minus small r 
to the power n plus 1 by n, right?  
So, it becomes the same for Newtonian fluid , of course this is for Non -Newtonian, otherwise , 
you will be misled , so, this is for Non -Newtonian. So , this becomes , if we put n is equal to 1 and 
k is equal to mu in this, then n is equal to 1 that is 1 by 2 , this is delta p by 2 mu L this to the 
power 1 and this is R to the power n is 1, 1 plus 1 by n that is 2 , R square minus r to the power n 
plus 1 by n r square, right? So , that means this is delta p by 4 mu L into R square minus r square , 
that is equal to delta p by 4 mu L into R square into 1 minus r by R whole square , so, for 
Newtonian fluid which we had developed, right?  
So, this is v and similarly , we can also say that vmax is equal to n by n plus 1 into delta p by 2kL 
to the power 1 by n into R to the power n plus 1 by n , this was for vmax, this is for Non -
Newtonian fluid and when we are writing n is equal to 1 and k is equal to mu, then vmax becomes 
equal to , this is 1 by 2 this is delta p by 2 mu L, right , to the power 1 and this is R to the power 
square, right? So , vmax is then equal to delta p by 4 mu L R square, right? And this is for 
Newtonian fluid under limiting condition, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 11: 20) 
 
And average velocity , vaverage , we have seen it is n by 3 n plus 1 into delta p by 2kL whole to the 
power 1 by n R to the power 1 by n or n plus 1 by n, right? This is for Non -Newtonian fluid, now 
if we put the limiting condition , n is equal to 1 and  k is equal to mu, then we can write average 
velocity, vaverage , is, this is 1 by 4, right , into delta p by 2 mu L , this is 1 R to the power 1 plus 1 
by n so R square, so , that means this is delta p R square by 8 mu L, right? So , this is for 
Newtonian flui d. For all Newtonian fluids , for all these expressions , we had shown earlier, if you 
do a back track , you can definitely get it that we have done these things for the Newtonian fluids, 
right?  
So, that means the expressions are correct under limiting condi tions , they are showing that what 
is the value for the Newtonian fluid , when limiting condition is n is 1 and k becomes mu for the 
expression developed for power law fluids , i.e., Non-Newtonian fluids, right? So , when Non -
Newtonian fluid becomes Newtonian, then the expressions which , we developed earlier for 
instantaneous velocity , for maximum velocity , and for the average velocity , the expressions are 
identical, right?  
This concludes that the derivations which w e had done are true, right? So , this you try. Now , we 
say that the average velocity equation , we can write that v average  is equal  to n by 3 n plus 1, right,  
into delta p by 2kL to the power 1 by n R to the power n plus 1 by n, right? So , this we can 
rewrit e as, delta p by 2kL this to the power 1 by n, right? This is equal to 3 n plus 1 by n into 
vaverage  by R to the power n plus 1 by n, right? This also we can rewrite as delta p by delta p R 
okay by 2kL to the power 1 by n is equals to 3 n plus 1 by n, righ t, into, this means , this term we 
can rewrite as v average , right , divided by R into R to the power 1 by n, right? This we can rewrite 
as, R into R to the power 1 by n. So , when we have taken out this 1 by n here, so , remaining is 3 
n plus 1 by n v average  by R, right?  
So that becomes this, so this we can rewrite , or delta p r, r is say R by 2 or it becomes 2 if we 
write in terms of D , i.e., R by 2 that is 4kL whole to the power 1 by n , this is equal to 3 n plus 1 
by n and if we convert it to , R by 2 is D , i.e., 2 vaverage  divided by D, right? This is true.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:37)  
 
Now , this we can rewrite as , delta p D by 4kL this is equal to 3 n plus 1 by n this 1 by n, okay , let 
us write again , otherwise it is out of that thing , this is , this was 2 v average  over D, right? So , if we 
write , delta p D by 4kL this is equal to 3 n plus 1 by n whole to the power n because , this when 
goes there is inverse, so , to the power n and this also becomes equal to 2 v average  by D to the 
power n, right? So , we can wri te, delta p D by 4kL, right? This is equal to delta p D by 4L , so, if 
we take k out, k is here , 3 n plus 1 by n to the power n into this , if we write like this okay , if we 
write like this 4 n, right? If we can write 3 n plus by 4 n , so, here we can write 8  vaverage  divided 
by D to the power n because , this 4 to the power n we have put in the denominator , so, we have 
put here in the numerator, so , 2 into 4 , 8 vaverage  by D, right?  
So, this we can rewrite that delta p D by 4L . This is equal to a new constant k prime into 8 v average  
by D to the power n prime, right? Where, k prime is equal to k into 3 n plus 1 divided by 4 n and 
n prime is equal to n, right? So , if this is true, then we can write delta p D by 4L , this is equal to 
like that, okay. k prime new constant , k prime is k into 3 n plus 1 by 4 n and n is equal to n 
prime, right? Now , in this equation , i.e., delta p D by 4L is equal to k prime 8 v average  D prime, 
right? So , say this is equation ‘A’, right?  
(Refer Slide Time : 20:20)  
 
So, now, in equation ‘A’, so, it was delta p D by 4L , this is equal to k prime 8 v average  by D to the 
power n prime, right? So , if this equation , we rewrite that , this is nothing but T auw, right? 
Because , this Tau at the wall is delta p D by 4L, right? Tau w, i.e., Tau at the wall is delta p D by 
4L, right? So , Tauw that becomes equal to k prime into that okay . If we say that this into minus 
dv / dr to the power n prime at the wall, right? Dv / dr at the wall, this we have show n earlier, 
right? This we have shown earlier also , in earlier expression , if you go , back trace that , Tauw that 
is shear stress at the wall is delta p D by 4L and that is equal to k prime and dv / dr negative at 
the wall that becomes equal to 8 v average  by D, right?  
So, we can write where v average  is equal to D by 8 delta p D by 4 k prime L whole to the power n 
prime, right? So , vaverage  we can rewrite  as, D by D, D by 8 delta p capital D by 4 k prime L, 
right? So , this is called generalized coefficient of viscosity , right? And this now , viscosity means 
shear stress by shear rate, right? So , shear stress by shear rate is the viscosity, so , this is equal to 
the slope of the straight line for Newtonian liquids , if we have a plot , this is shear rate and this is 
shear stress , so, this was the Newtonian fluid and that is the slope of the line is this, right?  
Slope of the line is that slope of the straight line for Newtonian fluids, right? For Non -Newtonian 
fluids we can s ay that shear stress over shear rate , this relationship varies with shear rate, right? 
This relationship varies with shear rate, and the slope is called apparent viscosity or this can be , 
say, termed as mu prime, right , which, decreases with increase in sh ear rate for pseudo plastic 
liquids and increases with shear rate for dilatant fluids, right? So , if you remember , it was like 
this for pseudo plastic and for dilatants,  it was like this, right?  
So, if we say that for dilatant fluids with the increase in shear rate the increase in the fluid , 
increases the shear rate for shear stress is to shear rate , this relationship varies with shear rate and 
the slope is called apparent viscosity , which , decreases , i.e., apparent viscosity decreases with 
increase in she ar rate for pseudo plastic fluids and increases with shear rate for dilatant fluids, 
right? So , this is true, so , till now this we have done , and apparent viscosity , we have shown , and 
next time we will also talk about the apparent viscosity and the Reynol ds number of the Non -
Newtonian fluids, right? Thank you.  