Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture 47  
Module 10  
Flow through packed beds  
Okay, we have done flow through pipe, flow through slits for both Newtonian and Non -
Newtonian fluids, right? So in Non -Newtonian fluids we also have to develop many things like 
generalized coefficient of viscosity or generalized Reynolds number things like that, right? Now 
let us move to  another very important aspect , i.e., flow in Packed Beds or Porous medium, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:02)  
 
Flow in packed bed , so, flow in packed bed or porous medium this is very important because in 
many cases , when you are handling , I am not saying only food material , because , this is not 
restricted to food material only , this is a general thing , where in many cases , maybe for minerals, 
maybe for metals, maybe for chemicals, maybe for many other metallurgical applications , these 
are possible , because , you have the packed bed.  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:08)  
 
Now , what we understand by packed bed? That is a bed , say this is a pipe , which is filled with 
certain material , like this, right? And depending on the material we call it to be a size of the 
material we call this condition to be under packed condition, right? And depending on how these 
materials are sized , and in what way , in what density , they are packed, so , this we call to be a 
packed bed , if your fluid is flowing through this , and going out of this , then, we call it to be flow 
through packed bed , or in many cases , this is also termed as porous medium, why porous 
medium?  
Because , if you look this section, then w hen it is porous , means this material, this material, this 
material , so, within this the fluid is flowing like that, right? So , that means there is a gap between 
the materials, so , the fluid can move this way that way like that and when it is moving like t hat it 
is called a porous medium, right? That means , in the medium , there are pores , through which the 
fluid can move, right? Now , to go for this , let us now define certain things . So, its applications 
are applications of this systems , is that catalytic re actor, hydrogenation of vegetable fat, 
absorption of solute, filter bed, etc . right?  
Now , let us define certain geometric definitions like the geometric relations like epsilon , this is 
called volume of voids in the bed over total volume of the bed, right?  Certain , this is epsilon, 
right? And this is called geometric relation in packed bed, right? Specific surface area of particle , 
this is , if a v is S p over V p, i.e., surface area of a particle to volume of particle. So , this specific 
surface, surface area of particle to volume of particle , that means it has unit a unit of meter 
inverse, right?  
So, this is in meter square, this is in meter cube , so, the a v comes to be meter inverse, right? So , 
this is  specific surface area , but, since , it is specific surfac e area that is why this unit is meter 
inverse, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:14)  
 
Now , for spherical particle , we can say that , av is equal to surface area of the particle , i.e., pi 
Dparticle  square divided by pi D particle  cube by 6, right? So , this D particle is D p is diameter of the 
particle in meter, right? Therefore , we can say , diameter of particle is nothing but 6 over a v, i.e., 
specific surface area.  
Now , if we define another term called ‘a’, as the total surface area available per unit volume of 
bed, if we say that, then , ‘a’ becomes equal to a v into 1 minus epsilon, right , which is 6 times 1 
minus epsilon, right? And if this is 1 , if ‘a’ is that , and if phi is the sphericity of the particle, then , 
we can write , 6 time into 1 minus epsilon divided by phi s into D p, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 9:53)  
 
Where , this phi s is the sphericity , and this is defined as phi s is the sphericity of the particle, right? 
Sphericity of the particle which is defined as S s over V s over S p over V p, right? Where , Ss is the 
surface area of a sphere having same diameter as the particle , Dp in meter square , Vs is equal to 
volume of the same sphere, right , in meter cube , Sp is equal to surface area of the particle in 
meter square and V p is the volume of the same particle  in meter cube.  
Now , what we understand by the term sphericity? Mathematical ly, we have said something, but 
physically , what we understand , that is the most fundamental thing which we have to understand, 
right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:22)  
 
Say, this is a material, right? Does this material have a diameter same as that of this D s? No , it is 
not everywhere D s, maybe at some places , it could be D s, but many others , it is not D s. So, in that 
case, this will not be a sphere , but how close it is to the sphere having the same diameter as that 
of the sphere , so, that we would like to know and that is the sphericity of the particle.  
That means , how close it is to the particle having the diameter D p close to that of the sphere wit h 
the same diameter D p, right? This is what exactly sphericity means , that whenever you are doing 
this, you must know the sphericity of the particle. Now , you know that if this is a cylinder having 
a diameter say D c, right? What is the area of this cylinde r? Pi D c square or there is a surface area, 
right? Now if this is D c, right? And diameter is D c and if the height of that is also D c, right? 
Then , all the three dimensions of this will be D c, so, it is D c by D c by D c, so, it is D c cube.  
So, it should be a sphere because all the dimensions of the 3 dimensions are and equal to D c, so, 
it should be same as D c of a sphere, but it is not, right? Does it look like that it will be a sphere? 
It does not, right? Though , the dimension wise , we can say  that, it could be same as that of the 
sphere, but it is not so, right? So , that understanding , that how close it is to the sphere, how we 
can define this , that particle closeness to the sphere , that is the sphericity, right?  
So, that is why sphericity is  defined as S s by V s over S p over V p, Ss is the surface area of the 
sphere having the same diameter of the particle D p in meter square, V s is the volume of the same 
sphere in meter cube , Sp is a surface area of the particle again in meter square and V p is the 
volume of the same particle in meter cube, right? Now , for fine particles , Dp is the sieve  analysis 
diameter or nominal diameter, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:30)  
 
For, okay , for Dp is large, then , it can be said that diameter of the particle is the diameter of the 
sphere having equal volume as that of the particle.  
So, large particle , means where particles , whose diameter can be assured or is greater than or can 
be measured or can be assured in ter ms of measurement or can be measured or is greater than 1 
millimeter, right? Now , for small particles , Dp is the si eve size or is the sieve analysis size or it 
can be a nominal diameter, right? So , we can say , phis is equal to 6 over D p over S p over V p or, 
this can be rewritten as , 6 V p over S p into D p, not, sorry , sorry, 6 V p over S p into V by D p 
(())(18:16) Sp into Dp, right? 6 Vp over Sp into D, if that be true then we can define another 
thing which is called hydraulic diameter , hydraulic radius, right? Hydraulic radius, so , hydraulic 
radius , rh, that is defined as r h is equa l to cross sectional area available for flow over weighted 
perimeter, right?  
So, this we can write cross sectional area times Capital H over weighted perime ter times H, 
right? Now , this means this is nothing but void volume, right? And this means weighted 
perimeter into H , total surface area, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:27)  
 
So, if now , we do a little jugglery , rh is to void volume , divided by total volume over total 
surface area divided by total void volume by total volume total surface area by total volume, 
right? So , void volume over total volume by total surface area by total volume.  
Now , void volume by total volume , we have seen  this is equal to epsilon by 6 into 1 minus 
epsilon divided by phi s Dp, right? So , this is equal to epsilon phi s Dp divided by 6 into 1 minus 
epsilon, right? Now , for that , we can write , equivalent diameter , capital D is nothing but 4 r h, 
right? So , this c an be written as 4 epsilon, now if we introduce the term , we have introduced that , 
phi s into D p, right? Divided by 6 into 1 minus epsilon, right? Now , that v prime is the velocity , if 
v prime is the velocity based on empty cross sectional area of the bed a nd v is the actual velocity 
through void space, right? v prime is the velocity based on the empty cross sectional area of the 
bed and v is the actual velocity through void space, right?  
So, if that is true , then we can write v  prime is equal to epsilon in to v, right? Therefore, we can 
define N Re particle  is equal to D v rho by mu , by common definition , now, if we substitute this D 
with the equivalent diameter, or hydraulic rad ius and equivalent diameter, so , this becomes v 
double prime 4 r h into rho divided by epsilon into mu, right? So , this is nothing but 4 v say , 
prime or double prime , does not matter here , we have given v prime, right? So , v prime 4 v 
prime epsilon phi s Dp rho divided by 6 into mu into epsilon into 1 minus epsilon, right ?  
So, this we can rewrite as , 4 phi s Dp Vp prime rho divided by 6 mu 1 minus epsilon, so , this is 
phi s Dp v prime rho by mu into 1 minus epsilon, right? So , this is N Re particle , not D  v rho by mu, 
right? So , till now then , we have defined many things for  packed bed, number 1 we have said 
that what is the area, then what is the specific surface area, then what is the hydraulic radius, 
what is the hydraulic diameter, then we also have said the specific rather, okay , specific surface 
area, we have said , and also we have said , the sphericity , defined sphericity, then after that 
definition when we came to N Re, i.e., Reynolds number, right?  
So, NRe of the particle , normally , it is D  v rho by mu, but , since , it is for particle , and D is not for 
the phi, so , that equivalent , or hydraulic radius , or hydraulic diameter , that has to be found out 
and for which , it has become v prime 4 r h, okay , v is also not v prime, v is also not v , it is also v 
prime , that is the velocity based on empty cross section, right? So , that is why the Reynolds 
number is not D  v rho by mu , so simple it is , some , a little complicated , as phi s Dp v prime rho by 
mu into 1 minus epsilon, right?  
So, till now we have started this packed bed , so, we have also to go a long and today of course 
we have come to the end because time is not there, so , we finish it today thank you.  