Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 45  
Module 9  
Flow of Non Newtonian fluid through slit  
So, in the previous class we had done a problem and solution . Hopefully , we have done for 1 N Re 
for the applesauce the second one two fluids where there, one was milk and the other was 
applesauce and hopefully , milk we have done for both the cases , 500 and 50 00 N Re general . We 
found out both these velocity and pressure drop and for the other one that is applesauce for milk 
we had done for  both the N Re general , i.e., 500 and 5000 . We have done both velocities and 
pressure drops. And for applesauce we have done for 500 N Re general  that what was the velocity 
and what was the delta P because of the time constraint we could not do for 5000, hopefully you 
have done it.  
So, if you had any problem, so , please bring to our notice , and we will solve it , or we will give 
you the values, okay , because , I have also not done , but if you want we can do it here also 
because , afterwards we will not get time , I hope let us do that, okay.  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:00)  
 
For applesauce we had gamma is equal to 1.073, r ight, NRe general  given was 5000 , so v average , we 
can write to be 5000 into 1.073 divided by 1 into 10 to the power minus 2 and n was 0.7 and 
density was 1100 this to the power 1 by 2 minus 0.7 , so, this becomes equal to let us see that 
5000 into 1.073 was this , divided by 10 to the power minus 2 to the power 0.7 is this , equal to 
this divided by 1100 is this to the power 1 by 2 minus 0.7, right?  
So, is equal to that , so, this is equal to 40.39 , so, 40.4 meter per second is average velocity and 
delta P , we can write to be 32 into 1.073 into 10 length L by D into 1 into 10 to the power minus 
2 into v average , i.e., 40.4 divided by 1 into 10 to the power minus 2 whole to the power 0.7, so , this 
comes to  equal to , let us see , 40.4 divided by 10 to the power minus 2 this whole to the power 
0.7 is equal to this into 10 to the power 3 so , 1000 into 1.073 into 32 is equal to 114872.65 , 
sorry , not point 11487265.4, right?  
That means , 1, 2, 3 , so much Pascal , so, is equal to 11487 , no 11487.265 kilo Pascal is equal to 
114.87 bar , if we take Pascal equals to 1 bar, right? So , this we have done , so, you please check , 
hopefully , you will get the same, right? Now , let us move to another very important Non -
Newtonian fluid flow, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:15)  
 
And that is , let us look into where it is, yeah , here it is , flow of Non -Newtonian fluid through slit . 
Flow of Non -Newtonian fluid through slit, right? Now , if you remember that in earlier case we 
had done , so, this also we are doing in the same way , similar way, so , here, what we are doing? 
We are taking in say , x, y, two dimensional , third dimension is also perpendicular to this , so, we 
have taken a volume element, right? And the thickness of this is del y and this is del x, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 8:34)  
 
So, we assume that flow is steady and flow is laminar , and there is no end effect , and there is 
flow, fully developed, right? These all assumptions remain same. So , now as we had taken 
earlier , here also we have taken volume element, so , this volume element is having a thickness of 
delta y, right? And it has a length of , say, delta x, right? And the plate  or slit is having a , this slit 
is having a thickness of 2 delta, right? 2 del ta is the thickness, so , it is acting the pressure force at 
the face x and the pressure force at the face x plus delta x , and T au at the face T auyx at the face y 
and Tauyx at the  face y plus delta y, right?  
So, if this be true, then , if this is the xy coordinate , obviously , the third coordinate is z, okay. If 
we take these, right? And sorry, like in the previous , which , we had done for the slit, so, let us 
here also take that , from the previous , as we have said that there is no , this is all steady state so , 
no accumulation  at all, some of the forces is equal to 0. Then , we also assumed , we also said that 
since , it is a steady state , so, bulk flow is getting nullified , all these taking together , we had said 
that if you remember in earlier class , very beginning , there , we had said that , we will start in all 
practical purposes , from this relation of Tau, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:41)  
 
So, now Tauyx, this is equal to delta P by L into y, right? This is equal to k minus dv x / dy to the 
power n, right? Or minus dv x / dy is equal to delta P y over kL to the power 1 by n, right? Or , 
integral of dv x, right , is equal to delta P y or delta P by kL to the power  1 by n integral of y to the 
power 1 by n dy, right? So , this on integration gives v x with negative is equal to delta P by kL to 
the power 1 by n and y to the power 1 by n plus 1 divided by n plus 1 by n, right , plus C. Now , 
we have to find out the constan t C, value of the constant C , what it is coming , that we have to 
find out, right?                
(Refer Slide Time: 13:23)  
 
To find out that constant C , let us, okay , our expression is v x minus is equal to delta P by kL  
whole to the power 1 by n y to the power 1 by n plus 1 over n plus 1 by n plus C, right? Now , the 
boundary condition for getting the value of C is like that at y is equal to , del v x is equal to 0 , this 
is plus minus del ta, so, we could take plus or we could take minus del ta. If you remember , this 
we have taken 2 del ta, right? Total thickness, so plus del ta, minus del ta, so, if it is at this center 
axis, so, it is plus del ta and this is minus del ta, right?  
So, that is why , it is 2 del ta, so, boundary is v x is rather v x is equal to 0 at y is equal to del ta, i.e., 
at the wall, right? This is at the wall , so, if it is plus del ta or minus del ta, in either case it is 0 , vx 
is 0, here also v x is equal to 0, right? So , if that be true, then , we write y is equal to plus del ta for 
all practical purposes , so, it is 0 , delta P by kL whole to the power 1 by n and this y is now del ta 
to the power 1 by n plus 1 divided by n plus 1 by n , so, this is plus , is equal to C, right? So, C is 
equal to minus delta P by kL whole to the power 1 by n into del ta to the power n plus 1 by n 
divided by n plus 1 by n, right?  
This is C, so , by substituting C we can write , minus v x, substituting C , value of C , of course , vx is 
delta P by kL whol e to the power 1 by n, right , y to the power n plus 1 by n divided by n plus 1 
by n minus delta P by kL whole to the power 1 by n del to the power n plus 1 by n by n plus 1 by 
n. So , if we take common , is equal to delta P by kL whole to the power 1 by n , if we take 
common , and if we also take common , n plus 1 by n, right? So , we can write y to the power n 
plus 1 divided by n minus del ta to the power n plus 1 divided by n or this is equal to this, right? 
Or, we can write v x is equal to delta P by kL whole to  the power 1 by n divided by n plus 1 by n, 
right , into del ta to the power n plus 1 by n minus y to the power n plus 1 by n, right?  
So, this we can rewrite is equal to delta P by kL  whole to the power 1 by n over n plus 1 times if 
we take del to the power n plus 1 by n common , so, 1 minus y by del whole to the power n plus 1 
by n, so , this is the v x, right? So , vx comes like this , so, that is the instantaneous velocity at any 
point a t any time , of course , time is independent , we have taken steady state, so , instantaneous 
velocity at any place is v x and that is equal to delta P by kL over n plus 1 to the power 1 by n 
times del ta to the power n plus 1 by n times 1 minus y by del ta whole  to the power n plus 1 by n, 
so, that is the v x, right?  (Refer Slide Time: 19:00)  
 
So, if this v x, if we tell now , we also can write that, okay v x is equal to delta P by kL whole to the 
power 1 by n over n plus 1 by n, right? This into del ta to the power n plus 1 by n times 1 minus y 
by del ta whole to the power n plus 1 by n, right? So , for y is equal to 0 , vx is equal to v max, true , 
because this was our del ta, 2 del ta, this is our center , so, this was our 1 del ta, plus del ta, this was 
our mi nus del ta. So, it is 2 del ta, right? So , at y is equal to 0, v x is equal to v max. So, that value is 
vmax, then, is equal to or v x at y is equal 0 is equal to v max is equal to delta P by kL whole to the 
power 1 by n divided by n plus 1 by n, right , into del ta to the power n plus 1 by n . So, it is 1, so 
this becomes equal to this which on simplification we can write n by n plus 1 times delta P by kL 
to the power 1 by n times del to the power n plus 1 by n is the v max, right?  
So, for slit , again you see the d ifference , now, for a limiting condition , if n is equal to 1 and k is 
equal to mu , so, vmax, or slit flow is , that becomes equal to n becomes 1 , so, it is 1 by 2 delta P by 
mu L, right? And this becomes 1 and this is del ta to the power 1 plus 1 , so, delta square, right? 
So, that is delta P by 2 mu L del ta square , if you go back to the previous classes , you will see that 
flow through slit , for Newtonian fluid , this is for Newtonian fluid , and this is for Non -Newtonian 
fluid, right? So , if you go back and see the previous class es, there , we had done for Newtonian 
fluid , this derivation , and there it was delta P by del ta square by 2 mu L as the v max, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:55)  
 
 
Then , it comes , the average velocity, so , average velocity , vaverage  we can write , 1 by del ta, if 
height is the H, then 0 to del, 0 to H, right? v x, dy dz is area, so , this is equal to 1 by del ta, 0 to 
delta vx dy, right? So , this we can write v x, we have already found out is n by n plus 1, right , into 
1 by del ta into delta P by kL whole to the power 1 by n , 0 to del ta, then this was del ta to the 
power n plus 1 by n minus y to the power n plus 1 by n into dy, right? So , this on simplification  
can be written , n by n plus 1, right , into 1 by del ta into delta  P by kL to the power 1 by n and this 
is 0 and del ta, so, this is y, right? So , delta to the power n plus 1 into y , on putting del ta, so, we 
can write this to be del ta to the power n plus 1 by n into del ta that is y, right , minus this is on 
integration giv es y and plus 1 by n plus 1 that is 2 n plus 1 by n, right? So , this is , that is , delta to 
the power 2 n plus 1 by n divided by 2 n plus 1 by n, right?  
So, this is dy , so like that, so , on simplification , this we can write n by n plus 1, right , 1 by del ta, 
delta P by kL to the power 1 by n , so, this becomes del ta to the power n plus 1 plus n that is 2 n , 
plus 1 by n, right , minus this is del ta to the power 2 n plus 1 by n over 2 n plus 1 by n, right? So , 
if we, sorry , take, if we take , delta n by n plus 1, 1 by del delta P by kL whole to the power 1 by 
n into del ta to the power 2 n plus 1 by n , if we take common, so , 1 minus 1 by or , n by 2 n plus 1, 
right? So , this can be written as n by n plus 1 to 1 by del ta delta P by kL to the power 1 by n 
delta to the power 2 n plus 1 by n , this becomes 2 n plus 1 minus n by 2 n plus 1.  
So, that means 2 n minus n, so , n plus 1 by 2 n plus 1. So , it is n by n plus 1, right , into this 
becomes n plus 1 by 2 n plus 1, 1 by del ta, delta P by kL , whole to the power 1 by n and this is 2 
delta 2 n del ta to the power 2 n plus 1 by n, right? So , n plus 1 and n plus 1 goes off, so , this is 
equal to n by 2 n plus 1, right , into 1 by del ta so, this is del ta to the power minus 1, so , we can 
write , delta P by kL  whole to the power 1 by n and this del ta goes there, so , delta to the power 
minus 1. So , that is 2 n plus 1 by n minus 1 is equal to 2 n plus 1 minus n by n is equal to 2 n 
minus n, so , n plus 1 by n , so, delta to the power n plus 1 by n, right?  
(Refer S lide Time: 28:32)  
 
So, the average velocity , this has come to , the average velocity has come v average  is equal to n by 
2 n plus 1, right , into delta P by kL to the power 1 by n, right? And , delta to the power n plus 1 
by n by n plus 1 by n, right? So , this is also nothing but equal to v max, what we had shown earlier , 
vmax was this, right? Delta P by kL into n by n plus 1 , so, this was , vmax is delta P by kL to the 
power 1 by n into n by n plus 1 into del to the power n plus 1 by n. So , this was v max, and now , 
we have got this new vaverage is equal to , so, vmax was this, what did we write just now, yeah , 
so, vx, vmax was this.  
So, delta P by kL, so , delta P kL by this one n by n plus 1 this is n plus 1 or 2 n plus 1 n by 2 n 
plus 1 this will be del ta n by n plus 1 v x is delta P by kL 1 by n n plus 1 by n, so , 1 minus this , so, 
this we can write, this is nothing but n plus 1 by 2 n plus 1 v max, right? So , that was n by n plus 1 
so, this is also n by 2 n plus 1 , so, vmax was originally delta P by kL  to the power 1 by n, n by n 
plus 1, right , delta to the power n plus 1 by n. So , v average  has become equal to n plus 1 by 2 n 
plus 1 v max, right? So , today we are going out of time so let us stop it today, thank you.                                                                                   