Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture 48  
Module 10  
Ergun’s equation -derivation (Part -1) 
Hello, we are doing packed bed, okay. So , in the packed bed , we have already said , what is the 
utility of the packed bed? What is the application? Particularly , in process engineering, but we 
also have shown , there were some definitions , ‘a’, or many others , like hydraulic ra dius or 
sphericity , these things , we have already defined . We have also found out Reynolds number, 
right? So , now we will go from that packed bed Reynolds number, then yeah.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:08)  
 
 
Now , from the Hagen Poiseulle equation for laminar fl ow, we have seen that delta P was equal to 
32 mu v delta L or mu v L , since , it is L , so, we can take it as delta P for delta L , for delta P over 
D square, right? Now , this we can rewrite as , 32 mu v prime delta L over epsilon into 4 r h, where 
rh is hydraulic radius square, right? This we have substituted D, right? v as v p prime and v prime 
by epsilon and D as 4 r h whole square, right? Because , your v prime was equal to epsilon into v, 
right? So , this v prime is the flow through the packed bed.  
So, if that be true, then we can also write , this is equal to 32 mu v prime delta L over this , we can 
rewrite as 4 epsilon phi s Dp over 6 into 1 minus epsilon , this square, right? This r h, we have done 
it earlier in the previous class, right? r h, hydraulic radius , and then , to, from there , to hydraulic 
diameter , that we have done. So , it is 4 epsilon phi s Dp by 6 into 1 minus epsilon square, right? 
This on rearrangement , we can write , this is equal to 72 mu v prime delta L into 1 minus epsilon 
whole square o ver epsilon cube into phi s square into D p square, right?  
Now , this can roughly be written as equal to 150 mu v prime delta L into 1 minus epsilon square 
divided by epsilon cube phi s square into D p square, right? Why? Because , this has been seen , this 
has been found out that whenever the value of delta P predicted , this is a relation, so , that means 
you can predict the delta P for a laminar flow using Hagen Poiseulle’s equation . This you can at 
this state using epsilon phi s everything, right? So , this is for packed bed that what is the delta P 
when your , there is a sphericity of phi s, or there is a void space of epsilon.  
So, when all the se are known, then you can write it in terms of 72 mu v prime delta L into 1 
minus epsilon square by epsilon cube  into phi s square D p square. So , that means , if you know all 
these terms , then you can tell that , what is the delta P, but , the problem is that when you do this , 
in the actual case , it has been found that the actual case will be much better if this 72 is r eplaced 
by 150 , i.e., the predation is much closer to the actual delta P , that is why this 72 has been 
replaced with 150, right?  
This was done by Blake and Kozeny , and according to their name , this equation is known as 
Blake Kozeny equation for flow throu gh packed bed and this is for the laminar part . So, for 
laminar flow , we have started with Hagen Poiseulle equation , from there the delta P relation , 
whatever we had , we have taken that , and we have modified that only in terms of putting the 
actual parameters , like epsilon phi s Dp and the velocity , v prime, right? So , these , by rearranging , 
we have now got one relation , where delta P is , instead of 72 , it is 150, then mu v prime v prime 
delta L 1 minus epsilon square by epsilon cube into phi s square into D p square . This we call it to 
be the Blake Kozeny equation, right?  
And this is valid for N Re less than 10, this is valid for N Re less than 10, right? Now , let us look 
into the other , i.e., the other part , when the flow is not laminar.  
(Refer Slide Time: 8:45)  
 
For turbulent flow , we can use that delta P f is equal to 4 f rho delta L by D into v square by 2 . 
This we know for turbulent flow , for laminar flow it was there using fanning friction factor , we 
have reduced it that delta P f is 4 f rho delta L by D or L by D to v square by 2, right?  
This, we have established long back. Now , if we start from that point and rewrite, right? Now , 
this w e can also write as 4 f, right , rho then this delta L remains there, this D we can write 4 by 6 
epsilon phi s Dp over 1 minus epsilon, right , times that v has now become v prime square divided 
by 2 epsilon square , so, v square by 2 , so, v prime square by 2 epsilon square again , the same 
thing that v prime is equal to epsilon into v, right?  
From that relation , we got this v prime square by 2 epsilon square right? This D , we have 
replaced with D p and that we have shown earlier that this is equal to that 4 by 6 epsilon phi s Dp 
by 1 minus epsilon, right? This we can rearrange , rewrite as equal to 3 f rho delta L by phi s Dp 
times v prime square times 1 minus epsilon over epsilon cube, right? This , we can rewrite , like 
this, because , this 4 that 4 goes out,  this 2 and this 6 goes  out and 3 remains , so, 3 comes 4 rho 
delta L phi s remains there , Dp remains there , 1 minus epsilon goes up v prime square and this 
remains epsilon and 1 epsilon so , epsilon cube, right? This epsilon square , epsilon remains and it 
becomes epsilon cube, right?  
So, here also the researchers have seen that the delta P , which is predicted with this equation 
with this relation of delta P which is delta P f for turbulent flow , for turbulent flow the pressure 
drop under friction factor delta  Pf that can be predicted through this relation , where we also have 
the particle size as D p, we also have the void space as epsilon , and we also have this velocity 
through that packed bed , i.e., v prime , I think , we had said that , v prime is velocity throu gh 
empty cross section and v is through that packed bed, right?  
So, if there is epsilon void space, then , that v that becomes equal to v prime over epsilon, right? 
That is what  we have earlier established and shown. Now , so, that is what that delta P f, when it is 
equal to this 3 f rho delta L by phi s into D p v prime square into 1 minus epsilon by epsilon cube . 
This has been seen that the predation of delta P with this relation is not so close. So , it was 
changed to roughly equal to 1.75 rho delta L by p his Dp v prime square into 1 minus epsilon 
divided by epsilon cube, right?  So, roughly 3 f is equal to 1.75 , sorry , 1.75, right? So , 3 f is 1.75 , we have substituted, right? 
Like the previous one , we had substituted 150 , instead of 72 with 150, right? Her e, we have 
substituted 3 f with 1.75, right? Then delta P f that is equal to 1.75 rho delta L by phi s Dp v prime 
square into 1 minus epsilon by epsilon cube, right? So , this is called , this was proposed , or, this 
relation was derived by the other pair of sc ientist , or another pair of researchers , their name s are 
Burker - Plummer and this equation is known as Burker Plummer equation, right?  
So, this, like the previous one , that was valid for N Re less than 10, this is valid for N Re greater 
than 1000, right? So , in one case we have seen that we can predict delta P for  flow through 
packed bed when N Re is less than 10 and in another  case for turbulent flow when N Re is greater 
than 1000. Than the question automatically comes that what a bout if N Re is between 10 and 
1000, is not it.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:08)  
 
So, for that another scientist who did a club bing, I mean punching , of these two , that he has 
predicted , he has used both of these two relations , and then what he did it , from the Burker 
Plummer equation or Blake Kozeny equation , first was Blake Kozeny, right? It was Blake 
Kozeny equation , from Blake Kozeny equation , we have seen delta P was 150 mu v prime delta 
L 1 minus epsilon whole square divided by epsilon cube phi s square D p square, right?  
So, this can be rearranged as 150 mu v prime delta L 1 minus epsilon whole square by epsilon 
cube phi s square D p square. Now , if we multiply both numerator and denominator with v prime 
rho square , then we can rewrite and rearrange it as 150 mu v prime, right , mu v prime, v prime 
we can use afterwards, okay , 150 mu say , delta L mu delta L , because this v prime we can use 
inside. So , 150 mu delta L into 1 minus epsilon whole square , now, this v prime , we can take 
there , and write rho v prime sq uare, right?  
And in denominator , we have epsilon cube phi s square, right? And D p square and this side it was 
v prime rho square, right? So , this again we can rewrite as equal to 150 G prime square, right? 
Because G is rho v , so, G prime is equal to rho v prime, right? So , if that be true then we can 
write , 150 G prime square delta L by phi s Dp, right? Over phi s Dp rho v prime over 1 minus 
epsilon into mu times 1 minus epsilon over epsilon cube times 1 by rho because we have taken 1 
additional rho and that rho came out here, right?  
So, this we can rearrange , rewrite , 150 G prime square delta L by phi s Dp into 1 min us epsilon by 
epsilon cube into 1 by rho, right , into phi s into D p into rho v prime over 1 minus epsilon into mu, 
right? This v prime was there and this rho is taken only , here it was rho square so , 1 rho is taken 
here, and 1 rho remains here, right? So , this rearrangement is required because we would like to 
proceed to one relation because , this was developed by the scientist , we will name him 
afterwards and during that process he has done all these.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:03)  
 
So, this equation , we name i t to be , say equation 1, right? So , let us keep it aside , and now from 
the other one , i.e., Burke Plummer , I think the previous one , where we so far remember it was 
Burke not er BURKE only, right? B, U, R, K, E Burke Plummer P, L, U, M, M, E, R, right? 
Burke Plummer, okay. So , next form the equation , Burke Plummer , we can write , delta P is 1.75 
rho into delta L over phi s Dp square , Dp rather , into v prime square into 1 minus epsilon over 
epsilon cube , this was the original equation which was Burke Plumme r, right? This we just have 
done here, it was like that 1.75 rho delta L over phi s Dp v prime square into 1 minus epsilon by 
epsilon cube, right?  
So, this if we know, then we can rewrite it as 1.75 rho, right , delta L by phi s Dp into v prime 
square into 1  minus epsilon by epsilon cube into both numerator and denominator , let us multiply 
and divide with rho. So , in that case , we can rewrite it as 1.75, right,  this as rho into v prime , this 
as rho into v prime, right? rho v prime , and we also can write this delta L by phi s Dp, right , into 1 
minus epsilon by epsilon cube, right , divided by into 1 by rho because , this rho v prime , we have 
gathered together, so , 1 by rho remains. So , this we can write that , this is equal to 1.75, right? G 
prime, right?  And this was v prime square, right? So , it was v prime square , so, it should be 
square here this rho this rho is this rho v prime square.  
So, this is rho v prime square , so, we can write G prime square into delta L by phi s Dp, right , into 
1 minus epsilon by epsilon cube into 1 by rho, right? So , this is , if we tell that , this is equation 
number 2 . So, that means , till now , what we have done , we have taken in one hand that Blake 
Kozeny equation , that we have taken , and we have come to equation number 1 , with a relation, 
right? So , delta P is equal to this , this, this, this, with a relation we have found out what is the 
delta P.  
And in another , with the Burke Plummer equation , which was for the turbulent flow , we have 
taken that equation , and we have come to this relation that 1.75 G prime square delta L by phi s 
Dp into 1 minus epsilon by epsilon cube to 1 by rho, right? This we have done purposefully so 
that we can utilize ultimately our target is we have said we have gotten , 1 equation t hat is Blake 
Kozeny , which is valid for Nre less than 10, right? And we have also taken another equation 
which was and that we started with laminar flow, right? And now in this case we have taken for 
turbulent flow and in turbulent flow , we hav e said that this is valid for N Re greater than 1000, 
right?  And in both the cases in terms of G prime that is mass velocity , we have taken that okay , now, in 
terms of G prime and epsilon D p rho, all these terms , we have done in one form , as delta P for 
prediction , in terms of G prime and we named them as say , equation 1 and equation 2, right? So , 
perhaps , this class we cannot proceed further, when we again come to the next class then we will 
see, how beautifully that scientist has utilized and made another , what I sho uld say another 
relation by which you can use both for laminar as well turbulent flow you can use the 
generalized equation and for the intermediate also, okay thank you let us go for the next class 
thank you.                                                                    
 