Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 41  
Module 9  
Velocity profile for Non Newtonian fluid  
Hello, you remember in the last class we were discussing about the Non Newtonian fluid, right? 
And we had also developed velocity at any instance the expression for the velocity that we had 
done, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 1:03)  
 
Now , if we go to that, ye ah, this we had developed that velocity was at any instance , v was delta 
p, right , by 2kL, right , to the power 1 by n, right , r to the power 1 by n plus 1 divided by 1 by n 
plus 1 within that limit of r to R , and this was n by n plus 1, right , into delta p  by 2kL to the 
power 1 by n and R to the power n plus 1 by n into 1 minus r by R to the power n plus 1 by n, 
right? This we had developed in the previous class, right?  
So, this is the instantaneous velocity, now , I would like to go back to a little as rec apitulation 
because , I got some information from the students side that if I explain a little more about the 
momentum relation between momentum and the shear stress, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 2:51)  
 
So, a relation between momentum and shear stress , if we look at the definition momentum , we 
said is equal to rho v, right , rho into v, right? So , rho v , if this is the momentum, then , this is , rho 
is kg per meter cube into meter per second, right? So , this is called momentum per unit volume, 
right? Or , we can also write as momentum, right , per meter cube, right? Where , this is kg meter 
per second per meter cube, right?  
So, this is momentum, now , this also is a recapitulation , that shear stress , when we write , we 
write with the plane, right? Two dimensions , rather two coordinates , i.e., Tauyz or Tauxz or rather 
r theta, right? Whatever , there, right? Depending on the coordinate system , you are employing. 
Now , this Tauyz, this, we can interpret as , this is equal to flux of z directed momentum acting on 
the y direction, right? z directed momentum acting on the y direction, right? This we can also 
write as the rate of flow of momentum per unit area, right? This can also be written as this and 
unit of momentum obviously , we have said that , unit of momentum is kg meter per second, yes 
kg meter per second.  
Shear stress , then this can be written as Tauyz is equal to kg meter per second per meter square 
into second, right? The moment rate is there , i.e., per unit time, right? Any flux is per unit time 
and per unit area we have said, so this is per unit area and this is the momentum. So , this we can 
say momentum per meter square per second, right? That is why this is called momentum flux, 
right? So , any flux is that thing per unit area per unit time , i.e., the flux of that thing , if it is 
momentum, then momentum, if it is heat, then heat, if it is mass, then mass , whatever it be , that 
flux of that thing means per unit time per unit area is the flux of that thi ng, right?  
So, this is true , whether it is for momentum , or for heat , or for mass, so , depending on what 
variable you are taking that will be the flux of that thing , that per unit time per unit area. So , and 
rate means anything per unit time is the rate, right? So , how you are , at what rate you are moving 
is as it is being said in terms of velocity , i.e., meter per second. So , this is the rate at which you 
are moving, right? Your velocity is like that, si milarly , any other thing per unit time is the rate of 
that thing right? So , this we can say that this gives us an amount this is what , is the amount of 
momentum transferred per unit time per unit area, right? So , this we have done a recapitulation, 
right? Whenever this comes into so please bring to our notice we will definitely bring back again 
and we will try to explain as much as we can, right?  
Now , from this expression that v is , which we developed , v is equal to n by n plus 1 delta p by 
2kL to the powe r 1 by n R to the power n plus 1 by n into 1 minus r by R to the power n plus 1 
by n. So , this tells that the velocity profile is something like parabolic, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 9:31)  
 
So, velocity profile is something like parabolic, so , that parabo lic in nature depending on in 
which direction you are taking . So, it can be like this, it can be like this. So , we need to know , 
that means it has a maximum, right?  
So, if we again draw that pipe , this is the pipe , this is the diameter;  this is the axis, right? Then 
the velocity profile looks like this, right? That means this is 0 at the surface and maximum at the 
center, right? So , if this is r, right? If this is r, then and if this is capital R, right? So , the 
maximum velocity we can write , this to be v max, right? And that is true when r is equal to 0. So , 
in this expression , if we put r is equal to 0, then , v becomes vmax and then we can write n by n 
plus 1, right , into delta p by 2kL this remains unchanged 1 by n, right?  
And since this is 0, right? So , this is 1, so , that means , into R to the power n plus 1 by n. So , the 
maximum velocity is this, right? So , v is equal to vmax that means , v is equal to vmax at r is equal 
to 0, right? So , this we know and we have seen earlier in pipe flow also. Now , here also we can 
see, we had told you that limiting condition, right? This is the Non Newtonian  fluid , right? And 
now, if we put n is equal to 1 , i.e., if it is Newtonian  fluid , then it becomes 1 by 1 plus 1, okay let 
me write in another page.  
(Refer Slide Time : 12:18)  
 
So, vmax is equal to n by n plus 1, right , into delta p by 2kL, right , to the power 1 by n R to the 
power n plus 1 by n, right? This is for any power law fluid , or conventional ly we call Non 
Newtonian  fluid,  for any Non Newtonian fluid, right? So, if this be true, then we said that for a 
limiting condition , if this holds good, right? So , what can be the limiting condition? Limiting 
condition is , n is equal to 1 , i.e., Newtonian fluid , i.e., for Newtonian fluid. So , vmax we can write 
for Newtonia n fluid , here we write Newtonian , that is equal to n is 1, so , 1 by 2, right , delta p by 
2 k is okay , here n is 1 and k is equal to mu, right?  
So, delta p by 2 mu L, right? 1 by n is equal to 1 R to the power n plus 1 by n , i.e., n is 1 R 
square, right? S o, this is nothing but delta p by 4 mu L R square, so , that is corresponding to the 
Newtonian fluid flowing through a pipe . This we have done earlier . So, this is r and this is capital 
R, right? And flow is taking place in this direction and velocity profile is like this and the 
maximum velocity is this . This we have done earlier , and you can check that , the one which , we 
have said this for power law fluid , i.e., fluid following the power law , where n can have  any 
value which earlier we said , n is what for what kind of fluid and generally , it is called Non 
Newtonian fluids, right? And typically , it is Newtonian , when n becomes 1 , and k becomes mu. 
So, under that situation this turns out to be the expression developed for Newtonian fluid flowing 
through the pipe, right? That means , the development or the proceedings , which we have done is 
correct and it is following the limiting condition, right? Very good.  
Now, we look into , when we have seen velocity at any instance , at any point that is v, right? 
Instantaneous velocity, so , we have also seen the maximum velocity , i.e., at r is equal to 0, right? 
Now , next is what the average velocity is,  right? What is the a verage velocity, right? Now , 
average , if you remember , we had said that for average velocity , you need 1 by area , i.e., pi R 
square, right? And 0 to R , so, we had shown earlier in many times , number of times that how 
area and how the velocity they are both  together is coming into picture, right?  
So, here we are taking directly 1 by pi R square , i.e., the area . So, 0 to R and this is v , 2 pi r dr, 
right? So , that is there, so this means we can write this 2 pi r, right , dr, so, 2 comes out pi goes 
out, so it is 2 by R square, right? 2 by R square , we can write 0 to R, right? v r dr, okay , now, this 
v, if we substitute with okay v r dr, right? Now , substituting the values of v , we can write 0 to R , 
the value of v was this, right? So, if we substitute this value of v , that it is n by n plus 1, right , 
delta p by 2kL to the power 1 by n R to the power n plus 1 by n, right , times it was 1 minus r by 
R to the power n plus 1 by n, right , times this is v , already 2 we have taken out, pi i s out into r dr, 
right?  
So, this on simplification , we, or on integration, okay , before that again , we simplify a little 0 to 
2 by R square this is n by n plus 1 because that is also not within the integration or we can call to be constant 2kL to the powe r 1 by n and R to the power n plus 1 by n and remaining is 0 to R, 
right? This is r dr minus 0 to R r into r to the power n plus 1 by n that is 1, so , 2 n plus 1. So r to 
the power 2 n plus 1 by n divided by R to the power n plus 1 by n dr, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:42)  
 
So, this on simplification we can write that this is equal to , so, this r , if it goes okay , this is 
beyond, so if this R square goes with this , so, it is R to the power minus 2, right? So , minus 2 n, 
right? So , that is 1 minus n, right , by n R to the power 1 minus n by n. So , we can write v average  is 
equal to 2 by R square or okay 2 into n by n plus 1, right , delta p by 2kL to the power 1 by n and 
this R becomes 1 minus n by n because this again this R square goes up as R to the power m inus 
2, so , n plus 1 by n minus 2 so n plus 1 by n minus 2 , this is equal to n plus 1 minus 2 n divided 
by n is equal to 1 minus n by n, right?  
So, this is R to the power 1 minus n by n, right? And here we write this is under bracket, okay 
that should hav e been. So it is r dr with a boundary of 0 to R , so, R square by 2 , that means , R 
square by 2, right? Minus this is again r that is 1 by R to the power n plus 1 by n this remains 
common and we write at r is equal to R this is R to the power 2 n plus 1 by n  again 2 n plus 1 by 
n plus 1 divided by 2 n plus 1 by n, that means , this becomes equal to 2 n plus n so 3 n plus 1 
divided by n divided by 3 n plus 1 by n, right?  
So, we can write this to be equal to R to the power 3 n plus 1 by n, right , divided by R t o the 
power n plus 1 this we have already taken out, right? Okay, R to the power this we have taken 
out, so 3 n plus 1 by n, right? So , if we now rewrite , this is equal to 2 into n by n plus 1 delta p 
by 2kL to the power 1 by n R to the power 1 minus n by n and let us rewrite , R square by 2 
minus 1 by or we write R to the power 3 n plus 1 by n divided by 3 n plus 1 by n, right , 3 n plus 
1 by n into r to the  power n plus 1 by n, right? So , on simplification we can write this term 
remains same , say ‘A., ‘A’ into, so, this we can write , so, R to the power 3 n plus 1 by n minus n 
plus 1 by n this becomes n and 3 n plus 1 minus n minus 1, so , this becomes 2n by n , right?  
So, 1, 1 goes out , so, this 1 , 2 n, right? So , 2 n that is R, so , here it is R square by 2 minus this is 
R to the power 2 n by n so that is R square again by 3 n plus 1 by n, right? So , if we again 
simplify , this is ‘A’ into R square by 2, right?  So, this is 2 into 3 n plus 1 by n, right? So , square 
into 3n plus 1 by n this minus this is 2 R square, right? This is equal to ‘A’ times, right? On the 
denominator 2 3n plus 1 divided by n on the numerator , if we take R square as common, then we 
can wri te R square into ‘A’, R square we take common , then, it becomes 3 n plus 1 by n minus 2, 
right? So , we can write ‘A’ R square into this becomes 2 n 3 n minus 2 n that is n plus 1 by n 
whole divided by 2 into 3 n plus 1 divided by n.  
So, this n that n goes out, so , ultimately it comes equal to ‘A’ R square into n plus 1 by 2 into 3 n 
plus 1, right? Now , if we substitute the value of ‘A’, which we were doing , i.e., 2 into n by n plus 
1 into delta p by 2kL to the power 1 by n R to the power  1 minus n by n, right , into R square, 
right? ‘A’ square into n plus 1 by 2 into 3 n plus 1. So , this is that , so, which , we can write this 2 
this 2 goes out, right? This n plus 1, this n plus 1 goes out. So , n by 3 n plus 1 this becomes that, 
this is delt a p by 2kL to the power 1 by n and R to the power 1 minus n by n plus 2, so , that 
means , this is equal to n by 3 n plus 1 into delta p by 2kL to the power 1 by n into R to the power 
n this is 2 n minus n that is n plus 1 by n, right?  
So, if you see that t he final average velocity is like that, okay. Now time is out, thank you.             
                                                                        