Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 43  
Module 9  
Problems and solutions of Non Newtonian fluid – Part -1  
So, in the previous class we have developed generalized viscosity, right , Coefficient of viscosity 
that we have done, right? Now , let us go and find out that, yeah , so, let us derive now 
relationship for generalized coefficient of viscosity, right?  
(Refer Sl ide Time: 0:52)  
 
So, if we see that Tauw was mu dv  / dr at wall, right? So , let us use the shear stress and shear rate 
expressions at the wall of the pipe, right? For , Newtonian fluids , and if , we do Newtonian and 
from that analogy , we can also find out f or the Non Newtonian, right? So , if we do it for the 
Newtonian fluid, then it was delta PR by 2L or delta PD by 4L , this was mu minus dv / dr, right? 
This was 4 mu by R into delta PR square by 8 mu L is equal to 4 mu by R into v average  is equal to 
mu into 8 v average  by D, right?  
This relation , we have already done , or mu can be written as delta PR by 2L over 8 v average  over 
capital D, right? This we can write , for Newtonian fluid, right? But , for Non Newtonian fluid , we 
know that Tauw or shear stress at the wall was minus k dot dv  / dr, k rather not minus 1 k dot into 
minus dv / dr at the wall n to the power prime or k prime minus dv  / dr at the wall to the power n 
prime and also we have seen that delta PR by 2L this was equal to k prim e 8 v average  over D to the 
power n prime, right? So , we can write that delta PR divided by 2L over 8 v average  by D this is 
nothing but k prime 8 v average  divided by D to the power n prime minus 1, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 4:42)  
 
Now , let us define , mu prime , that is equal to k prime into 8 v average  over D to the power n prime 
minus 1 , or we can also write mu prime is equal to k prime 8 to the power n prime minus 1 into 
vaverage  over D to the power n prime minus 1, right? So , if we define now general ized coefficient 
of viscosity , if this we say to be gamma, right? Then , gamma is equal to k prime 8 to the power n 
prime minus 1 and we also had earlier found the relation between k prime and k , and we defined 
that n prime was n, right?  
This relation , k prime with k , earlier we have found out , defined , and we assumed that n to be n 
prime, right? So , gamma , then is equal to k prime 8 to the power n prime minus 1, therefore , we 
can write mu prime is equal to gamma v average  divided by D to the power n prime m inus 1, right? 
So, this we know and we have also done this for Non Newtonian fluid and this is then the 
generalized coefficient of viscosity, right? So , generalized coefficient of viscosity, now , if we 
define generalized Reynolds number, right? So , that N Re general , so, this we can write is nothing 
but v average  D rho by mu prime.  
So, this is equal to v average  D rho , this is mu prime is k prime into 8 v average  over D to the power n 
prime minus 1. So , this we can write v average  to the power 2 minus n prime into D to the power n 
prime into rho over k prime 8 to the power n prime minus 1, right? So , this we can write to be 
equal to v average  to the power 2 minus n prime, right , into D to the power n prime rho divided by 
gamma, righ t? So , the N Re general , we can write , this is equal to v average  to the power 2 minus n 
prime D to the power n prime rho over gamma, right? Where , of course , gamma is equal to k 
prime 8 to the power n prime minus 1, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 9:24)  
 
So, if we define like this, then we have seen for Newtonian liquid , for Newtonian fluids , we have 
seen that friction factor and N Re, I mean , Reynolds number , the relationship between friction 
factor and Reynolds number was like this ‘f’ was equal to 16 by N Re, this was true, right? Now , 
for the same pressure drop of Non Newtonian fluid and flowing through the pipe etc . same 
identical situation , we can write delta P is equal to 4 f rho L by D v average  square  by 2, this was for 
Newtonian fluid which , we can write  64 by N Re general  into rho into L by D into v average  square by 
2, right?  
This we can rewrite as 64 over v average  to the power 2 minus n prime D to the power n prime into 
rho into L by D into v average  square by 2. So , this becomes , 32 gama L by D into v average by D to 
the power n prime, right? So , delta P with ‘f’ is for Non Newtonian fluid can be related like this, 
right? For , Non Newtonian fluid delta , P is 32 gama L by D v average  by D to the power n prime, 
right? So , now if we see for turbulent flow , modified Moody’s diagram , for turbulent flow for 
Non Newtonian fluid , modified Moody’s diagram , because , we have seen Moody's diagram for 
Newtonian fluid , this can be used to find out the fanning friction factor ‘f’, right?  
And if we look at how it looks  like, the N Re general , this is equal to D to the power n prime v to the 
power 2 minus n prime rho divided by gama , this is N Re and this side is fanning friction factor 
‘f’, right? So , if we see this is a log - log plot , 10 to the power 3, 10 to the power 4, 10 to the 
power 5, etc . and this side if we see say 0.001, 0.002, 0.003 and 0.002 , 0.005 say this is 2, this is 
5 this is 0.01 this is 0.02 like that, right?  
So, the plot is like this, right? And for this side is like that so , for different n prime so , n prime 
can be 0.22 say 2.0, right? In between say , 1.0, things like that. So , from this generalized 
Reynolds number versus friction factor for Non Newtonian fluid this is the modified Moody's 
diagram, right? So , this is modified Moody's diagram, okay. So , fully this is not visible , so, it is 
modified Moody's diagram, right?  
And from this diagram , we can say that the value of ‘f’ for pseudo plastic fluids, right , is slightly 
smaller than that shown in Moody's diagram, right? So , this is the difference tha t modified 
Moody which , we had use d. Moody , we had used for this , not value of ‘f’ this is that for pseudo 
plastic , for rough use, yeah this is that value of ‘f’ for pseudo plastic fluid is slightly less than or 
smaller than that in the Moody's chart , we h ad shown this in the Moody's chart for Newtonian 
fluid , if you remember , when it was flowing through a pipe, right?  
If we just recapitulate a little that it was flowing through a pipe and the pipe was the genesis of 
Moody's diagram , was that for pipe flow , when we developed the relation called from the Navier 
Stokes or for the pipe flow with the shell momentum balance , developed , and the equation was 
Hagen Poiseuille equation , and in that Hagen Poiseuille equation , whatever  we found out we 
said that the l ength of the pipe was L . Subsequently , when the friction factor was defined and it 
was said by Moody , from Moody's diagram which saw that the friction factor , when it is 
included and length which we assumed to be L , that was not originally L , because of the 
roughness of the pipe , through which the fluid was flowing, right?  
And to give an example of that barrel of the ice cream freezer, right? It is absolutely smooth, 
right? That is for , of course different reason , but it is absolutely smooth , so the travelling of the 
liquid is exactly the same as that in the pipe , more or less but if the pipe is not smooth , if it is rough that depends on the construction of the pipe, then Moody showed that length , which we 
actually had taken as L is no longer L, it is something beyond L, right? Which we had shown 
also and that extra L could be taken into , from the roughness of the pipe , and that relative 
roughness , equivalent roughness , those things came up , and we showed that the friction factor 
versus Moody's  Reynolds number or rather Reynolds number , friction factor versus Reynolds 
number , from Moody's chart , we had shown how friction factor can be found out, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:57)  
 
Now , here, for Non Newtonian fluid , slightly modified , that Moody 's chart was slightly modified 
and as we have shown , if we look at this here , this looks like more or less like that, okay , this is 
of course , taken from any published literature, right? Because , drawing it on the paper is little 
difficult , so, we had take n it from there so it is in the log  - log scale . So, then,  here, it is N Re 
general , that is D to the power n dot n prime v to the power 2 minus n prime rho by gamma , so, 
this is plotted versus fanning friction factor , again it is, say here it is given , 10 to the power 3, 4, 
5, here it is 0.01, 0.001, 0.002, 0.005 like that 0.01, 0.02 , this range and this side is n prime, 
right?  
So, n prime also varied from 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 like that 1, 1.4 to like that , as many n prime we can, 
right? And for a correspondi ng n prime , we find out , which one it is , and then for a given N Re 
general  or generally general you obtain from there you can find out the value of friction factor, 
right? What is the problem here is for turbulent Non Newtonian fluid flow modified Moody’s 
diagram , this can be used, right? Where , the diagram is available for Newtonian fluid is also 
applicable except the fact that values of ‘f’ for pseudo plastic liquids , in rough tube is slightly 
smaller than those given by the Moody's diagram, okay.  
That sl ightly smaller is definitely , it has impact, but not for all engineering purposes , not so high , 
such that your prediction will be upside down, right? So , all practical purposes this chart or this 
diagram is used and for Non Newtonian fluids , okay for dilatant or pseudo plastic , these fluids 
are these rather values are utilized and you get the value of ‘f’ or the friction coefficient or 
friction factor, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:06)  
 
This you have to find out, right? Now , to solve it to see that whe ther we have understood 
correctly or not , let us go for a solution of a problem , that is like this, two Non Newtonian fluids 
such as 50 percent concentrated milk having density of 1030 kg per meter cube and applesauce 
having density of 1100 kg per meter cu be are being pumped through a pipe having diameter of 
10 millimeter and length of 10 meter, right? Consistency coefficient and flow behavior indices 
for applesauce are assumed to be 0.5 Pascal second to the power n and 0.7 , and those of 
concentrated milk a re 30 Pascal second to the power n and 0.6 respectively, right? If the 
Reynolds number s are 500 and 5000 for both the liquids, calculate , the average velocities and 
pressure drops, right?  
So, I repeat, two Non Newtonian fluids such as 50 percent concentra ted milk having density of 
1030 kg per meter cube and applesauce having density of 1100 kg per meter cube are being 
pumped through a pipe having a diameter of 10 millimeter and length of 10 meter. Consistency 
and flow behavior indices for applesauce are as sumed to be 0.5 Pascal second to the power n and 
0.7 and those of concentrated milk are 30 Pascal second to the power n and 0.6 respectively, 
right? If the Reynolds number s are 500 and 5000 for both the liquids, calculate the average 
velocities and pressur e drops, right? Now of course we have come to the end session of this 
class , it is also very difficult to solve it at this very moment, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:04)  
 
So, what we do that we let you know or we ask you that you try we give some hints th at the 
generalized coefficient of viscosity that gamma if we write this to be k 3 n plus 1 over 4 n to the 
power n divided by 8 to the power 1 minus n, right? So , if we see that and if we use N Re general  
that is given , 500 so , find out average velocity , so, if we do this at home maybe next time when 
we are in the class , we can solve it in the class and do it, but you try at home and see how much 
you are getting, right? But , read carefully , the problem given , what has been given , and what has 
been asked to find out, right? And all the things , I have already been told and shown , so, you can 
do it, right? Okay thank you.         
                                                                       
