Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 11  
Lecture No 52  
Fluidization  
(Refer Slide Time:  1:20)  
 
We are done on that bed, now another application of this fluid flow typical  in packed bed is 
called fluidised  bed or flow -through fluidized bed. For example, let us go to that , yeah, so, 
flow-through fluidised bed, now what we understand by that, this is the fundamental thing 
what we understand by fluidisation of bed, we will come to applications afterwards but 
before that let us find out let us understand what we mean by fluidisation.  
  
(Refer Slide Time:  1:24)  
 
The other day , we had said if you remember , in packed bed , that if , suppose , you have a 
container like this , and in that container if it is perforated , and if we have full of say , peas, or 
similar kind of material, like this , if we assume that it is full up to this , now, say, a gas is 
being passed through this, or a fluid  is being passed through this. Now , this fluid , you can 
pass at any velocity, say at a very nominal low velocity of 0.1 meter per second, so , what will 
happen?  
This will go , and there is a term called Tor tuosity , so tort uous  path that tortuous  path is 
nothing but when it is moving like this through the vacant or through the void space between 
the particles, so , we have some void space between the particles, so , that void space will be 
utilised by this gas , and when it will go, it will move like this, say , gas is passing through this 
way, this way , this way, it will pass out and this is called tortuous  motion or movement of the 
fluid.  
Had it been no particles, then this gas could have gone through like this step forward but , it is 
not, it has to move through the space available , when the velocity of fluid is there,  Now , if we 
go on increasing , say from 01 to 0.2 , then 0.3 , like that 0.4 , like that , we are going increasing 
the velocity, so , what will happen , after some time , these particles , will feel that some one is 
making a thrust from the bottom of this , and then they will start moving a little , this adjusting , 
this like that, so , there will be some velocity when that may be 1 meter per second , that may 
be 2 meter per second , that all depends on the gas used and many other factors, the particles , 
many other and packing all.  
So, at some higher velocity , what will happen, these particles , they will feel that some thrust 
is coming from the bottom and they will start gradually , little movement in the m, so, there 
will be some velocity , when these particles will move a little , like from here , if the particle is 
getting shifted to this layer, so , these particles will be shifted a little like this, like this, like 
this, like that, like  that, so , there will be some increase of the length of the original packed 
bed. Originally , we had the packed bed length , say, this one, as I said, before the movement 
of the particle it was say L. Now , when this has started, and when the onset of fluidis ation , 
we call it be “Onset of fluidisation”, so , when onset of fluidisation occurs , then this height 
will change to L mf, it is called the length of the minimum fluidisation velocity.  
So, what I mean that these particles , they will gradually move from this and all the particles 
will have a floating like individually , they are floating on the gas. Obviously, as we have said 
that you have to increase the velocity of the fluid, the moment you increase the velocity of the 
fluid, there will be increment of the cost for making that higher velocity. Then , if that be, 
then, why do we do? What is the need? The need is that the moment you are doing this, as we 
said that each particle , say this particular particle, it will have , if we  bring down to this, it will 
have all around it , that gas , so, the entire surface area of the particle will be exposed to the 
gas. Now, this gas could be hot gas, this gas could also be cold gas.  
So, either for heating or , for cooling , if you are using tha t gas, or, fluid then , heat transfer will 
be better , because the surface area now you got exposed all the entire surface, this is not for a 
typical one particle, this is for the entire set of the particle s, the entire set of the particle s 
which are here, s o, all the particles , they are now exposed to the environment of that gas , 
either hot or cold , whatever you are doing, so , this improves your heat transfer drastically. 
There is this addition access up this money which you have invested for creating that h igher 
velocity is compensated , or maybe , you are getting some profit out of that by increasing the 
heat transfer there , and thereby decreasing the heating or cooling time.  
So, you are buying the time by increasing the velocity, this set is known as , this c ondition is 
known as the velocity at which this particle will start just floating on the medium , i.e., the 
fluid by which you are heating or cooling or through which it is , I mean that medium , which 
is passing through th ese particles, that will be the mini mum fluidisation velocity. So , 
minimum of fluidisation velocity is that when your particles have started dancing , i.e., what 
you can call it to be dancing , as if somebody , I hope you have seen during your , I mean , 
when you were a child , some parties or some functions you might have seen that a jet of water is coming out and on the top of it , there is a ping -pong or the table tennis kind of ball, 
which is floating on that.  
So, that you have given , the jet of this water , and depending on t his force , which you are 
applying , that particular ball is floating , and dancing on that, water particles are gradually 
hitting on the side , and it is dancing like that. So , these particles also starts dancing on that 
environment , and velocity at which thi s dancing or floating of the particles takes place , i.e., 
called the onset of fluidisation , and the velocity corresponding to that is called minimum 
fluidisation velocity , or minimum velocity for fluidisation. For example, I have taken this 
from net , or internet , which is available.  
(Refer Slide Time:  12:12)  
 
So, here if you look at this is a zip file, it will go . So, gas is coming , these particles are there, 
you see , when there will be a stay at beginning. So , this gas is moving, and gradually , it is 
taking, this one gas , only shown one. So , if you assume that you are passing all along all 
through so , gas is all coming , like that so , then what will happen? These particles will start 
dancing so that the bed and height of the bed is also getting i ncreased, this is the typical 
example , so, just to show that yes , these particles are gradually , I am not saying , they are 
moved away, normally , they are not moved away. So , that we had told you earlier that 
pneumatic conveying , pneumatic conveying , we had  said and in that pneumatic conveying , 
you are taking one particle or particles from one place to other place , so, that is conveying by 
pneumatic condition , or pneumatic flow.  
But, this is not that, you are not conveying the particles, what particles are d oing? They are 
just dancing on that fluid just floating on the fluid this is that example of that okay. So , this is 
the bed, originally it was like this and now it has started this all the particles they are moving 
or floating then the height will be a lit tle increased as we have shown it to be here.  
(Refer Slide Time:  14:32)  
 
So, then let us see that how we have said this, we have said this that , flow in fluidised bed , 
i.e., fluidisation, what is fluidisation? Whatever we have said that is noted down in a  
language or in a concise way. So , what is that, according to Ergun’s equation, when velocity 
v of a flowing fluid increases the pressure drop also increases. You remember Ergun’s 
equation , we had said , it was Delta p Rho , Delta P Rho , and then it was , Delta P Rho by yeah , 
it was like this.  
(Refer Slide Time:  15:37)  
 
G prime square into Phi s Dp by Delta L epsilon cube by 1 – epsilon , that was 150 by N Re + 
1.75, this was Ergun’s equation. So , Delta P Rho by G prime square into Phi s Dp by Delta L 
epsilon  cube by 1 – epsilon is equal to 150 by N Re + 1.75 . This we said to be the Ergun’s 
equation. So , according to this Ergun’s equation , as the velocity is increasing , or the velocity 
through the particles , or packed bed is increasing, the pressure drop also i ncreasing, this is 
Delta P and in this G prime we have Rho v, Rho v here. So , as velocity is increasing, Delta P 
is also increasing , remaining , say, other things remains same. If that be true , then Delta P is 
increasing this Rho goes there , so, as this is , this being , was there , so, as G prime is 
increasing, Delta P is also increasing.  
So, when velocity increases, the pressure drop also increases , this is true. So , when , velocity 
reaches a critical value , pressure drop multiplied by the cross -sectional area  of particles , that 
equals the gravitational force. Obviously, that the pressure drop , this is the Delta p, this 
pressure drop must be applied by the cross -sectional area CSA, this must be equal to the 
gravitational force , because gravity is pulling like t his, and this force is trying to move it. So , 
when the velocity reaching this condition , that the velocity is such that the pressure drop 
multiplied by the cross -sectional area Delta p times CSA is equal to the gravitational force . 
This condition we call O nset of the fluidisation , when Delta p times the cross -sectional area , 
this is equal to the gravitational force.  
So, when this is applied , or when this is applicable , this situation arises , that situation is 
known as onset of fluidisation , that means , any little increase in the velocity will allow the 
particles to move , or to dance , or to move inward so , it can also be said as dancing as you get 
the example of that ping -pong ball or table tennis ball on the jet of the water , many places 
you might have seen,  so, that situation , that the pressure drop multiplied by this cross -
sectional area that should be equal to the pressure force so , that situation , when the velocity is 
such that this condition is also good , that condition is known as onset of the fluidisation, so , 
we have understood this , and this is the onset of the fluidisation , and particles begin to move.  
The fluid velocity at which the particles begin to move is the minimum , the fluid velocity at 
which the particles begin to move is the minimum fluidisation velocity, so , and that is what I 
said earlier , when giving the example , that when you are having a 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 likewise , 
you are increasing your velocity , so, in the beginning nothing is happen ing, after sometime 
okay , there could be some this or that , that particles started feeling that okay , something is , 
some thrust is coming and then , we will attend that velocity, when this situation or this 
condition , that Delta P times sectional area must be equal to the gravitational force , when the 
velocity corresponding to that attends , then we call that , it is the onset of fluidisation , and the 
particles will start moving or as we said it is the dancing of the particles.  
The velocity at which it is happ ening is called the minimum velocity of fluidisation or 
minimum velocity for fluidisation, velocity below that , it will not be fluidised. Above that , 
obviously , it will fluidise and in that case some more particles may slow or may rise or if you 
go on incr easing the velocity, then at certain time , this particles may be transferred to some 
other , which was in our case earlier , as the pneumatic conveying , but, we are not going to that 
extent. So , the velocity at which the particles have started dancing or mov ing is called the 
minimum fluidisation velocity okay. And the velocity at which the particles begin to move is 
the minimum fluidisation velocity or v dot mf based on the empty cross -section of the tower.  
The porosity of the bed at the onset of fluidisation  is known as minimum fluidisation 
porosity, so , as we said , when we had initially , up to this , then there is a porosity , and this 
porosity , if it is epsilon , then when the fluidisation has started corresponding to that and the 
height was L , now, the new height has become L mf, i.e., the height corresponding to which 
the fluidisation is occurring , that is called the minimum fluidisation height. And this 
minimum fluidisation height corresponding to that , your void fraction, the void fraction 
which i s there , or the gap between the particles , i.e., the void, the gap between the particles , 
which is there , that is called epsilon mf or minimum void fraction , when the fluidisation has 
started.  
So, the porosity of the bed on the onset of fluidisation is the minimum fluidisation porosity or 
epsilon mf, epsilon mf prime because we have denoted that when there was no fluidisation if there is Delta epsilon if the porosity and corresponding pressure is Delta p corresponding bed 
height is say L or H whatever you call , say L and when and the velocity is v prime based on the 
empty cross -section , if that be true then , when we have started , we have obtained that 
fluidisation , that corresponding velocity is vmf prime , then corresponding the void is epsilon mf 
prime, corresponding length is L mf or height of this is L mf, corresponding pressure is Delta p mf. 
So, all these parameters are getting changed depending on your fluidisation condition. So , 
when fluidisation condition appeared, that time all the parameters like length or height of the 
bed or porosity of the bed or velocity in the bed, all these are getting changed and 
corresponding to this, we are denoting as mf , under minimum fluidisation condition. So , we 
see here that the porosity of the bed at the onset of fl uidisation is minimum fluidisation 
porosity , or epsilon mf prime  and the height of the packaging at this porosity is L mf. Now , further 
increase in velocity results in the particles being thrown upwards and the bed resembles a 
boiling liquid increasing poros ity and height of the bed.  
As I said , obviously , if we go on increasing this, then this height will go on increasing like 
this or then further like this or then further like this , or then maybe even further like this. So , 
this will go on increasing and as we said after sometime , if still we are going on , these 
particles will start moving , and they will be transferred from one place to other place and this 
is called that , this we have said earlier , and this condition is called your conveying , or 
pneumatic co nveying , when you are using air, you call it to be pneumatic conveying as the 
medium.  
So, then what you have understood that before the onset of fluidisation, we have a porosity , 
we have a velocity , we have a Delta p , we have a height of the bed, under that situation , as we 
are increasing the velocity , there will be a minimum velocity at which the particles will start 
moving , as if all the particles are floating on the medium , i.e., the fluid , which is flowing 
through that and the particles appear to be like just dancing, this condition is known as 
minimum fluidisation condition , corresponding parameters like height of the bed is L mf, 
velocity is v mf, or vmf prime , void is epsilon mf prime . So, this and your Delta p is Delta p mf, so, this 
way all the parameters will get change d, so, we will see subsequent process , we can find out 
how much change in the height, what is the velocity, et c thank you.  