Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture 56  
Module 12  
Problem and solution  
 
Okay, so we have done pipe flow and flow through annulus and many others so in that let us do 
also some problem because we said that if you do and if you can solve problems then you are 
definitely grasping the subject more. So , to do that let us also try some problems to be solved, 
mind it t hat this problems you can also find out in many books many , many sources and as many 
problem solutions you will do, it will not only give you that application of the subject, 
application of the topics, application of the equations but also it will help you  to understand 
different values different values I mean that it is unlikely that I give the one good example that 
we if we have in both the hands, one had a copper rod and another hand one wooden stick.  
And both if we put in say oven and a within very shor t period of time, we get in the hand where 
we have copper rod that will be very much heated up we cannot hold it, whereas the other one 
wooden one we know that it will be some more time required lot of time required by that time 
you can no more hold it. Th is is then known fact, true the reason also you know true, but the 
values , what is a value of the conductivity of copper , or that of the wooden stick , or wood if you 
are not coming across.  
Then , that the difference between you and another person who is no t of your field or who is not 
basically from science , if he says , then it , you will feel that , he is also saying the similar thing , I 
am also saying the similar thing , difference, the differences will be . you will not be able to 
explain the reasoning with scientific background, scientific details. So , for that detailing you may 
need to know the required values, right? And this you can gather , you can capture as many 
problems you solve so much you can do, right?  (Refer Slide Time: 3:55)  
 
This you keep in mind and solve as many problems wherever from you get it and solve it, right? 
For example , here if we look at that apple juice has to be sterilized using a 10 meter long tubular 
heat exchanger and a 10 meter long plate heat exchanger separately. Diameter of the tube is 15 
millimeter gap in the plates is also 15 millimeter. The juice has a visco sity of 7 into 10 to the 
power minus 4 Pascal second and density of 1100 kg per meter cube. For both the heat 
exchangers , Reynolds number N Re is set to be 3000 , you can take it 2000, you can take it 1500 , 
this is just for an example. What are the average v elocities , and pressure drops , for the two cases, 
right?  
So, we reread the problem once again, apple juice has to be sterilized using a 10 meter long 
tubular heat exchanger and a 10 meter long plate heat exchanger separately. Diameter of the tube 
is 15 mi llimeter. Gap in the plates is also 15 millimeter. The juice has a viscosity of 7 into 10 to 
the power minus 4 Pascal second and density of 1100 kg per meter cube. For both the heat 
exchangers Reynolds number N Re is set to be 3000. What are the average vel ocities and pressure 
drops for the two cases, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:36)  
 
So, it is a simple problem , as far as you are concerned , by this time , we have come to know the 
details of it , and you can solve it, but you see , the tubular heat exchanger , what it is, that means 
tube in tube. So , one tube is here and another tube is there , so, one fluid is flowing, one fluid is 
say flowing through this , and another fluid is through that , this is called counter current. Of 
course , when you come across with it in heat transfer you will see that count er current is more 
effective tha n co-current , had it been like this, this is also m oving this way and this is also 
moving , this is the annular and this fluid is also moving , this way the n, it would have been 
parallel, right? So , parallel is less effective than counter current, okay. So , whatever dimension  
has been given that we have seen and we have been here , it is not the heat transfer problem, it is 
the problem of fluid flow, right?  
So, one fluid is of our interest that is the juice which is flowing and not the heating or cooling, 
so, heat exchanger does either heating or cooling that is exchange of heat, right? So , if it is hot, 
then you can cool it, if it is cold , then, you can heat it. So , depending on what you are doing 
accordingly it will be, right? The other one is a plate heat exchanger as it is said, right? So , in the 
plate heat exchangers , there are plates , like this , several plates are there, right? I am drawing a 
little apart . reason being so , that you can make it out, right?  
So, in that case also, so , one fluid if it is going this way, another fluid maybe coming out this 
way, right? So , this acts as this plate acts as the heat exchanger plate, right? So , let us put this 
one, so, this will go this way and this again will come this way , this will again go this way like 
that, right? So , this will go this way and then again come back, right? And again maybe going 
out from there it will enter this way, right?  
So, that depends on and in each plate there are if you look at in each plate there are if this is the 
view of the plate there are four holes like this, right? Out of which depending on the flow of the 
fluid maybe one maybe for one fluid say this is for one fl uid and maybe this is for another fluid. 
These two plates are normally then closed, but these two are open. So like that depending on 
which one is open, which one is closed the flow becomes either parallel or counter current that is 
as far as heat transfer  is concerned we are not in this subject, what we need? We have to find out 
whatever has been said that what is the velocity and what is the pressure drop, right?  
So, we would like to find out that velocity and pressure drop. Now , you remember that this i s 
simply nothing but a fluid flow problem , I think yeah this is for this, okay this is nothing but a 
food fluid flow problem and in that we have been asked that what is the pressure drop and what 
is the velocity, that we have to find out. So , for that here  we have not we have been given a 
Reynolds number of say rough 3000, we know that for pipe flow, flow through pipe that 
Reyn olds number is less that 2100 N Re less than 42 or 4000 roughly it is said 4000, right?  
So, that means beyond this number less than this, this is laminar, this is turbulent and in this 
region it is intermediate means , neither , laminar , or turbulent. If you remember we had said that 
laminar flow means this is the flow, this is the flow;  this is the flow so it is all these are not 
interc hanging interacting with the other layer if these are each layer of the fluid, right? If it is 
intermediate means it will be going like this some may come and exchange with like this so there 
could be some exchange some laminar, so that will be.  
Whereas if  it is turbulent, then it will be a totally mix so all the fluid inside is mixing, right? So 
that means depending on the , and who will dictate this laminar or turbulent, this R eynolds 
number Nre, right? If N Re is less than 2100, then for pipe flow it is la minar if it is more than 4000 
it is turbulent intermediate is be tween that, right? So what is N Re? N Re is D v rho by mu , all are  
fluid s property , rho is the fluid property, mu is the fluid property, velocity is the fluid not 
property that has to be found out and D is the diameter of the pipe, right?  So, if that means this property values of the fluid for a given D the property values of the fluid 
can also dictate either on the Reynolds number or on the velocity or vice versa, right? If it is high 
velocity Reynolds number will be high, if it is low veloci ty Reynolds number will be low or vice 
versa for a given D if the property values are changing that is why I said that moving the values 
are also very much effective and in most of the cases are required also, right? Okay.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:04)  
 
Now , let us come to the problem solution, right? Solution is what, in case of the tubular heat 
exchanger so in case of the tubular heat exchanger the flow of the juice is a flo w through the 
pipe, right? So N Re is D v rho by mu or v is N Re into mu over D and rh o, right? Now the values 
are given the values are given as Nre given as 3000 mu given is 7 into 10 to the power minus 4 
Pascal second and D is given 15 millimeter if I remember 0.015 and density of the fluid was 
given 1100, right? So from that if we do the  calculation then we can see that 3000 into 7 into 10 
to the power minus 4 so much divided by 0.015 is equal to this divided by 1100 is equal to 0.127.  
So the velocity through the tubular heat exchanger is 0.127 meter per second, right? So if we 
have found  out, then pressure drop we can also find out from the Hagen Poiseuille’s equation, 
what is Hagen Poiseuille’s equation? So from the Hagen Poiseuille’s equation we can also find 
out what is the pressure drop, so if you remember Hagen Poiseuille equation we  have derived 
developed, so delta P is equals to 32 mu v L by D square, right? So , delta P is 32 mu v L by D 
square, so in this case delta P become equal to 32 into mu is 7 10 to the power minus 4, right? v 
we have found out just now 0.127, right? And we h ave been said that it is 10 meter.  
So if it is so, then D was 0.015 square, right? So if you see what is the value coming, value is 
coming 0.127 times 7 times 10 to the power minus 4, right? So , this into 10 into 32 is equal to so 
much divided by 0.015 squ are, so that is 126.435 so delta P is 126.435 Pascal, right? So , the 
pressure drop is not so high because velocity is also not so high maybe and whatever the 
property values have been given you just with the same all of the dimensions all of the things it 
change the property values and see how it is affecting and you will see that the property values 
have great influence on both the velocity and the pressure drop, right?  
The same thing you do for water it will altogether different, okay. So now let us do t he other one 
this is for the tubular heat exchanger. So for the plate heat exchanger here it is it was a pipe but 
in this case the plates are very close and we can assume it that this is that was for here let us 
write for tubular heat exchanger, flow is th rough a pipe. Whereas for plate heat exchanger the 
flow is through a slit, so we have to remember the relation of N Re for the slit flow, right? And if 
we remember that for the slit flow N Re a was equal to 4 v del rho by mu or it should have been 4 
del v rh o by mu D was substituted this D was substituted by the 4 del, right? So , and if you 
remember , if we had taken this as slit we had taken this as 2 del, right? If this was the axis, right? 
This was 2 del , 1 half plus del and another half minus del, right? This was our consideration if 
you remember, right?  
So, that is why it is coming and this was equivalent diameter or equivalent to that this slit what is 
the equivalent diameter that we can find out it is to 4 del we had also found out there. So , it is 4 
del v rho by mu all other things remaining same, then v becomes equals to N Re into mu over 4 
del rho so N Re we have said to be 3000, mu we had said 7 10 to the power minus 4, 4 del now 2 
del we have said to  be if we remember that it was 15, right? So , 15 millimeter apart. So , that 
means 1 del 2 del is 15 mm so del is 15 by 2 that is 7.5 mm, right?  
So, we can write 4 into 7.5 into 10 to the power minus 3 into 1100, right? And then let us see 
what it comes? I t comes to be 3000 into 7 into 10 to the power minus 4 is equal to so much 
divided by 4 divided by 7.5 divided by 10 to the power minus 3 divided by 1100 is equal to 0.06 
meter per second. This tells that we have a this thing much , much less velocity much , much lower than that in the tubular heat exchanger. So , the velocity in the for the same now let us look 
into the delta P.  
So the delta P is equals to from the flow through slit if we see the expression this was 3 mu v of 
course average L by del square, r ight? So , 3 into mu 7 10 to the power minus 4, right? To v average , 
we just have found out 0.06 , into L, right? L was same as 10, right? And del 7.5, so 7.5 10 to the 
power minus 3 square, right? Let , us look how much it comes, 3 into 7 into 10 to the power  
minus 4 into 0.06 into 10 is equal to , so much divided by 7.5 into 10 x to the power minus 3 x to 
the power 3 plus minus this square, so is equal to 22.4 Pascal.  
So, here the pressure drop was also high, here the pressure drop is also low, here the veloc ity was 
also high, here velocity is low, pressure drop is also low. So , that gives us idea that whenever we 
are doing such kind of thing we have to be also knowing this value gives us idea that in tubular 
heat exchanger the pressure drop and the velocities  are high, whereas in the similar way because 
we maintained the dimensions more or less very , very close same fluid, right? But in the plate 
heat exchanger the velocity as well the pressure drops are much lower than that of the tubular 
heat exchanger.  
You will see if you find out the percentage it will be almost 30, 40 even 50 percent lower than 
that of the tubular heat exchanger then in plate heat exchanger. So , that is why solving problem 
gives you some idea not only on the values, but also on the subject  like here you got idea about 
the both tubular and plate heat exchanger out of which who is giving how much velocity and 
how much pressure drop. So when you go to the industry obviously pressure drop will be very , 
very fundamental thing because in the high er the pressure drop more will be your expenses, 
right? So that has to be encountered so this way you can get idea about the values, right? So , do 
some problems, thank you.  