Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 11  
Lecture No 53  
Fluidized bed flow  
So, we have seen that what is the minimum fluidised velocity , or the condition , at which the 
particles start moving corresponding to that velocity , which is the minimum fluidisation 
velocity and the height is the minimum fluidisation velocity condition height  and velocity is 
already said and of course before the fluidisation starts, the packing was compact, now when 
the fluidisation has started packing will be little if it was closed pack, now it will be little 
loose packed and that that void corresponding to that is called minimum fluidisation void, 
void under minimum fluidisation condition. So , let us now find out what is the height, what is 
the velocity all this let us now find out okay.  
(Refer Slide Time:  1:49)  
 
So, let us see that what it is, it is that w e can determine this length and height of this. Now , I 
will say that before onset of fluidisation if the porosity is epsilon, velocity is v prime and the 
length is length , or height whatever we call, this corresponding to the this , we said and here 
we had , particles were like this , so, this was the height or L , whatever we call. Normally , in 
most of the books it is said L, can also use nomenclature as H , it does not matter as long as 
defined. Length or height , that L and epsilon v prime and pressure drop Delta P, so , this is 
before onset of fluidisation.  
Now , the cross -sectional area of this is CSA is equal to A and which is uniform. And we can 
say the volume of the bed we can say that volume of the bed that is equal to L into A in to 1 – 
epsilon . If epsilon is void , the remaining solid is 1 – epsilon , so, area is uniform , so, A, L is 
the height , so, volume is that L A into 1 – epsilon. Now , this under minimum fluidised 
condition , this under minimum fluidised condition , if we say , corresponding to epsilon , it is 
epsilon mf, velocity is v mf prime, length is L mf, area remains same area of the particle. In 
that case , we can say that the volume of the bed under minimum fluidised condition, this can 
be said equal to L mf into A into 1 – epsilon mf.  
Now , if we assume that there is no porosity, so , here we have , that container and the particles 
are like that , it is highly compact, no porosity , epsilon is 0 , then it becomes the full solid 
particle. In that case , we can say , the volume of the particle , then you can say that volume of 
the particle having no porosity , that should be equal to L into A, A is the cross -sectional area 
and L is the bed height . So that is the volume of the particles which is containing in that 
contai ner. So , then we can say that this L into A , volume of the particle , that must be equal to 
L mf times A times 1 – epsilon mf , because , same particle is there, this is the height under 
fluidised condition, particle sectional area remains same.  
Epsilon mf go t changed, earlier here it was 0 and now it is new epsilon mf, so , the particles 
remaining , is 1 – epsilon mf into A into L mf, that is equal to L A. Therefore, we can write L 
mf that must be equal to L times A over A times 1 – epsilon mf.  So, this we can  say is 
nothing but L over 1 – epsilon mf. So , we can easily say then that L 1 A 1 – epsilon 1 must be 
equal to L 2 A 1 – epsilon 2 etc, etc, dot, dot, dot. That means , we can say that L 1 over L 2 = 1 – 
epsilon 2 by 1 – epsilon 1. Same is true here , i.e., Lmf over L = 1 over 1 – epsilon mf, here it was 
no epsilon , no void , so, there is 1 by this.  
So, this we can say , what is the minimum height , when we have got minimum fluidisation or 
we have got fluidisation that height corresponding to the bed height is the minimum fluidised 
bed height, or height of the bed under minimum fluidisation condition , height of the bed 
under minimum fluidisation cond ition, i.e., Lmf. So L mf, we can find out , if we know the L , 
i.e., original height of the particles , when there is no void , and in that condition , we have seen 
that the relation between the void , as on the fluidised condition , and the initial length or 
height of the bed , i.e., written as L mf, Lmf over L = 1 over 1 – epsilon mf, where epsilon mf is the 
void under minimum fluidised condition. So , what we can write is that L mf is L over 1 – 
epsilon mf, say, we note it to be equation ( 1). Next , comes this is the length of the bed under minimum fluidised condition . So, we can 
write , length of the bed under minimum fluidised condition , Lmf. So, next comes what is the 
pressure under fluidised condition . So, pressure drop under minimum fluidised con dition , 
what is that. Now , in that case , we have to do the force obtained from the pressure drop times 
sectional area must be equal to the gravitational force as we have said , exerted by the mass of 
the particles that – the Buoyancy force of the displaced fluid.  
So, if we say that , if we do the force balance , by doing force balance , we can write that the 
pressure drop times sectional area , it is a cross -sectional area okay, let us also write cross -
sectional area, this must be equals to the , gravitational force exerted by the mass of the 
particles. And we can also say this – the Buoyancy force of the displaced fluid.  
(Refer Slide Time:  15:49)   
 
So, this if we write mathematically , we can write Delta P A , that is equal to L mf A into 1 – 
epsilonmf times Rho P – Rho into g, where , Rho P = density of the particle , and Rho = density 
of the gas or fluid. So , we got that Delta P A = L mf A into 1 – epsilon mf into Rho P – Rho into 
g, this is equal to , we can write that Delta P over L mf, this is equal to 1 – epsilon mf by or 1 – 
epsilon mf into Rho P – Rho this into g . Delta P by L mf is, A, A goes out , uniform cross -
sectional area, so , Delta P by L mf = 1 – epsilon mf into Rho P – Rho into g . So, this we say , to 
be equation (2). 
  
(Refer Slide Time:  16:49)  
 
Now , we can write , Ergun’s equation as Delta P by L , that is equal to 150 Mu v prime over 
Phi s square D p square into 1 – epsilon whole square over epsilon cube + 1.75 , Rho v  prime 
square over Phi s Dp into 1 – epsilon over epsilon cube , this is the Ergun’s  equation. So , if this 
is the Ergun’s equation , so, at minimum fluidisation condition , we can say that this Ergun’s 
equation we can rewrite as Delta P mf also at minimum fluidised condition over L mf, this is 
equal to 150 Mu v prime mf divided by Phi s square  into D p square , because particle size will 
not change , because , we said uniform cross -sectional area , into 1 – epsilon mf whole square by 
epsilon mf cube.  
So, this we can rearrange as , 1 – epsilon mf times Rho P – Rho into g , this must be equal to 150 
Rho, sorry, v mf prime over Phi s square into D p square whole into 1 – epsilon mf square over 
epsilon mf cube , just rewriting that, this + 1.75 , Rho v mf prime over Phi s Dp into 1 – epsilon mf 
over epsilon mf cube, so , 1.75 into Rho v  mf prime by Phi s Dp into 1 – epsilon mf over epsilon mf 
cube, so this is the Ergun’s equation as required by you, in this case we have said that , so, 1 – 
epsilon mf Rho P – Rho into g , this is that Ergun’s equation okay fine.  
  
(Refer Slide Time:  24:14)   
 
So, if this is true , then we can also write Rho P – Rho into g , this is equal to 150 Mu v mf 
prime over Phi s square D p square into 1 – epsilon mf over Epsilon mf cube + 1.75 into Rho v mf 
prime square by Phi s Dp into 1 by epsilon mf cube times Dp cube Rho by Mu square , so, this i s 
what was D p Rho by Mu square D p cube Rho by , not epsilon mf, okay , this is true but D p cube  
Rho P – Rho into g = 150 Rho v prime mf by Phi s square D p square 1 – epsilon mf by epsilon mf 
cube + 1.75 Rho v  mf prime square by Phi s Dp multiplied by 1 by epsilon mf cube multiplied 
by 1 by epsilon mf cube , so this is no more required.  
So, now, we can rewrite , our D p cube multiplied all along Mu square Rho P – Rho into g this 
is equal  to 150 Mu v  mf prime divided by Phi s square D p square into 1 – epsilon mf 150 Mu v 
mf prime Phi s square D p square 1 – epsilon mf by epsilon mf cube, we multiply both the sides 
with this , Dp cube Rho by Mu square + 1.75 Rho v mf prime square divided by Phi s Dp + 1 by 
epsilon mf cube into D p Rho by Mu square.  
If this is the Ergun’s  rearranged condition, we can further rewrite that D p cube Rho by Mu 
square into Rho P – Rho into g , this is equal to 150 by Phi s cube into 1 – epsilon mf whole 
square by epsilon mf cube into Phi s Dp v mf prime into Rho, this divided by Phi s cube is there, 
so, Mu 1 – epsilon mf this + 1.75 over Phi s cube into 1 – epsilon mf square over epsilon mf cube 
into Phi s Dp v prime mf, so , Phi s Dp v prime mf into Rho divided by Mu into 1 – epsilon mf. 
So, this on rearrangement we can write 1.75 by Phi s square into 1 – epsilon mf square over 
epsilon mf cube N Re square + 150 by Phi s cube into 1 – epsilon mf square divided by epsilon mf 
this 150 by Phi s cube 1 – epsilon mf by epsilon mf cube N Re. 
This, – Dp cube Rho by Mu square into Rho P – Rho into g , this is equal to 0. So , we have 
found out that the relation using Ergun’s equation with N Re is a quadratic equation , NRe 
square N Re, so, we can use Sridhar Acharya’s rule as  - B ± √(B2 – 4 A C ) / 2A,  that finding 
out root, fluidise solution and get the correct value okay thank you. 