Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami 
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering IIT Kharagpur 
Mod 01 Lecture 05
Equation of motion Part-1
 
Okay, so, we have done  equation  of continuity in  the three co-ordinates, Cartesian co-
ordinate, cylindrical co-ordinate and spherical co-ordinate. Of course, out of these three we
have derived 2, i.e., Cartesian and cylindrical, and spherical co-ordinate, we had shown you
that what is the final form of the equation of continuity, and we also said that these relations,
so, right from that partial derivative, time, total derivative, substantial time derivative. These
will be very much useful whenever also progressing towards the development of the equation
of motion.
So, when, you are deriving those equations, will be very much required, and of course, even
in more complicated. Now, in earlier case, what we have done in the equation of continuity,
we had done the mass balance, but here when you are doing the equation of motion you have
to do the momentum balance and this momentum can be transferred in, not only by one way,
but by two ways. This momentum can be transferred, right. How? One is due to the bulk
flow, right, for example, if this is, say 1 fluid, of course, this is solid, but assume, it to be, if it
is coming, so, this bulk is converting or transporting this momentum to another if this is
another. But, this is one, and another way is, say, these are the 2 or if we assume that this
fluid to be of this kind of multilayer, right. 
So, one layer like this can transfer to its neighboring layer and that can transfer to its
neighboring layer. So, like that this momentum can be transferred from one layer to the other.
If you exactly, the way, if we have seen that playing cards. Playing cards, if you keep that
bunch of playing card, and if you just given one push at the button layer of that card, then,
what happens, it is note that you have to give very high, I mean force to be very high. Just
give a small force and then see that the top one has come out, bottom and one has come in
and there is distribution of the velocity or that cards that coming like a, like angular one,
right.
In an angle, that those cards are making an angle with the base, right. So, this is how there,
this cards, we can assume to be each card to be one layer and they are passing one layer to the
other layer the force, which you have given a, say, horizontal force, and that force is also
translated to the vertical one that is why the top one, as remain there, whereas, bottom one
has gone a little away and they have made one like this. 
(Refer Slide Time: 4:11)                             
So, if we take this, so these are the cards, right and you have given a force at this place then,
what we will see? This card, which we have given a force, has gone a little away whereas itsadjacent is like this. Sorry, it should have been like that, okay, and this adjacent is like that,
this adjacent is like that, this adjacent remain like that, right. So, there is distribution, there is
this kind of change, you can see there now. So, that, if, you see in reality, in the in the liquid
also, in the fluid also, the same thing happens, if you consider the fluid to be of multilayer
and when the force is given, this is happening to that. So, how they are changing? How they
are transporting the energy? This energy, we said that it was through the bulk, that this is a
flow of the fluid by the bulk flow, so, that is being transported and another, when you are
doing this, that shear, the one layer to the other layer, that is by, you called, shear. 
So, that force is called shear force so that shear force is acting on the layer and thereby as it is
like this, so adjacent to this, it is being pulled. This, it is being pulled by that, that is being
pulled by that, that is being pulled by that. Whether, the top one remain, may be there, or a
slight moment. So, it is there, is definite way of deflection, you can see in all the cards.
So,  similarly, the  layers,  scientific  way, what  we  say  that,  we  know  that  in  the  fluid,
particularly, gaseous, right, in the fluid, particularly, say gaseous, so right. There what we are
showing that, okay. So, what is in that, what we have seen that, when you are looking at these
layers, you have read kinetic theory of gases, right? There, you have seen that gas molecules
can, in the kinetic theory, can move in all directions, right. Of course, they can collide also,
but, they can also move in all directions, and thereby, they are imparting the energy from one
to the other. May the kinetic theory of liquids is established. So many people have given
many theories on that, but, they, till now, there is no such kinetic theory in fluids or liquids,
right.
So, gases also a fluid, but, okay, in liquid, there is no such kinetic theory, but more or less, we
assume that this may be applicable for the derivation, which you will get, will not give, so
much that a prediction will be absolutely different. So, in that case, these molecules, you
imagine  that  one  layer  molecule  and  next  layer  molecules.  So,  this  molecules  are  by
vibration, they are exchanging the energy one to the other, right. 
So, this energy is being exchanged, whichever is having more is giving to the less one.  That
energy is exchanged and thereby this kind of vibration, we call it to be the shear, ultimately,
one is dragging, pulling down the other, and that is causing the drag force, or, we are calling
it to be shear force. So, this shear force is also acting on that. These two types of transport
mechanism is there. When, you are considering the momentum equation, or equation for
motion, on the basis of the momentum transfer, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 9:24) So, here, simply, we take the simple one, i.e., the Cartesian co-ordinate. So, you take one
volume element. So, take one volume element, right, and as earlier we have said it to be del
x, del y and del z, right. So, if that to be there then we said that the momentum will be
transferred by the bulk flow and another by the molecular transport, right. So, this molecular
transport, if we consider that to be say, this is normally represented as shear force (Tau), this
symbol Tau is used, and unfortunately, may be in our slides that tau might not have come
properly, it might be in place of Tau τ. So, but, it is exactly the Tau. So, Tau xx at the face x and
this is Tauxx at the face x plus delta x, right.
Similarly, one can be, like this, and like that right. So, which we can write to be Tau at the
face zx at z and Tau here, it is zx right at the face z plus delta z, right, whereas the third one is
perpendicular to this. So, there we can write to be like this and one like that, okay. Then that
can be said to be Tau yx at the face y and Tau yx at the face y plus delta y, right. So, other than,
this is our xyz. This is z, this is x and this is y. So, other than xyz sorry, (other than the
molecular), other than the bulk transport, which we have shown that other than the bulk
transport, this additional one is the molecular transport which has to be also taken care of,
right.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:57) So, when we are doing it then we do the general equation for motion is like that, momentum
balance as we have said in the beginning that momentum balance is done So, in that case we
can say that the rate of momentum in minus rate of momentum out plus sum of all the forces
acting  on  this  volume  element,  right.  This  must  be  equal  to  the  rate  of  momentum
accumulation, right. So, this is the basic general equation for the momentum transfer that is
based on the momentum, the rate of momentum in minus rate of momentum out plus all the
forces acting on the volume element must be equal to the rate of momentum accumulation,
right.
So, this based on this, the entire development of the equation of motion is based on. So, here,
we can write that by convection, what is coming and going out by convection or we can also
say by bulk flow. The work we have coming across is that rate of x component of momentum
on face x and x plus delta x, right. So, what is x, so this was the face x, this was the face xplus delta x, right and this was the face y and the other one was this, y plus delta y and this
was the face z and the other one is the z plus delta z, right.
So, if we look at that by convection, now, there are three, right x component momentum
acting  on  the  x,  x  component  of  the  momentum  acting  on  the  y, x  component  of  the
momentum acting on the z. All these three are to be considered, right. Similarly, for the other.
So, x component, now, first let us then look into that x component of the momentum that
means momentum derived from the velocity the v which is acting on the x direction as v x. 
So, momentum arising out of that in the acting on the x direction is that is the x component of
the momentum acting on the x. This we will be first finding out and then we will go to x
component of the momentum acting on the y and z, right. So, then what we can write that x
component of the momentum or rate of x component of momentum, so, which is acting on
the face x and x plus delta x, right. So, they are Rho v x times vx at the face x times its area del
y del z. This is for face x and the other one, Rho v x right into vx at x plus delta x into del y del
of z, right. 
So, similarly, we can also write that x component of the momentum, right, acting on the face
y and y plus delta y. This can be written as Rho v y due to the x component v x at the face y this
times the area, what is area, del x del z. This is for the face y. similarly for the face y plus
delta y it will be, Rho v y vx at the face y plus delta y into the area del x del z sorry, del x del z,
right. So, similarly, the x component of the momentum acting on the z direction is, so, z and z
plus delta z that can be written as Rho v z right into the x component that is v x at the face z
into area del x del y and similarly Rho v z due to x component v x at the face z plus delta z into
area del x del y, right.
So, these are then all three x component momentums acting in the all three, right, what we
have given. So, fluid was flowing, right fluid was flowing. So, if the moment it has velocity
v, it will have three components, one acting in the x direction, one acting in the y direction
and another acting in the z direction. So, all these three directions we have taken care of due
to the velocity component v x, or, the vx component that. How much momentum is being
transported to all three directions, i.e., x, y and z, that we have taken care of, right. So, both at
the inlet and also at the outlet, right.(Refer Slide Time: 20:45) 
So, then we can say that this was by the bulk flow. So, by molecular transport, this molecular
transport again for understanding, I am repeating that molecular transport means that one, we
assume that in the face, this is one plane or we also showed that this is one plane, right and
that is another plane. So these two layers, when they are there, so, if, we assume that this to
be one molecule and if we assume that this to be another molecule, these two molecules,
because of these vibration of the molecule within that plane. It is noted that they are going
like kinetic theory of gases. What we have seen that it is going up till it is colliding, right and
to the boundary. It is not like that it is on that plane not going the molecules and not going
away, but it is just like vibration. It is oscillating, right. In that case, this molecule, one
molecule is imparting energy to the other molecule; obviously the one which is having more
will give to the lower one, right.
So, but, this is happening for the flow of the fluid. Now, we are considering in the x direction,
right. So, that if we look at by molecular transport, if we see similar way that how it is being
rate of momentum transferred, how we write it that rate of x component of momentum on the
face x and delta x we can write that x component of momentum acting on the face x and x
plus delta x, right. So, this is by molecular transport. We can write to be equal to Tau xx at the
face x into its area del y del z, this was for the x face and for the x plus delta x, we can write
Tauxx at  the  face x plus  delta  x into  del  y del z, right. Similarly, x component  of the
momentum acting on the face y and y plus delta y that should be equal to Tau yx at y into the
area del x del z and Tau yx at the face y plus delta y into area del x del z.
Similarly, we can write x component of the momentum acting on the z and z plus delta z
direction is Tauzx at z into the area del x del y and for the other face Tau zx at z plus delta z intodel y del x, right. So, if we see this, we have taken all, both for the molecular transport as
well for the bulk transport. The total components for the bulk transport, the total components
of the x component, or, rather total molecular transport, total momentum transport for the x
component of the momentum in all the three directions say x, y and z, right. 
So, velocity component v x that is imparting the momentum and this momentum is in acting
on all three directions and in two ways, one by the bulk transport, and another by the
molecular transport. So, all these 6, right, three for the bulk flow and three for the molecular
transport  that  we  have  seen  how  they  are  acting  for  one  component  that  is  velocity
component vx, right.
Refer Slide Time: 25:58) 
We can then say that sum of the convective and molecular terms if we write they will be rho
vx into vx at x minus rho vx at into vx at x plus delta x into the area del y del z plus Rho v y into
vx at y minus Rho vy into vx at y plus delta y times the area that is del x del z, right plus Rho
vz into vx at z minus Rho vz into vx at z plus delta z, this, right, plus when this times the area,
area is del y del x, right del y del x and this is for the all three terms of the bulk transport, and
for molecular transport, we can write that Tau xx at the base face x minus Tau xx at the face x
plus delta x times the area that is del y del z plus Tau yx at the face y minus Tau yx at the face y
plus del y times the area that is del x del z plus Tau zx at the face z minus Tau zx at the face z
plus delta z into del x del y. So, these are all the forces acting, not all the forces, rather this is
for bulk and molecular transport, right, bulk flow and molecular transport.
So, this is said the Tau zx is that is x component of the molecular transport acting on the z
direction right, x component of the molecular transport acting on the z direction, Tau zx, x
component of the molecular transport acting on the x direction, Tau xx, x component of the
molecular transport acting on the y direction, Tau yx, this is how? This is interpreted, this we
have to keep in mind subsequently when we will derive, and find out that this Tau can also be
expressed in terms of viscosity, right from the basic definition of viscosity.
 (Refer Slide Time: 29:35)
Then, we also, we will see that there the velocity component and the direction both are acting
together. So, here, as we said at Tau yx, Tauzx, Tauxx, these are x component of the molecular
transport acting on the respective directions of x, y and z, right. So, other terms could be
pressure force that can be written as p at the face x minus P at the face x plus delta x into the
area that is del y by del z. Then this is all for x component and gravity forces acting, which is
Rho times gx times del x del y del z, right. Rho is kg per meter cube, this is a meter cube. So,
that is why this is coming, and accumulation, we can write accumulation of the x component
of the momentum, that we can write del del t of Rho v x, right, del del t of Rho v x into the
volume element del x del y del z, right. So, we have done in this class till now, that how the
molecular  transport  and  how  the  bulk  transport  we  can  formulate  it,  in  terms  of  the
components  of  the,  rather, velocity  components  individually  acting  on  the  different  co-
ordinates that is x, y and z. Of carouse, you have taken Cartesian co-ordinates right. 
So, as we said that this will take long time this is not small one and that is why you have
taken the easiest one, or, the one which you can handle easily in the class, i.e., Cartesian co-
ordinate and we have done up to that accumulation of x component momentum, right. So,
next we will sum it up, sum means we will go for the other two that is y and z component and
then look into the total and finish the entire thing as the equation of motion, known as we
said, Navier-Stokes equation, right. Thank you.    