Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering  
By Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami  
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture 58  
Module 12  
Problem and solution (Continued)  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 0:33)  
 
Okay, so you have done rather we have done here under different conditions if you remember 
that Brookfield viscometer the theory of that so it was like this the two concentric pipe or yeah 
concentric pipe and one was inner wall was fixed say and the out er one is rotating with an 
angular velocity of omega and we have found out what is the velocity profile, pressure drop, 
etcetera, right? So , this is used for Brookfield viscometer or if it is closed if it is rather fixed if 
this is rotating then also we ha ve found, right? We have found how the pressure drop or how the 
velocity profile is changing, right?  
Now , if you are asked, okay that was one type of viscometer, normally it is a viscometer by 
which viscosity is measured. So , if you are measuring the visc osity, then , no problem you have 
already seen for Brookfield viscometer how the theory is occurring and experimentally you can 
find out in knowing the all other parameters you can know you can find out the viscosity of some 
solutions of or some fluids, rig ht?  
Now , if you are asked that okay you have another type of viscosity measuring instrument like 
say capillary we also have done if you remember the theory for a ball dropping from a height, 
right? Till it is coming to its terminal velocity what is the ho w the viscosity can be developed, 
right? So , if you remember that expression we have also done, right? And if now the third case if 
you are asked that okay you are given a capillary, right? You are and you have heard the name of 
capillary viscometer there are many capillary viscometer manufacturers so if you are asked that 
if you are given a capillary and you have to find out the viscosity, right?  
Now , viscosity what does it mean? Viscosity means if the fluid is less viscous  if this is the 
capillary say if  this is the capillary and if through this if I have to pass the liquid the less viscose  
for the same height that will pass faster the more viscose  for the same height that will pass at a 
lower speed or at a later time, right? So , what will happen? The mor e viscosity means the both 
the wall as well as between the layers of the fluid they will have a drag force acting very high, 
right?  
Now , this if it is happening that  is why we need the value of viscosity to be known, right? For the 
importance of the visco sity is there that whether a fluid will move fast or a fluid will move 
slowly that will depend on the viscosity of the fluid, the higher the viscosity value, right? That is 
more the viscose  the fluid, it will take more time for the same diameter same lengt h of the pipe 
then compare to that of the less viscose  fluid, right? Now you also have done we have done 
rather Stoke’s law on that regard, right? That dropping of the ball, okay we have done the 
Brookfield viscometer also that one wall is fixed other wall  is moving, right?  
And then how the fluid characteristics flow characteristics are there. Now , if you are said that 
okay you are given a capillary viscometer and find out the viscosity, right? So , we cannot do 
experiment in this class because that is beyond the scope, but we can definitely do some problem 
on that, right? So , let us look into how the values are that is why repeatedly we saying that values 
are very , very important, okay.  (Refer Sli de Time: 6:16)  
 
So, let us look into this problem, this problem is saying for the capillary viscometer of glass a 
glass capillary viscometer has a height available for free fall is 9 centimeter and a capillary 
length of 7.5 centimeter. If the fluid used i s distilled water at 24 degree centigrade, the efflux 
time measured is 35 second. Volume of water drains between two marks on the viscometer is 4 
centimeter cube. What is the radius of the capillary? Assume density and viscosity of water at 24 
degree centi grade to be 950 kg per meter cube and 1 into 10 to the power minus 3 Pascal second 
respectively, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:35)  
 
So, this is also giving us a chance to see if it is a capillary, right? And liquid  water is flowing 
through this, right? Fro m one definite height to another definite height the time required to pass 
is known, then how can we find out the viscosity of water, this is the basic fundamental question 
we are given that we have given you a capillary through which water is flowing and we have 
given you the property values of water at a definite temperature of course property values are a 
function of temperature so that is why it is mentioned, right?  
And for your when it has come, so let us also say there is a very good book called ASHR AE, 
right? So , this I am using  for heating, refrigeration and air conditioning engineering that general 
or that is not general that is a bound where I should say that a bound volume and data book that 
data book you can find out any fluid properties at many  different temperatures, right? Like steam 
table , you get property values, similarly that book hand book that is hand book, so , this handbook 
many other books are also available, so , you can get the property values from there.  
So, what where we have been a sked that we have been given a capillary and water at definite 
temperature and that through the capillary water is dropping, right? And we have to find out 
what is the viscosity when we know that what is the time required to travel that water from one 
height or one distance to the other distance, right? We have been given the values, we have to 
find out.  
So, let us reread that problem and then solve, it is a glass capillary viscometer has a height 
available for free fall is 9 centimeter and a capillary len gth of 7.5 centimeter. If the fluid used is 
distilled water at 24 degree centigrade, the efflux means , what is coming out time measured , te, is 
35 seconds. Volume of water drains between two marks on the viscometer is 4 centimeter cube. 
What is the radius of the capillary? That is a fundamental question that what is the radius of the 
capillary that we have to find out, not the viscosity, so , if it is the radius is given then we could 
find out the viscosity, we can try if one is done we can if we have time w e can do the other way 
that one value is given what is the other value, right?  
So, that means one is given the other has to be found out, given that at 24 degree centigrade the 
value of viscosity and density or density and viscosity of water are 950 kg per meter cube and 1 
into 10 to the power minus 3 Pascal second, right? This we have to find out.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 11:52)  
 
 
Now , here since it is flow through a capillary so we can assume that we can use Hagen 
Poiseuille’s equation. So , from Hagen Poiseuille equation what we have seen that delta P is equal  
to 32 mu v L by D square, r ight? So , from there if we have to find out the v, then we can say that 
v average , so, this is average v average is equal to delta P D square by 32 mu L, right? Or , this 
we can write if it is not D, then delta P so D is 2 R so 4 R square D is 2 R so 4 R sq uare by 32 
mu L or this can be written as delta P R square by 8 mu L, right? So , v average is like that, 
therefore we can say that mu is delta P R square by 8 v average into L, where delta P is nothing 
but rho g and H, right? Height of the liquid, right?  
If that be true, then we can use this delta P here as delta P is given as rho g H, right? And v 
average is rho g H, okay into R square by 8 v average L, right? Now , from other side v average 
can also be written as volume over surface sectional area that is  pi R square times the required to 
flow that is t efflux, right? So , this volume by this means we can substitute that volume from 
there from the given value, right? So , we can write t hat this expression mu is equal  to rho g H R 
square divided by 8 , now, v average is this 8 into pi, this is 8 volumes  by this v average, right? v 
average is this 8 into volume, right , into pi into R square into  te, right?  
So, if we say that volume to be q or something, right? Then, we can write that this is rho g H R 
square pi R square t e by 8 times L is also there, right? pi R square L v average this is okay, so 8 v 
average into L, right? So , we can write from there that R to  the power 4 is equal to 8 times 
volume times L times mu over rho g H pi t e, right? So , this is correct, so now if we substitute the 
values 8 remains volume whatever was given if we remember that was 4 centimeter cube, right?  
That means 8 into 4 centimete r cube means 10 to the power minus 2 cubes , right? Into L, L was 
given 9 centimeter, right? L given, L is that 7.5 centimeters , okay. 7.5 into 10 to the power minus 
3 into mu, mu given is 1 into 10 to the power minus 3 over rho, rho given is 1000, no 950 i nto 
9.8 into H height it was given 9 centimeter so 9 into 10 to the power minus 2 into pi into te was 
35 seconds, right?  
So, now if we do this, then let us find out what is the value R to the pow er 4 so we can write R is 
equal  to 8 into 4 into 10 to the p ower minus 2 whole cube into 7.5 into 10 to the power minus 3 
into 1.0 into 10 to the power minus 3 by 950 times 9.8 times 9 times 10 to the power minus 2 
times pi times 35 to the power 1 by 4, right?  
So, let us look into this that 8 into 4 into 10 to the  power minus 2 square, right? 10 to the power 
minus 2 square is equal to this, no something wrong 8 into 4 into 10 x to the power y 2 plus 
minus, right? That was the mistake why it could not be, okay 8 into 4 into 10 x to the power 2 
plus minus so now you square it this is that into 7.5 into 10 to the power minus 3 into 10 to the 
power minus 3 another divided by 950 divided by 9.8 divided by 9 divided by 10 to the power 
minus 2 divided by pi divided by 35 is equal to this x to the power y 1 by 4 7.14 10 to the power 
minus 4 7.14 10 to the power minus 4 so much meter, right?  So, that means 7.14 10 to the power minus 4 meter, so into 1000 than 10 to the power minus 1 
that is 0.714 millimeter, right? So , 0.714 millimeter is a capillary we can say, okay let us s ee how 
much it came up it was no 1.237 10 to the power minus 3 not 7.14 I think somewhere we have 
made a mistake so it is 8 into 4 okay 8 into 4 1 10 to the power minus 2, that was another mistake 
1 10 to the power minus 2 this is 1 10 to the power minus 3  we have written but taken here as 10 
minus 2 in both the cases 10 to the power minus 2 has been so this is something wrong here this 
is wrong I think we are right, right? So , however the value you see it is so low, right? So that 
means, okay now if we loo k at now if we look at that this R we said this is for the capillary what 
is the radius of the capillary, right?  
Now , if the radius of capillary is given, right? Then we can also find out the viscosity from this 
expression we can also find out the viscosi ty, so in that case it would have been that the radius of 
this capillary is given all other parameters are given and mu has to be found out, right?  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:43)  
 
For example , so, here if we take that for 7.14 10 to the power minus 4 meter radius, what is the 
value of mu? So , mu should be equal to from this rho g H pi t e R to the power 4 by 8 into volume 
into 8 volume into L, right? So if we take rho was given 950 g is 9.8 H 9 pi t  35 seconds R we 
have found out to be 7.14 10 to the power minus 4 to the power 4, right? Over 8 volumes  if we 
remember volume was given 4 centimeter cube so 4 into 10 to the power minus 2 whole cube 
into L, L was 7.5.  
So, 7.5 10 to the power minus 3, righ t? So , if we solve it, let us see of course it should come the 
same unless we have done something somewhere some mistake. So , 950 into 9.8 into 9 into pi 
into 35 into 7.14 into 10 to the power minus 4 to the power 4 might be we have done something 
wrong di vided by 8 divided by 10 x to the power 2 plus minus, right , Cube into 7.5 divided by 
7.5 divided by 10 to the power minus 3, 39.90 , I said no , somewhere , we have done something 
wrong , maybe here , we have done something wrong, let us quickly try , I think o ur time is up.  
So, you try here hopefully this part we have not done correctly, so , you try it should come the 
same value of mu, okay thank you.                                 