Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami 
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering IIT Kharagpur 
Mod 02 Lecture 06
Equation of motion (Part-2) or Navier Stokes equations
 A small recapitulation of the previous class that  we have done, i.e., the momentum transfer, how
that is being done for a particular component, i.e., a velocity component, i.e., x component of the
velocity, vx acting on the x, y and z directions by the bulk transport as well by the molecular
transport. You remember, we said that the molecular transport is being done by the molecules of
the layers, which are vibrating in staying in the layer, but they are giving the energy, or, they are
exchanging the energy with the adjacent layer molecules, right. This way the two ways of
transport of momentum is occurring. We have done for the one component, i.e., x component.
Now, we will do for y and z, and then, sum up all of them and derive the basic equation of
motion that is the NAVIER-STOKES equation, okay.
(Refer Slide Time: 1:47)   
So, let us follow. So, then, we had come, if you remember, we had come up to this, that
accumulation, right, where the volume element was there del x del y del z and we also had taken
that by molecular transport by the bulk transport. This was for molecular transport, this was for
bulk transport we had done, right, and then pressure term and the gravity term, i.e., sum of the
other forces, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 2:45) 
So, now, if we divide in both the sides with del x del y del z, right. If we divide with del x del y
del z, dividing both the sides, we can write that Rho v x into vx at x minus Rho vx into vx at x plus
delta x, right. This divided by del divided by del x del y del z and we had the on the top this if
you remember that this was del y del z. So dividing it to with del x del y del z we take of del y
del z it remains del x, right. 
Similarly here also del x del y del z we take of del y del z or rather del x del z del y remains and
in this case, also del x del y del z. So, we take off del y del x del z remains, right. Similarly, here
also, so, dividing all with del x del y del z we get respective terms like that divide by del x right
plus Rho vy vx at the face y minus Rho v y vx at the face y plus delta y over del y plus Rho v z vx at
the face z minus Rho v x Rho vz into vx at the face z plus delta z over del z, right plus Tau xx at theface x minus Tauxx at the face x plus delta x over del x plus Tau yx, right, Ta yx at the face y minus
Tauyx at the face y plus delta y over del y plus Tau zx at the face z minus Tau zx at the face z plus
delta z over del z, right.
So, this is equal to and the pressure terms, i.e., p at x plus delta x minus p at x plus delta x minus
p at rather, sorry, p at x minus p at x plus delta x, it should be p at the written face, p at x minus p
at x plus delta x into, or, divided by that was also, we had del x del y del z So, here, it is del x.
So, this plus in Rho g x rather, we had del x del y del z, if you remember so that goes off, so Rho
gx remains and this is equal to nothing but del del t of Rho v x, i.e., the accumulation term, right.
So, this, applying the theory of limit del x tends to zero and from the definition of applying the
definition of derivative, right you know, derivative that is out minus in over the del. So, this is a
derivative, so we can write then, this is nothing but del Rho v x del t right. This is equal to minus
del del x of Rho vx into vx, right plus del del y of Rho v y into vx, right plus del del z of Rho v z into
vx, right. This minus del del x of Tau xx plus del del y of Tau yx plus del del z of Tau zx, right. This
minus del p del x plus Rho g x over this Rho gx. This is equal to, rather, already we have made it
equal. So, this we can say to be equation number 1, right.
In this case, here, you remember that we have applied this concept that limit del x del y del z that
tends to zero number 1 and number 2 when limit tends to zero and by the definition of the
derivative this out minus in over delta, that is nothing but the derivative, i.e., del del x of Rho v x
vx del del y of Rho v y vx del del z of Rho v z vx, right. Similarly, del del x of Tau xx, del del y of
Tauyx, del del z of Tauzx, right. Here, in this case also, minus this that is why negative is coming.
So, del p del x and here, we had Rho g x all x, y z was out. So, only Rho g x is remaining, right.
 So, this we can say that equation number 1 and subsequently we can write for the other two
components that is  for the y component and z component we can also write that, similar to this
del del t of Rho vy this is equal to minus del del y of rho v y  Rho vy, right Rho vy vy or rather Rho
vx vy, right and this plus this is  del del t, so, del del x of Rho v x vy plus del del y of Rho v y vy,
right plus  del del z of Rho v z vy, right. This is for the bulk transport and for molecular transport
we can write Tau del del x of Tau xy, right plus del del y of Tau yy right plus del del z of Tau zy, right.
This plus that del p or rather here would be minus, because by definition.
 So, minus del p del y plus Rho g y and in the same way we can write the z one right. We are not
writing then we will okay, it will take only just a little time del del t of Rho v z, this is equal to
minus del del x of Rho v x vz plus del del y of Rho v y vz plus del del z of Rho v z vz, right. So, thiswas like this plus or this plus of course that will come minus ultimately, right. Here, you should
have been minus; here also it is minus, right. So, del del x and one this term, so, del del x of right
Tauxy or in this case it will be xz, right plus del del y of Tau yz plus del del z of Tau zz, right this
minus del p del z plus Rho g z. These are the three equations for the three co-ordinates systems,
right.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:54) 
Now, if we remember we had given, this was the equation 1, right. So, keep in mind that this
equation, then, from that equation, we can write del del t of Rho v x, right. This is again nothing
but Rho times del v x del t or del del t of Rho v x plus vx del Rho del t, right again this is on x
function uv we can write, right. So, this from equation of continuity we can write that del Rhodel t, this is equals to minus del del x of Rho v x, right plus del del y of Rho v y plus del del z of
Rho vz, right. This was taken in the equation of continuity and we can write it here.
So, we can write then del del t of Rho vz or, rather, Rho vx is equal to Rho times del vx del t
minus vx into del del x of Rho vx, right plus del del y of Rho v y plus del del z of Rho v z, right. So,
this, we can write and if you remember the right of the equation which was this, was equation 1
and the right side was this big minus del del x of Rho v x vx, right.
So, one term if we take then we can write minus del del x of Rho v x vx, right del del x of Rho v x
vx, right plus del del y of Rho v y vx plus del del z of Rho v z vx, right. This was like that minus del
del x of Tauxx plus del del y of this will be under bracket. So, del del y of Tau yx plus del del z of
Tauzx, right. This minus we also had del p del x plus Rho g x, right. So, this on further expansion
we can write, so this first term can be expanded like this that minus Rho v x if we take this as u
and this as v the minus Rho v x into del vx del x, right minus Rho v y del vy del y plus minus rather
minus since, we have not given in a bracket if you were have given a bracket then we could have
written like this, then Rho v z del vz del z rather del vx del x, this is del vx del y del vx del z, right.
This we could have written and this minus v x times del del x of Rho v x plus del del y of Rho v y
plus Del del z of Rho v z, right. This term on expansion we can write like this, right as u and v.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:47) 
So, if we do like that then we can rewrite this equation one which we have shown you earlier as
Rho del vx del t, this is equals to vx into del del x of Rho v x, right plus del del y of Rho v y plus del
del z of Rho vz minus Rho vx times del del x of v x, right minus Rho v y del del y of Rho v y, right
and also minus Rho v z del del z of Rho del del z  of vz, right. So, this minus v x del del x of Rho v x
plus del del y of Rho v y plus del del z of Rho v z Rho vx okay, Rho vx. So, this also will be Rho v x.
So, we can write, so, del del Rho v x del del x, sorry, this is y and this is z, right. Rho v z. This if
we write then minus del del x of Tau xx plus del del y of Tau yx plus del del z of Tau zx, right. So, this
minus del p del x plus Rho g x, right. So, this we can write further that we can say that Rho del v x
del t plus del del x of v x plus del del y of v y plus del del z of v z. This is nothing but Tau del del x
of Tau y xx del del x of Tau xx plus del del y of Tau yx plus del del z of Tau zx, right. So this we
can write and of course here, we can with a if we remember that earlier we had taken this and of
course, minus  del p del x plus Rho g x was also there, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:20) Then, we can say that this to be nothing but the operant capital D. So, we can write that capital
Dvx into Dt times Rho, this is nothing but minus del del x of Tau xx plus del del y of Tau yx plus del
del z of Tauzx, right. So, this is so. This is for the x component. Similarly, for the y and z
component we can write Rho capital D operand del v y del t, right. This is equal to minus del del x
of Tauxy plus del del y of Tau yy plus del del z of Tau zy, right. So, this and similarly for the z
component Rho D of V,  D v z Dt. This is equal to again minus del del x of Tau zx or in this case xz,
right plus del del y of Tau yz plus del del z of Tau zz, right. So, this three can be written easily, right.(Ref Slide Time: 23:17) 
Now, if we substitute that by using the value Tau xx, is nothing but minus Mu del del x of v x is
Tauyx. Similarly, we can also write Tau yx is equal to minus Mu del del y of v x, right, and using the
similar way all others they can be written,, right. You remember that this one and this one, okay, I
have given two, okay. Let me also give the third one Tau zx, Touzy Tauzx. This is equal to minus Mu
del vx del z, right. So, this is for the velocity component, this is for the direction, this is for the
velocity component, this is for the direction, this is for the velocity component, this is for the
direction. If we keep in mind, this simple thing then we will be able to expand it in terms of v,
right. 
All this Tau terms, i.e., your shear stress terms, we can expend in terms of the velocity terms if
they are in Tauxx, first x is the direction, second x is the velocity component, Tau yx, y is the
direction x is the velocity component. So, that means Tou xy will be del vy del x right. Del vx del x.
Then similarly, Tau yz will be del vz del y, right. So keeping all these terms in mind if we
substitute, then in this equation, because, okay. Some more if we show, that, for example this we
can write okay, Tau this minus Mu this. Therefore, we can write del del x of Tau xx is defined as
this, right. So del del x of Tau xx we can write, this is nothing but del 2 v y del x square, right, del 2
v, this is Tau, not xx, Tau xx will be  del del x of Tau xx will be minus, okay, minus Mu right, minus
Mu into del 2vx del x square, right del 2v x del x square. 
So, keeping all minus Mu, similarly, we can write del del y of Tau yx, right, is equal to again del 2
vx del y square. Like that, all the terms we can write, with of course, minus mu etc, right, and in
that case, if we substitute them in the equation, what we have shown as equation 1, if we
substitute all these Tau values in terms of velocity and viscosity then we can say that Rho timesdel del t of vx plus vx del del x of del vx del del x of vx plus del vy del del y of vy plus vz del del z
of vz, this is equal to that Mu, now it has come to the right side. 
So, negative has gone out Mu del 2 v x del X square, right, plus del 2 v x del y square plus del 2 v x
del z square, right minus del p del x plus Rho g x, right. This is for x component for y component
we can write Rho del del t of v y, right plus vx del del x of vy plus vy del del y of vy plus vz del del
z of vz, right or rather this will be y, v y , this is equal to Mu del 2 v y del x square plus del 2 v y del
y square plus del 2 v y del z square, right minus del p del y plus Rho g y and for the z component
similarly, del vz del t plus vz del vz del x plus vz  plus, this is vx then vy, sorry, vx del vz del y plus
vz del vz del z right. This is equal to Mu del 2 v z del x square plus del 2 v z del y square plus del 2
vz del z square, minus Rho, no rather, del p del z minus del p del z plus Rho g z. 
So, these are known as NAVIER-STOKES equation. So, when, and this is for the Cartesian co-
ordinate, x, y, z, right. Now, when you will be doing it, you have to identify from the problem
given, or, from the situation which term corresponds to what.
(Refer Slide Time: 31:25) 
So, if you can identify, you can solve any problem on the momentum transfer with the help of
this NAVIER-STOKES equation, right. We will do some problems next time, and then identify
and understand this individual terms, okay. So, that is what here we do. So, NAVIER-STOKES
equation in a cylindrical co-ordinate, I have given, in  the slide you can check and also this of
course, not coming proper way, in these, R component, theta component like that. So, thank you.