Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami 
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering IIT Kharagpur 
Mod 02 Lecture 07
Application of Navier Stokes Equation
Good morning. If you remember, in the previous classes, we had dealt with equation of
continuity and equation of motion. So we developed in both R component, theta component
and z component that is in the cylindrical co-ordinates, i.e., R, theta, z. We had developed,
also we developed in x, y, z co-ordinate, and we also got the equations for the spherical co-
ordinates r, theta, phi, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 1:34)
Now, the question comes, in the last class, if you remember, in the last slides, where we had
given these equations of motions, i.e., Navier-Stokes equations. These equations were not so
much visible, the reason being, the color was mismatched with the background, was not, was
rather, there for which it was not properly visible, right, and besides, if we recapitulate that
what was the equation, then we say that it was like this, in the R-component, i.e., Rho del v r
del t plus vr del vr del r plus vtheta by r del vr del theta minus v square theta by r plus v z del Vr
del z that is equal to Mu times del del r of 1 by r del del r of r v r plus 1 by r square del 2 v r del
theta square minus 2 by r square. This also should be del 2 v theta del theta square minus 2 by r
square del vtheta del theta plus del 2 v r del z square minus del p del r plus Rho g r. This is for the
R-component, right, and then we proceeded to, this is for R, theta, z in which R-component
of the equation of motion was like that.
(Refer Slide Time: 2:57)Now, if you look into the other 2 components, like theta component, then theta component
looks like this, that Rho into del v theta del t plus vr del vtheta del r plus vtheta by r del vtheta del theta
plus vr vtheta over r plus vz del vtheta del z. This is equal to Mu times del del r of 1 by r del del r
of r vtheta plus 1 by r square del 2 v theta del theta square plus 2 by r square del v r del theta plus
del 2 vtheta del z square minus 1 by r del del p del theta plus Rho g r, this is for the theta
component, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 4:06)
So, if R and theta is done then we left with the third component that is the z-component, r,
theta, z is our co-ordinate. So, if you look at that z-components looks like this, Rho times del
vz del t plus vr del vz del r plus vtheta by r del vz del theta plus vz del vz del z, this is equal to Mu
times 1 by r del del r of r del v z del r plus 1 by r square del 2 v z del theta square plus del 2 v z
del z square minus del p del z plus rho g r, right.So, this is, these are rather, all three co-ordinates, or, rather, three components of the co-
ordinate system R, theta, z and why we recapitulated, because, it was not properly seen in the
previous class last slide. Again, I say that this was due to the mismatch of the color with the
background so that was not visible; however, it is rectified now, one more reason, of course,
is that in this is the basis of the further development, further for follow up of these equations.
Now, it is one of the best way of knowing any anything, i.e., until and unless you solve some
problems, you identify the parts of this equations, identify individual components, and then
you implement it in the problem, and solve the problem. If you can do that, then, it will
appear that you have understood these equations, meaning of thus equations, meaning of the
individual components, how one component is affecting the other? These terms must be
known and must be understood. So, this is the reason we recapitulated and now we will try to
solve some problems so that our understanding becomes more clear, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 6:38) 
So, let us go to the problem, say, if we define the problem like this, if an incompressible fluid
is flowing between two vertical coaxial cylinders, and the outer one is rotating with an
angular velocity of omega then determine the velocity for the tangential laminar flow. I repeat
if an incompressible fluid, so, here, we are taking the fluid to be incompressible, is flowing
between two vertical coaxial cylinders, right, so, we have two cylinders, so one cylinder like
this and the other cylinder like this. These two cylinders are there and the outer one is rotating
with an angular velocity of omega, so, if this is the outer one, so this is the inner one, so inner
one is fixed, outer one is rotating with an angular velocity of omega, then determine the
velocity for the tangential laminar flow, right.Now, given this problem, here, we assume, one thing, that the flow is steady. There is no
unsteady component. Then, because, as we said that this is the outer one and this is the inner
one, inner one is fixed outer one is rotating with an angular velocity of omega. If that is there,
then, the fluid inside between these two i.e., in the annular space, how is the velocity profile?
What is the momentum distribution that if we find out then we will be able to understand and
use the Navier-Stokes equations properly, right. So, for this, what we need to know first, what
is the problem theoretically given and how it looks like on paper.
(Refer Slide Time: 9:18)
Now, if you look at this, what we are given that, we have two cylinders, this is the outer
cylinder and this is the inner cylinder, right. So outer cylinder and inner cylinder, so if this is
the inner cylinder and if this is the outer cylinder, right, and if this is the center, then, we have
the radii as this one is R, and this one is some multiple of R, say kR, right. So, if this is true,
then, of course, this is the outer  cylinder and this is the inner cylinder, right, and we said that
it  will  have  an  angular  velocity  of  omega,  right.  This  principle  is  used  in  Brookfield
viscometer.
So, if we look at the velocity components, we will look into this, looks like this, right, where
this vtheta is function of r, right. So, this and  inner cylinder has a radius of R and the outer
cylinder has the radius of a multiple of R, say kR. What that k is unknown; k is a constant
which we do not know. So, it can be anything twice of R, half of R, 0.3 of R, 1.8 of R,
whatever value you can assign to it, right. So, it does not matter. So, we have to find out this.
So, this problem, if again, I am repeating that this is the outer cylinder, this is the inner
cylinder and the fluid inside is air, right and this what we said, this inner cylinder is fixed and
out outer cylinder suddenly started rotating with an angular momentum of rho omega. So, at
steady state, what is the velocity distribution, and what is the momentum profile, that, if we
can find out, or, say shear stress component, that, if we can find out then we will be able to
understand how the Navier-Stokes equations can be utilized to solve this kind of problem,
right.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:05)So, if we look at whatever is given, now from this problem, what we understand that number
1, it is incompressible fluid. So, Rho is constant, right. It is incompressible fluid Rho is
constant. If Rho is constant then many factors will go out, number 1. Number 2, we said that
there is, this flow is, of course, we assume to be laminar, right. Why you are assuming it to be
laminar? If we again look into this, this is there and this is the outer. So, the layers which are
like this, right, layers which are like this, these are the liquid layers. When they are moving
like this, this interaction between the layers is not there. So, that is why we assume it to be
laminar, that, if, we assume the flow to be laminar we assume that the density of the fluid is
constant, then if that be true then there is no interaction between the layers. So, when there is
no interaction between the layers, that means one layer with the other layer, they are not
having any mutual interaction, right. They are just moving freely and this we have depicted
like this, right okay.Now, if that be true, from this condition we can say that v r is equal to vz, that means, there is
no velocity in the R-component, right. In the R direction, had there been any velocity, then it
would have mixed like this, right, which, it is not, because, we assumed that there is a stream
line, like this, as  it can, right. So, these stream lines are rotating there. There is  no R
component. 
Similarly, if this is R, the other one is theta and the third one is z, right. Similarly, this is one
and you, just extend it like this, okay. If this is the z component, right. So, this is the z
component, so there is no vertical flow. There is no horizontal, since R component of the
velocity is not there. Similarly, z component of the velocity is also not there, i.e., there is no
mixing within the fluid, right. So, that is what we know it to be laminar. So, like this, then,
another like this. So, these kinds of layers are there, so that is one layer is not mixing with the
other. So, that is why we can assume we can say that v r is equal to vz and that is equal to zero,
and also here, one must say that this seems, this is moving like this. Now, since this is moving
like this, this one is not going and mixing with that one, right. So this, there is no velocity
component in the theta direction also. This is the theta direction.
So, there is no velocity component in the theta direction also. So, in that case, we can say, del
vtheta del theta is equal to zero, because, this theta component or v theta say 1 and say this v theta of
say 5, is not that they are one over the other, there is no mixing of this, v theta also, right vtheta 1
and vtheta 5, we can, whatever be the value, remaining the same and there is no change in the
theta component in this direction, right. So, that is why we can say del v theta del theta is zero.
If this is true then, if we remember that the Navier-Stokes equations, which, we had originally
given, right.(Refer Slide Time: 17:29)
So, this is the R component and in R component, v r is zero. First, Rho is constant, and also it
is under steady state. So, del v r del t this is also zero, del v r del t is zero. Rho is constant, right.
So, we can say that this component del v r del t is zero, vr is zero. So, this component goes out,
right. del vr del theta, right del v r del theta that is change in v r with theta. So, that can be there.
So, that is why we can say Rho v theta square by r del vr del theta del vr del theta, if there had
been any vr component also with the theta, right. With the theta direction change in theta with
vr that is not also there. So, we can say, since v r is zero, so, del vr del theta is also zero. v r is
zero, right. So, we can say this component also is not there, minus v theta square by r. Som it
remains, so it is Rho v theta square by r with negative. Now v z is also zero, so this component
remains zero. Then, this is equal to Mu del del r of 1 by r, since v r is zero. So, this again is
zero, del 2 vr del theta square, since v r is zero then del 2 v theta del del 2 or vr del theta square
that remains zero. Then, since del v theta del theta that also is zero. So, this term also is notthere, then this term del v theta del theta is also not there, and since v r is zero, so, del 2 v r del z
square is zero, but minus del p del r plus rho g r is there.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:28)
Similarly, this is, if that is true, then, we can write that for the first equation minus Rho v theta
square by r that is equal to minus del p del r. So, here one thing is the rho g r, right, rho gr that
is the gravitational value g r, since r is there we assume that g r is negligible and g r component
is not there, right. So, we than, get that, minus rho right, into v theta square by r. This is equal to
minus del p del r, right. g r is assumed to be negligible, and that rho g r can be neglected. (Refer Slide Time: 21:04)
So, if this is r component, similarly, for theta component, we can say, on the same way, since
rho is constant, and since it is steady state, so, we can say that del v theta del t is equal to zero,right. We also said v r is equal to vz is equal to zero. This was our initial del v theta del theta was
also equal to zero, right. So, if that be true, then, we can write del v theta del r, right vr into del
vtheta del r, that is there. So, v theta by r del vtheta del theta that goes out. Then, v r vtheta v over r,
since, vr is zero, so that it goes out. So, this goes out v z is zero, this goes out, right. v r is zero.
So, this also goes out. But, v theta by r del vtheta by del theta. So this is equal to zero. So, this is
zero, this is zero, this is zero, this is zero, and this is also zero.
So, left side is zero, right side is Mu del del r of 1 by r del del r of r v theta, right, which is a
function of r. So, this results to, one by r square del 2 v theta del theta square. So, since del v theta
del theta is zero. So del 2 v theta del theta square is also zero. So, this  term goes out. The third
one del vr del theta right, So, 2 by r square del v r del theta. So, this for this is v r that is R
component of the velocity, v r vtheta del vtheta del vr del theta, right. So, this also goes out,
because, since, vr is only function of r, so, 2 by r square del v r del theta, okay. Now, del v r del
theta this can be there, right. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:27)
So, second one, this del v theta del theta is there. So, theta component v r by r square, r is there
del vr, vr is zero, right. So, del v r is zero. So, 2 by r square del v r del theta is also out, and the z
del 2 vtheta del z square, since it is the double derivative and there is no v theta, vz component. So,
that is also zero. So, we can write remaining 1 by r del p del theta plus rho g r.
Now, here, you rho sorry, this will be rho g theta, as I said, that there may be some mistakes. So,
here it should have been rho g theta, right. Now, here, also g theta, we can assume to be zero, and
del p del theta, what does it mean? Physically, del p del theta, so, pressure varying with the
theta. So, this is the theta component, so, whatever pressure is here same pressure is there, the
assume pressure is there. So, del p del theta from the physical understanding, is also zero.
Now, so, we cannot say that del p del theta is also there. Then, we get, from the left hand side
is equal to zero, because all these components have been zero. So, zero is equal to Mu del del
r of r 1 by r del del r of 1 by r del del r of r v theta, this is the second equation. The first equation we got there as to remember that, it was rho minus Mu ya this was Rho
vtheta square, this that is Rho v theta square by r is del p del r right. But, here, that, it is zero, This
is the second and the third component, if we look at is ho is constant v z is zero. Not only v z
zero del t is also not there, that is it is not with type. So, del v z del t is zero vr is zero.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:36)  
So, del vz del theta, this is also zero, because v z is zero vz this term is also zero. Mu one by r
del del r of r vz del vz del r, so, vz is zero, this term will go out, del 2 v z del theta square. This
was also zero. del 2 v z del z square is zero. But, minus del p del z plus rho g r, this term is
again, here, it should be rho g z, right. So, this term is there, so, we can write zero is equal to
minus del p del z plus rho g z, this is equation 3, right. So, we need to find out v theta. So, only
one equation is good enough, because one unknown, other Mu is known for a given fluid,
right, r is known for the given diameter of the cylinder. So, if they are known, then, unknown
is vtheta.(Refer Slide Time: 28:02)
So, to find out this v theta unknown, if we solve this problem, then we can say that, let us start
with that second equation that is zero is equal to del del r of 1 by r del del r of r v theta, right. A
second equation, which we got, that was minus del p del z plus rho g z this one, right. So, this
one was the second and the third one which we had already shown that minus rho v theta square
by r is equal to minus del p del r, right. Out of these three equations, let us start with the
second equation that is, del del r of 1 by r del del r of r v theta is equal to zero. On first
integration it gives one by r del del r of r v theta that is equal to an integral constant, say, A.
So, on simplification, this can be written that del del r of r v theta is equal to Ar, right. So, on
again second integration, we can say, r v theta is equal to A r square by 2 plus B, which on
simplification can be written that v theta is equal to A r by 2 plus B by r, right. Now, we have
two equations and two boundary conditions, to find out integral constant B and C, right. So,
we have to find out what is the value of A and B. What is the boundary? Boundary is v theta is
equal to zero at r is equal to R. That is what we have been saying, v theta is equal to zero, at r is
equal to R. So, vtheta is equal to zero at r is equals to R. So, in that case, we can write, then, the
second boundary is the outer cylinder is rotating with an angular velocity of omega.
So, we can say, vtheta is equal to omega kR at r is equals to kR. So, using these two boundaries
and solving we can write zero is equal to AR by 2 plus B by R, and omega kR is equal to
AkR by 2 plus B by kR.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:24)So, in that case we have these two equations zero is equal to AkR by 2 plus Bk by R and AkR
by 2 is equal to minus Bk by R and omega kR is equals to AkR by 2 plus b by kR. So, on
simplification and solving, we can write, omega kR is equals to B by kR minus Bk by R that
is equal to B into 1 by kR minus k by R, that is equal to, in that case, we can say, B is equal to
omega kR by 1 by kR minus k by R. This is equal to omega kR by 1 minus K square by kR
that must be equal to omega k square R square by 1 minus k square. So, similarly from that
equation omega kR is equal to be kR by two plus B by kR. 
So, from there, we can write, zero is equal to AR by 2 plus AR by 2 k plus B by kR and
omega kr is equal to AkR by 2 minus AR by 2k, that is equal to AR by 2 into k into 1 minus 1
by k. So, in that case, A becomes 2 omega k over k minus 1 by k. So, v theta can be written as
omega kR. by k minus 1 by k plus omega k square R square into 1 minus k square into R that
is, omega k square R over k square minus 1 plus omega k square R square over 1 minus k
square. So, this on simplification gives omega k square r square by 1 minus k square into Rminus omega k square R by 1 minus k square. So, omega k square R square minus omega k
square R square over that was capital R, this id small r, 1 minus k square r, so, this means on
simplification we can write omega k square into R square minus r square over 1 minus k
square into r. So, v theta is equal to the omega k square R square minus r square 1 minus k
square r. So, we have come down from the problem and understanding of the problem what is
the velocity component which is acting in the theta direction, right. 
(Refer Slide Time: 34:20)
So, this way, if you solve many problems, you try, the other one. In this case, what we have
given that inner one is fixed and the outer one is rotating. Now, you try to do that the reverse,
inner one is rotating and the outer one is fixed. So, inner one is rotating in that case, what will
be the velocity component in the theta direction? So, when, there is no v r, there is no vz,
because we assumed it to be say laminar, So, that is why there is no v r, there is no vz as it is
steady state. 
So, del t part is also not there. So, implementing all these you can find out how the equation
of motions, i.e., Navier-Stoke equations can be utilized. Obviously, we will do some more
problems, otherwise it is really difficult. It will be required to implement and understand,
okay. So that is why we do here for this class, thank you.                   