Course on Momentum Transfer in Process Engineering
Professor Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Lecture 08
Module 2
Navier stokes equations utilization for solving problems
Now, I hope you have tried with several other problems, in solving different problems using
Navier Stokes Equations. So, if you have any problem, any difficulty in understanding?
Obviously, you can come back to us; we will try our best to solve those. But, as we said
earlier that to understand the utilities, the implications, and the places, where it can be
utilized, the areas, where it can be utilized. The equation of motions, you need to find out,
you need to solve some more problems and that some more problems, let us take one more
problem today and that problem will, let us come to that, right. So, if we think that any
problem, which you can do, or, which you cannot, that you bring to us and we will solve
them, ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 1:45) 
So, let us look into the problem 2 i.e., a cylindrical container of radius R containing a fluid of
constant density and viscosity is caused to rotate about its own axis at an angular velocity
omega. The cylinder axis is vertical. Find the shape of the free surface at steady state, right.
I hope, in secondary classes, we have done a locus of equation, or locus of some surface etc.
Those things we have done in a secondary class. So, here also, a similar problem, we will do.
In understanding the problem, here, you just imagine, I do not know, whether during your
childhood you had played it, or, you had that option of playing with, that is also true, because,nowadays, it is being so much, what should I say, urbanization, that those openness is also not
available in all the places.
So, if you think, if you go back to your child ages and their if you had ever a bucket full of
water, right, and you take that full of water and start making a round, right, start rotating like
this, right, bucket full of water and you are rotating on around you, right, with that bucket. If
you had remembered, if you remember that the surface of the bucket water that looked like
this, right, that looks like this, that the surface is like that, when you are rotating with that
bucket, right.
If you remember and know, we will find out this surface of the bucket, which is like this, and
what is the locus of that surface? This you can easily do with the help of Navier-Stokes
Equations. So, this is another kind of application of the Navier-Stokes equations to solve your
problems, ok. So let us look into that.
So, we say again this problem, a cylindrical container of radius R containing a fluid of
constant density and viscosity is caused to rotate about its own axis at an angular velocity
omega. The cylinder axis is vertical. Find the shape of the free surface at steady state, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 4:57) 
So, let us let us look into this that we have a cylinder, right, and this cylinder has the axis like
this, ok, and originally we had a layer of liquid like this, right. Now, suddenly we started
moving this with a velocity, omega, in the axis, in the own axis, right, and if we look at the
picture, this is R, or, say let us write, small r and this is z, right and third one is the theta of
course, right. So, initially, if we say, this is the height z 0, initial height, i.e., where, we started
with, right, and after some time, when the steady state has arrived, we will have a surface like
this, right. We will have a surface like this.
Now, we have to find out what is the locus of this surface, right, i.e., this equation of this
surface, that if we can solve, then, we can say that the understanding of Navier-Stokes
Equation has become little bit more easier, or, we have understood a little more application of
the Navier-Stokes Equation.
Here, one more thing has to be said that P is equal to P 0 on the surface, right. If that be true,
again, we bring the condition, the Physical understanding of the problem, right. We said that
we have a liquid in a container and this container is rotating on its own axis like this, and with
an angular velocity of omega, right.
So, we have this axis at r and z. These are the two initial heights, where, we started with. It
was z0 and after some time when steady state arrived, we got this surface with an angular
velocity omega like this, and P is equal to P 0. Obviously, that pressure on the entire surface is
same, right. So, from the understanding of the problem, we can say that, since, this is vertical
gr is equal to gtheta is equal to 0. We also said, flow is equal to constant, we also said, at steady
state, so, del del t of any v r, vz, vtheta, all are equal to 0.
Fourth thing, which, we have not said yet, let us say, again the flow, or, it is such a way that
turbulence is not occurring. So, flow is laminar, right. Again, laminar means, this layer, thislayer, they are all not mixing with each other, right. A free layer is like that again when it
became a surface like this, the layers in the bucket, were, like this, right. So, that means, there
is no mixing of the layers, interaction of v r, vz vtheta, these were not there, right. It is a
streamline laminar flow, ok.
So, this indicates that v r is equal to vz is equal to 0, right, and v theta is also a function of r, right
and since, it is laminar we can also say, del v theta del theta is equal to 0, right. That means, this
layer is moving, right, this layer is moving, but there is no interaction between this v theta and
this vtheta, right. So, otherwise, there would have been a rippling, there would have been a
mixing of the layers, which is not there.
So, del vtheta del theta is also 0, right. Then, we can say that r component of the velocity that is
equal to rho vtheta square by r, this is del P del r, right. You remember, in the previous thing, we
have shown, it was minus on the both sides. So, we can write, rho v theta square r is equal to del
P del r. Similarly, theta component, we can write, for theta component we can write that this
was 0, equal to mu into del del r of 1 by r into del del r of rho v theta. If you remember the same
thing we had written.
And z component, we can write, this is 0, is equal to minus del P del z plus, or, here, it was
minus rho gz, since it is there. So, rho g vertical thing is there so rho g z is also acting or, g z is also
there.  These  are  the  three  equations.  We have  three  equations  from  the  Navier-Stokes
Equations, which, originally started with and putting the boundaries, understanding of the
problem, we have identified different individual components and said, that, yes, this is the
equation, which come after putting the right situations involved in the problem, right.
So, the terms, which can be neglected or which can be written as 0, is already shown also in
the previous class, right. So, we are not repeating them. Otherwise, again and again, the same
thing, we will be doing, right. So, we understand that again if we have any understanding
problem, you can come back to ask and we will, I will definitely try to solve your doubt if
there be any, ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:44) So, if this is, these are the three equations, then, we can say that the integration of the theta
component, that is 0 is equal to theta component towards 0, is equal to mu del del r of 1 by r
del del r of 0, sorry rv theta, right. So, if this is there, this was that, on first integration, we can
write 1 by r del del r of rv theta is equal to A, right. On simplification we can write del del r of
rvtheta is equals to Ar, right.
So, this was first integration with constant A, and the second integration, we can say, rv theta is
equal to Ar square by 2 plus B, where, B is the second integration constant, right, which we
have also seen earlier. So, we can write v theta is equal to A by A by, sorry, A by 2 into r, Ar by
2. So, vtheta is equal to Ar by 2, r, r, so, it goes out, plus B by r right.
Now, at r is equal to 0. Since, at r is equal to 0, since, v theta is not equal to infinity at r is equal
to 0, since vtheta is not equal to infinity, we can write, B to be equal to 0, otherwise if r is 0 v theta
has to be infinity, then, only you will have some value otherwise, B is equal to 0. Since this is
applicable, we can write B to be equal to 0, right, the second constant, at r is equal to capital
R, vtheta is equal to capital omega r, right.
So, this omega r is the second equation. So, we can write omega R is equal to AR by 2 or A is
equal to 2 omega, right. Therefore, v theta is equal to omega r, right. So, this is v theta is equal to
omega r. This is one situation from the solution of one component that is theta component.(Refer Slide Time: 16:58) 
Now, if we see, the other one, rho v theta square by r is equal to del P del r, rho v theta square by r.
This was, from the r component, right, we did. So, this on simplification, we can also right
del P del r is equal to, already, we have found out, what is the value of v theta. So, that is, rho
omega square by r, this is omega r square, right, r into r square omega r. It was (A is) v theta was
omega r so this is equals to this so that means rho omega square r is that del P del r, right.
And, the third equation was del P del z. This is equal to minus rho g z, right. If you remember
that it was equal to del 2 (())(18:09) del z minus rho g z so we can write del P del z del P del z
minus rho gz so no it was not minus it was plus del 2 del z minus rho plus rho g z so that on
simplification it was it comes del P del z is equal to minus rho g z right. 
So, now, if that be true we can write, since P is a function of r and z, right, we can write that
del P or dP is equal to del P del r dr plus del P del z dz. So, dP is equal to del P del r dr plusdel P del z dz. This we can write right. So, now we have already found out the value of del P
del r this is rho vtheta square by r and also we have found out del P del z is rho g z.
So, we can write that dP is equal to, this is del P del r is v theta square by r right. So, dr (plus)
minus so this is minus this plus goes out rho g del P del z is we have found out minus rho g z,
so, minus rho gz dz, right. So this is then dP is equal to rho v theta square by r dr minus rho g z
dz, right.
So, on integration of this, we can write P is equal to rho right, v theta, we have already found out
that was equal to omega r, so, we can write this is omega square r square right by rho v theta
square by r is del P del r ok. So, this is P is equal to rho omega square by 2, because, this dr,
this becomes 1 by r dr then that becomes r square by 2 and on integration minus rho g z, right
this plus C.
So, dP become P 1 by r dr this becomes rho omega square v theta was omega square r square
right. So omega square by r square that became r so on r dr integration r square by 2 rho g z
plus C, right so this is that and from the given boundary we know P is equals to P 0 right that
means at z is equal to z 0, r is equal to 0, this is true at P is equal to 0 when this is at z is equal
to z0 and r is equal to 0 right. Therefore we can write P 0 is equal to minus rho g z, right, or,
minus rho gz, z0 plus C right or C is equal to P 0 plus rho gz z0, right.
Therefore we can write, P is equal to rho omega square r square by 2 plus P 0 plus rho gz0
minus rho gz z right, or, we can write P minus P 0, this is equal to 0 at all the points on the
surface, right. Therefore, we can write g into z minus z 0 is equal to omega square r square by
2. This is omega square r square by 2 right, or, we can write that z minus z 0, this is equal to
omega square r square by 2g, right.
So, the locus of this equation right locus of this curve we can write this is nothing but z minus
z0 is equal to omega square r square by 2g, right. So, we have solved this problem by using
the equation of motion or by using the Navier Stokes Equation. Obviously, we have not done
some of the things which we have done earlier that showing initially that how the conditions r
applicable right.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:09) Now, since we have little time so what we can do, oh! this was our problem, right, we can go
back a little and show that from the original equations we have how arrived. The problem was
given that we have a bucket and that bucket was rotating that I gave the example we have a
bucket which we were rotating like this but in this case say we have some bucket which is
rotating at its own axis with an angular velocity of omega right and now we were said what is
the steady state flow this curve there will be there will be there will be a circular this thing so
that will be how where is the locus of this right this we were asked that what is the equation
right.
And we said, which starts from the Navier-Stokes Equation we have already shown you what
is the is the locus of this line that we have shown you but again for recapitulation or a re-
understanding that, let us look into the r component, theta component and z component.(Refer Slide Time: 26:39) 
So, here we have said that the given condition P is P 0 on this surface, gr is gtheta is equal to 0 in
earlier we also had v r is equal to vtheta is equal to 0, but here we have v r is vz is equal to 0 and
vtheta is a function of r right, and in this case, v r, vz was 0 and vtheta was also a function of r,
here also vtheta  is a function of r and del v theta del theta is 0. These are the three, from the v r,
vtheta, vz, because, had there been any r component right, so there would have been a mixing,
had there been any z component, then there would have been a mixing, which is not there it is
under laminar condition, right.
If that is true then v r is vz is equal to 0 and del v theta del theta is equal to 0 and also v r is a
function of r right. So, if we go back to that r component, right. Since, v r is 0 and del vr del t,
i.e., it is steady state, rho is constant, ok, but this is 0 this component is 0, this component is
0, right, but vtheta square by r with a negative minus, rho v theta square by r that remains, vz 0,
this is 0 right since v r is 0 this 0, vr is 0 this is 0, del v theta del theta is 0, so that del v theta deltheta 0, del vtheta del theta also becomes 0, or this should be del 2 v theta del theta square so this
is 0, this is 0 and vr is 0 this is 0, minus del p del r plus rho g r.
So, we got minus rho v theta square by r, is equal to minus del p del r plus rho g r, right. But,
here also gr is 0. So, we get del p del r. So, this we said. And since, there was two negatives
we can make it positive. Now for that theta component, we have said, right, the first v theta del
vtheta del theta del t is 0 which is steady state, v r is 0, this is out, del v theta del theta is 0, vr is 0,
this is out, vz is 0, this is out, right, mu del del r of 1 by r del del r of rv theta, this is not 0, this
remains, but del 2 v theta del theta square is out, then del v r del theta is out, vr is 0, del vtheta del z
square del 2 vtheta del z square del vtheta del z is also 0.
So, del 2 vtheta del z square is also 0. So, this is minus 1 by r del p del theta plus rho g r, right gr
is also 0, and this should be g theta, right. So, we know g theta is 0, we said that g r is equal to gtheta
is equal to 0. So, g r, gtheta is 0. So this becomes 0, but del p del theta that is also we said this
del p del theta cannot be there, so that is also 0 because this p on this, on this surface, this p is
same, at every place. So, got the second equation, 0 is equal to mu del del r of 1 by r del del r
of rho vtheta.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:49) 
And, the third z component, we got, this del v z del t is 0, vr is 0, this del vz del theta vz is 0, vz
is 0. These all terms goes out. Then, v z is 0, this comes out, this v z is 0, this comes out, del 2
vz del z square goes out, what remains del p del z minus plus rho g z right.
So, we wrote 0 equal to minus del p del z, of course this minus rho g z, there was also a
negative ok. Now this was rho g z, that was, since it is acting vertical, so, here we are saying
that gravity is acting on that, so, means, rho g z plus this has become minus and this on
solution, we have found out that, ultimately, we got this v theta was omega r and we got thelocus of the equation as z minus z 0 is equal to omega square r square by 2 right, z minus z 0,
omega square r square by 2g. This is the solution, right.
If you remember that we said that we will do some problems for the application of the
Navier-Stokes Equation, right, so, this we say that, ok We have done some problem on
Navier-Stokes Equation, thank you.