1 
 Post-Harvest and Processing of Fr uits, Vegetables, Spices and P lantation Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Te chnology Kharagpur  
 
Lecture 17 
Sorting and Grading    
 
This lecture covers various concepts related to sorting and cri teria for sorting, sizing of fruits and 
vegetables, grading and systems of grading and new innovations in grading systems.  
 
 2 
  
Sorting 
Sorting refers to the separation of foods into categories based  on a measurable physical property 
such as size, shape, weight, and colour.  
The purpose of sorting is to remove items, which are undersized , oversize or under ripe, 
m i s s h a p e n  a n d  d a m a g e d .   T o  m e e t  r e q ui r e m e n t s  o f  a  gr a de  e s t a b l i shed by the centre, state or 
marketing agreement authority. To improve attractiveness of the  produce and reduce the quantity 
to be handled during subsequent operations like grading, packag ing, etc. To remove the damaged 
produce which reduce losses due to post harvest diseases during  transport and storage.  
 
 3 
  
Criteria for sorting   
On the basis of weight:  It is the most precise method of sorting and independent of th e shape of 
the product. Fruits or vegetables like apple may be separated i nto weight categories using spring-
loaded strain gauge or electronic weighing devices installed wi th the conveyor system or 
conveying system. In some places, a high pressure or compressed  air is utilized to blow lesser 
weights and it separates heavier products. A disadvantage of we ight sorting is the relatively long 
time required per unit. This method is more appropriate for the  smaller produce.  
On the basis of size:  Size sorting is less precise than the weight sorting but it is  considerably 
cheaper. Size categories could include a number of physical par ameters including as volume, 
axes, perimeter measurement, and calculation of projected area.  Sorting into size categories 
requires some sort of screen. This screens may have a fixed or variable aperture.  
Fixed aperture screens have number of screen in series or in pa rallel to sort produce into several 
categories simultaneously. Whereas the variable aperture screen s, they have either a continuous 
or step-wise diverging aperture. These are much gentler and are  commonly used with large or 
more delicate fruits. 
 
Size sorting equipment   
In concentric drum screen , the fruits or vegetable is fed into the central screen. It mo ves in 
various holes with different sizes . When it moves the smaller, medium, and large sized particles 
are grouped.  
Roller size sorter  has rollers with a widening gap between the rollers to separat e the materials 
moving in the gaps based on various sizes.  4 
 In belt and roller sorter,  a  s l o p i n g  c o n v e y o r  b e l t  i s  u s e d  w h e r e  d i f f e r e n t  s i z e d  m a t e r i a l s are 
grouped.  
 
 
Criteria for sorting  
Shape:  Useful in cases where the produce is likely to be of uneven si zes and weight. Particularly 
applicable to spice seeds which may contain other seeds. The pr inciple is that disks or cylinders 
with accurately shaped indentati ons will pick up spice seeds or  fruits of the correct shape when 
rotated through the stock, while o ther shapes will remain in th e feed. 
Density:  The suitability of some processe s depends on sorting by densit y. Some properties of 
produce can be defined by its density. For instance, density of  peas correlates well with 
tenderness and sweetness. Total solid content of potatoes deter mines suitability for manufacture 5 
 of crisps and dried products. Sorting on the basis of density c an be achieved using flotation in 
brine at different concentrations. 
 
Colour:  It is the measure of maturity, presence of defects or degree o f processing. Colour sorting 
it can be done manually or by automated system. Conveyor belts or sorting tables are used for 
manual sorting. But in the automated system highly accurate pho tocells are used which compare 
the reflectance of the produce. It can eject defective or wrong ly coloured material. For example, 
blackened or small fruits are removed by a blast of compressed air. The number of photocells are 
positioned at different angles in  the system, which can detect blemishes on large units such as 
potatoes, red and green tomatoes.  
 6 
 
 
Colour sorter 
The fruits and vegetables like tomato, apples, oranges can be q uickly sorted automatically using 
microprocessor control colour sorting equipment. Photo detector s measure the reflected colour of 
the produce and compare it with the standard. The sensors they sense these colours of the 
different commodity, this signal is sent to the data processor unit and which finally, analyses and 
send its output to the ejector. Reflected light is processed by  a microprocessor which operates 
rejection system automatically.  
 
Rollers sorter  
The produce for sorting generally moves over a belt or a roller  conveyor. The roller conveyor 
turns the produces as it moves forward, is preferable to a belt , because it allows the sorter to see 7 
 all sides of each item. Each sorter on the line picks out those  products, which are not suitable for 
high marketing. Sufficient light above the sorting table is als o essential for high efficiency of this 
operation. 
 
Sizing of the fruits or vegetables   
Sizing is done either by hand or by machine. The machine sizers  work on two basic principles, 
i.e. weight and diameter. Most effective for spherical commodit ies like oranges, tomatoes, 
certain apple cultivars and elongated commodities like deliciou s apple and European pears.  
Type of sizing machines 
 Diverging belt or rope graders : Different speed of belts makes produce rotate besides 
moving forward to a point where produce diameter equals belt/ro pe separation 
(Cucumbers, gherkins, pineapples and large root vegetables).  
 Sizing rollers:  It has increased spaces between the rollers that separates lon ger produce 
from the smaller ones, it is sui table for the citrus fruits.  
 Hand held template : Sizing can be performed manually using rings of known diamete r. 
 Sizing by weight : Weight sensitive trays automatically move fruit into another belt 
aggregating all units of the same mass such as citrus, apples, pears are irregular fruits. 
 Mesh screens : Generally used for sizing po tato, onion, aonla et cetera.  8 
 
 
Grading  
Grading is a classification on the basis of the quality.  The main difference between sorting and 
grading is in grading the commodities are classified on the bas is of the quality whereas the sizing 
or sorting is classification on the basis of their physical pro perties. The produce is classified into 
two or more grades on the basis of the surface colour, shape, s ize, weight, soundness, firmness, 
cleanliness, and maturity to obtain the maximum worth in the ma rket. Fruit grading is an 
important process that affects the quality management and stora ge of the produce. Grading may 
be done manually or mechanically. Some basis of the grading and  examples are: Size and colour 
grading used for citrus foods such as lemons, tangerine and ora nge, Screen graders are used for 
ber, lemon, anola, Grading based on size is used for onions, po tato, apple tomato, and electronic 
colour grading is used for highly perishable fruits.  
 9 
 Grading system 
The y m aybe as static system  or dynam ic syst em. Static syst em  is  common in tender and high 
value commodities. The product is placed on a static inspection  table where sorters removed the 
units which do not match the requirements for the grade or the quality category. Whereas in the 
d y n a m i c  s y s t e m  p r o d u c t  m o v e s  a l o n g  a  b e l t  i n  f r o n t  o f  t h e  s o r t e rs which remove units with 
defect. It is much more efficient in terms of volume sorted per  unit time. For example, in onion 
grading et cetera dynamic system has proven to be much effectiv e (Eg. Onion). The criteria for 
grading of fruits and vegetables may be in terms of physical, t echnological, organoleptic, and 
commercial criterion.  
 
 
 10 
 Screen grader 
In this machine the produce is conveyed along with a series of belt having holes of different 
s i z e s .  A n y  i t e m  s m a l l e r  t h a n  t h e  h o l e  s i z e  o f  t h e  b e l t  d r o p s  d o wn onto a chute or crosswise 
conveyors below. The machine will have two or three belts with the holes of different sizes. The 
first belt will have smallest holes to remove the smaller size first. The size of the mess increases 
with the subsequent belts and the largest fraction would be the  carry-over from the larger mesh 
belt. The shape of the hole in the belt is usually square but h exagonal shapes are also now 
available. This is usually a harsh method and is not suitable f or fruit like apple, peach which 
require gentle handling. Continuous shaking of the belt provide s easy cleaning of the holes and 
faster movement of the produce.  
Diverging belt grader   
The grader operates on the basic principle of diverging element s. The produce is conveyed along 
a narrow channel, the width of which increases gradually as it travels along until it is so wide 
that the produce drops through the gap by gravity and a belt or  chute below. The smaller ones 
drop through first and the larger ones are carried further. Gra ders working on this principle are 
available for different horticultural produces.  
 
Barrel screen graders 
These graders have cylindrical screens in place of flat belt sc r e e n  a s  i n  s c r e e n i n g  g r a d e r .  A  
typical barrel grader will have three cylindrical screens. The smallest holes are at the upper end 
of the sloping barrel and the largest hole are at the lower end  of the sloping barrel. The barrel is 
tilted at around 5° so that the produce passes down by gravity.  This type of grader is suitable for 
onion, carrot, beet, citrus, gladiolus, and bulbs. 11 
 
 
Roller graders  works on the principle of diverging elements where the produce  is conveyed by a 
series of rollers which get wider as it moves along. The smalle r fruits or vegetables drop down 
first and the larger ones are carried forward. The main drawbac k of this machine is that it cannot 
differentiate between the longer and shorter produce. It is sui table for a spherical shape fruits like 
oranges, apples, and tomato.  
Link grader  works almost in the same way at that of roller grader. But ins tead of rollers, it 
carries the produce between the links which moves along the div erging rails. It gives more 
precise grading than the roller grader.  
 
 
 12 
 Iris grader  
This is the grader where round hole mechanism has been used, an d instead of having only two 
links, it has a set of elements arranged in an iris with a cent ral hole. The iris picks up on fruit 
each at the entry point and then moves along a track. The irise s widen as they move along 
providing increasing diameter of the hole of the fruit. The fru it while passing through the holes 
drops at appropriate place.  
Mass grader 
It is different from the other grader where the produce is grad ed on the basis of the weight, 
whereas most of fruit and vegetable are brought and sold by bot h the size and weight. Singulator 
separates produce into the packet or cup so that each one can b e weighed independently.  
 
New innovation in grading system for fruits, vegetables and spi ces  
 Computer weight grader  operates on the basis of tipping buckets that drops to release  the 
pre-weight item at a particular position (Eg. apple, citrus fru its).  
 Video image capture and analysis systems  used for size, colour and external defect 
grading (Eg. coffee bean, apple).  
 NIR spectrometer is used to assess the TSS non-destructively in apple and stone fruits.  
 X-ray imaging and computer aided tomography 
 Magnetic resonance imaging 
 Spectroscopy 
 Acoustic methods or volatile emission anal ysis like E-nose or E-tongue are now 
becoming more popular.  13 
 
 
Computer vis ion system   
It i s wi de l y  use d f or q ua li t y i ns pe ct i o n of s pi ce s. It  ca n a ls o  be used to inspect the quality of 
fruits, vegetables or any other commodity. There is an image ca pturing chamber where the 
sample moved through a conveying system comes across the light source. The light falls on the 
product and some of the light is  reflected back. Then the refle cted light is captured in the image 
capturing device. It sends the data to the data acquisition and  pre-processing system where the 
data is processed and send to the control system.  
 
Spectroscopy systems 
Some of the spectroscopy systems are NIR spectroscopy, FTIR spe ctroscopy, Raman 
spectroscopy, and Hyperspectral imaging.  14 
 
 
Electronic nose (E-nose) system for grading of spices  
There are various sensors in the sensor arrays which mimics hum an olfactory. Similarly, some 
metal oxide sensors are there. The commodity is kept in the sam ple chamber. Air is pumped 
through air pump and passed th rough air filter and dehumidifier .  A s  t h e  a r o m a t i c s ,  a n d  t h e  
flavours are volatile components, they volatilize and pass thro ugh the three-way valve to heat up 
to desired level (i.e. temperatu re controller) followed by the sensor arrays. These volatile 
compounds are sensed while the data is acquired and pre-process ed. Finally, data analysis by 
comparing the data with the library set and fusion is done thro ugh different softwares.  
 
Electronic tongue (E-tongue) system for grading of spices   15 
 Electronic tongue works like our taste buds available on the to ngue. E-tongue with voltammetric 
chemo-sensor is used to discriminate between pure cardamom and cardamom adulterated. The 
liquid extract from pure cardamom is taken and then this extrac t is sent to the sensor. It senses 
the compounds in it and the data is analysed by storing into it s memory. Thus, on exposing the 
system to the extracted liquid of the adulterated one, it compa r e s  w i t h  t h e  s t o r e d  l i b r a r y  a n d  
discriminates the commodity. The mechanism in the taste recogni tion by E-tongue occurs in 
three levels, (1) At the receptor level: chemo-sensitive metal oxide sensor, (2) At transmission 
level: detectors and transducers, (3) At the perception level: data analytics and chemometrics. 
 
 
Automation of fruits and v egetable grading system   16 
 Automation technologies are introduced in many grading faciliti es to guarantee safety and 
security of produce. Labor intensive work of hand-sorting, trad itionally considered the only 
accurate method for fruit grading is completely eliminated by h aving a fully automated 
conveyance system that ensures that fruits are fed to the senso r at a constant speed. They can 
measure colour, size, shape, external defect, sugar content, ac idity, and other internal qualities.  
Roles of the automated grading systems may be as follows, (1) E fficient sorting and labour 
saving, (2) Uniform fruit quality, (3) Enhancing market value o f products, (4) Fair payment to 
producers based not only on quantity but on quality of product,  (5) Farming guidance from 
grading results and GIS, and (6) Contribution to the traceabili ty system for food safety and 
security. 
The schematic figure shows automatic tomato quality grading usi ng clustering-based support 
vector machine. The input test and training images are processe d by converting them from RGB 
to grey scale and histogram and threshold is calculated followe d by grey scale conversion to 
binary version. The data set is then divided into support vecto r machine (SVM) testing and 
training sets by considering different features categorised int o various clusters. This helps in 
separating any tomato commodity into different categories such as first, second, and third grade.  
 
Dataset tomato samples represent ing the first second and third grade tomatoes   
First grade represents pure green or medium ripe or fully ripe.  B ut  i n  s e c o n d  gr a de  a n d  t h i r d  
grade, it detects the tomatoes that are spoiled or about to spo il. 17 
 
 
Orange grading system   
A t  t h e  f i r s t  s t a g e  o f  t h e  m e c h a n ization, plates with holes of o range fruit sizes were used for 
sorting. Machine vision and near  infrared (NIR) technologies ha ve been utilized and improved 
with engineering design to convey fruits to detect fruit size, shape, colour, sugar content and 
acidity. The system inspects fruit with colour CCD cameras installed at six different positions on 
a line to provide all side fruit images with lighting devices.  The light devices are made by 
halogen lamps or LEDs fitted with PL (polarizing) filters to el iminated halation on glossy fruit 
surfaces. The near infrared inspection systems consist of halog en lamps and a spectrophotometer 
to analyze absorption bands of transmissivity light from fruits . X-ray imaging system is 
sometimes installed on each line to find internal defects such as rind puffing. 
 18 
 Robotic grading system  
A grading robot for deciduous fruits such as peaches, pears, an d apples to automatically provide 
fruits from containers and to inspect all sides of fruit. The r obot system consists of two 3 DOF 
manipulators, in which one is a providing robot, while the othe r  i s  a  g r a d i n g  r o b o t  w i t h  1 2  
machine vision systems. After container comes under the providi ng robot (1), 12 fruits are 
sucked up by suction pads at a time (2) and are transported to intermediate stage making space 
toward vertical direction on this  page between fruits (3). The grading robot picks 12 fruits up 
again (4) and 12 bottom images of the fruits are acquired durin g the manipulator moving to trays 
on a conveyor line (5). Just before releasing the fruits to the  trays (7), 4 side images of each fruit 
are acquired by rotating the suction pads (6).  The fruits are pushed out onto a line (8) and top 
images are acquired by another colour camera stationed on each line. In this system, fruit colour, 
size, shape, and defect are measured. 
 
In summary, fruit sorting and grading is an important process t hat affects the quality, 
management and storage of products. Manual grading is expensive , laborious and inefficient. 
The most important difference of the automation systems from th e conventional machines is                       
to be able to handle a lot of precise information. To handle th e comprehensive data on 
agricultural products and foods, understanding of diversity and  complexity of biomaterial 
properties is required and sensors to collect data should be of ten designed based on the 
properties. Machine vision technologies are utilized and improv ed with engineering design to                        
convey fruits to detect fruit size, shape, colour, sugar conten t and acidity. 
 19 
 
 
These are the references for further study lecture. Thank you.  
 