Page 1 of 29 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation Crop 
Products  
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Te chnology Kharagpur 
Lecture 36 
Tea and Tea Products  
 
 
Hello, everybody, Namaskar. In this lecture 36 today, we will d iscuss tea and tea products.  
 
The concept which will be covered in this lecture includes tea chemistry and processing, 
classification of teas, unit operations involved in tea process ing, major machinery used in the tea Page 2 of 29 
 processing industry, and finally, we will also discuss some of the novel tea products available in 
the market.  
 
Tea ( Camelia Sinensis )  
So, let us see what is the tea. Its botanical name is Camellia sinensis . It is an evergreen shrub or 
tree, which grows wide from India to China. About 45 species of  Camellia  are known among 
which the Camellia sinensis  is considered native to India and is important tea of commerce .  
The trees, as you can see here in the figure, are regularly pru ned in order to encourage more and 
more leaf production to obtain a bush shape. The cultivated Camellia sinensis  are of two types, 
China type and Indian type. China's type is a fast-growing, lar ge drooping leaves, whereas the 
Indian type is a slow-growing variety, it has narrow leaves. Bu t the yield from the Indian type is 
higher than that of the China type.  
The leaves are usually plucked at a week interval in India abou t five, six pluckings are made in a 
season. Usually, you can see the terminal top and terminal bud.  The top terminal two leaves from 
the end of each shoot are plucked. The important tea-growing co untries in the world are India, 
China, Sri Lanka, Japan, Korea, etc.  
 Page 3 of 29 
 
 
Processing of Tea 
Let us discuss the processing of tea. These green tea shoots co nsist of about 23 to 26 percent 
solid, as well as about 74 to 77 percent moisture. So, whatever  solid is present, half of that solid 
is insoluble. Half of the insolu ble compounds consist of cellul ose, lignin, lipids, etc. and the 
remaining half consists of water-soluble compounds like phenoli c compounds, catechins, 
epicatechins, proteins, lipids, p igments, alkaloids and the enz ymes like polyphenol oxidase, 
peroxidase and so on.  
So, this utilization and manipulation of these chemicals, both water-soluble compounds as well 
as water-insoluble compounds present in the leaves is a state o f the art of tea manufacture. In the 
processing of tea basically, enzy matic oxidation occurs. In tea  leaves, the enzymes and substrates 
are present in different compartments i.e. in the plastids and vacuoles. So, when the leaves are 
macerated these cells get broken and then these enzymes and sub strates get released from their 
position and in the presence of atmospheric oxygen, an instant oxidation reaction takes place. 
There is a formation of theaflav in and polymeric thearubigins. Theaflavin gives the tea its quality 
c a l l e d  b r i g h t n e s s ,  b r i s k n e s s ,  f r eshness and aliveness. Thearubi gins are dark brown coloured 
molecules responsible for body depth of colour and richness of the brew. Too much thearubigins 
make the tea soft and flat. Several other metabolic events take  during the processing of green leaf 
and some catechins also get oxidized and some remain unoxidized  which contributes to the 
astringency and bitterness of the tea and that is particularly true in the case of green tea.  Page 4 of 29 
 
 
Tea classification 
So, the classification of tea, you can see here, depending upon  the type of processing of green 
shoots, i.e. extent of interaction of the enzymes and the pheno lic compound, different types of 
teas are available like black tea, green tea, oolong tea. Green  tea is basically non-fermented tea. 
Oolong tea is semi-fermented and black tea is fully fermented. I t  i s  a l s o  i n  s o m e  c o u n t r i e s ,  
known as red tea. There are also green tea, white tea, yellow t ea or even compressed black tea 
bricks or bowl tea, etc. So, various types of tea are produced in India. In fact, if India is known 
for one single product, so, it is  Indian tea. Worldwide, it has  found very good acceptability.  
 Page 5 of 29 
 
 
Green tea 
Green tea, as I told you, it is one of the oldest and the most popular drinks in the world. Green 
tea is widely known for its anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory p roperties. It has a very good 
health value. It has a grassy flavour and even grassy colour as  well of a little greenish colour. So, 
what is done basically? These green shoots are taken immediatel y after harvesting, they are de-
enzymed, i.e. they are given some sort of heat treatment either  steaming or some other suitable 
heat treatment so that these enzymes, polyphenol oxidase is ina ctivated.  
After that, it is rolled and dried and you get green tea. So, t here is no oxidation here. So, de-
enzyming causes the halting of the oxidative browning of tea le aves by inhibiting the PPO and 
peroxidase and polyphenolic enzymes. The drying is done to lowe r the moisture content to a safe 
limit and the rolling, we will see in the later part of the lec ture also, green tea leaves are rolled 
for breaking up the structure through twisting etc. This facili tates further drying and then finally 
in the preparation of the brew. 
 Page 6 of 29 
 
 
Black tea 
B l a c k  t e a  i s  a l s o  c a l l e d  r e d  t e a  i n  v a r i o u s  A s i a n  l a n g u a g e s .  I t  is a type of tree that is more 
oxidized than oolong, yellow, white and green teas. So, these t ea shoots are taken, they are 
weathered and after weathering either by orthodox method or CTC  method, they are prepared 
a n d  t h e n  t h e  c e l l s  a r e  b r o k e n  a n d  f i n a l l y ,  t h e s e  c e l l s  a r e  p u t  for the fermentation and the 
fermented leaves are dried, and then subjected to a rotary sift er or breaker or stalk extractor and 
finally packaged. So, black tea is generally stronger in flavou r than other teas and it is a good 
source of antioxidants.  
 Page 7 of 29 
 Orthodox tea 
Black tea has two types depending upon the type of rolling used , the rolling method is either 
orthodox or CTC cut. It is prepared in either orthodox tea or C TC tea. In both teas , it is black tea, 
but the only difference is the method of rolling. In orthodox t ea either hand rolling or such other 
rolling is used whereas in the case of CTC tea, the black tea l eaves are passed through a series of 
cylindrical rollers with hundreds of sharp fresh teeth that cru sh, tear and curl the tea into a small 
pellet. So, the extent of the tissue damage is more. The CTC te a you get a large higher number of 
cups and also the brew has better colour, whereas orthodox tea is known for its better flavour.  
 
Oolong tea 
Oolong tea, as I told you is in between black tea and green tea  i.e. after the green tea shoot, they 
are withered, rolled, and then de-enzymed. There is a partial f ermentation and after that, it is 
dried and you get the Oolong tea. So most oolong tea especially  those of fine quality involve 
unique tea plant cultivars which are used for that particular v ariety.  
 Page 8 of 29 
 
 
Major unit operations in tea processing 
Let us discuss the major unit operations in tea processing that  include plucking, withering, 
rolling and cutting or rolling and twisting, fermentation, whic h is basically enzymatic oxidation, 
but in the tea industry, popular ly it is known as fermentation,  and then finally drying and 
packaging. These are the important unit operations. So, all the  operations are very important as 
far as the quality of the final product is concerned.   
 
Plucking of tea shoots Page 9 of 29 
 So, let’s see the plucking of the tea shoots. As I told you, th e shoots with one top bud and top 
leaf or bud plus top terminal two leaves or bud plus terminal t hree leaves are detached by either 
hand, shear or machine and they are kept in the basket. So, let  me tell you here, if you go to a 
lower side, the number like, bud plus 4, bud plus 5 etc., the q uantity of the tea will be more, but 
its quality will be less because in the top bud and terminal le aves, they have higher polyphenolic 
compounds and they have a better antioxidant and other capaciti es. So, once the tea leaves are 
detached from the plant, the anabolic reaction is stopped and c atabolic reactions start and the 
energy for these catabolic reactions is provided by the burning  of the sugar. So, care should be 
taken i.e. too much leave should not be held in the plucker’s h and or it should not be kept in the 
basket or trolleys in too much-pressed form. Because oxygen sup ply for the burning of the sugar 
will get restricted in closely packaged leave, closely packed l eaves, carbon dioxide produced 
through respiration will not be ab le to smoothly escape and hea t from the exothermic reactions 
will not smoothly escape. Therefore, in order to maintain the l eaves in their fresh form and 
suitable for the next operation, withering and rolling, etc., t he harvested leaves should be loosely 
kept and there should be sufficient air space, and care should be taken that leaves should not get 
bruised otherwise there will be o ozing of the water juice and w ater-soluble compounds also will 
lose out.  
 
Withering of green tea leaves Page 10 of 29 
 The next operation is the withering of the green leaves. The wi thering is carried out by spreading 
tea leaves thinly on racks or selves and it is allowed till the  water content in the leaf is lowered 
by approximately 40 percent. The next operation begins after a reduction in moisture by half. In 
this withering, the leaf becomes flaccid and assumes a velvety appearance. In the withering, 
sufficient air is applied and waited for a breakdown of large o rganic molecules into a simple 
structure.  
So, almost around 18 to 20 hours or overnight, withering is giv en and very important, the 
withering would be optimal. If there is an optimum withering, i t will give a balance of theaflavin  
and thearubigins and the liquor produced from that will be bright a nd brisk and will have a good 
body. Overwithered leaves will have less theaflavin  but more thearubigins, underwithered leaves 
will have more theaflavin,  and less thearubigins and accordingly the liquor characteristics wi ll 
also change. 
Greenness reduces due to converting chlorophyll to pheophytins.  T he g ree n c o l o ur of t he l ea f  
gets a little bit reduced during withering, about half of the m oisture is removed from the leave 
and around overnight, about 18 to 20 hours are given for the co nversion of some other product 
also.  
 
Rolling Page 11 of 29 
 So, after withering, the next operation is rolling. As I told y ou it may be an orthodox roller using 
non-cutting rollers or CTC cutting rollers or Lawrie tea proces sor which is your hammer mill 
tight cutter. The withered leaf is here fed to the roller where  the leaf cells are broken to release 
the juice as well as enzymes. Co llectively, it triggers the fer mentation process. It starts the 
fermentation process. The type of roller used, accordingly, the  e x t e n t  o f  t h e  m a c e r a t i o n ,  t h e  
extent of the breakage of the cells, the fermentation also will  be there. During rolling, the leaf is 
given its characteristic twist a nd flavour characteristic inher e n t  i n  v a r i o u s  t e a s ,  p a r t i c u l a r l y  
depend on the type of the rolling technique. As I told you that  orthodox rollers give the best tea, 
they are best known for their flavouring characteristics worldw ide.  
 
Fermentation 
Fermentation means rolled leaves are given sufficient time for the action of the enzymes. The 
leaves are spread about 3 to 4 inches thick on a flat surface i n the fermentation room, where 
humidity is just slightly short of the saturation point. The op timum fermentation period is around 
2 to 6 hours at around 21 to 27 degrees Celsius temperature.  
The important changes during the fermentation are that the cate chins get oxidized, caffeine gets 
bound to polyphenols and brings stimulating character to the dr ink and typical tea flavourings are 
formed. Theaflavins and thearubigins are formed. Page 12 of 29 
 Here you can see that it is the fermentation time and OD, aroun d an hour or so, that the optimum 
fermentation reaches and when the optimum fermentation comes in  the tea brew, the leaf will be 
coppery brew in colour. If the fermentation is more, the colour  will change.  
In fact, the theaflavins and thearubigins, because the catechin s get oxidized and theaflavins are 
formed and polymerized. If there is excessive fermentation, mor e and more theaflavins will be 
polymerized into thearubigins. So, you will have more thearubig ins and less theaflavins. So, the 
brew prepared from such will be dull, flat and heavy. The optim um theaflavins to thearubigins 
ratio in properly fermented leaves is reported to be 1:10. 
So, it will give a balanced liquor which is bright and has a br isk body. Under fermented leaves 
will have less theaflavins as well as less thearubigins. That i s very important for the quality of 
the brew when it is properly fermented when it has a copper bre w colour. So, it should be 
immediately, fermentation should be immediately stopped.  
 
Firing of fermented leaves and drying 
The next process is firing, process or firing or drying. So, th e firing is to stop the fermentation. 
So, fermented leaves are passed through a chamber in which hot air is circulating and at the 
entrance of the chamber, the temperature is around 90 degrees p lus maybe 93 degrees or 95 
degrees which dropped to around 49 degrees Celsius near the exi t .  T h e  t i m e  re q ui r e d  f o r t h i s  
process is about 30 to 40 minutes and the dried product contain s 3 to 4 percent moisture content.  Page 13 of 29 
 So, besides halting the fermentation process firing also causes  some caramelization to occur 
resulting in the characteristic colour of the black tea leaves.  The black colour of tea developed 
due to the formation of pheophytins from chlorophylls, also pol yphenols bind with the proteins 
and bring down astringency. Interaction of sugar and amino acid  results in the formation of 
flavouring compounds, etc.  
 
Grading and packing 
Then, next comes the grading and packaging. So, the dried produ ct is cleaned and sorted into 
various grades of tea of commerce. There is a leaf grade or bro ken grade. The Broken grade 
comprises smaller sizes sifted from the bulk or those obtained by cutting the longer leaf grades to 
a desirable size. Both the leaf grade and broken grade are furt her characterized as orange, pekoe, 
pekoe and souchang depending upon the size. Orange pekoe has th e largest leaves followed by 
pekoe and souchang. orange pekoe is perhaps the best quality. F anning and dusting are the waste 
products also which are there.  
These are all packed in paper, cartoons, plywood boxes lined wi th aluminium foil and parchment 
paper. That is very important, that the packaging material, wil l  b e  f u l l y  w a t e r  v a p o u r  
impermeable. Coextruded laminates have become more popular for consumer packs nowadays. 
It is as per the regulation in India as well, because if the mo isture content goes beyond 6 to 7 
percent, the tea should be subjected to second firing or second  drying before packaging. Page 14 of 29 
 
 
Major machinery in tea processing 
Now, let us see briefly the major machinery used in tea process ing like a withering trough, leaf 
sifter, leaf shredder, leaf roller, CTC roller, continuous ferm entation machine, endless chain 
pressure dryer and sorter.  
 
Withering trough 
Withering trough, you can see here. Withering trough are used f or preconditioning the green 
leaves. Green leaves from the garden first come to leave the wi thering house and then spread on Page 15 of 29 
 a number of tea withering troughs for several hours, these are wire mesh trays and these tea 
withering troughs are fitted with the axial flow fan to blow ai r to the leaves, sometimes 
vertically, sometimes from the bottom to leave or over the leav es at room temperature so that it 
facilitates the remova l of the moisture.  
 
Leaf sifter 
Leaf sifter you can see in the figure. It is designed to remove  extraneous matters such as stones, 
m e t a l  p i e c e s ,  e t c . ,  t o  a v o i d  d a m a g e  t o  t h e  C T C  r o l l e r .  T h e  G r e e nleaf sifter consists of a 
reciprocating tray powered with an electric motor, the reciproc ating tray is fitted with a mesh 
through which leaves are past and unwanted materials are remove d. Powerful magnets are also 
fitted in the sifter which removes some iron or steel parts, et c. if there are any.  Page 16 of 29 
 
 
Leaf shredder 
A leaf shredder is a preconditioning machine. This machine shre ds the leave into a smaller piece 
before sending it to the rotor vane. Besides the green leaf, th e shredder helps to increase the rotor 
vane capacity and improves the mixing efficiency of the withere d leaf, especially in the CTC 
type of processing. The machine consists of a cylinder, as you can see here in the figure, in 
which the main shaft having knives or blades rotating at a spee d of around 25,000 rpm. 
 
 
  Page 17 of 29 
 
 
Orthodox roller 
Orthodox roller sees here, in the  figure, it is shown. It is a conventional roller for orthodox 
rolling. It consists of three-part, the table, hood and pressur e cap. Rotation of the machine is 
achieved through three crankshafts attached to the table. The p ressure cap in the orthodox roller 
applies pressure to leaf mass during rolling, imparting proper twisting and brushing action. This 
pressure causes the extraction of sap and twist to the leaf.  
In some kind of rolling tables. both vertical and lateral press ure may be applied. Vertical 
pr ess ur e i s a pp l ie d wi t h  t he  h el p of  t he  p ress u r e c a ps w he r e as lateral pressure is applied by a 
c o n e  f i t t e d  i n  t h e  m i d d l e  o f  t h e  t a b l e .  T h i s  c o n e  a l s o  c a u s e s  g reater circulation of the leaf. 
Sometimes tea of a certain grade where they are made by normal hand rolling.  Page 18 of 29 
 
 
CTC rollers  
It consists of the main shaft, which you can see here, the main  shaft on which the segments are 
fixed by heat treatment and a mandrel form. Generally, two roll ers are fixed horizontally and 
parallel to each other and both rotate in opposite directions. The ratio of speed between the low-
speed and high-speed rollers may be around 1 to 10 depending up on the requirement of the leaf 
or dust grade.   
 
Continuous fermentin g machines (CFM)  Page 19 of 29 
 It is, sometimes basically, a room which is controlled temperat ure and humidity. It helps 
eliminate microbial contamination. The continuous fermenting ma chine consists of a tray, as I 
told you, made of conveyor racks with 3 to 4 tier systems. Abov e or below the tray, ultraviolet 
lamps are fitted which are used to kill the external bacteria a nd trigger the activity of polyphenol 
oxidase thereby hastening the biochemical reaction. So, bright infusions are obtained in CFM 
fermented teas.  
 
Endless chain pressure type dryers 
You can see here, the feeding point and then it is a moving tra y. Top circuit, mid circuit, bottom 
circuits etc., you can see here in this figure. So, the endless  chain pressure type dryers consist of 
two or three individual tray circuits. When the leaf is fed int o the feeding circuit, the spreader 
spreads the leaf uniformly on the tray. As soon as the leaf com pletes the run on the top circuit, 
the tray carrying the leaf is au tomatically tilted at the end o f the circuit and the leaf falls on the 
mid circuit where the direction of the tray, movement is opposi te to that of the top circuit.  You 
can see, it here in the mid circuit. Thus, the leaf is subjecte d to a gradual high temperature from 
top to bottom circuit and then drying is completed when the lea f reaches the bottom circuit. So, 
the total drying time in this process may be around between hal f an hour or 30 to 40 minutes.  Page 20 of 29 
 
 
Sorter 
It is a simple machine which is used to grade the bulk tea from  the fibre extractor into different 
grades according to the size. Generally, the sorter is fitted w ith a mesh of different sizes i.e. wire 
meshes, and accordingly, it is sorted into different sizes, and  then finally it is packaged. That, we 
have already discussed in the packaging type. 
 
Novel tea products Page 21 of 29 
 Now, let us discuss some of the novel tea products like instant  green tea or instant black tea, 
instant green tea powder and granules, decaffeinated tea powder , tea tablets, iced tea, herbal tea, 
and spice tea. India makes all types of these teas and they are  exported and sold in the market 
worldwide.  
 
Instant green/black tea 
 So, in this process flowchart, I have shown you the commercial  process for making instant green 
tea or instant black tea.  What is the need of making soluble t ea or instant tea? Because it is of 
urgent practical importance. The success of instant coffee is t hat you get the coffee from the 
coffee vending machines and this has necessitated the need of m aking similarly soluble tea so 
that the same vending machine can be used for its making. 
Demand for ice drinks greatly increased and convenient products  h a v e li tt l e  or n o was t e.  T h e 
commercial process for making instant green tea or black tea, s o far whatever process we have 
discussed. Either black tea or green tea prepared is taken and it is subjected to extraction, that is 
the tea brew just like we make the tea in our home. Similarly, at the industrial level, there are six 
or seven columns of hot water which recirculates with the tea l eaves in opposite direction, it may 
be around 170 or 180 degrees Celsius, water at high temperature . So, from the tea leaves, the 
water-soluble flavouring and colouring compounds get extracted.  S o ,  t h a t  i s  b a s i c a l l y  t h e  
extraction. This extract is taken and the spent leaf is used as  manure or for other purposes. These Page 22 of 29 
 extract leaves are then subjected to aroma stripping, by an app ropriate method, the aromatic 
compounds are stripped, and collected from this extract and the  dilute aroma is concentrated by 
freeze or vacuum drying.  So, the concentrated aroma is kept se parately. The de-aromatised 
extract is put next to the decreaming treatment. Decreaming mea ns, during the fermentation 
process, the tea cream is formed like polyphenol and caffeine, they form a polyphenolic caffeine 
complex and this is soluble in h ot and in cold, it becomes inso luble. After the tea brew is made, 
the tea cream is responsible for the haziness and cloudiness of  the brew. So, it is subjected, in 
this step, to avoid haziness and cloudiness. It is subjected to  the cream solubilisation treatment, 
which means the caffeine polyphenol complex is broken, then by using appropriate methods, so 
soluble cream is taken and it is added back into the extract. S o, the cream is added back to the 
CAB extract, and it is passed to the dehazing and polishing fil ters to have complete thorough 
mixing.  
So, you get a polished cream added back extract. And then in po lish cream added back extract, it 
is concentrated, so one gets tea concentrate, and then this ear lier this aromatized concentrated 
aroma or flavour, now it is added back. So, aromatized concentr ate is used, that it is used as a 
dryer feed, so either in the spray drying or in that freeze dry ing, it put and you get instant soluble 
powder.  
So, that is the commercial process. But you see, this is a high ly energy-intensive operation, there 
are certain problems with the flavour because the flavouring co mpounds are extracted and then it 
is given cream solubilisation treatment, etc. So, these teas ar e always, they have some issues with 
the that is either highly energy intensive or also the flavours , etc.  Page 23 of 29 
 
 
Instant black tea powder and granules 
So, to avoid that, at our institute, we have developed and pate nted a process technology for 
making both instant green tea powder as well as granules as wel l as instant black tea powders 
and granules. For the black tea process, what we took, we took green shoots after it is plucked 
from the field, then it is crushed and pressed, and this pressi ng process we optimized. So, we get 
to the juice. 
Approximately, half of the juice and along with the juice water -soluble components, we are 
pressing, and the remaining half we are leaving in the fresh le af, and then it is subjected to, this 
liquid is put to the fermentation where oxygen supply is given.  After that, it is given some sort of 
heat treatment to stop the fermentation process. After the ferm entation is complete, centrifuge 
and freeze-dried, and we get instant tea.  
So, from about that, we get around 18 to 20 grams or 1 kg of th e leaf, which has a 3.2 percent 
moisture content wet basis and the pressed leaf residue, we put  t o  t h e  s a m e  p r o c e s s  t h a t  i s  
fermentation and tea granules. We getting a tea granule which i s equivalent to the CTC tea. So, 
from the same leaf, we are getting, and also, we have avoided t he withering process and we are 
getting instant tea as well as tea granules. This is a patented  process and both the teas, have good 
liquoring capacity. Page 24 of 29 
 
 
Instant tea powder and granules 
Here, there is, after tea shoots are taken, they are immediatel y given some steam treatment before 
crushing so that this steam treatment inactivates the enzymes a nd then the rest process is almost 
the same. Of course, the proce ss parameter, a little bit varies .  
So, we are getting here that is around 29 to 30 grams of green tea powder from 1 kg leaf and 
around 208 to 210 grams of green tea granules. Both are these, you see green tea granules, 
powders, and granules and this is the tea prepared from this. Y ou see that instant tea, we get from 
1 kg fresh tea about 29 grams and 208-gram granules. In the com mercial method from 1 kg tea, 
you will get 50 grams.  The number of cups of instant tea 9 gra ms, you get 58 cups and here tea 
granules, are 83 cups. The total, we get 141 cups, whereas from  t h e  c o m m e r c i a l  m e t h o d  o f  
instant tea production from 1 kg tea, finally, one gets 100 cup s. So there is the excess, advantage 
of  t his , t ha t  i s f rom  the  sam e  prod uc t , we  are ge tt i n g b ot h  th e  i ns ta nt t ea  as we l l  as g ra n ul es,  
CTC, comparable weightage.  Page 25 of 29 
 
 
Decaffeinated tea powder 
As I told you the caffeine, so the consuming caffeine may, exce ssive consumption of caffeine 
may cause, in the long run, some extreme caffeinism like sleep disturbance and such other 
problems, etc. According to the FDA, caffeine stimulates the ne rvous system and affects brain 
function-altering behaviours. Such persons who are sensitive to  caffeinism or caffeine, want to 
avoid caffeine consumption, for them, decaffeinated tea is also  available in the market. The 
process here is, these green tea leaves, they are using either the supercritical fluid extraction 
method or such other methods that caffeine is extracted from th e leaf and then, it is a 
decaffeinated leaf is passed, put to the next process in the us ual form. You get that decaffeinated 
green tea powders or decaffeinated black tea powders as the cas e may be. 
 Page 26 of 29 
 
 
Instant soluble tea tablets from tea-infused oat milk 
Finally, that is, we have, instant tea. This instant tea, solub le tea tablet also we have designed, 
and it is patented. We have applied for the patent, and it is a n awarded method. The award has 
been received for this process, we have, tablet making machine.  This tablet-making machine 
although we are using for the making of the milk powder tablet,  at the same time, for green tea 
tablets, we have standardized them here. In the green tea table ts experiment, we used oatmeal, 
so, for lactose intolerant people, normal milk also can be pref erred. So, either the milk can be 
added with the milk powder and this instant tea powder giving s ome binding agents, and this is, 
by the tablet pressing machine, these tablets are made, or even  the instant tea, green tea, black tea 
which is a very good source of antioxidant. So, the, such can b e put, pressed into the machine 
and you can get only green tea tablet or pure black tea tablet and that, this tablet size, etc. we 
have developed the frame and maybe one tablet or two tablets ca n be put in 200 ml or 50 ml 
water and one can get the desired brew. So, that is the instant  soluble tea tablet that facilitates, 
becomes very convenient for use.  
 Page 27 of 29 
 
 
Different kinds of instant tea products of India 
These are the different kinds of instant tea products available  in India like herbal tea, immunity 
boosting, spiced tea or frozen tea concentrates, iced tea, made  tea, ready tea and so far, various 
combinations and permutations ar e made. A lot of variety of pro ducts are available.  
 
Summary 
But the preparation method is almost in all the products are ba sically, that is tea in the tea leaves, 
these compounds, there is a wate r-soluble compound, water-insol uble compounds, they are Page 28 of 29 
 manipulated in such a way that they are converted into a good f lavouring and colouring 
compounds. These flavouring and colouring compounds are both wa ter-soluble compounds, 
which are further extracted using, in the hot water, and we giv e that tea brew.  
S o ,  t h i s  h o t  w a t e r  b r e w ,  w h i c h  i s  o b t a i n e d ,  t h e s e  b r e w s  c a n  b e  further concentrated, and 
dehydrated in the form of, spray drying or freeze drying. It ma y be freeze-dried powder, spread-
dried powder or even frozen concentrate, or iced concentrate in  different parts. These tea 
powders can be mixed with the appropriate amount of sugar and m ilk. It can be made into 
readymade tea or other tea products, etc.  
 
 Page 29 of 29 
 So, these are the references used in this lecture. With this, t hank you very much for your patience 
here. Thank you. 
 
 
 