1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetable, Sp ices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 10 
Quality Assurance and Control (QA/QC) 
 
In this lecture the various aspects of quality assurance and qu ality control protocols will be 
discussed.  
 
The concept covered of this lecture includes quality and safety  attributes of fruits, vegetable 
and other related commodities, various factors which influence the quality and safety, safety 
and hazards and after that continuous quality monitoring and sp oilage detection as well as 2 
 various sensors which are used fo r the detection of freshness i n fruits and vegetables and the 
discussion about predictive modeling of quality attributes of f resh fruits and vegetables.  
 
Quality and quality assurance 
The quality of a material refers to the rated ability of a prod uct, whether it is processed 
product or fresh produce; to perform its functions, proper func tions. Quality assurance is a 
system for evaluating the performance service of the quality of  the product standard or a 
specified requirement for customers.  
It is a systematic approach to provide adequate confidence of p roduct and service. Quality 
system includes quality assuranc e and quality control and their  relationship. However, quality 
system is a bigger umbrella, whic h includes quality assurance a nd quality control. For the 
evaluation of the quality of a pa rticular fruit, vegetable or a ny other food there are two types 
of methods one is the objective as sessment other is the subject ive assessment.  
Subjective assessment generally i ncludes the sensory evaluation  or sensory attributes like 
taste, aroma, size and flavor. In the objective method, general ly instrumental approaches are 
used and various instruments are used for measuring the quality  attributes like pH, water 
holding capacity, vitamin and mineral content etc.  
 3 
 
 
These objective methods may be further categorized into chemica l method, physiochemical 
method, microscopic method or physical methods. 
 
Undesirable changes in the quality attribute  
There are various undesirable changes in the quality attributes  like in the texture, there may 
be loss of solubility, loss of w ater holding capacity, the mate rial may become soft or it may 
become tough depending upon the various reactions and process w hich are undergoing in 
these commodities.  
Similarly, regarding flavor there may be development of rancid flavor either hydrolytic 
rancidity or oxidative rancidity  depending upon the nature of t he material that may be cooked 
or caramel flavors, other off flavor development. Like for colo ur, the commodity may 
become dark or it may become bleached or a new color may come o r there may be 
development of off colors.  4 
 Similarly, nutritive value of the  commodity may also get change d and it because of either loss 
or degradation of micronutrients  like vitamins, minerals and ma cronutrients like proteins and 
lipids.  
 
Food safety  
Food safety is the assurance that food after we eat, it will no t cause any harm to the 
consumer. The food will not cause any harm to the consumer when  it is prepared or 
consumed according to its intended use.  
Toxicity is capacity of a substance to produce harm or injury o f any kind under any 
conditions. Hazard is the relative probability that harm or inj ury will result when substances 
are not used in a prescribed ma nner or in a prescribed quantity . The hazards may be physical, 
chemical or biological hazards.  
Physical hazards : Any physical material wh ich is not normally found in food.  
Chemical hazards : Chemicals which may be intentionally or unintentionally added  t o  t h e  
food.  
Biological hazard  Living organisms and various mic robiological agents like bacte ria, molds 
in the food.  5 
 
 
Physical hazards, in fr uits and vegetables  
Physical hazards, in fruits and vegetables, include various mat erials. The examples of few 
physical hazards are as follows:  
 Glass : This may come from the various sources like bottles, jar or li ght bulb, fixtures, 
utensils, gauges etc.  
 Wood:  Comes from the field or pallets or boxes which are used for pac kaging of the 
material.  
 Stones:  Food may have stones from sources like broken teeth, fields or  buildings etc. 
Insulation : This is from building materials 
 Plastic:  It is the packing, either in pa llets, comes from various equip ments etc. 
These are the various sources from which physical hazards may c ome into the fruits and 
vegetables. So, we have to identify the possible physical hazar d along the products and chain 
and implement proper practices and counter measures and create awareness and 
responsibility among the workers to ensure that the commodity i s free from any such physical 
hazards.  
 6 
 
 
Chemical hazards  
Chemical hazards may be found in  fruits and vegetables and they  can pose a serious health 
hazard if they contaminate frui ts and vegetables in significant  concentrations. There are many 
commodities there are naturally occurring chemicals like allerg ens found in the weeds or 
peanuts. Allergic reactions sometimes lead to severe and seriou s health problems. Similarly, 
multiple poisoning either acute or chronic may be caused by fun gal toxins present in the 
materials like mycotoxins, aflat oxin or phyto-haemagglutinin. A lkaloids present in the food 
material also cause on multiple poisoning, either acute or chro nic.  
There should be minimal and correct use of chemical additives. The thumb rule is to reduce 
chemicals during processing as far as possible or use of chemic al in any food may be 
avoided. However necessary minimum possible concentration of ch emical to be allowed in 
agrochemicals, processing and treatment agents, packing additiv es, pest control agents and 
antibiotics etc.. If these chemicals are used in excessive quan tity or they readily remains in 
the food material and may induce a potential health hazard.  
 7 
 
 
Biological hazards  in fruits and vegetables 
Similarly, biological hazards in fruits and vegetables may incl ude contamination with 
bacteria, fungi like yeast, and molds or parasites like protozo a and helminthes or viruses. So, 
the primary sources of microbial  contamination are fresh fruits  and vegetables are as follows:  
 Untreated manure or faeces or municipal biosolids and sewage fluids  a r e  
accumulate by the plant if not treated properly. The contaminan t through the plant 
comes into the fruits or vegetables.  
 If contaminated water  is used either in the agricultu ral field or for processing. Th e 
contaminated water will be a nother source of biological hazard.   
 Contaminated soil, dust, surroundings, and poor handling of equipment . 
 Poor sanitary practices  in the field as well as in the processing plant or where the 
equipment or the material or  where it is be ing handled.   
 8 
 
 
Food safety management   
The food safety management system includes food safety and qual ity can be ensured through 
implementing of proper Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP),  good hygienic practices  
(GHP)  and Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP).  G M P  e n s u r e s  t h a t  
products are safe, it eliminates contamination and false labeli ng, thereby protecting the 
consumer from being misled.  
GMP also helps to refine the compliance and performance. GHP an d HACCP are used to 
identify potential sources of risk, they are the steps to minim ize the risk of contamination. It 
ensures that all persons who handle the food have good hygienic  p r a c t i c e s  o r  t h e y  a b s o r b  
good hygienic practices.  
 
Hazard Analysis and Critic al Control Point (HACCP).   9 
 As previously mentioned, hazard is a systematic preventive appr oach to food safety that 
addresses physical, chemical and biological hazards as a means of prevention rather than 
finish product inspection. Ther e are seven chronological steps of HACCP is commonly 
known as 7 principles of HACCP, which includes 
1. Hazard analysis i.e conducting a analysis and identify the pote ntial hazards  
2. Determining the CCP. The critical control point in the food pro cessing is crucial in 
value chain.  
3. Establishing critical limit for preventive measures  
4. Establishing a procedure to monitor that CCP.  
5. Establishing a corrective action that is when monitoring shows that a critical limit has 
exceeded. If it has not been followed or implemented properly t hen what should be 
corrective action 
6. Finally establish verification pro cedure that whether CCPs are in proper order in value 
chain, are properly monitoring is in force or not 
7. Documentation and recording of eve ryday procedure and easy retr ieval of the data. 
 
Quality attributes of fresh fruits and vegetables  
 As far as the quality attributes  of fresh fruits and vegetable s are concerned, they can be 
classified into three groups according to the occurrences of th e product characteristics like it 
may be external quality attribute , internal quality attributes or hidden quality attribute.  
External quality  means appearance, feel, touch or such other defects and it can  be measured 
either by visual evaluation of s ize, shape, gloss and colour or  there are visual guides and with 
the help of colorimeters.  10 
 
 
Manual evaluation of texture can be done by mechanical texture analysis or evaluation of 
absence of different defects or d eterioration of c olor. Externa l quality parameter can also be 
measured by mechanical methods like ultrasound.  
Internal quality  like order, taste, and texture can be qualitative or subjectiv e methods. These 
include sensory methods as well as instrumental methods. Instru mental methods are like gas 
chromatography, are becoming more popular nowadays than oral te sting or sensory 
evaluation of sweetness, bitterness, sourness. Furthermore, tec hnical quantific ation of the 
taste compounds using HPLC can be done. Texture profile like fi rmness, tenderness, 
mouthfeel can be measured by applying the force to the produce and analyzing that how 
much force is required to br eak or rupture the product.  
 
Wholesomeness and nutritive valu e are food safety attributes wh ich are considered as a 
hidden quality attributes  they can be analyzed by laboratory methods and instrumental 
method for determining micronutrients and phytochemicals.  11 
 There are standard setup procedures and protocols which can be used to determine their 
antigenic microbial load content of chemical contaminants. The presence of foreign matters 
should be analyzed.  
 
Technologies for non-destructive  continuous quality monitoring 
There are some non-destructive methods for continuous quality m onitoring for fruits and 
vegetable. These methods include optic, X-ray mechanical method  and electromagnetic 
method.  
1. Optic method : Determination of the size, shape, color, reflectance and abso rption can 
be achieved by Image analysis. It can be also be used to find o ut if there is any 
external defect in the commodity.  
Similarly, reflectance spectroscopy  can be used for internal component analysis and 
color. Laser spectroscopy  can be used to find out firmness and visco-elasticity for 
various commodities.  
2. X-ray mechanics : X-ray image and CT:   can be used to find out internal cavity and 
structure, and degree of ripeness of the produce so that the ma terial is fully ripe or less 
ripe can be found out.  
In the mechanical methods , vibrated excitations can be used to find firmness, visco-
elasticity, ripeness. Sonic method and ultrasonic  method can be used again to find 
firmness, visco-elasticity as well as the internal cavity, dens ity, sugar content, and 
tenderness.  
3. Electromagnetic methods : These are used to find impedance which is used to 
determine moisture content, density, sugar content and internal  cavity. Similarly, MRI 
can be used to find out sugar content, oil content, moisture co ntent or internal defect 
and internal structur e of the material.  12 
 
 
Optical methods  
These optical properties are based on reflectance, transmittanc e, absorbance, or fluorescence 
or even a scattering of light. S o, any of these properties can be used to determine the optical 
characteristics.  
Time-resolve reflectance spectroscopy  is a simple setup page which involves the penetration 
of light into a diffusion medium which depends on the optical p roperties of the medium and 
under source detector distance.  
In case of fruits and vegetable,  the depth of the probe volume i s  o f  th e  s a m e  o r d e r  a s  t h e  
source detector distance. It pr ovides information on internal q uality of fruit, as it measures the 
bulk properties not the superficia l characteristics alone. As t his method can give information 
about the internal quality chara cteristics, it is suitable for grading, maturity determination and 
detecting the internal defects and in predicting the shelf life  of fruits and vegetables.  
 13 
 Visible or near infrared spectroscopy  includes wavelength ranges from 780 to 25,000 nm in 
electromagnetic spectrum. It can be used for analyzing various properties such as fruit 
firmness measurement and detection of visible blemishes, solubl e acid content, dry matter, 
hygroscopicity, firmness, sugar content, acidity etc. Fruit mat urity of banana, apple, tomato, 
and mango can be determined by ev aluating the skin color by usi ng visible or NIR 
spectroscopy.  
The application of portable micr o near infrared spectroscopy to  the screening of extractable 
polyphenols in the grape fruits is shown here in this figure. T his set constitutes a 
spectroscopic camera, monitor, a micro NIR and an adaptor. The subject (grapes) information 
this is sent to the micro NIR with an adapter and micro NIR whi ch reads the spectra and send 
the information to the laptop or computer where the required da ta is analyzed by various 
quantitative method or qualitative method like PCA,. There is s ome software which  analyzes 
the spectra and give t he output as well. 
 
Dynamic method  
X-ray imaging  which is a dynamic method, can detect maturity and various int ernal defects. 
For example, freeze damaged or internal browning or presence of  pits, presence of foreign 
particles, infestation which exhi bit changes in the density and  the water content. 
X-ray radiography and the X-ray computed tomography (CT scannin g) are widely used 
method. Infestation in apple, peach, pears, cherry, tomato and orange have been detected 
successfully using this X-ray imaging.  
In the given figure there is a computer, a control panel along with high tension transformers 
and high tensile insulated cable s connected to the X-ray tube h ead to X-ray sensor. The 
sensor absorbs the data and pass it on to the computer, where i t is analyzed using appropriate 
software and the output is given.  14 
 
 
Mechanical method  
Then mechanical method includes gas sensor array or electronic nose . Chemical and 
electronic sensors are there in the electronic nose which is si mulate the functioning of 
olfactory system  
Electronic nose  has various sensors that cons titute data processing unit softw are and digital 
pattern recognizing algorithm and a reference library. When a s ample is given and the 
volatile components which are present in the sample which are r esponsible for the flavor: 
evaporates and these volatile components are sent to the gc cha mber. The sensor interact with 
the volatile compounds non selectively to produce signal and th is signal is read by the 
computer which is called as “electronic finger print” and then these signals are analysed for 
determination of quality attributes.  
 15 
 The acoustic impulse response method  is used to analyze the texture of fruits. It uses natural 
frequencies of the intact fruit which is obtained by recording the sound, that is produced by 
hitting the fruit and then by Four ier transformation the signal  is analyzed. 
Similarly, ultrasonic  is a surface wave transmission technique. It is used to detect t he density, 
moisture content and firmness of many commodities. In the case of oranges, it had been 
successfully applied to deter mine quality attributes.  
 
Electromagnetic method  
Electromagnetic method which includes nuclear magnetic resonance techniques  i s  a  
absorption of magnetic energy by nuclei placed in an alternatin g magnetic field. The amount 
of energy absorbed by the nuclei is directly proportional to th e number of protons present in a 
sample. It determines the freeze damage by locating the special  NMR signals and also useful 
in detection of pits in fruits and vegetables. Spectra can be i nterpreted easily and can 
differentiate into healthy and freeze damaged oranges.  
The machine vision  system usually consists of five basic components i.e light sou rce, an 
imaging unit, an image capture board, computer hardware and sof tware. An automatic 
machine vision system was industrialized to detect small insect s raspberry fruit.  
The given figure represents a machine vision system where the c ommodity (tomato) is placed 
i n  f r o n t  o f  t h e  l i g h t  s o u r c e .  T h e  l i g h t  s o u r c e s  d e t e r m i n e  t h e  l i g h t  a n d  a r e  s e n s e d  b y  t h e  
camera. The camera sends the signals to the computer CPU where it monitors and analyzes. 
The image and result is displayed on the monitor.  16 
 
 
Hyperspectral imaging  
The basic principle of hyperspectral imaging  is that the food reflects scatters, absorbs and 
produces electromagnetic energy i n different forms at particula r wavelength. The reflectance 
is plotted against the wavelength and curve is referred to as t he spectral signature of the 
constituent. It helps in determining the firmness, total solubl e solids (TSS), titratable acidity 
(TA) of mangos in the spectral regions are 450 to 998 nm. The h yperspectral imaging system 
contains lighting source sensor which accurately acquires a spe ctra, spectro graph or 
computer to produce the acquired images.  
 17 
 
 
Different freshness parameter 
For climatic fruits parameters like ethylene production, humidi ty and temperature, time 
maintenance inside the storage environment that may be taken as  criteria for the quality 
determination. Similarly, for dry fruits, spoilage or leak or t he microbial contamination can 
be considered. In the case of multiple fruits that ethylene and  microbial contamination or 
spoilage can be taken as the indicator for freshness. The fresh ness indicators helps to 
determine whether the material  is good for consumption or has b een spoiled.  
Sensors for freshness detection 
Direct sensors  can detect spoilage, ripeness, leak, microbial contamination a nd ethylene gas 
production. On the other hand , indirect methods  detect humidity and temperature. The direct 
methods detects a particular com pound directly from the fruit a s an indicator of the food 
freshness and the indirect methods are good and the based on th e reaction based detection of 
degradation due to certain fres hness parameters such as tempera ture and time.  
 18 
 In case of spoilage sensor , the spoilage can be detected using chemical sensor including pH 
sensor. The pH of the enclosed fruit package changes within the  headspace, which can be 
measured by using a pH sensor. Formaldehyde can be detected by exploiting  the chemical 
reaction between the formalde hyde and the primary amines.  
Then similarly, ripeness sensor  reacts with the aroma emitted by the ripened fruits like Pears , 
Kiwi, Melon, Mango etc. And different stages of fruit ripeness can be studied using even e-
nose.  
 
Colorimetric sensor  utilizes the pH indicator based on methyl red to detect aldehy de 
emission as a marker of the apple ripeness and this can be used  for similar such other fruits. 
In this figure, the Degree of se nsory ripeness and RGB index pl ot vs storage time relationship 
is shown. There is a Colour changes in sensor label after expos ure to apple flavors and on the 
basis of these color changes, one  can get an id ea about its fre shness.  
 
Indirect indicators of freshness or spoilage 19 
 Similarly, the indirect sensors like the  capacitive  humidity sensor  are a type of humidity 
sensor (i.e., hygrometer) that utilizes change in capacitance t o detect relative humidity levels. 
The first figure is indicating the initial setup of capacitive sensor indicating no detectable 
voltage across the plates and then the introduction of water va por in the atmosphere is shown 
in the second figure. The change of permittivity of the dielect ric because of the water vapor 
generating a detectable voltage on the plates is displayed in t he third figure and that is 
measured by this sensor.  
 
Time temperature indicator 
Time temperature indicator empowers on chemical and physical me chanisms that are based 
on a chemical reaction or a physical change respectively due to  changes in the time and 
temperature. There are various TTI indicators available in the market which include Fresh-
Check®, Monitor MarkTM, OnVuTM, eO®, Timestrip®, Checkpoint®, a nd Tempix.  
In monitor mark figure C the ethyl label is completely blocked indicating the freshness. In 
figure D, if the circle is pink, it indicates spoilage. So, the re are various combinations of TTIs 
by using nano technology and the sen sors that are produced can give the desired information. 20 
 
 
Traceability and RFID based sensor  
The traceability and RFID based s ensor system indicator is used  to track and identify the 
product quality during storage a nd transit. These systems requi re RFID tag with an antenna 
and an RFID scanner and utilize radio waves to communicate data  to the network. These 
active tags allow the real time traceability as they can consta ntly send out information. 
Freshness sensors are being empl oyed commercially with RFID tag s to monitor relative 
humidity, temperature, light expo sure, pressure, pH of foods or  even during transit they are 
used to check whether the material is in good condition or not.   
Food traceability using smartphone and tracking and tracing acr oss the supply chain can be 
achieved by developing an mobile a pp and displayi ng the data fr om RFID on the app. So, this 
is how the smart apps and cloud sto rage is being used for trace ability 
 
Predictive modeling of quality par ameters of fruits and vegetab les  21 
 Artificial neural network (ANN)  is one such model which is mostly used for predictive 
modeling of quality parameters.  ANN draws on previously gathere d information and uses this 
information when analyzing new data point. So, for pattern dete ction, it may take the make 
the electronic nose applications more powerful for fruit qualit y analysis.  
So, neural network models are us ed to predict the shelf life of  greenhouse lettuce or any other 
any such their commodity. So, by using two stage ANN model syst em models were 
developed which could predict t he shelf life of the fruit.  
ANN model system consists of input, output and hidden layer.  I t could analyze the bais and 
send it to hidden layer and finally, on the basis of this analy sis the model gives output which 
may be of any particular desired quality like weight loss, pH, calorie, ion exchange, ethylene 
and respiration etc. 
 
In summary, transformation of quality assurance from external i nto internal parameters in 
fruits should be accomplished by a reliable mechanism to evalua te the standards. Quality 
control and quality assurance allows to test that what the cons umer is expecting will be 
effectively fulfilled. Current sensor and communication technol ogies can provide means of 
monitoring and regulating the qua lity of the package fruits and  vegetables. artificial neural 
network and genetic algorithm ar e analytical alternatives to vi sual modeling methods.  
Consumer awareness is must about health hazards of chemical and  hormones used in 
malpractices. The consumer must report this to the regulatory b odies about any malpractice in 
the value chain or if the comm odity or material is not of desir ed quality and safety standards.  22 
 
 
 
These are the references  for further study. Thank you.  
 