1 
 Post-Harvest  Operations  and Processing  of Fruits,  Vegetables,  Spices  and Plantation  
Crop  Products  
Professor  H N Mishra  
Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  13  
Processing  by Addition  of Heat  
 
 
The concepts  covered  in the lecture  include  principles  and methods  of thermal  processing,  
blanching , pasteurization,  sterilization,  aseptic  process ing, important  aspects  of the thermal  
process  calculations  like D value,  z value , lethal  rate and the quality  changes  during  thermal  
processing.   
2 
  
Principles and methods of thermal processing  
The purpose  of the addition  of heat or thermal  processing  is to reduce  or destroy  the microbial  
activity , reduces  or destroys  the undesirable  enzyme  activity , and it causes  desirable  physical  
and chemical  changes  such as  gelatinization  and denatur ation  in the product  to give the desired  
characteristics.   
The thermal  processing  is divided  into 2 major  categories i.e. in-container  sterilization  (also  
called  as bulk canning ) and the aseptic  sterilization  (aseptic  processing  and packaging ). The 
principle  involved  in both the processes  remains  the same.  These  heat processes  can also be 
categorized  on the basis  of their severity  like milder  processes  (blanching  and pasteurization ), 
and severe  processes  including  canning , baking,  roasting  and frying.   
 
Blanching  
Blanching  is used for destroying  enzyme  activity  in fruits  and vegetables,  it is used as a 
pretreatment  to freezing  drying  and canning.  Air, water  or steam  are used to heat the product  
3 
 to about  88 to 99 ᵒC and when  the water  or steam  is used to blanch the  product,  it is referred  to 
as wet blanching . So, it is a very important  operation  to improve  or to get the desired  
characteristics  of the product  after the drying  or during  the canning  or freezing  of vegetables.   
 
Hot water blanching  
In this method , the clean ed food is subjected  to hot water  (85 to 100 ᵒC) until the enzymes  are 
inactivated.  Port blanchers  are used at home  scale . Its capital  cost is low and it has better  energy  
efficiency . However,  there  are certain  disadvantages  such as  loss of water  soluble  constituents , 
risk of contaminants , and higher  effluent  disposal .  
The table shows the blanching time (in minutes) for different vegetables. For example, broccoli  
can be blanched 3 to 5 minutes , the blanching time of carrots depends on the size and varied 
from 2 to 5 minutes  etc. 
Steam blanching  
In steam blanching, food product is directly exposed to steam to avoid the loss of the food 
soluble solids. On commercial level tunnel steam blanches with product conveyors are used. 
CIAE Bhopal has claimed they are developing a steam blancher that is having 100 kg capacity 
per hour and it is used for blanching of the cabbage, cauliflower, pea and okra and they cla im 
that there is better retention of the color in the dried product.  
Pasteurization, it is a mild heat treatment for relatively brief duration to kill the part of the 
microorganism and to eliminate human pathogens present in the food. Pasteurization may be  
either low temperature long time popularly known as LTLT, or high temperature short time 
(HTST) method or ultra -high temperature (UHT) methods. The LTLT method is generally used 
at 63 to 65 ᵒC for 30 minute or 75 ᵒC for 8 to 10 minutes. This is a minimal heat treatment for 
grape juice, it is normally done at 76.7 ᵒC for 30 minutes.  
4 
   
 
The HTST process  is generally  used at 71.7 ᵒC for about  15 seconds , grape  wines  are 
pasteurized  at 81 to 85 ᵒC for about  1 minute . In the UHT process, it is operated at 85 to 90 ᵒC 
or more  temperature  and time in order  of seconds.  Typical  combinations  are 88 ᵒC for 1 minute , 
100 ᵒC for 12 seconds  or 121 ᵒC for 2 seconds  are used in UHT process, which  provides  the 
best product  with better  flavor  and vitamin  retention  but it is generally  expensive  than LTLT 
and HTST .   
5 
  
Sterilization  
Sterilization  involves  the complete  destruction  or elimination  of all viable  organisms  in all food 
product , it destroys  yeasts, molds , vegetative  bacteria  and spore  formers  and allows  the product  
to store  and distribute  at ambient  temperature  with extended  shelf  life.  
 
Canning  
Canning involves placing the prepared fruit or vegetable in a suitable container, evacuating and 
sealing the container followed by heating at desired temperature for required time to achieve 
microbial inactivation. The typical fruit canning process involves various treatme nts such as 
peeling, washing, cleaning, peeling coating, cutting, slicing , filling the cans, syrup addition, 
exhausting the steam, sterilization, water cooling, and storing. Blanching  is a suitable  method  
and then finally,  the fruits and vegetables are  sealed  into the suitable  cans. In vegetable  canning  
process , the steam  or hot water  blanching  is done  in order  to facilitate  the better  heat transfer  
inside  the vacuum . So, to facilitate  the heat transfer  in the case of vegetable , generally  brine  
6 
 solution  is added , whereas  in the case of fruit generally  sugar  syrup  of variant  concentration  
depending  upon  the type of the fruits  and its acidity  is used.  
 
Aseptic  processing  
In aseptic  processing , the product  is subjected  to a thermal  process  to inactivate  vegetative  cells 
or spores  prior  to being  placed  in the sterile  container , where the  packaging  material  is sterilized  
separately  and the pump able food mostly liquid foods which  are used are sterilized  separately  
and then the product  is aseptically  packaged  in the using  form fill and seal ( FFS) machine . For 
the sterilization  of the juices  different  types  of heat exchanger  equipment s like scraped surfaces  
exchangers , plate  heat exchangers,  tubular  heat exchangers  or steam  injection  based  heat 
exchangers  are used. Most of the packets  which  are seen  in the market  with various  brands  of 
vegetable  juices,  fruit juices , majority  of them  are produced  using  this aseptic  processing  and 
packaging  technologies.   
 
7 
 For thermal  process  design , the foods  are normally  classified  into 3 groups  on the basis  of their 
pH like high acid food, acid food and low acid food since  the pH of the food is an important  
factor  affecting  the growth  and multiplication  of microorganism . In high acid food having pH 
less than 3.7, spore forming bacteria does not grow. I n acid foods  which  has pH between  3.7 
to 4.5 yeast and molds  can easily  grow.  There is growth of spoilage and pathogenic organisms 
in low acid foods. The pH 4.5 is the dividing line between acid and low acid food . It is slightly 
higher than the pH, the Cl. botulinum  spores can grow and produce toxin.  Cl. Botulinum  is 
most heat resistant, obligate anaerobe, spore forming pathogen which can grow in low acid 
canned foods (vegetables).  Destruction of Cl. botulinum  is used as criteria for successful heat 
processing of low acid foods. Most heat resistant strains are Type A & B.  Toxin produced is 
extremely potent but can be destroyed by exposing it to moist heat for 5 – 6 min at 80 - 85 °C.  
 
In this slide, the optimum  pH values for the thermal  processing  of vegetables  in order to 
categorize these into low and high acid foods and most probable spoilage organisms acting on 
the products. Most vegetables have pH >  4.6 and are considered low ‐acid foods and these are 
highly  prone to spoilage  and pathogenic  microorganisms . Clostridium botulinum  is the main 
criteria.  Botulinum spores are heat stable and can be inactivated only by heating to 121 °C 
under pressure of 15 –20 lb/in.2 for at least 20 min.  
Process considerations  
The process  severity is directly  proportional  to the safety  and quality  of the product,  more  the 
severe  process,  then it will reduce  the quality  of the process ed product.  The sterilization process 
takes into consideration the  microbiological characteristics of  the product, and  storage 
requirements after the process.  A heat ‐resistant microorganism is selected, and it s kinetics of 
inactivation is determined in the product to be processed.  Most of the nutrients and 
nutraceutical compounds would be affected by high  processing temperatures.  Consumers are 
concerned with the quality and nutritive value of products.  The consumer demand is a driving 
force for optimization of processing conditions, such as heating temperature and time, to 
balance safety and quality aspect s. 
 
8 
  
 
Thermal destruction of microorganisms  
The impact of heat treatment on microorganisms is estimated from the measurement of 
surviving cells against heating time.  The destruction profile that is obtained allows the 
determination of the characteristics  of resistance of the microorganisms that are the basis of the 
designation of the operational requirements of a thermal process.  Traditional estimations of the 
efficiency of preservation and disinfection processes are based on the assumption that 
microbial  death follows a known evolution.  As each species has its own particular heat  
tolerance, thermal operating conditions are determined experimentall y and data are presented 
as the number of surviving  microorganis m or viable spores against the exposure time at a given 
temperature.   
9 
  
Thermal  calculation  involves  the need  for the knowledge  of the concentration  of the 
microorganism s to be destroyed , the acceptable  concentration  of microorganism  that can 
remain , the thermal  resistance  of the target  microorganisms , and the time-temperature  
relationship  required  for destruction  of the target  microorganism .  
 
Microbial survival curve  
During heating of the food, the population of the microorganisms and its spores reduces . A 
general model of the description of microbial curves is given as   
                                                             𝐝𝐍
𝐝𝐭=−𝐤 𝐍𝐧 
Where, N is number of microorganisms, k is the rate constant, and n is the order of the model . 
The microbia l death curve fo llows first order kinetic model (n=1). Hence,  
                                                                𝐝𝐍
𝐝𝐭=−𝐤 𝐍 
10 
 dN
N=−k dt 
 
ln(N
N0)=−k t 
 
ln(N0
N)=k t 
This basic model has been used to describe survivor curves obtained when microbial 
populations are exposed to elevated temperatures.  
 
In many cases this representation gives a linear relationship that implies that the thermal 
destruction phenomenon is a first order reaction.  However deviation from the thermal death 
curves are frequently observed and thermal death curve can also be characterized by shoulders 
and trials.  Deviation from linearity can be related to the  composition of the microbial 
population,  germination of sporulated forms, or  heterogeneity of the thermal treatmen ts.  
 
11 
 In this plot between log of survivors vs time, the curve 1 represents the t ypical survival curve 
for a homogeneous population of microorganism homogeneously heat treated.  Curve 2 
represents  the typical curve of a composite population of cells where thermo -sensitive and 
thermo -resistant cells coexist.  Curve 3 represents the typical curve of  microorganism that                              
are activated by short exposure to heat (e.g. Germination of spores, fragmentation of chains) . 
 
Decimal reduction time  
When microbial survival curve data presented on semilog coordinates, a straight line is 
obtained.  The decimal reduction time (D) is defined as the time necessary  for a 90% reduct ion 
in the microbial population or t he time required for a one log -cycle reduction in the population 
of microorganisms.  
logN0−logN=t
D 
log(N0
N)=t
D 
D=t
log(N0
N) 
(N0
N)=10t
D 
The first -order rate constant (k ) is inversely related to the decimal reduction time (D)  
k=2.303
D 
  
12 
  
Thermal resistance of microorganism (z value)  
The z value (°C) is another characteristic value, corresponding to the increase in temperature 
that induces a reduction of D -value by a factor 10.   
log(Dref
D)=T−Tref
z 
log(D
Dref)=Tref−T
z 
D=Dref 10Tref−T
z 
Where, T is the treatment temperature (°C) , Dref is the decimal reduction time (min) at the 
reference temperature T ref . 
There are specific D and z values for the thermal inactivation and destruction of enzymes, 
vitamins, pigments, etc.  Reactions or components (microorganisms/nutri ents) that have small 
z-values  are highly temper ature dependent.   
Typical z-values of 10 °C are characteristic of pathogenic bacteria whereas z values of 
enzymes, vitamins and pigments are generally contained in the range of 20 to 70 °C. This 
difference allows the manufacturers to determ ine an optimal t hermal process (temperature / 
exposure time).  HTST corresponds to the shadowed area located between the curves                                        
of pathogenic  microorganisms  and vitamins.  The figure shows the r elative changes in time -
temperature profi le for the inactivation of microorganisms and vitamins . The shadowed area 
represents  in the region where thermal parameters allows preservation of vitamins and 
destruction of microorganisms .   
 
13 
  
 
Thermal  dead  time  (F value)  
The thermal death time, F value is the total time required to accomplish a stated reduction in a 
population of vegetative cells or spores at constant temperature.   
F
=
 Dlog(N0
N) 
12 D concept means 12 log reduction of microorganisms . If the initial number of microorganism 
N0 = 1012 is reduced to N = 1 (100), then   
log(N0
N)=log(1012
1)=12 
F
=
12
 D 
For commercial sterility in low acid foods,  12 log reduction or 12 D process are usually 
specified.  
14 
  
Letha l rate (L)  
Lethal rate (L) is the ratio of Fr value at reference temperature (T ref) to F value at any 
temperature (T).  
log(Fr
F)=Tref−T
z 
Fr
F=10T−Tref
z 
L=Fr
F=10T−Tref
z 
Above equations can be used to comp ute the thermal death time (F) at any temperature (T) 
when the F r, is known  at a reference temperature, T r. In most of cases, the reference temperature 
Tr is considered as 121  °C. Therefore, the Fr value of any thermal pro cess can be said as the 
number of minutes of heating at 121  °C required to achieve the same thermal destructi on ratio 
of specified microorganisms.  
Q10 value  is defined  as the ratio of the reaction  rate constant  at temperature  differing by 10°C.  
It indicates how fast a reaction will occur if the temperature is raised by 10°C, and thus can be 
used to predict the ex pected product shelf li fe. For example, if a food attribute is stable for 10 
weeks at 30°C and has a Q10 of 2, then its stability at 20°C will be 2*10 weeks = 20 weeks.  
The effect of temperature on quality is expressed by a temperature quotient Q10, which is 
defined as   
 
15 
 Where, q 2 and q 1 are the rates of quality function at two temperatures, T 2 and T 1, respectively. 
The Q 10 values have been used to describe the effect of temperature on a particular quality 
attribute, such as color, texture, flavor, etc.   
 
 
The term commercially  sterility  signifies  total destruction  of all microorganism s within  a 
medium . Commercial  sterility  is often  used in the context  of canned  or aseptically  processed  
products  to indicate  that microorganism s related  to food spoilage  and public  health  concern s 
have  been  destroyed,  but there  are several  cases  where  the product  there  do exist  some  
thermophilic  bacteria  like Clostridium  thermosaccharolyticum , Bacillus  stearothermophilus  
and they have  much  higher  resist ance than Clostridium  botulinum , they are ignored . 
So, in the commercial  processing  they are ignored  means  that but they are taken  care of their 
thermal , there are thermophilic  microorganisms  they require  high temperature  may be around  
50 - 55 ᵒC for their growth.  So, the current  food so, obviously,  this is taken  care of that these  
microorganism s survive , their survival  is not a problem,  but only when  they grow  and multiply  
will create  problems.  So, their growth  and multiplication  post processing  is taken  care by 
16 
 appropriate  handling , appropriate  storage  of the products . By the application  of heat which  
renders  the food free of microorganism  capable  of reproducing  of the food under  normal  
refrigerated  condition  of this storage  and distribution  and viable  microorganism  including  
spores  of public  health  significance  and that means  the commercial  sterility.   
 
Factor s affecting  commercial  sterility   
The classical microbial inactivation models based on temperature levels and exposure time are 
highly influenced  by intrinsic and environmental conditions during thermal treatments.  The 
heating rate which is generally not taken into account in models of thermal destruction has been 
found to be a determinant parameter affecting cell survival to heating.  Heat shocks a re more 
effective than progressive heating enabling the optimization of the thermal destruction process 
by increasing thermal gradients.  At a fundamental level, the effects of heating rates on 
membrane permeability also emphasized the fact that cell membra nes are probably structurally  
dependent on heating kinetics.  
 
17 
 Effect of environmental  parameter  like water  activity  and other  hydrostatic  pressure  markedly  
affect  the thermal  treatment  effects  on the viability  of the microorganism s. Microorganism s 
appear  to be thermally  stabilized  by intermediate  water  activity  value  in the range of  0.3 to 0.5 
and the most  favorable  hydration  condition s for their destruction  correspond  to either  fully  
hydrated  or fully  dehydrated  media.   
 
As proteins  are generally  stabilized  by extreme  dehydration,  it can be speculated  that the 
thermal  destruction  of cells in dehydrated  media  is enhanced  by oxidation  or by membrane  
destabiliz ation  favored  by low hydration.  The major  role played  by membrane  destabilization  
in the induction  of the cell death  can be seen in the way that passing  through  the membrane  
phase  transition  using  a cooling  step enhances  cell resistance to osmotic dehydration  
significantly.  So, the main  implication  of these  results  is that thermal  stabiliz ation  of 
dehydrated  products  can be optimized  especially  when  heating  rates  are used.   
 
 
18 
 Quality changes during the thermal processing  
The time and temperature combination causes different kind of quality changes like physical, 
chemical, nutritional and sensory.  
 
Effects on nutritional quality  
Protein : Protein  denaturation , hydrogen  bond  rupturing , conformation  changes  in the protein , 
there  will be oxidation reaction with reducing  sugar, degree  of protein  denaturation  depend s on 
the level  of heat treatment  and total crude  protein  content  is generally  not affected  by canning.  
Lipid s: Normal heat processing has generally no effect on fat content. Hydrolysis reaction can 
occur but has no adverse effect on nutritional value. Unsaturated lipids are more  prone to 
oxidation than saturated one under heating in presence of oxygen.  
Carbohydrate : Levels of total and available carbohydrates are largely unaffected during 
thermal processing of fruit and vegetable. In general, their effects more related to interaction 
with other food constituents and to the overall eating quality of the foodstuff. Starch 
gelatinisation and increased digestibility . 
Minerals : Minerals are susceptible to changes in bioavailability due to interactions with other 
food components.  Major changes that can occur in mineral levels on canning are caused by 
movement between the foodstuff and the canning liquor.   
Vitamin s: Most vitamins are unstable under conditions of heat and are susceptible to loss 
during the canning process. The fat -soluble vitamins are generally more stable than the water -
soluble vitamins, but losses can occur during canning due to oxidation.  
 
19 
  
 
Effects on sensory  quality  
Flavour : Lipid oxidation ( Unsaturated fats are degraded, under the conditions of oxygen and 
heat, leads to both des irable and undesirable flavors),  Maillard reaction ( Depends on 
temperature, pH and water content),  Taints ( Off-flavour development due to contamination 
from  environment, e.g. ‘Catty taint ’). 
Texture : Starch gelatinization  (Swelling of starch granules, where, amylose and amylopectin 
gives firm gel and transluce nt paste product after cooling),  Pectin changes ( Loss of semi -
permeability of cell membranes, solubilization and breakdown of pectic substances in the cell 
walls and middle lame llae).  It could lead to improve palatability of food or over processing can 
cause excessive softening of fruits and vegetables.  
Colour : Chlorophyll (B reakdown of natural pigment which leads to breakdown with the 
associated color change from bright green to  olive green or brown, t his gets converted to 
pheophytin by the loss of magne sium ions (Mg2+), with heat and low pH during processing 
20 
 greatly accelerating this change), Carotenoids ( Oxidation and isomerization under the 
conditions of heat and low pH ). 
 
In summary, Blanching and pasteurization are the mild thermal processes, whereas canning, 
baking, roasting and frying ar e the severe thermal processes. Hot water blanching or steam 
blanching is generally used for enzyme inactivation, whereas pasteurization, sterilization and 
aseptic processing are u sed for microbial inactivation. Thermal process calculation for low acid 
food is required and is mostly based on the inactivation of Cl. botulinum.  Thermal death time, 
D-value, z -value, F -value, Q 10 and lethality a re the concepts need to be properly understood 
during thermal process calculation. Thermal process mostly effect the nutritional and sensory 
properties of fruits and vegetables.  
 
These are the references for further study.  
