Post Harvest  Operations  and Processing  of  
Fruits,  Vegetables,  Spices  and Plantation  Crop  Products  
Professor  H. N. Mishra  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  50  
Quality  Characteristics  
This lecture  discuss es the  quality  characteristics  of plant  based  fermented  foods  and beverages.  
It includes  different fermented  fruit and vegetable  beverages  and its  quality  characteristics  such 
as physical  and rheological  qualities,  nutritional  and sensory  properties,  microbiological  
properties  and spoilage  microorganisms . It also discusses about  evaluat ion of  these  properties  
and quality  characteristics . 
Fermented Fruits and Vegetables  
 
 
The fruits and vegetables are usually fermented to improve the palatability and shelf life. Many 
forms of juice either raw, centrifuged and filtered are used for fermentation. However, it is 
important to kill the harmful spoilage microorganism thus heat tr eatments like pasteurization, 
sterilization are usually done before fermentation. Various types of fermentation depending 
upon the need is done by making different conditions favorable for enzyme activities. The 
fermented beverage is stored at low temperat ure for higher shelf life.  
Different Beverages and Microorganisms Used in Fermentation  
The table provided shows different  fermented  beverages  from  different  countries  and the 
microorganism  used for the fermentation  or that has been  isolated  from  the fermented  
beverages.  Hardaliye  is a beverage  originated  from  Turkey  that has  red grapes  as its substrate. 
Microorganism  that are  isolated  from  the beverage are  Lactobacillus paracasei, L. casei, L. 
brevis, L. pontis, L. acctotolerans, L. sanfrancisco. L. v accinostereus.  Kombucha  is another 
feremented beverage from  China . It is fermented tea and microorganism s used are 
Glucomacctobacter spp. (G. xylinus), Acctobacter spp., Lactobacillus spp., 
Zygosaccharomyces spp., Hanseniaspora spp., Torulaspora spp., Pichia spp., Dekkera spp., 
Saccharomyees spp. Gefilus  is a fermented juice from Finland and organisms u sed are 
Lactobac illus rhamnosus GG, Propionibacterium freudenreichii ssp. shermanii JS . 
 
In Sweden , Provi va is prepared  from  orange,  strawberry  or black  currant  juices.  
Microorganisms involved is  Lactobacillus  plantarum  299v . Goodbelly  is a fermented beverage 
from USA prepared from Mango, blueberry acai, pomegranate, blackberry, tropical green, 
cranberry, watermelon, tropical orange, and coconut water juices, fermented by Lactobacillus  
plantarum  299v . Norway  and Finland  has Biola  prepared  from  orange,  mango , apple -pear 
flavour  and several  vegetable  juices . Lactobacillus  rhamnosus  GG is the organism involved .  
Kevika  is from USA,  which  is a sparkling  lemon  or ginger  probiotic  drink . Microorganisms 
used are  Bacillus coagulans, L. rhamnosus, L. plantarum, L. paracasei . In Sweden  Rela it is 
prepared  from  fruit juices  and Lactobacillus reuteri MM 53. Healthy life probiotic is a drink from  
Australia  made  from  apple and mango  juices  and Lactobacillus paracasei and Lb. plantarum . 
In Thailand , Malee probiotic  juice is prepared  from  white  grape  and orange  juice . Lactobacillus 
paracasei  is the microorganism used. It could be summarize d from the table that lactobacillus  
plantarum  is the most  commonly  used microorganism  for the fermentation  of food and 
beverage s, which is a  probiotic bacterium . Substrate  can be different  depending  upon  the type 
of beverage  prepared.  
Quality Characteristics  
Physical Properties  
Quality  characteristics  includes the  physical , chemical,  and microbiological  properties of the 
beverage . The physical properties of fermented beverage are of great importance for their 
positive perception by consumers. The plant based fermented beverage must provide the 
required texture liked  by consumer. The consumer do their first judgment based on the physical 
properties of the fermented beverage. Color and appearance are the most important for quick 
judgment. However, taste, texture, aroma, etc. also contributed equal role in acceptance of  final 
products. The physical properties of the beverages that are considered in quality analysis are 
texture, total soluble solids (TSS), color, pH, titratable acidity and aroma.  
Texture  
The texture  is measured  as hardness,  adhesiveness , cohesiveness , springiness  and gumminess . 
The texture  profile  curve  provided shows that  hardness  is the highest  force , followed by 
cohesiveness and adhesiveness as the negative peak.  
  
Hardness is the peak force of the compression cycle, which is  defined as the necessary force 
to achieve a required level of  deformation. It is the final power required to reach a stable                  
deformation.  Adhesiveness is the force required to detach a sample from the                         probe.  
It is calculat ed as the field surface of a negative peak.  Cohesiveness is calculated as quotient 
field surfaces indicated by  the curves of the second and the first press.  Springiness is a ratio of 
the time measured from the start of the second and the first cycles of pressing to reach 
maximum deformation during each cycle.  Gumminess is determined as a multiple of hardness 
and cohesiveness . 
Total Soluble Solids  
Total soluble solids (TSS) are measured by refractometer either hand and abbe’s refractometer.  
The measured T SS or sugar content includes the carbohydrates, organic acids, proteins, fats 
and minerals of the fruit.  It represents from 10 -20% of the fruit's fresh weight which increased 
as fruit matured making the product less acidic, sweeter fruit.  
Color Measurement  
The color of the fruit juice and concentrate was determined using a colorimeter.  This is very 
important property as it defines the first appearance of fermented fruits and vegetable 
beverages.  For measurement photometric  methods  or Hunter  lab colorimeter is used.  
pH 
pH is a quantitative  measure  of the acidity  or basicity . Fruit  juices  have  different  pH levels  
which  can be measured  by pH meter . The balance  of pH level  is important  to have  optimum  
taste and shelf  life of the fermented  products .  
Titratable acidity   
Titratable  acidity  is a measure  of the amount  of acid or acid present  in a food sample . It is an 
important  parameter  defining  the quality  of the fermented  fruit juices.  If titratable  acidity  of 
juice  is higher,  then it becomes  difficult  for saliva  to neutralize  it and becomes  potentially  
damaging  particularly  to the teeth . Thus an  optimum  TTA  must  be maintained  to have  a better  
quality  of fermented  fruit beverage .  
 
Electronic Noses and Tongue  
Electronic noses and tongue could be used to determine the taste and smell of the fermented 
beverages. The slide shows the sensory perception of the red wine via human tongue and nose, 
and e lectronic  tongue  and nose. W ine tasting  requires  high skill and sensory perception .  
The mouth has tongue which has taste buds, where acquisition of taste occurs. Similarly, e -
tongue has sensory arrays that works as taste buds. They collect the information  as like in our 
actual  system . Then information  acquired by tongue is  immediately  sent to our brain  for 
processing . The brain  analyses  the information  sent by the tongue  and record  it as the taste of 
that product.  The e -tongue send the information to the chemometric tools, process it by 
comparing the pre -recorded data sets and models developed to give the decision.  
Similarly, the olfactory cells in the human nose acquires the information on the smell and send 
it to the brain by the nerves. The neurons in the brain  compares the odor and provides the 
decision.  The e -nose acquires the smell using sensors and the information is processed using 
neural networking and decision is provided.  
In summary, similar to the human nose and tongue these electronic devices use sensors and 
processing model for brain to provide results. The  food matters are volatilized and the volatiles 
are sensed by sensors like metal oxide sensors . The data collected is sent to the instrument to 
analyze using neural network or PCA. In discriminative sensory analysis the system is first 
provided with fresh samples or standard samples and the data generated is compared with the 
given samples.  
Rheological Properties  
The rheological  measurement  of the fermented  beverage  is important  for knowing  about  its 
consistency . In general , the contro lled viscometer  having  coaxial  geometry  or cone and plate  
geometry  is used for carrying  out steady shear  experiment . In this experiment , the shear  rate is 
varied  from  0 to 100 Hz and the temperature  is remained  fixed.  The the viscosity  versus  shear  
rate graph  this revealed  the flow property  of the juices  which  is either  a pseudoplastic  or 
dilatant. The figure shows the curve plotted with apparent viscosity (mPa.s) as Y -axis and shear 
rate (1/s) as X -axis at different temperatures. The apparent viscosity decreases with increase in 
shear rate and temperature. T he consistency  coefficient  of juice  sample  is measured  by 
evaluation  of Power  Law model .  
 
The power  law model  is given by the equation,  
𝜂=Κ𝛾𝑛 
Where,  𝜂 is viscosity of juice (Pas) ; K is the consistency coefficient (Pasn); γ is shear rate (Hz) ; 
n is flow behavior index . 
𝐾=𝐴𝐾exp𝐸𝐾
𝑅𝑇 
𝜂=𝐴𝜂exp𝐸𝜂
𝑅𝑇 
Where, A K, Aη are the pre -exponential constants ; EK, Eη are the activation energy (KJ/mol) ; R 
is the universal gas constant (KJ/K.mol) ; T is absolute temperature (K) . 
The consistency coefficient and flow behaviour index are used for explaining the rheological 
properties of fermented beverage.  Temperature and total soluble solids of beverage affect 
consistency coefficient and viscosity.  The consistency coefficient and viscosity of beverage 
follows Arrhenius concept.  
Nutritional Properties  
During  the fermentation  process,  various  new primary and  secondary  metabolites  are produced  
and compounds  like vitamins,  minerals  are synthesized . Thus,  fermented  beverages  are 
considered  more  nutritive  then their unfermented  counterparts.  Fermented foods and beverages 
are more nutritious than their unfermented counterparts due to the presence of microorganism 
during fermentation . 
Microorganisms are both catabolic and anabolic; break down complex compounds, and 
synthesize complex vitamins and other growth factors.
  The LAB & yeast fermentation were 
observed to enhance nutritional content and food digestibility.  Enzymatic  hydrolysis  in the 
fermented  food cause  reduction  in the level s of anti-nutrients  like tannins  and phytic  acids  et 
cetera,  degradation with the help of phytases, and results in  enhanced  availability  of simple  
sugar  or polysaccharides  (amylases ), proteins (p rotease ), free fatty acids  (lipases ), and iron . 
 
The Rhizopus oligosporus or similar molds in the ‘Tempe’, an Indonesian origin -rich dish, 
cause increase in niacin about seven times and synthesized vitamin B 12 through fermenting 
bacterium growing with the essential mold.  Thus, the  fermented  food has B12 whic h is not 
normally present  in plant  food sources . Similarly , Klebsiella pneumoniae bacterium, i.e., 
(nonpathogenic strain), is responsible  for producing  vitamin  B12 when inoculated  into Indian  
idli fermentation . Similar  nutritional  improvement  in ferme nted beverages  can be observed . 
Fermentation process synthesis vitamins resulting in bio -enrichment , produces peptides, 
enzymes, polyglutamic acid, increases antioxidant  activity , saponin  and isoflavone  values,  and 
causes  degradation  of antinutri tive compo unds.   
Sensory Properties  
Sensory  propert ies is crucial as most  of the fermented beverages  are accepted based on their 
sensory characteristics by the consumers. The parameters analyzed  through  sensory  studies 
include  taste, aroma, flavour, colour, appearance , after taste,  texture  et cetera .  
 
The acceptability  of the fermented  food and beverage  is largely  dependent  upon  its sensory  
properties . Thus, it is important  to have  a brief  knowledge  about  the sensory  method  used for 
testing  of fermented  foods  and beverages . In sensory analysis, the panel of judges  or even  
consumers  are given  the beverage  and asked  to record  their perception  about  the beverage  into 
a datasheet  provider  and then the data are analyzed  to make  decisions . The different tests for 
sensory analysis are discriminative  tests,  9-point  hedonic  scale  testing , ranking  method  and 
fuzzy method .  
Discriminative Tests  
 
Discriminative or difference  tests is one of the most  useful  sensory  tests. This test is designed  
to discriminate  difference  between  two or more  samples.  The types of  discriminative  tests are 
paired  comparison  test, duo-trio test, triangle  test and multiple  sample  test.  
Paired Comparison Test  
Paired comparison  test is used to make  comparison  between  only two samples  based  on sensory  
attributes  like texture,  taste,  acidity , colour , et cetera . This test is relatively  easy to organize  
and implement.  It is typically  used in comparing  new and old processing  techniques,  change  of 
ingredient s in the product , preference  testing  at the consumer  level  et cetera . If already  a 
standard  reference  beverage  exists in the market , this test is used to compare any  newly 
developed beverage  with it .  
Duo-trio Test  
 
It is a modified  paired comparison  test. One sample  is identified  as a reference  (R), first given  
to panel ists for evaluation . Subsequently  two coded  samples , one of which is identical to R are 
presented. T he panel ists are asked  to indicate  which  of the  two sample s is same  as the reference  
R. The  test is suitable  for products  that have  relatively  intense  odor, taste and/or kinesthetic  
effect s such that sensitivity  of evaluator  is significantly  reduced . The duo trio assessment sheet 
is provided in the slide. It has column for assessor name, number and date and the instructions 
to perform the test. The sample codes along with column for the comments are also provided.  
Triangle Test  
Triangle  test is the most  well-known  and more  frequently  used out of the three  different  tests. 
As its name  implies , it is a three -product  test in which  all the samples  are coded  and the 
panelist’s task is to determine  which  two are most  similar,  or which  one is most  different  from  
the other  two. The test is more  difficult  test because  the panelists  must  recall  the sensory  
characteristics  of two products  before  evaluating  the third  and then make  a decision.   
An example  of the test is provided in the slide. There  are three  samples  here coded as 212, 347, 
and 652. The panelists are provided with the samples and the assessment sheet. They have to 
record which sample is different from other two. If no difference is perceive d, the panelists are 
forced to guess one samples. The data obtained is analyzed statistically  to come to a conclusion . 
As shown in the slide, all panelist except one selected 347 as the most different. Thus, the 
probability of 347 being a different sample is higher.  
Multiple Sample Test  
Test involving more than 3 samples are classified as multiple sample tests. They may have 
equal (symmetrical) or unequal (asymmetrical) numbers of each sample. When they are applied 
as true difference tests, the judge is required to separate the sample into two groups of like 
samples. When they are applied as directional tests, the judge is asked to identify the groups of 
higher or lower intensity of a given criterion.  The assessment sheet provides the information to 
group  the samples. The panelists ha ve to taste the samples and  evaluate it to the reference 
sample of odor and flavor. They have to rate in each sample degree of difference and direction 
of quality.  
  
9 Point Hedonic Scale  
Hedonic relates to the psychology of  pleasurable and non -pleasant states of consciousness. In 
hedonic method, psychological states of like and dislike are measured on a rating scale. 
Normally rating scale has been categorized into five forms, viz. numerical, graphic, standard, 
cumulated poin ts and forced choice forms.  The nine points numerical scale as given in figure 
has been most extensively used for new product development & consumer studies. The samples 
are rated on a 9 -point hedonic scale ranging from 1 to 9 with 1 being extreme dislike and 9 
being liked extremely. The samples are rated for their color, texture, aroma, breakability, and 
overall acceptability.   
 
Ranking Method  
 
In ranking method two or more samples are provided to the panelists who are asked to arrange 
them in an ascending or descending order of intensity of a specific attribute, e.g. sweetness. 
Ranking is often used for screening inferior from superior samples in product development. 
This method is also suited for comparison of market samples of different brands.  Samples may 
be ranked in order of degree of acceptability or by a specific attribute.  The assessment sheet 
for ranking the samples based on aroma/taste characteristic of the product is provided in the 
slide.  
Fuzzy Method  
 
In fuzzy method the rating of bot h sample and its attributes in terms of importance is done.  
For each sample, the scale of measurement is from not -satisfactory to excellent and for sensory 
attributes, the scale is varied from not at all important to extremely important.  The sensory data 
is converted into triplets using the pre -defined  fuzzy methods. These triplets are then converted 
into membership  function values using standard fuzzy scales and finally similarity                                                                   
values are  evaluated for ranking of the samples.  Fuzzy method has advantage of taking the 
importance of sensory attributes for ranking of the samples. The assessment sheet for fuzzy 
method is provided.  
Microbiological Properties  
In fermented beverages, various kind of microorganisms like yeasts, molds, algae, viruses, 
bacteria, pathogens, spoilage, beneficial, inert, etc. may be present.  Early destruction of 
spoilage causing microorganism (MO) are generally done before fermentation. However, 
further safe  GMP practices must be followed to have spoilage MO free fermented beverage at 
the end.  However, the thermal processing should be done in such a way so that the spoilage 
organism get s killed but beneficial organism must remain preserved.  The table provides  
information about the fermented food and beverages, substrate used and the microorganism 
involved in the fermentation.  Dairy based fermented products are    curd, yoghurt, cheese, 
yakult, kefir, and et cetra.  The substrate used are milk and milk casein. M icroorganisms 
involved are L. bulgaricus, L. lactis, L. acidophilus, L. cremoris, L. casei, L. paracasei, L. 
thermophilus, L. Kefir, L. caucasicus, Penicillium camemberti, P. roqueforti, Acetobacter 
lovaniensis, Kluyveromyces lactis , and Saccharomyces cerevisiae . In case of vegetable -based 
products like kimchi, tempeh, natto, miso and sauerkraut, the substrate are soybean, cabbage, 
ginger, cucumber, broccoli, and radish, the fermenting microorganisms are Leuconostoc 
mesenteroids, Aspergill us sp., Rhizopus oligosporus, R. oryzae, L sakei, L. plantarum, 
Thermotoga sp., L. hokkaidonensis, L. rhamnosus, Rhodotorula rubra, Leuconostoc carnosum, 
Bifidobacterium dentium, Enterococcus faecalis, Weissella confuse,  and Candida sake . For the 
cereals b ased fermented foods like bhatura, ambali, chilra, dosa, kunu -zaki, and marchu, the 
substrates are wheat, maize, sorghum, millet and rice. The microorganisms involved are L. 
pantheris, L. plantarum, Penicillium sp., S. cerevisiae, L. mesenteroids, E. faeca lis, 
Trichosporon pullulans, Pediococcus acidilactici, P. cerevisiae, Delbruekii hansenii , and Deb. 
Tamari.  For the beverages like wine, beer, kombucha and sake, the substrate are grapes, rice 
and cereals. Aspergillus oryzae, Zygosaccharomyces bailii, S. c erevisiae, Acetobacter 
pateurianus, Gluconacetobacter, Acetobacter Xylinus, and Komagataeibacter xylinus  are the 
fermenting organisms. Meat products like sucuk, salami, arija, jama and nham has meat as 
substrate, while L. sakei, L. curvatus, L. plantarum, Leuconostoc carnosum, Leuconostoc 
gelidium, B. licheniformis, E. faecalis, E. hirae, E. durans, Bacillus subtilis, L. divergens, L. 
carnis, E. cecorum, and B. lentus  as fermenting microorganism.  
For all the fermented foods and beverages, lactic acid bacte ria (LAB) is the dominant 
microbiota, which has been considered the most critical part contributing to beneficial effects 
in fermented foods/beverages. The fermenting microorganisms mainly involve LAB like 
Enterococcus, Streptococcus, Leuconostoc, Lactobac illus and Pediococcus; and yeasts and 
molds viz. Debaryomyces, Kluyveromyces, Saccharomyces, Geotrichium, Mucor, Penicillium 
and Rhizopus species . In homofermentative pathway, Lactobacillus converts glucose to 
fructose diphosphate and to 2 triose phosphate , to 2 phosphoglyceric acid, to 2 pyruvic acid 
and finally to 2 lactic acids. In the process it uses phosphate from ATP to produce ADP and 
takes hydrogen from NADH 2 to give out NAD. In heterofermentative pathway glucose is 
converted to D -Ribulose – 5 – P and it involves one ATP and 2 NAD. It is converted to D -
Xylulose -5-P and to Acetyl -P. It takes up H 2 from NADH 2 to produce Acetaldehyde and 
produces ethanol with NAD H2. Sacharomyces  converts glucose to ethanol with fructose 
diphosphate , triose phosphate, phosphoglyceric acid, and pyruvic acid  as the intermediate 
metabolites.  
Spoilage Causing Microorganism in Wine  
Several microbial contaminants appear to survive on wa lls and other interior surfaces of 
wineries, including those of presses and fermentation tanks, and within wooden barrels. 
Zygosaccharomyces, Dekkera, Saccharomyces, and Saccharomycodes  causes spoilage of bulk 
and bottled wines. D./B. bruxellensis and Zygo saccharomyces bailii are spoilage yeasts. S. 
cerevisiae appears to be more problematic than indicated, as some strains isolated from dry 
white wines seem to be more of a potential spoilage yeast than Z. bailii, due to its sorbic acid 
and sulfite tolerance at high ethanol levels. Both Z. bailii and S. cerevisiae can grow at low pH 
in the presence of acid concentrations near the legal limits. The microorganism present in wine 
causes spoilage which could be seen fro m the change in physical properties like sedimentation, 
film formation, turbidity and viscosity change.  
 
 
The picture shows the microorganisms sensory visual problems such as sedimentation, film 
formation, turbidity and change in viscosity.  
Case Study  
Spoilage microorganism present in commercially available fermented alcoholic beverage were 
studied and presented as the case study. About 469 commercially available fermented alcoholic 
beverages including beer (draft, micro -brewed, and pasteurized), fruit wine (grape and others), 
refined rice wine, and yakju  (raw and pasteurized) were evaluated. The graph shows that 
Microbrewed beer containe d the highest number of microorganisms (average aerobic plate 
count, 3.5; lactic acid bacteria, 2.1; acetic acid bacteria, 2.0; and fungi, 3.6 log CFU/ml), 
followed by draft beer and yakju (P < 0.05), whereas the other FABs contained , 25 CFU/25 
ml microor ganisms. Unexpectedly, neither microbial diversity nor microbial count correlated 
with the alcohol content (4.7 to 14.1%) or pH (3.4 to 4.2) of the product. Despite the harsh 
conditions, coliforms (detected in 23.8% of microbrewed beer samples) and B. cere us (detected 
in all FABs) were present in some products. B. cereus was detected most frequently in 
microbrewed beer (54.8% of samples) and nonpasteurized yakju (50.0%), followed by 
pasteurized yakju (28.8%), refined rice wine (25.0%), other fruit wines (12 .3%), grape wine 
(8.6%), draft beer (5.6%), and pasteurized beer (2.2%)   
Acetic acid bacteria are not detected in pasteurized grape wine, refined rice wine, yakju  and 
even in their non -pasteurized forms. The fungi growth was observed in beer and non -
paste urized yakju . 
Summary  
 
The fermented fruit and beverage ha ve higher nutritional value than its unfermented 
counterparts.  Various physical properties of fermented beverage like pH, texture, taste, color, 
aroma, titratable acidity and rheological can be measured using different instruments. Aroma 
and taste of wine can be measured using e -Nose and e -Tongue.  The fermented bevera ge must 
have acceptable sensory property which can be analysed using four methods like discriminative 
tests, 9 -point hedonic scale, ranking and fuzzy methods.  The fermented fruits and vegetable 
beverage can be spoiled due to improper processing, carrying a nd storage conditions, thus, it 
is important to kill the spoilage microorganism with stability of beneficial microorganism.  
References for further reading are provided in the slide.  
