Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and 
Plantation Crop Products 
Professor H.N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department   
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture 54  
Modified Atmosphere Packaging   
 
This lecture covers modified atmospheric packaging of horticult ural and plantation crop 
produces including the methods and systems, their advantages an d disadvantages, requirements 
of the packaging materials for modified atmosphere packaging of  fresh produce and its effect 
on nutritional quality, and the concepts of equilibrium humidit y packaging. 
 
Modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) 
Modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) may be simply defined as pa ckaging a product in an 
atmosphere that is different from air. Due to its substantial s helf-life extending effect, it is an 
innovative growth area in food sector. MAP involves modificatio n of the headspace gases in a 
package which reduces the rate of ongoing biological or physiol ogical processes in the food. 
MAP have potential to increase the shelf life of the fresh prod uce. Composition of the air 
surrounding the produce in the package is modified to reduce th e rate of respiration and other 
associated processes. It is commonly used for cut fruits & vege tables or even whole fruits and 
vegetables. 
 
Principle of modified atmosphere packaging 
MAP basically balances the oxygen permeability with the vegetab les respiration rate. So, as 
shown in a thumb setup, permeable and semi permeable materials are used, which selectively 
allows in and out of the gases such as O 2, CO 2 and water vapour and therefore it maintains a 
proper desired level of compositi on of these gases, i.e. the ox ygen, carbon dioxide and nitrogen 
content are controlled and regula ted  inside the packet and thi s is achieved by modifying the 
film with its permeability limit depending upon the type of the  produce, because different 
produces have different rate of r espiration as well as their re quirements for O 2 and CO 2 etc. 
might be different.  
However, it is very important to  control the proper conditions inside the packaging material and 
there should be proper balance between the humidity inside the packet and outside the packet. 
So, the fruit and vegetables aft er the harvesting are subjected  to the usual pre-treatment 
processes such as cleaning, was hing, grading, sorting and final ly packaging and storage.  
 
Respiratory behaviour of fresh produces 
Different commodities have different metabolic activities and, therefore, di ﬀerent respiration 
rates. A proper combination of O 2 (low) and CO 2 (high) should be maintained in package for 
allowing commodity to respire aerobically at minimum possible r ate. The optimum O 2/CO 2 
concentrations differ for different commodities. Even different  varieties of same commodity 
m i g h t  n e e d  d i f f e r e n t  O 2/CO 2 concentrations. The attainment of headspace composition at 
optimum level led to lower dete rioration of food produce with t ime at MAP. The reduction in 
deterioration of produce can be 30-40%. 
 
 
Tolerance to O ₂ & CO₂ concentration of different fruits 
The table represents the minimum O 2 tolerated and maximum CO 2 tolerated by different fruits. 
For example, the minimum O 2 tolerated level for tree nuts a nd dried fruits is 0.5%, for so me 
cultivars of apple and pear is 1.0%, most cultivars of  apple a nd pear, apricot, cherry, kiwi fruit, 
peach, pineapple, plum, papaya strawberry is 2.0% etc. Similarl y, the maximum carbon dioxide 
tolerated for apple, apricot, grape, olive, and pear is 2.0%, f or peach, plum, kiwifruit, banana, 
mango & papaya, it is 5.0%, grape fruit, lime, lemon, persimmon  & pineapple, it is 10%, for 
strawberry, raspberry, blackberry & cherry can tolerate up to 1 5%.  
 
Different MAP methods 
Different types of MAP methods are active modified atmosphere p ackaging, passive modified 
atmosphere packaging, gas incorporation during packaging or vac uum packaging. In fact, 
vacuum packaging is also a type of modified atmosphere packagin g where oxygen is completely 
removed or sometimes nitrogen flushing is used. 
 
Active MAP 
In active MAP, The atmosphere is modified by creating a slight vacuum & replacing the 
packaging atmosphere within desired gas mixture. The iron compo unds (FeO, Fe ₂O₃, Fe₃O₄) 
are used as the active oxygen absorbents. The CO ₂ absorbers are used are lime (freshly hydrated 
calcium lime [Ca(OH) ₂], activated charcoal, magnesium oxide, etc. The ethylene absor bers 
used are potassium permanganate , builder clay powder, hydrocarb ons, and silicones. 
 
Passive MAP 
Modification is achieved by resp iration of commodity within the  package. The degree of 
modification depends on characteristics of commodity & packagin g film. Steady state 
equilibrium is achieved when O ₂ consumption equals to O ₂ diffusion into package and CO ₂ 
production equals to CO ₂ diffusion out of package. This kind of equilibrium can be main tained 
through use of proper packaging material with required permeabi lity to respective gases. The 
commodity will be safe till this equilibrium is maintained. 
 
Relative changes in O 2 and CO 2 concentrations in active and passive MAP 
The figure shows the variation in physiological changes of food  products in a normal packaging, 
active modified atmosphere packaging and passive modified atmos phere packaging at day 0, 
day 3 and day 7. In active modified atmosphere packaging, scave ngers, emitters, and scrubbers 
are used. So, the desired atmosphere is achieved at a faster ra te. The O 2 concentration is 
progressively decreasing, and CO 2 concentration increased in case of passive MAP. However, 
for active MAP, the CO 2 concentration is made almost stable but O 2 concentration is 
progressively decreased. 
 
Gas incorporation during packaging 
It involves the flushing with the mixture of gases. The air ins ide the package is replaced with 
inert gas nitrogen, or mixture of gases (nitrogen, CO 2) before packaging and sealing in barrier 
materials. So, the material is filled into the package, placing  in the chamber, closing the 
chamber, evacuation of air (oxygen is completely removed), then  gas injection and nitrogen 
flushing is done, then sealing, releasing the vacuum, and final ly the modified atmosphere 
package is achieved. 
 
Vacuum packaging 
In vacuum packaging, the air is mechanically removed from the p ackage before it is sealed.  
 
MAP gases 
Three gases such as O 2, CO 2, and N 2 are used in the different combination according to the 
product and the needs of the manufacturer and consumer. The com positions for MAP of fruits 
and vegetables are as O 2: 3-5%, CO 2: 3-5%, and N 2: 85-95%. The choice for a particular 
combination is influenced by ongoing biological processes, sens itivity of product to gases, color 
stability requirements, and softening of fruits and vegetables texture. 
 
MAP considerations for fruits and vegetables 
Respiration rate can be reduced by decreasing O 2 concentration around the fresh produce. Pectin 
esterase, polygalacturonase, polyphenoloxidase, glycolic acid o xidase, ascorbic acid oxidase 
are the active enzymes and many of these continue because of th e continuation of the life in the 
fruit, physiological process, a nd respiratory behaviour. The ef fects on ethylene production can 
be described as blockage of synt hesis ethylene which control th e activities of these enzymes. 
 
Factors influencing effectiveness of gas 
The factors influencing the effectiveness of gas include origin al and final concentrations of the 
gases, stage of maturity of commodity, type of product being pa ckaged, water activity, ongoing 
biological processes, storage temperature, partial pressure of carbon dioxide, and bacterial 
population. 
 
Advantages of MAP 
Firstly, product packaging (cle ar all round visibility of the p roduct and it improve the product 
characteristics), secondly, product quality (overall high quali ty product, shelf-life increases 
from 50-400%), thirdly, special features (use of chemical prese rvatives can be minimized), and 
economics (Improved shelf-life re sults in less fi nancial losses  and better utilization of storage, 
space and equipment).  
 
Disadvantages of MAP 
Firstly, product packaging (increased package volume leads to p oor retail display and added 
transport cost etc, benefits of MAP are lost upon package leaka ge), secondly, product quality 
(product safety is not fully  established), thirdly, special fe atures (temperature control is 
required different products need a different gas composition an d  this becomes a complicated 
material that is one time only one specific commodity can be  s tored special equipment and 
training is required), and economic s (cost of analytical equipm ent to measure gas composition, 
cost of gas filling and other m achinery & their maintenance). 
 
Systems for gas packaging 
Horizontal FFS machines for rigid and semi-rigid packages (Deep -draw machines) is suitable 
for the retail packaging of processed products, and nuts, etc. Horizontal and vertical FFS 
machines for flexible ‘pillow-pack’ pouches (Flow-pack machines ) are mainly suitable for the 
retail packaging of snack foods, coffee, nuts, salads and fruit s, etc. Vacuum chamber machines 
are suitable for both retail and catering packaging of nuts, an d prepared meals, etc. 
 
Gemella can be used for packaging of fruits, vegetables, salads  and ready meals, etc. Fiberlam 
system can also be applied to fruit, vegetables, processed prod ucts, salads and ready meals, etc. 
Bag-in-Carton system  is used for making consumer size packs of dry powders and granu les 
such as coffee, tea and dried potato powder, etc.  Bag-in-Box system has the advantage that a 
conventional unit pack can be pr oduced and then gas is flushed.  
 
Packaging material requirements 
Integrity of sealing is important to maintain correct atmospher e in package. Package types (rigid 
or semi-rigid, lidded tray or flexible film pouch) help in choo sing packaging materials. 
Polyethylene in packaging laminates can be specially treated to  prevent condensation of water 
that fogs package and affects visibility of inside product.  Microwaveability of packaging 
materials is an important factor to be considered in gas packag ing, particularly in the case of 
RTE products. 
 
Biodegradability and recyclabilit y is a major challenge for the  materials manufacture is the 
natural hydrophilic behavior of many bio-based polymers. The me chanical properties in terms 
of modulus and stiffness should not be very different to those of the conventional polymers. 
The compostability is highly dependent on the type & compositio n of the material. 
 
Films used in MAP 
The films which are used in modified atmosphere packaging may b e polymeric film like LDPE, 
HDPE, Polypropylene, OPP, Metallized Polyester, EBA, PVC, Perfo rated, Micro Perforated, 
edible films like biopolymers, emulsion, laminates etc., smart packaging film material like 
temperature-responsive, ethylen e absorber etc., anti-microbial like  Wasabi-based polymers. 
 
Function of MAP gases in preservation 
The gases that are applied in MAP are basically O 2, CO 2 and N 2. N2 has no specific preservative 
effect but functions mainly as a  filler gas to avoid the collap se that takes place when CO 2 
dissolves in the product. CO 2, because of its antimicrobial activity, is the most important 
component in applied gas mixtures.  The different proposed mechanisms of antimicrobial action 
of CO 2 involving are lowering the pH of the food, cellular penetratio n followed by a decrease 
in the cytoplasmic pH of the cell, specific actions on cytoplas mic enzymes, and specific actions 
on biological membranes. The gas/product volume ratio and perme ability of applied film for 
O2 &  C O 2 will influence amount of dissolved CO 2 & thus microbial inhibition                      
of atmosphere. 
 
Effect of MAP on nutritional quality of fruits and vegetables 
There is a  decrease in all phenolic compounds (anthocynanins, flavonols, e tc.) in both skin and 
pulp of grape berries in CO2 enriched atmosphere due to anaerob iosis. Anaerobiosis can lead 
to unwanted browning and loss of anthocyanins. Low O 2 and high CO 2 enhances retention of 
ascorbate. But in fresh cut produce high CO 2 causes degradation of vitamin C.  Lower O 2 & 
enhanced CO 2 reduces loss of provitamin A. No changes in RTE oranges after 11 days at 4 °C 
in MAP (19% O 2 + 5% CO 2 and 3% O 2 + 25% CO 2). 
 
Equilibrium humidity packaging 
Fresh respiring in hermetically  sealed packs leads to decreased  O2 and increased CO 2 and H 2O. 
Increased CO 2 can have inhibitory effect on microbes. However, decreased O 2 can increase 
risks of anerobic growth of microorganisms like fungi & some ba cteria. Similarly, reduced H2O 
can lead to shriveling and drying of fresh produce. If a produc e item’s respiratory characteristics 
are properly matched to film per meability values, then a benefi cial equilibrium MA (EMA) 
(high O 2 and high moisture) can be passively established. This is the c oncept of equilibrium 
humidity packaging. 
 
The figure shows the experiment conducted in the laboratory. In  improperly designed modified 
atmosphere package, there is a condensation of moisture, and sp oilage of product. When the 
modified atmosphere is maintained properly, there is no accumul ation of moisture observed.  
So, a study of the transpiration rate (TR) helps to quantify th e rate of water evaporation from 
the fruit surface. And also helps to determine the water vapor transpiration rate required for the 
packaging of the fruit. 
So basically, equilibrium humidity packaging is can be used to extend the shelf life of fruits and 
vegetable considerably. If the equilibrium humidity is not main tained inside the water vapor 
will condense on the walls of the package, it will enhance the bacterial growth. So, to  design 
EHP for the fruit and vegetable, it is essential to have the in formation and about the rate  of 
water evaporation from produce surface and so, it should be bal anced with the water vapor  
transmission rate of the packagi ng material and the rate of the  water evaporation from the 
produce surface should be balanced with the water vapor transmi ssion rate of the packaging  
film and the equilibrium humidity packaging should be maintaine d ,  s o  t h a t  t h e r e  i s  n o   
condensation of water inside.  
 
The EMAs attained are influenced  by (i) Produce respiration rat e, (ii) Film permeability, (iii) 
Pack volume, surface area, fill we ight, etc. Different humidity  regulation techniques include 
packaging material like that perforated films, individual shrin k wrapping, and enhanced 
permeable films, and moisture absorbers such as desiccators, hu midity regulating trays or pads.  
 
The principle of MAP technology is modifying the headspace comp osition which depends upon 
the permeability of film. MAP can  be done via four methods viz.  active, passive, gas 
incorporation during packaging and vacuum packaging. The MAP of  produce can increase shelf 
life and preserve quality; howev er, it increases cost and addit ional facilitates is needed during 
functioning. The phenolic compounds and vitamin C get affected due to MAP, however, there 
is very little change in the carotenoids content. 
 
These are the references used in this lecture. Thank you very m uch. 
