1 
 Post-Harvest and Processing of Fr uits, Vegetables, Spices and P lantation Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Te chnology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 18 
Peeling, Coring, Slicing  
 
The topic which we will cover in this lecture include peeling a nd different methods of peeling, 
advantages and disadvantages of various peeling methods, cuttin g operations and methods of 
cutting, dicing and its type, and some methods for the coring o f some fruits and vegetables.  
 
 2 
 Peeling 
Peeling is a process to remove unwanted or inedible material an d to improve the appearance of 
the final product. It is a primary unit operation for preparing  fruits and vegetable for processing. 
The purpose of the peeling is to minimize cost by removing as l ittle of the underlying food as 
possible, to leave the peeled surface clean and undamaged, and to reduce energy, labour and 
effluent treatment costs to a minimum.  
 
Benefits of the peeling include improved palatability of the pr oduce, reduces pesticide residues, 
increases drying rate or osmotic dehydration rate, enhance wate r diffusion coefficients, decrease 
activation energy for drying up the pilled produced. However, i nappropriate peeling may lead to 
high peeling losses, low process efficiency, high water and ene rgy consumption, and increase in 
the economic losses. So, the operations should be carried out c arefully.  
 3 
 The different methods of peeling include manual or mechanical m ethods like abrasive and non-
abrasive methods, chemical methods including lye peeling, therm al processes like hot water or 
steam peeling, infrared flame peeling, ultrasound assisted peel ing, and enzymatic peeling 
process.  
So, these peeling technologies are grouped into two categories like conventional technologies, 
which include hot water peeling, steam peeling or lye peeling. The novel peeling methods 
include ohmic heating, ultrasound assisted infrared radiation, enzymatic peeling.  
 
Manual/hand peeling 
This is an ideal peeling which is  done very gently, by hand wit h a sharp knife.  Manual peeling is 
performed using stationary or rotatory hand peelers or knives a gainst the surface of fruits and 
vegetables.  Fresh-cut fruit and vegetables with good microbiol ogical quality can be obtained by 
this method. Knife peeling causes less wounding in comparison t o abrasion peeling. However, 
this method is limited to small scale processing and is laborio us and requires more time. 
Mechanical peeling 
Mechanical peeling includes different types of process that int eract directly with the 
commodities. Common commercial mechanical peelers are abrasive devices, drums, rollers, 
knives and milling cutters. It provides high quality fresh fina l products and they are 
environmental friendly and nontoxic. The factors affecting the peeling processes are skin 
thickness, firmness, toughness, variety, rupture force, cutting  force, maximum shearing force, 
shear strength, tensile strength, and rupture stress. 
 4 
 
 
 
Power operated batch type mechanical peeler is particularly con structed for potato, it is used 
potato peeling. As shown in figure, the machine consists of pee ling drum with protursions on the 
inside surface, the drum rotates and then detaches peel from po tato by abrasion. The peeler is 
provided with a warm water spraying unit that washes the potato  and simultaneously peels are 
removed from the drum. The capacity of the machine is 100 kg pe r hour with a peeling 
efficiency and peel losses of about 78 and 6%, respectively.  5 
 
 
As shown in the figure, the abrasive peeler consists of a drum coated with rough abrasive 
material viz. carborundum and a motor to rotate the drum. The r aw vegetables particularly 
potatoes are fed into the drum, the inlet is closed and the dru m is then rotated for a short period 
of time. Peeling takes place by abrasive material and the peel is washed off with a sufficient 
amount of water. Irregularly shaped fruits and vegetables can b e peeled uniformly using abrasion 
peelers. Abrasion peeling is also suitable for peeling of root vegetables.  
 
Non-abrasive peeling is used for peeling of garlic, cloves. Non -abrasive peeling involves peeling 
using cutting blades knives and ot her mechanical devices, which  is mostly carried out for rough 
skinned materials. Domestic garlic peeler has a holding jar whi ch is made up plastic provided 
with a suitable lid. Inside the jar, a helically grooved nylon shaft is placed in the middle which 
gets power from the motor. The motor rotates the nylon shaft at  a high rpm, due to the rotational 6 
 speed of the shaft, garlic bulbs fed inside the jar experience the certain impact force and break. 
The broken cloves rotate inside the jar and each clove is peele d due to the frictional force 
between the clove and also between the surface and the cloves. Finally, the peeled garlic along 
with the skin is removed from the shaft.  
 
Hot water or steam peeling involves the exposure of fresh produ c e  t o  h o t  w a t e r a t  a  c o n s t a n t  
temperature or even high temperature steam for a certain period  of time. So, this hot water or 
steam peeling is done in order to remove the peel more effectiv ely, the combination of steam and 
pressure i s utilized.  
This hot water or steam peeling involves certain changes in the  commodity like physical changes 
(mechanical failure of the cell due to vaporization of the cell  fluids and building up of internal 
pressure), and biochemical changes (breakdown of pectic substan ces, hydrolysis and degradation 
of other polysaccharide and diss ociates around the waxy layers on the product surface). 
Lye peeling is a very common method, used for peeling the commo dities like tomato. It involves 
immersing fresh produce in a hot alkaline solution of 1-2% sodi um hydroxide or potassium 
hydroxide for a specified time period. Among these sodium hydro xide is most commonly used. 
When lye solution comes into contact with the skin or pericarp of the commodity, the 
epicuticular wax dissolves. It leaves the bond of two galacturo nic acid units by dissolving pectin 
and hemicellulose in the cell walls. The solution then penetrat es into the epidermis tissue through 
the skin into the flesh or mesocarp. This process weakens the w hole network, collapses the skin 
and thereafter separates the skin from the fruit. So, the skins  get loosen and then finally has been 
emerged in lye solution and then hot lye solution for one or tw o minutes, followed by the 
collapse skin is finally either by simples rubbing or by using dry air or dry water spreads or jet 
spray, it can be removed easily.  7 
  
 
 
The ultrasound assisted lye pee ling involves applying ultrasoun d directly in the solution of lye.  
An ultrasonic probe of high power or amplitude is desirable to ensure the split of skin.  After 
ultrasound treatment, the treated product immediately cooled to  room temperature with tap water 
f o r 3 0  s  a n d s i m u l t a ne o us l y ,  t he  l o o s e  s k i n  i s  r e m o v e d  w i t h  s l i ght hand rubbing. The peeling 
assisted with ultrasound operates at 25 kHz frequency at 1500-3 000 W power. 8 
 
 
Similarly, this ohmic heat assisted lye peeling it is another t his peeling assisted with Ohmic 
heating at frequencies 30 and 60 Hz causes the skin to rupture and a low concentration solution 
l y e  ( 0 . 5  a n d  1 % )  e n h a n c e s  t h a t  l y e  d i f f u s i o n  i n t o  t h e  s k i n .  W h e n the electric current passes 
through the fruit, the heat is generated within the fruit as it  offers a resistance for the electric 
current. So, the waxy cuticle is thermally degraded, pectic and  hemicellulose substances are 
disrupted in the skin and the electroporation separates the ski n. So, the flow of the current seems 
to occur right under the skin, which contributes to the build-u p of pressure, resulting in the 
disintegration of the skin and then the remain disintegrated sk in is separated from the fruit either 
by simples rubbing or air jet spray.  
 
Another novel method of peeling is infrared peeling. Infrared r adiation is an electromagnetic 
wave with the wavelength range between the red light and microw ave. Infrared can be divided 9 
 into short waves (0.75–2.5 μm), medium waves (2.5–4 μm), and lo ng waves (4–1000 μm). 
Shallow penetration depth is considered best for peeling. When food products are exposed to 
infrared radiation, the heat penetration takes place into the t issue up to few millimeters deep 
through the conductive mode of heat transfer. This thermal ener gy results in a sudden increase of 
temperature of the cell wall fluid and evaporate moisture under  the outer skin which exerts 
pressure on the skin. Thermal he ating results in melting and re organization of extracellular 
cuticles, dramatical disruption of the middle lamella of hypode rmal cells, thermal                        
expansion of cell walls, and collapse of several cellular layer s, which in turn                        
cause peel loosening. 
 
Flame peeling utilizes a conveyor belt to carry and rotate raw vegetables through a furnace 
which is heated to high temperature as high as 1000 ᵒC.  It is passed through this furnace for a 
few seconds to few minutes depending upon the type of the fruit s or vegetables. The outer skin 
containing root hairs and paper shell is burned-off. The obtain ed charred skin is removed by a 
high-pressure water / air spray. It is one of dry peeling metho ds which is better than other wet 
peelings by reducing the population of microorganism and also p reserving the nutrient content. 
In this method, the average loss of product is usually about 10 %.  
Enzymatic peeling involves use of specific enzymes (Cellulases,  hemicellulases, and pectinases) 
to hydrolyze the cell wall components of fruits and vegetables peel.  The infusion of enzymatic 
solution into the peel breaks the pectin and facilitates the se paration and removal of peel. The 
cellulose, hemicellulose and pec tin of epidermal layer are brok en down, reducing the adherence 
of the peel to the fruit, and loosening the skin enough to be e asily removed from the material 
surface. Enzymatic treatment or peeling maximizes the conversio n of the plant tissue into the 
single cell. 
 10 
 
 
 
Manual peeling retains fresh and there is a less damage of free  edible flesh. However, it is time 
and labour consuming. Mechanical peelings are fast and the remo ved peel removed can be 
reutilized in another value add ition process, however, it is en ergy intensive operations and 
irregular shaped commodities are difficult to peel. In hot wate r or steam peeling, there is no use 
of chemical. However there are losses of water-soluble minerals , carbohydrate, vitamins and 
they generate large quantity of wastewater. Although lye peelin g requires a low processing cost, 
but it is not environment friend ly or needs the treatment of wa ste water before discarding it to the 
environment.  11 
 
 
Enzymatic method needs less heat treatment and produces good te xtured and appearance product 
with low waste, but it can only be applied to fruits whose dist inct separates of peel from the flesh 
is needed and it also takes a long time to process. Infrared, o hmic and ultrasound methods are 
considered novel peeling methods and eliminate use of chemicals  and water to reduce the peeling 
losses, it reduces peeling loss, concentration of lye is also n ot required, and peeling time is less.  
There may be non-uniform heating in infrared peeling, there is a need of safe disposal of used 
salt solution in ohmic peeling. The challenges associated with ultrasound technique are larger 
scale production and need for safe disposal of the use salt sol ution.  
 
Cutting, slicing, dicing, and shredding are non-thermal food op eration for size reduction. This 
process reduces the preparation time by consumers. Cutting remo ves inedible and discolored 
portions from foods using knife, chopper and slicer. However, t he cutting process may 12 
 accumulate fluids on the cut surface which increases microbial l o a d  a n d  e n z y m e s  a c t i v i t y .  
Removal of the injured tissues in the cutting results in reduce d respiration, reduced enzymatic 
activity or it may also result in retarding the spoilage and in crease in the shelf life.  
 
Shredding is a slicing technique which is accomplished by stack ing leaves, rolling them tightly, 
then slicing the leaves perpendicular to the roll, and used for  leafy green vegetables and herbs 
such as cabbage, spinach, sorrel, basil, mint. Julienne/allumet te (Match stick cuts) involves 
cutting of the produce into long thin strips similar to a match  stick. e.g.  Carrot, celery, potatoes, 
and cucumber sticks with a size of about 4 cm length, and are u sed for salad ingredients and 
green veggies.  
 
Fruits & vegetables are cut into thin and relatively broad slic es; this is accomplished by hand or 
machine. The slices are used for salad, baked goods for baking,  r o a s t s  g r i l l s  e t c .  I n  m i n c i n g ,  13 
 produce is finely divided into uniform pieces. Minced food is n ormally smaller than dice or 
chopped. It is an ideal technique for aromatics, such as onion,  garlic, and ginger, it is used when 
a paste texture is required.  
 
 Tourne or chateau is used to turn vegetables into a barrel sha pe, it enhance the appearance of the 
commodity when they are served as part of the main course. The cut always needs even sides. 
The crushing technique is used to crush the produce such as gin ger, garlic etc. into fine paste like 
ginger paste, garlic paste.  
 
The term Rondelle means round or circular, this technique is us ed to cut vegetables or fruits such 
as cucumber, carrots, pineapples, strawberry into a round shape . Paysanne cut consists of slices 
or vegetables of about one millimetre thick, it is ideal for so up and trims.  14 
 
 
The baton it a larger, thicker version of julienne and jardinie re cut, a baton usually measures 
about 1.5 to 5 centimetre. Wedges are the round vegetables cut equally lengthwise, this 
technique is used on tomato, potato, lemon which are cut into 4  or 6 pieces. 
 
The slide shows some new cutting equipment and these equipments  are very common and are 
available in the market.  15 
 
 
These are the figures of Sammic vegetable preparation machine o r Maxima VC540 for vegetable 
cutters with their components. 
 
The intelligent integrated multifunctional vegetable cutter sys t e m  i s  s a f e ,  l o w ,  n o i s e ,  a n d  
convenient with an LCD touch screen. The system’s maximum power  and load are 14 W and 25 
kg, respectively, with a speed in the range of 0.8 to 10 mm/s. This system has been found 
effective in pre ssing, slicing, and peeling. 16 
 
 
Dicing is accomplished by cutting the produce into three mutual ly perpendicular planes.  First, 
the material is cut into slices. The technique starts with the produce getting sliced and then cut 
i n t o  s t r i ps  b y  r o t a t i n g b l a d e s .  T h e  s t r i ps  a r e  t h e n  f e d  i nt o  a  second set of rotating knives that 
operate at right angles to the first set and cuts them into cub es.  
 
Brunoise is cutting vegetables in to small cubes of pieces and u niform measurement. In 
macedoing, mall dice vegetables should be cut into 6 mm dice, t his technically is ideal for soup, 
salad and large vegetables like carrot, potato, radish, onions etc.  17 
 
 
Parmentier (Medium dice) is the same dice style as to make doin g just slightly larger around 1.5 
cm. Carre (Large dice) features cubes with 6 even sides measuri ng approximately 2 cm (¾ inch 
). 
 
Coring involves the removal of core parts of fruits and vegetab les, which is generally inedible, 
and thus of no use to the end consumer. The smaller the produce  is, the lesser the efficiency of 
the treatment, as it takes more product loss yet the same time and resources to produce a smaller 
item as the big ones. Therefore, the produces are size graded t o avoid such losses as the size of 
cores is directly linked with the size of food item and cultiva r. So, the commodity like apples 
pineapple, peers are such other fruits and vegetables are cored  using these techniques. 18 
 
 
In summary, during peeling and processing operations of fruits and vegetables, many cells are 
destroyed and their components serve as a source of nutrients f or the growth of bacteria, fungi 
and yeasts. Peeling of fruits and vegetables is categorized int o manual, mechanical, chemical, 
thermal and enzymatic methods. The main factors affecting the p eeling, coring, cutting and 
dicing process are mechanical, and physical properties of fruit  and vegetable tissues, such as skin 
thickness, firmness, toughness, variety, rupture force, cutting  force, maximum shearing force, 
shear strength, tensile strength and rupture stress. Cutting, d icing and coring improve appearance 
of the produce and also helps in cooking food more easily and t aste better. 
 
These are the references for further study. Thank you. 