1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 44 
Essential Oil and Oleoresin 
 
This lecture is about Ess ential Oil and Oleoresin. 
 
The concept covered in this lecture are the essential oil and o leoresin, their extraction 
techniques, maybe conventional and novel extraction techniques,  and a few case studies like 
extraction of clove oil, turmeri c essential oil and lemon grass  oil. 2 
 
 
Essential oil and oleoresin 
Essential oil is a concentrated  hydrophobic liquid containing v olatile chemical compounds 
from the plants, which is easily evaporated at normal temperatu re. They are also known as 
volatile oils, ethereal oils, aet heroleum, or simply as the oil  of the plants from which they 
were extracted, such as oil of  clove, turmeric oil and so on. 
The oleoresin is nature or artif icial mixture of essential oils  and resins. They are resin-like, 
semi-solid extracts composed of essential oils or fatty acids o r fatty oils. So, both essential oil 
and fatty oils are present in the resins, they are a little bit  thick than the essential oils. They 
have the pungency and aroma which c ontribute to the taste of th e food products. The essential 
oils normally do not have the taste and flavor, but the oleores in definitely will have the 
characteristic taste and flavor of  the particular commodity fro m which they are made. 3 
 
 
Here these are the some of the examples of essential oils and o leoresins in this table. 
Essential oils like peppermint oil, eucalyptus oil, wild mint, van tusli, lemon tulsi, clove oil, 
lemon grass, khus, and citronella. So, these are the some of th e common categories of 
materials which are known for the ir essential oil content. Some  oleoresins like black pepper 
oleoresin, capsicum oleoresin, cardamom, cassia bark, celery se ed, mace, nutmeg, parsley, 
turmeric, cinnamon, all these are  used for, there oils are made  with the oleoresins. 
 
Active compounds in spices 
Spices, their active compounds and beneficial effects are shown  in the table. For example in 
turmeric, curcumin is the majo r active compound, it has anti-in flammatory, anti-cogulant, 
and it is used for dental purposes. Garlic has allicin, diallyl  disulphide, or diallyl trisulphide 
active compounds and are known for its antibacterial, antiviral , antifungal, or 
anticarcinogenic activities. In ginger, there is gingerol, para dol, or zingerone, these all 
compounds are known for their anti bacterial, anti-fungal, antiv iral activities, etc. Anise, the 
active compound is 1-methyl-4-1-propenyl benzene. In clove, it is the eugenol. In lemon 4 
 grass, it is the neral, citral, geranyl acetate, citronellal, a nd geraniol. In cardamom, it is 1,8-
cineole, terpinolene, myrcene, quercetin, and luteolin. In cinn amon, it is procyanidin, 
cinnamaldehyde, etc. All these ac tive compounds present in diff erent spices are known for 
their anti-bacterial, antioxida nt, anti-hyper protective, etc. that is they have the medicinal 
properties. 
 
Extraction techniques 
For the extraction of these essential oils and oleoresins, diff erent techniques are used. 
Appropriate extraction technolog ies like in conventional method , hydrodistillation, steam 
distillation, solvent extraction, or maceration whereas the nov el techniques like supercritical 
fluid extraction, subcritical wat er, ultrasound-assisted, micro wave-assisted, or pulsed electric 
field assisted extraction technol ogy is used to obtain the extr act oils and oleoresins. They are 
then subjected to various food app lications to add functional p roperties into the food, improve 
food safety, because many of them has antimicrobial activities,  or also they are used to 
enhance food colors like curcumin, etc. as they are known as na tural colorant.  
 5 
 Conventional techniques 
Hydrodistillation method consists of immersing the plant materi al in a water bath, the mixture 
is then heated to boiling point at atmospheric pressure. Under a source of heating, the 
odorous molecules which are contained in the plant cells are re leased in the form of an 
azeotropic mixture. Although most of these components have boil ing point above 100 °C, 
they are mechanically driven with the water vapor. The cooling by condensation leads to 
separation of the mixture water and the essential oils by decan tation. The water and the 
volatile molecules i.e. essential oils are separated by their d ifferences in the density. The 
duration generally may take around 3 to 6 h.  
 
Steam distillation is suitable to extract heat sensitive compon ents or volatiles and purify them 
by the application of steam. The figure is almost similar to th at of Hydrodistillation, but here 
the water is boiling water or steam is used. The extraction of the desirable components at a 
temperature below their boiling po int and the application of st eam would volatize them at a 
temperature lower than 100 °C, at atmospheric pressure. The ste am destroys the structure of 
the plant cells, releases the contained molecules and takes awa y most of the volatile 
components. The oil is then carried by the steam out of the col umn into a cooling system i.e. 
condenser where the steam is conde nsed into a mixture of water- oil liquid. 
Solvent extraction involves dissolving the plant material that contains essential oils in a 
solvent and then evaporating it to recover the essential oils. Solvent normally used are 
hexane. There is a porous thimbl e that is loaded with the solid  sample and is placed inside the 
main chamber of the soxhlet extractor. Then by refluxing the so lvent through the thimble 
using a condenser and a siphon side arm, the extraction cycle i s repeated many times. The 
extraction technique can also be combined with the microwave-as sisted extraction and 
ultrasonic-assisted extraction i n an attempt to improve the ext raction efficiency.  
 6 
 (
  
 
Maceration extraction technique is used for the extraction of e ssential oils and active 
compounds since old times. The process involves the whole or co arsely powdered crude 
material which undergoes grindi ng to increase the surface area for proper mixing of the 
powder material with the solvent and then this process is done in a closed vessel where an 
appropriate solvent is added, th e solvent is strained off follo wed by pressing the solid residue 
of the extraction process known as marc to recover an optimum a mount of occluded solution. 
Both the obtained pressed out li quid and the strained solvent a r e  m i x e d  t o g e t h e r  a n d  
separated from unwanted materials by filtration.  
Agitation during maceration faci litates diffusion, separation o f concentrated solution from the 
sample surface, and it increases the extraction yield. 7 
 
 
Comparison of different convent ional extraction techniques 
In this table, there are advantages and limitations of differen t conventional extraction 
techniques. Hydro or steam dis tillation does not use any organi c solvent, so it is 
advantageous. There is no need for the dehydration of the sampl e and it has a shorter 
extraction time. However, the high temperature limits the use o f heat sensitive phenolic 
compounds. In the solvent extraction, it uses a solid sample wi th limited solubility and it is 
most simple and easy to use. However, it takes a long extractio n time and the consumption of 
large amount of solvent is a li mitation. Then, in the case of m aceration extraction, it requires 
a small volume of menstruum that is the advantage, but the limi tation is longer extraction 
time, poor solvent penetration compared to others and also here  the yield is low. 
 
Novel techniques 
One of the most important novel extraction technology which is used presently by many 
industries is the supercritical f luid extraction. In this proce ss, raw material is placed in an 8 
 extraction container, where the f luid is pressurized and regula te the temperature conditions, 
and then the compounds are in the extraction column which is mi xed with the basically the 
pressurized carbon dioxide and temperature and pressure are con trolled regulated to the 
desired level. The compounds are dissolved in the fluid, they a re conveyed to the separator, 
and collected at the bottom and th e fluid is rather rejected or  released to the environment. The 
critical point i.e. there is a critical temperature and critica l pressure and above which these 
liquids (carbon dioxide, water), they behave as a supercritical  fluid. So, it can easily diffuse 
under those conditions into a solid matrix like gas while also having a high capacity to 
dissolve compounds like liquid. So, supercritical fluids have b oth the properties of a liquid as 
well as gas.  
For carbon dioxide the critical point that is critical temperat ure is around 31 °C and the 
critical pressure is about 74 bar, above which the carbon dioxi de will be in a supercritical 
fluid state.  
 
So, these supercritical fluids have an advantage in terms of di ffusivity, solid capacity, and 
low viscosity over other solvents. Due to its low polarity, the  salvation power of the 
supercritical carbon dioxide to d issolve the bioactive from a s olid matrix get reduced. Thus, it 
is often used in conjunction with co-solvent or a modifier. Man y times, depending upon the 
nature of the compound which needs  to be extracted, the co-solv ent or intruder generally 
ethyl alcohol, ethanol, etc. are used. The selective extraction  of bioactive compounds or co-
precipitation of heat sensitive antioxidants can be done using S C F  a s  w e l l  a s  a  m i x t u r e  o f  
SCF or intruder or co-solvent. By micronization through supercr itical anti-solvent (SAS) 
process, where supercritical car bon dioxide is used as an anti- solvent.  
The solute containing bioactive compounds are dissolved in an o rganic solvent. Carbon 
dioxide continuously flows into the extraction system under a r egulated pressure and 
temperature condition. The solute-organic solvent mixture is th en sprayed into supercritical 
carbon dioxide, where the organic  solvent is extracted out of t he atomized solute droplet by 
carbon dioxide. Due to the high mi scibility of organic solvent that is supercritical carbon 9 
 dioxide at its supercritical condi tions, an instant mutual diff usion occurs at the interface of 
the solute and the SCF and this phenomenon induces saturation a nd phase separation of the 
solute in the supercritical carbon dioxide. Finally, this resul ts in the nucleation and 
precipitation of the target bio active compounds. So, by using t his, selective extraction of 
bioactive compound can be possible. 
 
Subcritical water extraction 
This method also on the similar principle as SCF, but here othe r than CO 2, water is used. The 
basic principle of extraction by this technique involves heatin g water to a temperature 
between 100 to 320 °C at a pressure of about 20 to 150 bar. At these given conditions, water 
remains in the liquid state. However, the dielectric constant o f water is altered from 80 at 
room temperature to approximately 27 at 250 °C. The dielectric constant of water becomes 
comparable to that of the methanol and ethanol which are 33 and  24, respectively at 25 °C. 
Due to these low dielectric constant of water, the polarity, vi scosity and surface tension is 
reduced, and consequently, the di ssolution of the non-polar mol ecules is improved which 
helps in extracting the bioactive compounds. 
Ultrasound-assisted extraction 
The ultrasound having frequency ra nges from 20 to 100 kHz is us ed for effective extraction 
of functional compounds. Ultrasound causes acoustic cavitation which results in a cell wall 
destruction and that facilitates  extraction. The propagation of  ultrasound wave in liquid media 
induces cavitation bubbles to grow and collapse, generating var ious physical effects that 
includes microjets, shockwaves and turbulence. These physical f orces cause cell wall 
breakdown, cell surface holes, and exudation of nutrients from the cellular plant matter into 
the solvent. 
 10 
 
 
 
Cavities are dependent on the number of acoustic cycles, and th e n  t h e r e  i s  a n  e x p a n s i o n  
during the negative pressure cyc le or contraction (compression)  during the positive pressure 
cycle. The expansion and contraction is followed by the diffusi on of vapour in and out of the 
bubble. A diffusion process causes accumulation of mass in the bubble over time resulting in 
the net bubble growth which is known as rectified diffusion. So , bubbles collapse after 
growing up at a certain size called as resonance or critical si ze that is inversely related to the 
applied frequency. Mostly water is preferred, but other solvent s like ethanol, methanol, 
hexane, etc. can also be used i n the ultrasound-assisted extrac tion. 
Microwave-assisted extraction 
In a microwave oven, some container (flask) is kept and sample is placed in the flask and the 
heating system is through the microwave as seen in the figure. Microwave can be implied in 
combination with classical solvent extraction. Microwave energy  absorbed by the polar 
materials is transformed into he at by ionic conduction and dipo le rotation which is known as 
dielectric heating. The solvent wi th high dielectric constant i s selected for the extraction of 11 
 bioactive from spices and condiments and for maximum absorption  of microwaves that 
converts into kinetic energy. The molecules with high kinetic e nergy thus diffuse into the 
matrices resulting in effective mass transfer of solute into th e solvent. 
 
The factors needs to be controlle d during this microwave-assist ed extraction process are the 
source of the raw materials, pe rmeability of the matrix, and ta rgeted compounds. 
 
The mechanism of microwave-assist ed extraction is the selective  absorption of microwave 
energy by the water glands insid e the sample matrix. Then, ther e is a localized heating above 
or near boiling point of water ca using expansion and rupture of  cell walls by disrupting the 
interaction between solute and active sites of the matrix throu gh a splitting of hydrogen 
bonds, Van Der Waals forces, and dipole attraction. Then, the d isrupted cell promotes mass 
transfer of the solvent into the sample matrix and bioactive co mpounds into the solvent. 
Finally, the extracted bioactiv e compounds dissolve into the su rrounding solvent.  12 
 
 
Pulsed electric field extraction (PEF) 
PEF is a non-thermal method which includes cell destruction thr ough application of electric 
pulses. Electric pulses are appl ied in short duration ranging f rom milli to nanoseconds at 
moderate electric field strengt h. The sample matrix exposed to electric field accumulate 
charges on either side of the membrane surface, generating tran smembrane potential on the 
cell surface. When the transmem brane potential exceeds a certai n critical limit, the weaker 
section of the cell membrane creates pores, which are known as cell electroporation. This cell 
electroporation promotes the inc rease in permeation across the cell membrane, facilitating the 
release of intercellular compounds.  
The factor which are responsible o r which have the significant effect on this process include 
pulse number, electrical field strength, treatment temperature,  specific energy input, and 
electrode gap. 
 
 13 
 Comparison of different novel extraction techniques 
Supercritical fluid extraction is  nontoxic, non-explosive, ther e is a better extraction of 
nonpolar components, results in pa rtial extracti on of partially  polar compounds also. It has 
high solubility of oxyge nated organic compounds of medium molec ular weight. However, the 
limitation is the slow extraction kinetics.  
Subcritical water extraction is  an environment friendly technol ogy. It is low toxicity 
extraction method, so this is advantageous and the limitations are it is corrosive, and the high 
reactivity of the water at subc ritical state. The ultrasound-as sisted extraction, it is shorter 
time, increase extraction rate, higher yield, but limitations a re longer extraction time causes 
undesirable changes. 
Microwave assisted extraction, i ts advantage is it has a high e xtraction rate, less usage of 
solvents and shorter extraction time but the limitations includ e solute degradation at high 
temperature and risk of explosion due to high pressure. The PEF  assisted extraction is a non-
thermal treatment, better selectivity, it preserves sensitive c ompounds, and there is increased 
extraction yield. However, the limitations of this system inclu de membrane changes can be 
reversible, and air bubbles make t he process less effective.  
 
Case Study 1: Extraction of clove oil  
The characteristics of clove o il extracted from different parts  of the clove plant (bud, stem, 
and leaf) are shown in the table. The essential oil obtained fr om bud is 18 %, range is 15 to 
20 %, from stem it contains 6 %, range is 5 to 10 %, and from t he leaf it is 3 to 4 %, the range 
maybe 1 to 4 %. Similarly, specific gravity, refractive index, optical rotation, total eugenol 
content, solubility in ethanol, true eugenol, eugenol acetate, or beta caryophyllene all these 
compounds from the bud, stem and leaf is shown.  14 
 
 
The comprehensive comparison of  the clove oil obtained by diffe rent methods is shown. 
Methods used are supercritical f luid extraction at 50 °C and 10  M P a  p r e s s u r e .  
Hydrodistillation for 4 to 6 h, steam distillation for 8 to 10 h at 60 °C, and soxhlet extraction 
with absolute ethanol for about 6 h, and here in the soxhlet ex traction, extracts were 
concentrated using rotary vacuum evaporator at 50 °C. The yield  is reported maximum in the 
case of soxhlet extract ion i.e. 41.8 % followed by 19.6 % in su percritical fluid extraction and 
then hydrodistillation or steam d istillation are almost similar , but the eugenol plus eugenol 
acetate i.e. the active compound yield is maximum in the steam distillation and SCFE 
followed by hydrodistillation and is minimum in the soxhlet ext raction process. 
Similarly, the extraction time is minimum in SCFE and maximum i n steam distillation or 
soxhlet extraction. The color a nd texture in the SCFE and steam  distillation is pale yellow oil, 
but in the soxhlet extraction th ere is some discoloration maybe  brown ointment. The organic 
solvent obviously in the SCFE, no organic solvent is used, in s team distillation, 
hydrodistillation and soxhlet ext raction, organic solvent is us ed. 
 15 
 The extraction of clove oil i.e.  the eugenol content (%) of clo ve extracts obtaine d at different 
extraction conditions is shown. Five SCFE conditions viz. 150 b ar at 40 °C, 150 bar at 60 °C, 
185 bar at 50 °C, 220 bar at 40 °C, and 220 bar at 60 °C are ta ken. One condition for Soxhlet 
extraction with hexane solvent is used. 
The eugenol content varies with t he temperature and pressure bo th and the maximum eugenol 
content is found at 220 bar and 40 °C SCFE condition and SCFE h as more eugenol content in 
comparison to the Soxhlet extraction. The same thing can be see n in the yield and time curve. 
In the case of SCFE conditions , 220 bar and 40 °C gave better e xtraction. 
 
Case Study 2: Extraction of lemon grass oil  
The second case study is the extraction of lemon grass oil. Thi s lemon grass, raw material is 
preprocessed, cleaning of the required part, large washing tank , feed to heating tank, steam 
distillation, followed by oil se paration and ex traction, vacuum  evaporation, to get a pure 
lemon grass oil which is cool ed at low temperature. 
The minimum citral oil yield of about 0.53 % was obtained on th e sample particle size of 3 
cm and bed volume of 80 %. The maximum yield of about 1.95 % on  the sample particle size 
of 15 cm and bed volume of 40 % was reported by Alam et al. (20 18). Solubility of citral oil 
in the alcohol was around 70 % is  the ratio of 1:1 and the citr al oil concentration was around 
79 %. 16 
 
 
Case study 3: Extraction of  turmeric essential oil 
Here, the extraction is done by mi crowave-assisted solvent extr action. The effect of 
microwave power and extraction time on essential oil yield usin g hexane and petroleum ether 
solvent is shown in figure. In both the cases, RSM plot showed that the extraction time 
significantly decreases from 30 to 10 min with the increase in the microwave power from 200 
to 400 W. Essential oil yield was higher when hexane was used a s a solvent. Optimum 
condition for microwave-assisted  extraction was found to be 300  W microwave power and 20 
min extraction time.  
 
Comparison of hydro-distilled oil and sub-critically extracted turmeric oil is shown in the 
table. The compounds extracted are  α-curcumene, β-sesquiphellan drene, zingiberene, 
turmerone, and curlone. The hydro distilled fresh turmeric give s no α-curcumene, whereas 
the subcritical oven dried gives α-curcumene about 0.046 per gr am.  17 
 
 
The average yield and percenta ge of key components as a functio n of pressure and 
temperature is provided in the table. In the extraction tempera ture, 3 extraction temperatures 
are used 25, 27 and 30 °C and for each extraction temperature t hree pressure 65, 68 and 71 
bar was taken. The average yield in % dry weight basis is deter mined in the extract. With the 
bearing that both temperature a nd pressure, the yield percentag e as well as extracted key 
components are changing. So, for f resh peeled turmeric, fresh u npeeled turmeric, dried peeled 
turmeric, and dried unpeeled turmeric, the volume of oil collec ted is approximately same. 
Obviously, in both the cases, the peeled turmeric gives you the  more volume of oil in 
comparison to the unpeeled one.  
 
Summary 
The demand for extracting bio actives by green technology with no solvent or minimal use of 
GRAS classified solvent is incr easing. However, the selection o f appropriate method, 
optimization of the extraction process techniques, etc. is requ ired to retain the extraction 
efficiency, characteristic flavor and bioactive nature of the c ompound. Owing to the potential 18 
 toxicity of some organic solvent s, solvents such as carbon diox ide, water, and deep eutectic 
solvents can be used as an alternatives. However, the more focu s is on the non-thermal 
emergent technologies like PEF, or combination of two or more t echniques like microwave 
assisted extraction or that PEF assisted extraction, ultrasound  assisted extraction, they have 
better potential, they offer promise as per the extraction of e ssential oils and oleoresins with 
good characteristic flavoring poten tial, bioactive and antioxid ant potential. 
 
 19 
 
 
These are the references u sed in this lecture. Thank you. 