1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation Crop 
Products  
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Te chnology Kharagpur  
Lecture 37 
Coffee Processing  
 
 
 
This lecture is about coffee and its types, processing of coffe e (wet and dry methods), roasting, 
grinding and packaging of coffee bean, instant soluble coffee, brewing (extraction) of roasted 
coffee, and decaffeination of coffee.  2 
 
 
Coffee 
Coffee is the 3rd most popular beverage in the world. It is eve rgreen shrub or small tree. It is 
indigenous to Central Africa and Asia. Coffee is the third most  popular beverage in the world. 
There are three major species of coffee i.e. Coffea Arabica , Coffea robusta  (C. canephora ), and 
Coffea liberica . Coffea arabica  a n d  Coffea robusta  a r e  t h e  t w o  v a r i e t i e s  w h i c h  a r e  m o s t  
commonly used worldwide. Arabica  is the largest and best quality beans.  However, it has low 
yield. It grows at higher altitu de. It has delicate aroma, and it is mostly grown in Brazil. Robusta  
gives an inferior quality in comparison to that of the Arabica . However, its yield is high, it is 
grows at lower altitudes, it is a resistant variety and gives a  strong decoction and this coffee is 
mainly grown in India.  
 3 
 Coffee plantation 
The unprocessed seeds of the coffee are planted and grown into a coffee tree. The planted 
cherries are harvested depending upon its variety. Normally thr ee to four years are required for a 
tree to bear fruits. The harves ting of the coffee cherry is don e in two ways, i.e. strip picked, in 
which all of the cherries are stripped off the branches at one time, either by hand or by suitable 
machine. Second method is selectively picked. Here only the rip e cherries are harvested and they 
are picked individually by hand. Pickers move among the trees b y rotation of every 8 to 10 days, 
choosing only the cherries which are at the peak of their ripen ess. And because this kind of 
harvest is labour intensive and more costly, it is used primari ly to harvest the finer Arabica 
beans.  
From coffee farm to consumer table 
The steps involved are growing, harvesting, processing (wet or dry), milling, shipping, roasting, 
grinding, packing, brewing, and finally enjoying the coffee bev erage. 
 4 
 
 
Structure of coffee cherry 
The coffee cherry consists of fruit husk, cotyledons, which are  the actually valuable source of the 
coffee beverage i.e. coffee powder. The coffee beans are covere d  b y  a  t h i n  s i l v e r  s k i n ,  a n d  
consists of parchment,  fleshy pulp. Coffee processing consists of removing the  skin, pulp, 
parchment, and silver skin which surrounds the bean. 
 
Processing of coffee cherry 
There are two methods normally used either dry or wet method. T he quality of the coffee bean, 
processed coffee beverage depends significantly on the nature o f the, or method of the 
processing of the coffee beans. The dry method is very simple, which involves drying, hulling 
for removal of husk, and the green coffee beans are obtained. T he wet method is normally gives 5 
 a comparatively better quality of coffee beans. This method con sists of pulping, fermentation and 
washing for the washing and removal of the mucilage, drying, peeling an d polishing for removal 
of parchment silver skins, and the green beans are obtained.  
 
The processing must be done quickly to prevent the fruit or che rry spoilage. The beans are dried 
up to 12% moisture for storage. The dried beans are known as pa rchment coffee and are 
warehoused in jute or sisal bags. The dried beans are de-hulled  and polished, hulling removes the 
parchment layer from the dried beans and polishing is optional where silver skin is removed. 
 
Dry or natural processing 
It’s done in Brazil because uses less labor and machinery as we ll as less water. In this, the beans 
are sun dried by spreading them out on drying floors and the co verings are removed by hulling. 6 
 The beans are later cured in curing sheds. The product obtained  is known, in trade, as cherry or 
native coffee. 
Wet or washed processing 
It’s done in Central America and Columbia to produce washed cof fees. Produces better quality 
coffees. In this method after pulping the outer layer of mucila ge is removed by spontaneous 
fermentation. This is sometimes facilitated with added enzymes.  The seeds are washed and 
subsequently dried to a moisture content of 12%. The green seed s are then graded and packed. 
The green coffee as produced by wet method can be stored for pr olonged period, with no adverse 
effects. 
 
 
Roasting of coffee bean 7 
 Raw or green coffee has no flavor or aroma; has unpleasant tast e. Actually, the green coffee does 
not smell like a coffee. During roasting, 800-1000 different ar omatic compounds are developed. 
T h e s e  m a k e  t h e  f l a v o u r  o f  t h e  c o f f e e .  T h e  r o a s t e d  c o f f e e  i s  p o w dered and brewed producing 
aqueous extract which is used as beverage with or without milk,  sugar & other substances. 
Different degree of roasting results in various level of aroma and taste development in the coffee 
which have different applications. The commercial roasting para meters may be about 15 minutes 
4-bag batch roasts at a 427 ᵒC or 5 minutes (10,000 pound per hour) continuous roasters at a bout 
318 ᵒC.  
 
The roasting of coffee causes various chemical reaction due to heating at different temperatures. 
These resulted in the production of aromatic compounds, acids a nd other flavour components. 
These components are created, balanced or altered in such a way  which resulted in the              
perfect flavour, acidity, aftertaste and body of coffee. Major reactions occurred during coffee 
roasting include Maillard reaction, caramelization, first crack , pyrolysis, and second crack. And 
this is depending upon the time, during the time that is for th e initial 2 to 3 minutes there will be 
drying and then after 3 to 8 minutes, there will be a yellowing  which is followed by, there is the 
first crack and then once there is first crack, then there are a minute development inside the bean 
which leads to the paralysis. Finally, second crack, and then f urther development of the 
compounds.  8 
 
 
Maillard reaction 
A key reaction for the development of roosted coffee flavor and  color is the Maillard reaction. At 
temperatures from 150-200 °C, ca rbonyl groups (from sugars) and  amino groups in proteins 
react to form aroma and flavor compounds. Hundreds of coffee fl avor compounds are formed 
from Maillard chemistry, includi ng the potent coffee aroma comp ound, 2-furfurylthiol. 
Caramelization 
From 170-200 °C, sugars in coffee start caramelizing which brow n s  t h e  s u g a r  a n d  r e l e a s e s  
aromatic and acidic compounds. During roasting, most of the suc rose is converted to caramelized 
compounds, but if the roasting i s done too lightly, it results in bitter taste. Diacetyl give 
butterscotch flavour and furanones have a burnt sugar flavor. 
First crack 
Around 205 °C, water inside bean vaporizes, causing the bean to  expand and crack (both 
physically and audibly). This first crack makes bean double in size. Prior to this, bean changes 
from a green/yellow to a light brown color.  At this point, the bean losses about 5% weight from 
water loss. 
  9 
 
 
Pyrolysis 
At approximately 220 °C, heat cau ses a chemical change in bean,  leading to release of CO2. This 
process is called pyrolysis. The color changes to a medium brow n and the bean loses 10 – 12 % 
of its weight. Light roasts are done after this step. Acetaldeh yde is produced during pyrolysis and 
has a green apple aroma. 
 
Second crack 
Pyrolysis continues as temperature reach 225-230 °C, causing th e second crack in bean. The 
cellulose in cell wall of bean is broken apart. The bean is now  medium-dark brown in color and 
has an oily sheen. Aromatic compounds are released which contri buted to coffee’s classic flavor. 10 
 2-isobutyl-3-methoxypyrazine gives coffee as earthy scene and 2 -ethyl-3-5-dimethylpyzrazine 
adds earthy, roasted notes. 
 
Physical & chemical changes in coffee bean during roasting 
The beans swell in size to almos t double their original size, t he dull green color changes to 
brown and the characteristic coffee aroma develops. The beans l ose their hard horny structure 
and become brittle, with the outer surface still smooth and fir m. About 10-12 % of the moisture 
is driven off, followed by caramelization of sucrose and finall y pyrolysis of the carbohydrates 
and proteins within the 40 μ cells at internal pressure of seve ral hundred psi.  Carbon-dioxide is 
produced in a comparatively large quantity during roasting, som e of it escaping and some being 
absorbed with in the texture of the roasted bean. Volatile fatt y components (fatty acids) are 
driven off and complex fats and waxes are cracked to form simpl e ones. Proteins may be 
hydrolyzed and give cleavage products. 11 
 
 
Grinding of roasted coffee beans 
The purpose is to facilitate later water extraction of the roas ted bean. Granulation used in soluble 
coffee extractors was coarser than regular grind. The table rep resents different grind designations 
such as regular, drip, and firm with the amount of coffee retai ned on different size of mesh 
sieves. Regular grind that is about 33% of the coffee is retain ed on 10 to 14 mesh sieves and 
about 55% of coffee is retained on 20 and 28 mesh sieves, and a mount of the coffee passing 
through the control sieves that is 28 mesh is 12% in the regula r grind. Now a domestic electric 
percolator grind is used which gives all-purpose grind for whic h there is no industry standard. 
These grinds vary greatly, often  being same as regular grind.  
 
Packaging 12 
 Roasted coffee beans stale in air at room temperature within 10 -40 days. Ground coffee stale 
w i t h i n  f e w  d a y s  b u t  i s  t o l e r a b l e  t o  c o n s u m e  u p  t o  o n e  w e e k  d e p e nding upon the ambient 
temperature, humidity, air exposure, and the drinkers tolerance  to stale taste. On storage, CO 2 is 
lost and so are the flavour and aroma. Coffee exposed to moistu re losses its entire flavor in a 
relatively short time. The loss of flavour in vacuum packaged c offee or the coffee packed under 
pressure using CO 2 is less. Additional sacrifice in quality is made in vacuum pac kaging because 
there is a loss of desirable aromatics. There is at least 1% ox ygen residue left in the sealed can 
which reacts in a few weeks with the ground coffee. Inert gas ( nitrogen) packaging in flexible 
bags has become common now a days where protection in freshness  is offered for about 3 
months. 
 
Instant soluble coffee methods 
Then important product is the instant soluble coffee, that meth od for the preparation of instant 
soluble coffee. So, in fact, that is, like we make brew in our home that is in the hot water or hot 
milk coffee powder is used. So, the same process in fact is use d at the industrial scale. First, the 
coffee that is the water soluble components present in the coff ee cheery or roasted coffee beans, 
they are extracted using 6 or 7 extraction columns. In these co lumns, that is hot water at around 
176 to 80 °C flows in a counter current manner to the over the roasted and ground coffee within 
the column, where that overall hold time is around 3 to 4 hours  and it yields about 25 to 30 % of 
the soluble concentration extract and around 40 to 50 percent o f the soluble yields. These extract 
which is obtained, this is further concentrated normally either  by vacuum concentration, but the 
method of choice in the freeze concentration process. And then this concentrated coffee beans 
are next send to that it has a concentrated coffee. It has a TS S of about 50 % or so. And then this 
is sent to the freeze drying or spray drying, where that in the  freeze drying sublimation process is 
used or in the spray drying that hot air that is spray is atomi zed and we get the soluble coffee 13 
 powder. Mostly, the choice grade coffee is made by the freeze d rying process. Although, 
industrial operation makes the spray drying better.  
 
Classification of instant coffee powder 
Non-agglomerated instant coffee powder Consists of individual spherical bead-like particles giving the  powder its free-flowability and 
good solubility in hot water and produced economi cally from spr ay dryers. 
Agglomerated instant coffee powder 
Consists of either medium-sized or large agglomerates with a mi nimum of fines, giving the 
powder superior free- flowability and solubility in hot and cold  w a t e r .  M e d i u m  s i z e d  a r e  
produced using spray dryers, whereas in large agglomerates, spr ay dried powder are rewetted 
and again dried under controlled conditions. 
Granulated instant coffee powder 
Large granules, free from fine particles giving excellent free- flowability and solubility in hot 
water. These are produced in free ze dryers for maximum aroma re tention. 14 
 
 
Brewed coffee extract 
Coffee extraction is carried out at different scales, such as a t industry, instant coffee is target & 
at household a single cup of coffee is needed. The intimate con t a c t  b e t w e e n  w a t e r  &  r o a s t e d  
coffee solids is required for transfer of flavours from ground bean into water matrix. Type of 
coffee, extraction method and process parameters decides the qu ality of the extracted coffee.  
Extraction method majorly decides the quality. However, the deg ree of roasting has also some 
role in quality of extracted coffee.  So, the process variable may be extraction time water 
temperature, pressure, coffee to water ratio, particle size of the coffee powder, water quality etc. 
 
Extraction (brewing) methods 15 
 The extraction method maybe the decoction methods, include boil ed or Turkish method or 
vacuum method as shown in the figure. This method basically req uires prolonged contact 
between the solid and the water. In the infusion methods like i n the making filtered coffee, the 
hot water flows a coffee bed, allowing a short contact time. So , the soluble flavouring and 
colouring compounds are extracted  and come in the coffee brew.  
The pressure method like plunger French press or stove top coff ee maker or Mocha or espresso 
coffee machine, as shown schematically in the figure. Basically , here the pressure is used. 
Pressure is required for the continuous or uniform flow through  a compact bed of the coffee 
cake. And it is made from the ground coffee or coffee powder. A s shown in the figure, espresso 
coffee that is this coffee grounds or cake is put and the press urized hot water is flown. And then 
in the brewing chamber, a filte r medium, it filters and the cof fee brew is obtained. 
 
Instant coffee v/s freshly brewed coffee 
One cup instant coffee contains 60-80 mg of caffeine. It has le ss chlorogenic acid, high phenol 
and flavonoids, it has low cost and convenience is the key adva ntage of this. There are no by-
product and less time is required in its manufacturing. 
Whereas the freshly brewed coffee, it contains 60 to 120 millig rams of caffeine per cup, more 
chlorogenic acid, low phenols and flavonoids. It is expensive p rocess, but it has been in the 
traditional, a ritual process. In many countries, it is being u sed, there are some by-products, and 
it is a time consuming method.  16 
 
 
Decaffeination of coffee 
A typical cup of coffee contains between 70 to 140 mg of caffei ne. This caffeine can influence 
the central nervous system and can lead to sleep problems, rest lessness and discomfort. That is 
called extreme caffeinism. The major decaffeination process of coffee are solvent, super critical 
CO 2, and water decaffeination. 
 
Solvent-based decaffeination 
Solvent decaffeination uses solvents to selectively remove caff eine. Common solvents are 
methylene chloride and ethyl acetate. The process may be a dire ct method or indirect method.  In 
the direct method, beans are steamed, then soaked in solvent to  remove caffeine before being 17 
 steamed dried and roasted. In the indirect method, beans are so aked in hot water then mixed with 
solvent to remove the caffeine. 
 
Super critical CO 2 decaffeination 
The supercritical carbon dioxide, decaffeination  methods, gree n coffee is treated with the steam 
to make it permeable and to facilitate the extraction of caffei ne by liquid carbon dioxide 
supercritical carbon dioxide, in the first step. In the second step, the beans are contacted with the 
carbon dioxide under supercriti cal conditions at a particular p ressure and temperature, where this 
flavour, that is de-caffeine is solubilized in the supercritica l carbon dioxide. Super critical CO 2, 
decaffeination removes caffeine but can also remove other flavo ur compounds or precursors. The 
carbon dioxide is more selective in nature. At high pressure ca rbon dioxide disso lves caffeine. 
The caffeine is removed from the carbon dioxide with water for recirculation. The process lasts 
for up to 12 h. 
Water decaffeination process 
In Swiss water decaffeination, beans are soaked in hot water to  remove caffeine and flavour 
compounds. Caffeine is removed from the water by filtration, bu t flavour compounds remain. 
The flavour-saturated water removes caffeine from further bean batches without flavour loss. 
In French water decaffeination, bean are soaked in hot water fo r 24 h. The beans are removed 
a n d  d r i e d ,  a n d  w a t e r  i s  f i l t e r e d  t o  r e m o v e  c a f f e i n e .  T h e  c a f f e i ne-free water is added to                      
the dried beans for re-absorbing   flavour compounds. 18 
 
 
 
In summary, coffee beans has two major varieties viz. Arabica  a n d  Robusta . The coffee 
processing includes growing, harvesting, processing, milling, r oasting, grinding, packaging. Dry 
and wet method are the two major method of coffee processing. M aillard reaction, 
caramelization, first crack, pyrolysis and second crack are the  major reaction occurred during 
coffee roasting. Non-agglomerated, agglomerated and granulated are the major types of instant 
coffee powder. Solvent, super critical carbon dioxide and water  based are the major method used 
for decaffeination of coffee 19 
 
 
 
These are the references for further study. Thank you. 
 