Post-Harvest Operations and Proc essing of Fruits, Vegetables Sp ices and Plantation Crop 
Products  
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Te chnology Kharagpur 
Lecture 38 
Cocoa and Chocolate Technology 
  
 
Hello everybody, in this lecture , we will study cocoa and choco late technology.  
 The various aspects of the cocoa bean, cocoa pod, post-harvest treatment of cocoa, processing of 
cocoa, chocolate and its type and chocolate manufacturing techn ology, these topics and sub-
topics will be covered in today's lecture.  
 
Cocoa (Theobroma cocoa) 
S o, l e t  us s ee  co c oa , w ha t  c oc oa  is .  Its b o t a n ic al  na m e  is Theobroma cocoa . You can see the 
cocoa pod in this tree, it is a l ong tree, like a jackfruit, et c. These are cocoa flowers which further 
converted into pods. They grow on the main trunk or either on t he main branches of the tree.  
So, cocoa is actually the dried a nd partially fermented fatty s eed of the cacao tree from which the 
chocolate is made. Inside this pod, there are about 22 to 50 be ans arranged in a thick leathery 
rind inside that pod. These seeds which are there, inside, are embedded in white or pinkish pulp. 
The seeds are the principal source of cocoa or cocoa powder, wh ich are highly priced as a 
nutritious beverage and chocolat e. They are used as food all wo rld over.  
The principal variety of Theobroma cocoa  are Forastero  from the Amazon’s regions and grown 
mainly in West Africa as bulk cocoa, Criollo  is rarely grown because o f disease susceptibility, 
Trinitario  is a hybrid of Forastero  and Criollo , and Nacional  with the fine flavour, it grows in 
Ecuador.  
  
Post-harvest treatment of cocoa 
Raw cocoa beans have an astringent unpleasant taste and they ha ve to be taken through the 
various post-harvest treatments of fermentation, drying and roa sting to attain the characteristic 
cocoa taste, colour and flavour. It is similar to that of the c offee beans seen earlier, in the last 
class we discussed and studied. So, here also these cocoa beans  or seeds, have an unpleasant 
taste.  
So, various post-harvest treatments are done to cocoa in order to develop the characteristic 
colour and flavour. The major post-harvest operations and treat ment of the cocoa pods are 
number one, gathering the cocoa pod, then the pod is storage as  a means of pulp preconditioning, 
opening or pod breaking, then fermentation of the beans, drying  of the fermented bean, sorting, 
packing and storage. So, these are the post-harvest statement o f the cocoa pod and obtaining the 
beans from the cocoa.  
 
  
The mature parts are removed from the tree by machetes or by a similar knife attached to a long 
pole or the higher branches gathered and stored for further pro cessing. Post-harvest pod storage 
as a method of pulp pre-conditioning involves keeping the harve sted pod, i.e. the fruit which you 
have seen in the last slide in the figure, it is kept for a per iod of time before being broken.  
The pulp preconditioning entails changing the properties of the  pulp of the cocoa beans prior to 
fermentation. Because the pulp is the substrates metabolized du ring fermentation, changes in the 
pulp affect the production of acids by lactic acid bacteria, ye asts or even acetic acid bacteria. The 
main objective of pulp pre-preconditioning is to reduce the for mation of acid throughout the 
course and subsequent fermentation without enhancing the degrad ation of acids at the end of the 
fermentation process.  
After that, the cocoa pods are opened and they are de-pulped i. e. after a day or two the pods are 
split open with the help of a machete and the beans and pulps a re removed either by hand or by 
hand implements or even mechanical de-pulping equipment. The co coa fermentation, that is the 
beans which are obtained, they are next subjected to the fermen tation. The fermentation aids the 
degradation of the bulk of the pulp surrounding the cocoa bean so that the bean can easily be 
dried.  
The process of fermentation induces biochemical transformations  within the bean that lead to the 
formation of colour, aroma and flavour precursor of the chocola te, not actual compound but, 
their precursors are developed. Without fermentation, cocoa bea ns are excessively bitter and they 
will be astringent in taste. 
  
Different types of fermentation are used i.e. heap fermentation , you can see in the pictures, the 
cocoa beans are just collected in a heap and they are covered w ith the banana and other leaves 
and then heat inside respiratio n, it facilitates the fermentati on. Box fermentation is in the shade, 
they are kept, the cover in a box. Others are basket fermentati on or tray fermentation. So, 
different types of fermentation, basically storing and keeping the beans or pods for some time. 
Maybe depending upon the weather conditions and time during the  cocoa season, the period of 
the growing season, may take about 3 to 8 days for the completi on of the fermentation process. 
You see that during the fermentation process, as I told you tha t is in the figure, the various 
volatile acids, sugar, alcohols, etc., are produced in the bean s and act as a precursor of the 
flavouring and colouring compounds.  
  
After the fermentation, the next important operation is drying.  Here, they are dried either by 
shade drying or in an open environment, solar drying. These are  spread on some sort of raised 
platform, as you can see here in the figure, the moisture conte nt of the bean is reduced to a level 
of 5 to 8 percent. Because this is considered to be the appropr iate level for storage of cocoa for a 
couple of months, prior to marketing and processing.  
If the moisture content is above 8 percent, there will be the r isk of mold development within the 
beans. If the moisture content is below 5 percent, the beans wi ll become very brittle. So, 5 to 8 
percent is the average moisture content. The drying of the bean  continues the chemical changes 
that occur during fermentation, and it improves flavour develop ment. It reduces the bitterness 
and astringency and develops the chocolate brown colour as well  as well-fermented cocoa beans 
are obtained. So, dried cocoa beans after fermentation, you see  that from the pod, these are the 
pics.  
  
Technology of cocoa processing 
The beans are taken, cleaned, and then broken and winnowed. Aft er winnowing that hulls are 
blown away, then the nibs or cotyledons are obtained. These cot yledons are valuable or priced 
sources of chocolate or cocoa powder, may be directly sterilize d, roasted or may be subjected to 
alkalization treatment and Dutching process followed by roastin g .   A f t e r  r o a s t i n g ,  t h e  n i b  i s  
ground and liquor production in the trade is known as chocolate  liquor or bitter chocolate. This 
chocolate liquor is further processed or pressed and the cocoa butter and cake are obtained. The 
cocoa cake is further pulverized into a fine powder and used fo r making the beverage.  
You can see here, these are the two major products after proces sing of the cocoa bean, one is the 
cocoa butter, which is a very valuable ingredient in various co nfectionery, ice cream and other 
products, I will tell a little later about its characteristics and then, cocoa powder which is a priced 
item for making various beverages. This is used for beverage ma king.   
Cocoa processing 
The quality of cocoa beans is an important trade parameter beca use the quality of chocolate 
depends to a large extent upon the quality of the cocoa beans u sed to make the chocolate. So, the 
bean selection and quality criteria may vary depending upon the  local conditions. But in general, 
the degree of fermentation, the moisture content, as I told you  maximum maybe 7.5 to 8 percent, 
a number of defects and broken beans, beans count, that in per 100 gram, how many beans are 
there, degree of moldiness, flavour profile, colour, fat conten t, i.e. minimum fat should be around 
52 percent, etc. the fatty acid profile, free fatty acids conte nt, cell content, uniformity of bean 
size, insect and rodent infestation, etc. These are the criteri a for the selection of beans for 
chocolate manufacturing.  
Fatty acid content of the beans.  
Generally, to make good quality chocolate products, the free fa tty acid content of the cocoa 
beans should be less than 1 percent. If the level of FFA in a s ample of the bean exceeds 1 
percent, it is likely that the level in the cocoa butter derive d from them will exceed 1.75 percent, 
which is the CODEX limit. High free fatty acid content may be d ue to improperly stored for a 
long time i.e. too hot and high moisture, high humid environmen t, and/or they are due to the 
activity of the bacteria or mold in the cocoa.  Also, the actio n of enzyme-like lipase may cause 
the breaking of the triglyceride and the free fatty acids may b e generated. So, if the free fatty acid 
is present in significant amounts, it may lead to the developme nt of rancid flavour in the 
products. So, that should be avoided.  
Cut test 
It is basically the visual examination of the bean quality, whi ch is being found from the cut test. 
The bean cut test is used to assess the defects and the degree of fermentation. In this process, a 
sample of about 300 beans is randomly selected and split open l ongitudinally.  
The cut surfaces are then examined and assessed based on flat a nd shrunken beans, moldy beans, 
salty beans, germinated beans and degree of insect and rodent i nfestation. You can see here, the 
various type of visual expression, colour and other things are shown in the picture by the cut test.  
 
Cleaning, breaking and winnowing Cleaning, breaking and winnowing operations are done to obtain the nib of consistent quality. 
These processes also ensure that the nibs are clean, well broke n and properly de-shelled. The 
kernels which are are cotyledons which are known as nibs, they are obtained after the process 
and must be of uniform size to a chieve consistent quality in th e final product.  
Basically, the sieving, breaking  and winnowing are the three ma jor unit operations here. The 
sieving is done to remove all extraneous matters such as stones , strings, coins, wood, pieces, 
particles, nails and so on. Then, it is broken, i.e. it is to b reak the clean beans and loosen the shell 
from the nibs using multiple steps to avoid the access of fine particles. Finally, winnowing is 
done to remove the lighter broken cells or even the hulls, etc.  A f t e r  w i n n o w i n g  w e  g e t  t h e  
cotyledons which are nib.  
The breaking and winnowing steps are vital in separating the es sential components of the bean 
that is the nib from the shell. The shells are then discarded a nd are sold for use as agricultural 
mulch or as a fertilizer and the n ibs are taken for further pro cessing into chocolate and other 
valuable products.  
 
Sterilization  
These nips, once obtained, are subjected to the sterilization p rocess, we have discussed earlier in 
lectures, sterilization is the technique of exposing the beans in this case or nibs to a sufficiently high temperature for a sufficiently long time or desired time t o destroy all microorganisms in the 
beans, either by batch or continuous process by wetting or heat ing steam with steams. 
 The requirement after the ster ilization process is that the ni bs should contain a total plate count 
of less than 500 CFU per gram and it should contain nil pathoge nic bacteria. After sterilization, 
the nibs can then be roasted directly using either a natural pr ocess or can be alkalized first by the 
Dutch process and then roasted. 
 
Alkalization 
Alkalization is a Dutch process because this process was develo ped in Holland so it is known as 
the Dutch process. This consists of treating the cocoa nibs wit h an alkali solution such as 
potassium or sodium carbonate. The alkali is used to raise the pH of the beans or the nibs from 
about 5.2 to 5.6 to near neutrality, that is 6.8 to 7.5 dependi ng upon the strength of the alkali and 
the nature of the alkali used.  
The purpose of this Dutching process is primarily to modify the  colour and flavour of cocoa 
powder or cocoa liquor and also t o improve the dispersibility o r suspension of the cocoa solids in 
water and also remove the free fatty acids present in the bean powder or the liquor. The 
alkalization process can also be used to produce many different  colours of cocoa powder. You 
can see here in the picture that the different colours of cocoa  powder, are produced from the 
alkalization process.   
Roasting of cocoa beans 
Then the important operation is the roasting of the cocoa beans . The similar roasting which we 
studied in the last lecture in coffee processing. Similarly, he re also, the cocoa beans are roasted 
to develop further the original cocoa flavour that exists in th e form of precursors generated 
during the process of fermentation and drying of the beans.  
During roasting various physical and chemical changes take plac e. It loosens the shell, moisture 
loses from beans to about 2 percent final content, nibs or coty ledons become more friable and 
generally darken in colour, there is a reduction in the number of microorganisms, degradation of 
amino acid takes place and proteins are partly denatured, natur a l  r e d u c i n g  s u g a r s  a r e  a l m o s t  
destroyed. There is a loss of volatile acids and other substanc es that contribute to acidity and 
bitterness development.   
The degree of roasting may vary. In fact, a very light roast ma y be a fondant roast, a high roast is 
coffee roast or a very light roast is quoting roast. Many degre es of roast in between, most 
commonly used are full roast, low roast and intermediate roast.  If the type of roasting is 
sometimes secret of the manufacturing company to have their bra nded flavour and branded 
product. So, obviously, in choosing a roast, the degree of roas t, attention is given to the ultimate 
product being made, its use, and the kind of beans being used.  
Roasting parameters depend upon the type of roaster used and th e location of the measuring 
instrument, i.e. the temperature  measuring instrument put in th e roaster. Roasters traditionally 
were of batch design but modern manufacturing practices call mo re and more for the continuous 
roaster. There are three main methods of roasting, i.e. whole b ean roasting, nib roasting or even 
liquor roasting also. Whole bean roasting is the traditional wa y of producing cocoa liquor. In this 
process, the beans are roasted first before winnowing to facili tate the removal of the shells.   
Nib grinding 
After roasting, the next importa nt operation is the nib grindin g. Nib grinding involves milling the 
cocoa nibs to form cocoa liquor or bitter chocolate or bitter c ocoa mass. The purpose here is to 
produce as low a viscosity as possible to obtain a smooth cocoa  powder and chocolate taste 
during subsequent use of the liquor.  
The nibs have a cellular structure containing about approximate ly 55 percent cocoa butter in 
solid form, which is locked within the cells. Grinding of the n ib releases the cocoa butter into 
liquor, i.e. final particle size may be up to 30 microns or so.  For the production of cocoa powder, 
fine grinding is particularly important. Machines which are use d for nib grinding may be stone 
mills, disc mills, pin or hammer mills or bead or ball mills, e tc. So, when the cocoa nibs are put 
there, as they contain a very high amount, 55 percent cocoa but ter, the heat generated during the 
grinding process causes the coco a butter to melt which gives a cocoa liquor. That is, the melted 
cocoa fat carries with it the solid particles and finally, we g et either cocoa mass or chocolate 
liquor or bitter chocolate, etc.  
Liquor pressing 
These liquors are the next, as you know that they contain aroun d 50 to 55 percent high valuable 
fat, it will be wasted if this w hole batch is used for chocolat e manufacturing or beverage. In 
order to make the cocoa powder for the beverage industry, this liquor is pressed, and a high-fat 
cake is made out of 20 to 24 percent residual fat in the fresh cake or low fat cake of 10 to 12 
percent residual fat in the fresh cake.  
This fat is partially removed from the cocoa liquor by means of  hydraulic pressing, applying the 
pressure as high as 520 kg per centimetre square and the larger  presses take a charge up to 113.4 
kg per one pressing cycle. Because initially just by the simple  application of pressure the butter 
is removed. But as the quantity of fat lowers down, one has to give more and more amount of 
pressure to remove the remaining quantity of fat, and this high  pressure or temperature is 
developed, also excessively high heat, and that adversely affec ted the chocolate qualities as well 
as the cake, their powder quality.  
So, in fact, it becomes very economically unviable to lower the  fat content in cocoa to less than 
12 percent. Accordingly, there are regulations made for the ind ustry in BIS regulations, it should 
be brought down to around 15 percent to 20 percent, high fat ca ke or low fat cake. Depending 
upon the pressing time and the setting of the press the result in a cake may have a fat content 
between 10 to 24 percent. This is the limit, 20-25 percent and more or above that, is separated, 
and cocoa butter is obtained.   
Cake grinding  
After the pressing, cake grinding or kibbling or the cocoa powd er production, are the two major 
operations, for powder making because this powder is used for m aking beverages. After pressing 
the cake is released from a larg e handle, and therefore, it is passed through kibbling machines to 
be broken down into smaller pieces which are known as kibbled c ake. The kibbled cake obtain is 
stored by fat content and degree of alkalization and may be ble nded before pulverization to 
obtain the desired type of coco a powder with proper solubility another characteristic. 
The cocoa powder grinding lines usually comprises hammer and di sk or pin mills that pulverize 
the cocoa cake particles kibbled cake particles into the define d levels of fineness of the cocoa 
powder. The powder is then cooled after pulverization so that t he fat of the cocoa powder 
crystallizes into a stable form.  The free-flowing powder is the n passed through sieves over 
magnets and packaged in a bulk container and polyethene bags.  
  
Cocoa butter 
Cocoa butter is a very important product of the cocoa processin g industry. You can see here, it is 
a pale-yellow colour material. I t has a characteristic flavour of chocolate. It is brittle at a 
temperature below 25 degrees Celsius. It is soft in the hand an d melts in the mouth. It is not 
greasy to the touch, it keeps well due to the presence of antio xidants in it. It is rich in saturated 
fatty acids about 26 percent is a palmitic and lower saturated fatty acid, about 34 percent is the 
stearic and higher acids, 37 percent oleic acid and about 2 per cent linoleic acid. Because of its 
melting characteristics, it becomes a very important and common  ingredient in confectionery 
products, ice creams and others.  
But the polymorphic form arrangement of the cocoa butter is ver y important for deciding its 
usefulness in the various processes. As you can see here the di fferent polymorphic arrangements 
of the crystalline fat. Butter can crystallize into a number of  polymorphic forms as a function of 
triglyceride and fatty acid comp osition influencing how the liq uid fat solidifies.  
You can see here, generally, six polymorphs are produced. These  polyforms have 16 to 18 
degrees Celsius. It is cocoa butter of loose compacity, and onc e it crystallizes, 20 to 24 degrees, 
first polyform gamma, then during 24 to 26-degree alpha, which can polyform, then beta 26 to 
28 then fourth, fifth and finally, at around 30 to 34 degree, b eta 1 polyform is obtained. This 
gamma polyform which is loose and other beta 1 is a very compac t density. Accordingly, gamma 
1 is the unstable form and the most stable form is polyform 6, which is the beta 1 form.  So, cocoa butter as you can see here has 6 poly farms, 1 to 6 a nd the principal 1 among these are 
alpha, beta and beta dash. The form 5 i.e. beta 2 polymorph is the most desirable form, in 
general, in well-tempered chocolate, giving a glossy appearance , good snap, contraction and 
registrants to bloom. 
 
Chocolate 
We will now come to chocolate manufacturing. We have now cocoa powder, and we have got 
cocoa butter. Now, this butter is made for making chocolate. Ch ocolate is a semi-solid 
suspension of final solid particles from sugar, cocoa mass, coc oa butter and milk powder 
depending upon the type, making about 70 percent in total in a continuous fat phase of the cocoa 
butter.  
The FSSAI guidelines give for different types of chocolate like  milk chocolate, milk covering 
chocolate, plain chocolate, plain covering chocolate, white cho colate, blended chocolate, 
depending upon the amount of total fat percent by weight or mil k fat content or acid insoluble 
ash or milk solids, depending upon these various types of choco lates are made. 
Accordingly, in all these chocolates, the total fat should not be cocoa butter or cocoa fat, should 
not be less than 25 percent. Other regulations are also there, for instance, in milk chocolate, 
around 10.5 percent minimum by weight, there should be milk sol ids and so on.    
Technology for chocolate manufacture 
The process of chocolate manufacture or technology of chocolate  manufacture includes the 
mixing of the ingredients like sugar, cocoa liquor, cocoa butte r, skim milk powder, etc. After 
mixing, you get agglomeration of ingredients in a thick paste, a pliable thick mass is obtained at 
this stage and then this mass is sent for the refining where th e size reduction of the mix via 2-
roller refiner or 5-roller refiner. After refining, the conchin g is another process which helps the 
final flavour development process. Here, the addition of remain ing ingredients like surfactant, 
and cocoa butter may be added and then the conched chocolate is  finally tempered, enrobed, 
moulded or panned and finally packaged. The tempering, in fact,  gives the most stable form of 
cocoa butter crystal via heating and cooling systems.  
  
Mixing 
Mixing is very important, all these ingredients i.e. cocoa liqu or, sugar, cocoa butter, milk fat and 
milk powder, depending upon the product category are thoroughly  mixed, normally around 12 to 
15 minutes at 40 to 50 degrees Celsius in the batch mixing. The  purpose and objective of the 
mixing are for producing a homogeneous mass which is coated pro perly with fat all particles of 
the solid particles are uniformly properly coated with cocoa fa t, and also it helps the right mixing 
and right amount of fat.  
If there is too much fat, the feed roller of the refiner, which  is the next process, will take the fat 
first and then later the dry solids. If there is too little fat , the refiner will overheat due to much 
friction and will produce a very n on-uniform grade product. For  the mixing, batch mixers can be 
used or even automated kneaders are also. By automatic metering  of the ingredient, scaling and 
then properly mixing can be done. The purpose of the mixing is to produce a homogeneous, mass 
of uniform size.  
  
Refining 
The next step is refining. Refining of chocolate is important t o the products of smooth texture 
that is desirable in modern chocolate confectionery. The qualit y of the product depends upon the 
particle size distribution. A wide range of chocolate quality i s produced by varying particle sizes 
of sugar and chocolate liquor. The maximum particle size of sug ar may be around 25 to 57 
microns and the chocolate liquor particle size may be in the ra nge of somewhere 50 to 114 
microns.  
For good-eating chocolate, no more than 20 percent of the mass should have a particle size of 
more than 22 microns. The texture of the milk chocolate appears  to be improved by a bimodal 
distribution of particles with a small proportion having sizes up to 65 microns. The optimum 
particle size for dark chocolate is lower, that is, at less tha n 35 microns, although, the values are 
influenced by the particular product and composition.  
  
This is the refining process, you can see here, the 2-roller re finer. The material which is after 
mixing, is put into the 2-roller r efiner and this 2-role refine r, it is pre-grinding , grinding of coarse 
particle, that is granulated sugar, between fine, between these  two rollers, which are here and 
then they are pressed to the next roller. In the two rollers, i t increases the number of particles and 
decreases their size. Then these rollers, that is, the next rol ler move at a larger speed than the 
previous roller. These wipe the material and carry it to the ne xt roller. In fact, the clearance 
between these rollers has to be adjusted by the operator depend ing upon the size of the particles 
which is to be obtained finally. So, this second, third roller,  fourth roller, etc. reduce the size of 
the chocolate particles. So, they cannot be detected even by th e tongue. You get a completely 
homogeneous mass, it gives a smooth taste. Finally, the last ro ller is taken out, and the particle 
size may be 20 to 35 microns. The components of the different 5 -roll refiners are shown here. It 
consists of roll stack pressure, chocolate film, chocolate feed , feeds roll pressure, fixed roll, 
chocolate from scraper and motion of the rollers. These are the  various accessories that are 
provided in the refiner.   
Conching 
Conching is, a very important operation as you can see here in the figure. It is regarded as the 
endpoint or final operation in the manufacture of bulk chocolat e making. Conching is basically a 
balance of the temperature, time, agitation and aeration. Dry c onching is utilized when the feed 
material to the conch cannot be pumped. 
The heat generated by the agitation must be dissipated either b y atmospheric conditions or by 
water jacketing equipment. Wet c onching is utilized when the fe ed material can be pumped to 
the conch, and in this case, heat is supplied by the hot water to the jacket to the conch. There are 
different phases, which you can see here in the conching proces s.  
  
The longitudinal conches have been traditionally used in the in dustry but now rotary conches are 
becoming more popular as they c an handle large quantities of ch ocolate and require much less 
labour. Both, the milk and dark chocolates are conched at aroun d 49 to 82 degree Celsius for 
about 1 to 4 days. You can see here the internal mechanics for Frisse conche. It is a rotary 
conche, that is, Frisse’s conche and overhead conche used in th e modern chocolate industry. It 
had a large tank bigger tank with the three powerful interfacin g mixer blades providing shearing 
and mixing action. So during conching, the chocolate flavour de velops, its colour darkens, it 
stabilizes the viscosity by covering all interfaces with cocoa butter, and there is some lowering of 
moisture content.  
The flavour development results from mainly volatilizing the un desirable flavour as you can say, 
acidic material, etc. that they get volatile. Some moisture als o goes out. pH increases as the 
conching proceeds, and oxidation and browning reactions in the milk-type chocolates also take 
place which adds to the colour and flavour. 
  
Tempering 
Finally, the tempering process, i.e. tempering involves pre-cry stallization of a small portion of 
triglyceride with crystals forming nuclei maybe 1 to 3 percent total for the remaining lipid to set 
in the correct form. Tempering has four key steps, as you can s ee here in this figure. That is, the 
first is the complete melting at around 50 degrees Celsius, the n cooling to the point of 
crystallization, the material is  brought, its temperature to ar ound 32 degrees Celsius. Then 
crystallisation occurs at a temperature of 27 degrees Celsius, and finally, conversion of any 
unstable crystals at 29 to 31 degrees Celsius. So, here in the figure, that is a tempering sequence 
during lipid crystallization of chocolates is shown. Solid choc olate then the temperature 50, all 
fats melted, then a correct number of stable crystals get at ar ound 27 degrees Celsius, and finally, 
the temperature is a little bit raised, any unstable crystals a re melted out.  
A well-tempered chocolate has properties like it has a good sha pe, colour, gloss, and contraction 
from the mold. It has better weight control, is a stable produc t, is harder and more heat resistant, 
has fewer fine grades during packaging, and with a longer shelf - l i f e .  F o r  c h o c o l a t e  t o  b e  a n  
appropriate polymorphic form, tempering is crucial, influencing  final quality characteristics such 
as colour, hardness, handling, finish and self-life. In fact, m ultistage heat exchangers are used for 
the tempering of chocolate.  
  
Casting and moulding  
Finally, the casting and moulding, you can see here in the figu re, casting & moulding and finally 
moulded chocolate that is giving the chocolate the desired shap e. The tempered chocolate enters 
into the hopper of the depositor which deposits chocolates into  the moulds of different sizes. The 
rheological properties of the mo lten chocolates are critical to  obtaining uniform weight and size 
of the finished product. A vibrator shaker shakes each mould to  the level of the liquid chocolate 
deposited in the mould.  
Cooling and demoulding  
Then the moulds containing the molten chocolates after vibratio n, pass through the freezing 
section and are cooled in a tunnel freezer at around a temperat ure of 12 to 15 degrees Celsius. In 
the batch processing, the moulds are cooled in a refrigerator a t around maybe maintained at 
around 7 to 10 degrees Celsius for 20 to 30 minutes. A small am ount of force is needed to part 
the product from the mould, and this is affected by a hammer ai ded by a mechanism that twists 
the moulds. Finally, these products are again packaged in lamin ate or metallized polyester under 
control environment and the packaging materials should have pro per characteristics, appropriate 
characteristics, particularly hygroscopicity, gas permeation or  oxygen permeability, that is, they 
should be impermeable to all the light, gas, oxygen, etc. so th at the colour and flavour and 
characteristics texture of the chocolate is maintained during p ackaging and the storage.   
So finally, I will summarize this lecture, that as cocoa beans,  once they are obtained from the 
trees, they are fermented, left open for some days, then after that they are split open, fermented 
and the unwanted seeds, pulps etc. are removed. The cocoa beans  which are always, the main, in 
the industry, they store these cocoa beans and contain 10 to 12  percent moisture content.  
These cocoa beans as desired, are further roasted and grinded a nd during the grinding, the heat 
produces, causing the melting of the butter or fat. Then melted  fat carries with it, the solvent, to 
get the cocoa mass or bitter chocolate and this is pressed, but ter is obtained and the cocoa 
powder is prepared.  
The cocoa butter is mixed with the appropriate amount of milk s ugars, milk solids, and other 
flavourings and other agents, and it is converted into chocolat e. Chocolate manufacturing 
basically consists of three major operations like mixing, refin ing, and finally conching and 
tempering, and then properly tempered cocoa butter or chocolate  is then moulded and packaged, 
given the desired shape and packaged.  
  
So, these are the references which are used in this lecture. Fi nally, thank you for your patience in 
hearing. 
 