1 
 Post-Harvest Operation s and Processing of Fruits, Vegetab les, Spices and Plantation 
Crop Products  
Professor H N Mishra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
  
Lecture 06  
Post-Harvest Losses,  Causes and Preventive Measures   
The concepts that has been  covered in this lecture include current status an d causes of post - 
harvest losses, f actors affecting deterioration of fruits and vegetables , post-harvest physiology 
of fruits and vegetables , sprouting and methods of sprout suppression,  and the preventive 
measures for mini mizing the post -harvest losses.  
 
 
Post-harvest loss es  
2 
 The losses that occur from the time of harvesting of fresh produce till they reach t he consumer 
are referred as  post-harvest losses. P ost-harvest  losses may be quantitative loss  like reduction 
in the weight due to moisture loss or loss of the dry matter  in the value chain , or it may refer to 
the qualitative loss  i.e. the freshness deterioration leading to loss of consumer appeal and the 
nutritional losses. The estimated loss es in the fruits and vegetables are ve ry high (15-20%) in 
India ; in some cases as high as 30 to 40 % of the total produce.  
 
Stages of the post -harvest losses in the supply chain  
It starts  from the prod uction point (various field and preparatory losses ), then in the pre -
processing stage, the rejects, culls, s election/grading causing losses.  During transportation  
there may be spoilage, bruising , breakage, leakage that also result  to significan t amount of 
losses of the produce. Then during the storage, the loss  may be due to various reasons like 
insect attack , molds, bacteria, rodents, birds or there may be sprouting of  the material , rancidity , 
over ripening  etc. All these factors may lead to the losses during the storage of the produce 
particularly if the storage c onditions are not properly met. Then durin g processing and 
packaging, there may be inefficiency or  excessive peeling, trimming , and  polishing  or other 
operations they also may result in the loss depending upon how the various operations are 
managed during processing and packaging . There is a significant amount o f loss during 
marketing including  unsafe food s, quality losses and some losses also occur at the consumer  
level . 
3 
  
Causes of post -harvest losses  
Causes of  the post -harvest losses may  be due to the  primary and secondary factors. P rimary 
factors include biological and microbiological factor s (i.e. consumption  of produce or damage 
of the produce by insect s, pests, animals and microorganisms  like fungi and bacteria ), chemical 
and b iochemical factors or undesirable chemical and biochemical reactions among chemical 
compounds present in food (e.g. browning , rancidity ), mechanical  factor s ( e.g. spillages , 
damages caus ed by abrasion and bruising, crush ing, puncturing ), physical factors (i.e. improper 
environmental and storage conditions like temperatur e, relative humidity, air speed ), 
physiological factors (like sprouting , senescen ce or other respiratory and transpiratory 
changes ), psychological factors (like human aversion  or refusal due to personal or religious 
reasons ). 
 
The secondary factors affecting the post -harvest losses  include biological factors (like 
respiration rate,  ethylene production, compositional changes,  changes during growth and 
developm ent, transpiration, physiological breakdown, physical  damage , pathological break 
4 
 down , surface area to volume, membrane permeability of the material ), and  environmental 
factors (like temperature, relative humidity, composition  of the atmospheric gases, ethylene,  
light and other factors ). The primary reasons behind the losses are  improper harvesting and 
handling , inadequate  storage facilities , inadequate transportation,  inadequate  refrigeration and 
inadequate supply chain  and marketing system . These  are the major causes of the post-harvest  
losses.  
 
Biological factors affecting deterioration of fruits & vegetables  
 Respiration rate is an important biological factor. High respiration rate shortens the shelf life 
and accelerates the spoilage by early senescence.  The production of ethylene triggers the 
textural changes, colour changes, and tissue degradation in fruits and vegetables.  Some 
symptoms of ethylene injury are r usset spotting of lettuce , yellowing or loss of green colour 
(for example, in cucumber, broccoli, kale, spinach) , increased toughness in turnips and 
asparagus spears , bitterness in carrots and parsnips , yellowing and abscission (dropping) of 
leaves in brassica s, softening, pitting, and development of off -flavour in peppers, summer                                      
squash, and watermelons , browning and discoloration in eggplant pulp and seed ,   discoloration 
and off -flavour in sweet potatoes, and i ncreased ri pening and softening of mature green 
tomatoes  etc. 
5 
  
Similarly, during growth and the development of the produce , there may be some changes , 
which may lead to t he some quality or quantity loss like there may be loss of green colour  or 
loss o f chlorophyll in the vegetables;  loss of carotenoids like yellow and orange colour  in the 
case of apricot, peaches, citrus fruit and tomato; loss of anthocyanins (red and blue colour ) in 
case of a pple, cherries and strawberries ; changes in the carbohydrate may  takes pla ce du ring 
growth and development stage like starch  is converted into sugar  (potato); sugar to starch 
conversion (p eas, sweet corn ); breakdown of pectin and other polysaccharides in fruit 
softening ; change in organic acids, proteins, amin o acids and lipids may lead to the undesirable 
changes in the flavour  of the commodity; loss of vitamin, which will degrade the nutritional 
quality of the food.   
Compositional changes in some commodities during the  growth and development continues  
even after harvest and which accelerate deterioration . For example,  sprouting of  potato, onion 
and garlic during storage,  fresh routing of oni ons or  harvested crop continues to grow even 
after harvest, whi ch is very much evident in asparagus, there is  increase in the volume in 
lettuce. So, these changes res ult into the significant qualities  and other change s of the produce . 
Heavy transpira tion causes  loss in weight , loss in appearance like wilting , shrivelling  of the 
produce. There may  be loss in  the textural quality there may  be softening  or loss of crispiness 
and j uiciness of the product.  
Physical damage like mechanical injury or cut  during harvesting, handling, storage 
transportation  etc. may result into the loss of the produce . Bruising due to  vibration (during 
transport ation ), impact if the uncon trolled or improper dropping or  there maybe compression 
if there is overfilling of the material. So, all these factors may result in the damage of the 
produce . 
6 
  
Physio logical breakdown particularly when the produce is expose d to an undesirable 
temperature . For example, freezing injury occurs when the  commodity is stored at below its 
freezing point temperature. Chilling injury  is due to  when the commodity is stored at be low 
their desired storage cool  storage temperature then it may resu lt in the different spot  which is 
a common problem in the community like banana . The  heat injuries occurs when commodity 
is exposed to direct sunlight or at excessively high temperature , it causes defects like sunburn , 
bleaching, scalding, uneven ripening, excessive softening.  
Pathological breakdown may be caused by the activities of  bacteria and fungi (yeast and 
mould), particularly the fruits and vegetables because of their nature, they are more prone to 
attack by bacteria  due to the high sugar content. The common pathogens causing rots in fruits 
and vegetables are fungi such as Alternaria, Botrytis , Diplodia , Phomopsis , Rhizopus , 
Penicillium and Fusarium . Bacteria like Erwinia and Pseudomonas  also cause extensive 
damage.  
 
Sprouting  
7 
 Physiological basis for sprouting  i.e. after development, bulbs, tubers and some root crops enter 
into a rest period.  This is characterized by reduced physiological activity with non -respons e to 
environmental conditions. During rest, endogenous sprout inhibitors like abscisic acid 
predominate over promoters like gi bberellins, auxins and others. This balance changes with the 
length of  storage  to get into a dormant period. They will then sprout or form roots if placed 
under favo rable env ironmental conditions. There are no clear -cut bounda ries between these 
stages. With longer  storage  times, promoters predominate and sprouting takes                                                  
place which leads to spoilage of the produce.  
 
Chilli ng in jury  
The exposure of climacteric fruits to low -temperature storage (below 13 °C) causes chilling 
injury. The inj ury is caused by two mechanisms. These include e xcess production of ROS 
including superoxide anion (O2−), hydroxyl radical (OH) and hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2), which 
further increases the production of O2−. The accumulated ROS changes the membrane 
organization, such as decrease in unsaturated fatty acids of membrane lipids and accumulation 
of membrane lipid oxi dation related malondialdehyde by -products. Enzymatic oxidation of 
phenolic substrates by polyphenol oxidases ( PPO) enzyme  to form black or brown products.  
8 
  
The slide shows various major storage disorders in fruits and vegetables, which include soft 
scald, low O 2 injury, internal CO 2 injury, superficial scald, low temperature breakdown, and 
external CO 2 injury.  
 
Environmental factors affecting deterioration of fruits and vegetables  
Temperature  
Environmental temperature plays very major rol e in deterioration of produce. Every increase 
of 10  ⁰C temperature above optimum increases the deterioration by two times. Exposure to 
undesirable temperature results in many physiological disorders like freezing injury,  chilli ng 
injury  and heat injury, etc. Temperature influence growth rate of fungal spore s and other 
pathogens.  It affects the respiration and transpiration rate of produce.  
Temperature dependence of the rate constant (k) can be expres sed by the Arrhenius equation : 
k=Ae−EaRT⁄ 
9 
 Where, E a is the activity activation energy (J/mol)  
 R is the gas constant (8.314 J/K mol)  
 T is the absolute temperature (K)  
 A is the frequency factor  
 
Relative humidity has the direct ef fect on the growth of the micro organism in association with 
the temperature. So, the combination of the relative humidity and temperature can elevate or 
reduce the deterioration. I f the temperature is maintained at a higher level and relative humidity 
is low then deterioration will be very high . If the temperature and relative humidity both are 
high then th e deterioration or spoilage will be high . If the temperature and relative humidity in 
the storage environment, there will be very less or modera te deterioration and spoilage. If the 
temperature is low, but relative  humidity is high then this  result s into a  less deterioration.  
The figure shows the effect of moisture content, temperature, and relative humidity on the 
growth of bacteria, fungi, and insects as well as on the occurrence of biochemical reactions 
such as non -enzymatic browning, lipid oxidation, an d hydrolytic reactions etc. It has been 
observed that t he postharvest diseases  are most severe when RH is 90% or higher . 
10 
  
The gaseous composition mainly refers t o the concentration of O2, CO 2, and ethylene. In 
CA/MA storage, modified atmosphere packaging , the concentration of CO 2 is kept high and 
concentration of O 2 is kept low. B ut mind it , it has to be optim um depending upon the 
respiratory behaviour of produce. So, there shoul d be proper balance between  O2 and CO 2 
concentrations . If there is a very high CO 2 or very low O 2, then there will be texture loss, 
irregular ripening like poor skin colour  development, anaerobic respiration which ma y cause 
off flavour development, and  spoilage like hollow  heart disease in potato.  
 
The exposure of pot ato to light results in greening  of the tuber  due to the formation of 
chlorophyll and solanine , which is the toxic to human on  consumption . Other factors like 
various chemicals (pesticide , growth regulators) are applied to the commodities a lso contribute 
to deterioration causing loss of color, flavor, texture and nutritional value.   
11 
  
Preventive measures for minimising post -harvest losses  
These involve: evaporative cool storage, waxing,  irradiation, edible coating , control  
atmospheric storage, mod ified atmosphere packaging, pre -packing etc.  
 
1. Waxing : protective coating for many of the fruits and vegetables and it helps in the reducti on 
in loss of moisture and also reduces the rate of respiration. So, it results in prolon ged storage 
life.  
2. Evaporative cool storage : It is the best short -term storage of fruits and vegetables at farm 
level and helps the farmers to get better returns for their produce. It also helps in reduced 
shriveling of horticultural crops and extend th eir storage life.  
12 
  
3. Pre-packaging : is another  method that is which controls th e rate of  respiration and rate of 
transpiration and extends the self -life, it keeps the commodity in fresh  condition both at 
ambient as  well as at the low temperature. T he pre-packaging benefits the consumer and the 
producer because of its low cost and ready availability .  
4. Cold storage : it is a traditionally used prac tice for the prevention of post -harvest losses  by 
storing the fruits and vegetable at low temperature because it lowers down the rate of 
respiration and transpiration. The principle of maintaining the cold storages principle of 
maintaining the lower temperature in the storage environment . It reduces the rate of respi ration 
and de lays the ripening.  
 
5. Modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) : modify the atmosphere composition inside the 
package by respiration. For example, Papaya can be stored up  to 4 weeks when stored at 10 -
12 °C under modified atmosphere (MA) condition s. While using optimum low temperature, 
storage life of Cavendish b anana, capsicum, green chilli and tomato can be extended to 42, 21, 
28 and 30 days, respectively.  
13 
 6. Controlled  atmosphere  (CA) storage : principle of maintaining an artificial atmosphere 
having higher concentration of CO 2 and lower concentration  of O 2 than normal atmosphere, 
reduces the rate of resp iration and thus delays aging. It is v ery effective when combined with 
low temperature storage.  
 
7. Irradiation : It is a  novel technology to r educe post -harvest losses and extend storage life.  
Gamma -rays at optimum dosage delays ripening , minimizes insect infestation and retards 
microbial spoilages, c ontrol sprouting, and rotting of onion, garlic and potato during storage.  
This process is u sed as a disinfection treatment and controls fruit fly on citrus, mango seed 
weevil and papaya fruit fly.  
8. Edible coating : It involves  continuous matrices prepared from edible materials such as 
proteins, polysaccharides and lipids. It is also effective for controlling the migration of gases, 
moisture, oil, fat, and solutes, as well as retain ing volatile flavouring compounds. It improves  
structural integrity and mechanical handling in order to maintain quality and inhibit microbial 
growth.  
 
14 
 Methods for  sprout inhibition   
The methods for sprout inhibition are classified as physical (refrigeration, controlled 
atmosphere), chemical ( application of growth regulators ), and ionization (s prout suppression 
can also be achieved by irradiating onion bulb, potato and yam tubers) methods.  
 
This slide emphasizes on the chemicals which are used to control spoilage and improve quality 
in fruits and vegetable s such as sodium phenyl phenate  for apple, hot water for mango and 
papaya, hypo chlorite for potato etc.  
 
There are the chemicals which are used to extend  the self -life and quality of the produce like 
in the case of mango, calcium nitrate  (1%) and  calcium (1 -4%) for apples  etc. 
15 
  
Summary  
Post-harvest loss of fruits and vegetables occur due to lack of proper technique of harvesting, 
transportat ion, storage and distribution. The loss can be reduced by implementing the important 
cultural methods, careful handling and packaging. The us e of appropriate chemicals at pre and 
post-harvest stage may prolong the availability of fresh produce for a long period of time by 
protecting them from pathogens an d other environmental factors. Also controlled atmosphere 
storage and redurization at low t emperature  has been found to be effec tive for fruits and 
vegetables. The causes of losses occur at different times during the production                                                   
and post -harvest cycle of the cro p should be clearly understood  befor e taking control measure.  
 
These are the references for further study.  Thank you.  
 
 
