1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H. N. Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture 19  
Containers and Packaging Mat erials for Fresh Produce 
 
This lecture covers containers a nd packaging requirements of fr esh produces, selection of 
container and packaging materials, container used for packing f resh fruits and vegetables, 
packaging materials and tec hnologies for press produces. 
 
Packaging 
 2 
 It is the mean or system by which fresh fruits and vegetables/ processed product reaches from 
farm/production unit to the final destination in safe and sound  condition at affordable price. 
Packing and packaging materials contribute a significant cost t o the produce industry; 
therefore it is important to have a clear understanding of the wide range of packaging options 
available.  Bags, crates, hampers, baskets, cartons, bulk bins, and palleti zed containers are 
convenient containers for hand ling, transporting, and marketing  fresh produce.  
 
Why package farm produce? 
Protection 
It protects from mechanical damage and poor environmental condi tions during handling and 
distribution. Damage resulting from poor environmental control during handling and transit is 
one of the leading causes of rejected produce and low buyer/con sumer satisfaction. Each 
fresh fruit and vegetable commod ity has its own requirements fo r temperature, humidity, and 
environmental gas composition. Produce destined for export mark ets requires containers to be 
extra sturdy. Air-freighted pr oduce requires sp ecial packing, p ackage sizes, and insulation. 
Containment 
The produce is enclosed in contai ner of convenient units for ha ndling and distribution. The 
produce should fit well inside the container, with little waste d space. Small produce items 
such as potatoes, onions, and apples may be packed in packages of different shapes and sizes. 
Produces such as soft fruits, berr ies, or asparagus may require  specially designed containers. 
Usually up to 20 kg of fresh pr oduce packages are handled by ha nd. Bulk packages moved by 
forklifts may weigh as much as 500 kg. 3 
 
 
Convenience 
Adaption to consumer lifestyle suc h as saving time by facilitat ing handling                        
through easy-to-open or re -closable packaging. 
 
Identification 
It provides useful information about the produce. For instance:  Produce name, brand, size, 
grade, variety, net weight, c ount, grower, shipper, and country  of origin. Some of the 
packages provide nutritional information, recipes, and other us eful information directed 
specifically at the consumer end. Universal Product Code, UPC o r bar codes may be included 
as a part of the labeling. It c onsists of ten-digit machine rea dable codes. The first five digits 
are a number assigned to the specific producer (that is packer or shipper) and the second five 
digits represent the specific product information such as type of the produce, and size of the 
package, etc. 4 
 
 
The packaging materials should be non-toxic and compatible with  the specific produce being 
targeted to be packaged, it shoul d be having sufficient resista nce to temper, ease of opening 
and disposal, it should be low cost, adherence to the standards  in shape, size and weight 
limitations, provide protection against moisture, air and light  to the commodity, should be 
appealing in appearance, and printability and more importantly,  it should be recyclable or it 
should be as far as possible, biodegradable.  
 
Types of containers 
Primary container: It is the first line of defen ce between the   produce and the e nvironment. 
Secondary container: The outer box or wrap or drum to hold all the units together, 
providing an overall protection. 
Tertiary container: Grouping of products for bulk handling, warehouse storage, 
transportation and shipping. The main goal of tertiary packagin g is to properly protect 
shipments during transit. 5 
 
 
The package may be classified as transport or bulk packs, which  is used for long distance 
transportation in capacity ranging from 4-5 kg to 20-25 kg and these packs must withstand 
impact, compression and vibration during the transport, and the  c o n s u m e r  o r  r e t a i l  p a c k s ,  
which are small in size and designed to hold half a dozen, to 1  dozen fruit or half kg to 2 kg 
of fruits or vegetables.  
 
The images of consumer/retail packs and transport/bulk packs fo r fruits and vegetables are 
presented in this slide. 6 
 
 
Types of pack aging materials 
Wood 
Pallet bins 
These are made of milled lumber or plywood. These are primarily  used to move produce 
from the field to the packing house. The capacities may range f rom 12 to more than 50 
bushels with height may vary, the length and width is generally  the same as a standard pallet 
(48 inches × 40 inches). Double- wide pallet bins (48 inches × 8 0 inches) are more common. 
The average life of a hardwood pallet bin when stored outside i s approximately 5 years. 
When properly protected from the  weather it may last up to 10 y ears or more. 
 
Wire-bound crates 
Wire-bound crates are sturdy, rigid and have very high stacking  strength that is essentially 
unaffected by water. They are used for packaging of those veget ables which require hydro-7 
 cooling and ventilation such as snap beans, sweet corn. The mer its are like ease transportation 
and dissembling. However, it has demerits like it requires more  consumption of wood during 
its preparation, it is not cost-friendly for cheap vegetables a n d  a l s o  t h e r e  i s  d i f f i c u l t y  i n  
affixing suitable labels. 
 
Wooden crates & lugs 
These are extensively used for apples, stone fruit, potatoes, a nd some lugs for grapes and 
other exotic fruits. These are very sturdy and durable even for  rough conditions. It has a good 
stacking strength required duri ng long distance transportation.  It is also easy for handling 
because of durability. However, the bulk transportation of this  type of packages are not 
possible, it involves high cost, less attractive labeling and i t is replaced by other types of 
packaging.  
 
Sacks  8 
 The commonly used materials are cotton, jute, plastic like HDPE  and PP, they are usually 
combined with bamboo baskets and wooden boxes to improve cushio ning and reduce bruise 
injuries and losses during transportation. These are low cost, have high strength, reusability 
and require less space for empties. However, these have low pro tection against against 
puncture, compression, vibration and impact injuries as well as  these are poor in stackability.  
 
Paperboard  
Corrugated fibreboard is generally 0.02 cm thick; is made from unbleached pulp with a 
characteristic brown color. Most fiber board contain recycled f ibers. Cartons of fully recycled 
pulp have about 75 % of the stacking strength of virgin fiber c ontainers. These are available 
in market as 3 ply, 5 ply, and 7 ply. These are cost effective,  easy to handle and are 
lightweight, these have good stack ing strength, and are easily folded and re-transported and 
labelled. However, the demerits for these type of packs include  these are unfit for high humid 
fruits or cannot be used for  hydro cooling of materials.  
 9 
 Paper bags with mesh  
It has good ventilation, low cos t, attractive display, stimulat es purchases, potatoes and 
onions, cabbage, turnips, citrus fruits and some specialty item s are bagged. However, these 
large bags do not palletize well, small bags do not efficiently  fill the space inside. Bags do 
not offer protection from rough handling. Mesh provides little protection from lights or 
contaminants. 
 
Plastic bags  
These are predominant material for fruits and vegetable consume r packaging. It has the 
merits like film bags are clear, allowing for easy inspection o f the contents, and readily 
accept high quality graphics, is available in a wide range of t hickness and grades. These are 
engineered to control the environmental gases inside the bag an d it can be reused and 
sometimes even recycled. However, it creates environment havoc as they spoil the soil, the 
water and even blocks the guts of the domestic animals. So, fro m that point of view, the 
plastic is in many countries is banned and it is a serious envi ronmental concern.  10 
 
 
Shrink wraps  
It is an engineered plastic wra p used for packaging individual items like potatoes, sweet 
potatoes, apples, onions, sweet corn, cucumbers, and a variety of tropical fruits. It reduces 
shrinkage, fouling and provides good sealing, it protects the p roduce from disease and is 
moisture proof, it reduces the mechanical damage, provides a go od surface for stick-on 
labels, it extends the storage life of produce. However, the de merits of this wrap include it 
takes a lot of energy and resources to produce the shrink wrap products. It requires a lot of 
manual labor to apply and r emove from the product.  
 
Plastic punnets  
These containers are food grade, odourless, lightweight, stacka ble and recyclable and give 
good presentation. They are either made of PET, PVC or PP. The merits of these plastic 
punnets include these are strong, versatile, clear and bright c ontainers, they offer product 11 
 visibility, provided with holes f or the ventilation and keep th e produce fresh and it very 
attractive way of packaging produc t from the consumer point of view.  
 
Flexible plastic films  
Plastic films like LDPE (Polyethylene), PVC (Poly vinyl chlorid e), PP (Polypropylene) and 
CA (Cellulose acetate) are used for packaging of horticultural produce. These films are 
mostly used as pouches with holes punched at regular intervals to allow respiration. They are 
available in a wide range of thicknesses and grades. They can b e engineered to control the 
environmental gases inside the pouch.  
 
Trays with overwrap   
These are made of moulded pulp tray or plastic material like EP S, PVC and PP. Film can be 
applied without the application of heat. Film is usually made o f LDPE, LLDPE or PVC. The 
produce is placed in individual cavities so that abrasion and b ruising is avoided during 
transportation. The trays also provide cushioning effect to the  produce. The merits of this 12 
 type of system include that it is transparent and see-through, odourless plastic film, clings to 
the product packed, films are semi-permeable and allow the exch ange of gases or respiration 
of the produce.  
 
Trends in fresh produce packaging 
Jute reinforced plastics 
Jute fibres and wood are combined with thermoplastic materials like LDPE, HDPE, for 
making semi-rigid as well as rigid boards. The film layer is pl aced on both sides of non-
woven jute. The composite layer s are pressed in a hydraulic pre ss at the required temperature 
for a certain period of time depending upon the thickness of th e end product and the type of 
film. The merits of this system include it has good tensile str ength, good puncture resistance, 
and moisture barrier properties  as well as it is reusable.  
 
Mesh/Net bags 13 
 A string/ net/ mesh bag is an open bag constructed from strands , yarns, or non-woven 
synthetic material into a net-lik e structure. This is ideal for  thick skinned pr oduce like apples 
& oranges, or root vegetables like onions, potatoes, & garlic, and for produce that needs 
ventilation. 
 
Controlled atmospheric packaging (CAP)  
It is the alteration of the natur al gaseous environment & maint enance of this atmosphere at 
pre-specified conditions thr oughout the storage time. 
Modified atmospheric packaging (MAP) 
Modified atmosphere is the initial alteration of the gaseous en vironment in the immediate 
vicinity of stored and packaged product.  
 
Active packaging   14 
 This is another way of modifying the atmosphere. It can be crea ted by using oxygen 
scavengers, carbon dioxide absorbents / emitters, ethanol emitt ers and ethylene absorbents.  
The appropriate absorbent material is placed alongside the fres h produce.  It modifies the 
headspace in the package and cont ributes to the extension of sh elf-life of the fresh produce. 
 
Smart/Intelligent packaging 
Intelligent packaging system use communication functions to fac ilitate decision-making 
aimed at preserving food quality, extending shelf life and impr oving overall food safety. It is 
capable of carrying out intelligent functions such as sensing, detecting, and tracing, recording 
and communicating certain types of information. Here that is th e various RFID, biosensors, 
gas indicators, bar coding techniques or time temperature indic ators etc. are used This TTI 
indicators may provide any major attribute, the intelligent pac kages or smart packages 
provide the consumer about the quality of the product inside. I t is capable of carrying out 
intelligent functions such as s ensing, detecting, tracing, reco rding and communicating these 
quality attributes to the consumer and they can replace the mic ro sensors, sachets etc. These 
can be put into the packet.  15 
 
 
Bioactive packaging 
 Bioactive packaging materials are those materials that would b e capable of withholding 
desired bioactive principles in optimum condition until they ar e eventually released into the 
food product either through contro l or fast release during the storage. So, the overall concept 
of the bio packaging is integratio n and control release of bioa ctive compounds or nano 
components by micro and nano encapsulation of these active subs tances and finally, the 
enzymatic activity exerts a health benefit through the transfor mation of the food components. 
So, they are the concept of  the bioactive packaging.  
 
The examples of the bio-active packaging are chitosan. The solv ent casting method is used 
for making chitosan film or chitosan with the essential oil. Ch itosan film introduced with 
silver nano particles. It is used for wrapping of strawberry fo llowed by the gamma irradiation 
so, this enhances the shelf life as well as some bioactive comp onents can be introduced or 
retained more for a longer peri od and it can be introduced into  the commodities.  16 
 
 
Edible coating  
Edible coating is normally applied on produce surface where a t hin layer of edible film is 
formed directly on surfaces or between different layers. These edible coatings may contain 
the functional ingredients like antimicrobial, antioxidant, emu lsifiers etc., it may have 
improved appearance, glass and transparency, it may improve bar rier properties of the 
materials etc. So, these components are present on the outer su rface, though create if any 
microbial microorganism tries to contaminate the commodity. So,  this antimicrobials provide 
hinderance to that and also this coating is should be properly done, so, as to allow the 
respiration continuous respirati on at its lowest possible rate.   
So, the successful success of edi ble coating of fruits and vege tables depends mainly on 
selecting the film or coating, which can give a desirable gas c omposition that is appropriate 
for the specific product. So, in general, edible coating can ex tend the shelf life by inhibition 
of the microbial growth, it can p reserve bioactive nutrients, i t can inhibit oxidation or in with 
gas transfer, it can preserve physico-chemical and organoleptic  properties or even it can 
protect probiotic bacter ia viability in the food.  17 
 
 
Innovative packaging 
Pattruss Z leaf salad vegetable  packing, created by Japanese co mpany Pattruss, uses a special 
tetrahedral design. It uses abou t 1/10th of the amount of plast i c u sed  i n  reg u lar  cl am  sh ell 
packaging, making it an environmentally friendly option. It use s air to cushion and protect the 
contents to avoid them from bei ng bruised and crushed in crowde d refrigerator bins. British 
packaging manufacturing company Sirane has come up with a new s oft fruit packaging 
solution for strawberries, cherri es, blueberries and other soft  fruit that can bruise easily. It 
uses cushioning/bubble pads that bring together the protective and cushioning properties with 
effective absorbent qualities, high permeability and an elegant  appearance. 
 
Southern Lettuce brand produces container for lettuce leaves. T he container itself mimics the 
shape of the green leaves, with additional strength added throu gh interlocking tabs. The 
proposed material to construct i s a biodegradable, water-resist ant sealant made out of sugar 
that will gradually break down ove r time. The container is prin ted with vegetable inks so that 
the design is truly green. 18 
 
 
In summary, it is required to tra nsport the horticultural produ ce to the site of the storage, and 
ensure processing or marketing in a sound condition as quickly as possible. Physical injury 
during transportation initiates vigorous bio-chemical reactions  in the damaged cells, as a 
result, the bruised product begins to deteriorate rapidly.  The  transport pack must ensure 
minimal damage to the packaged commodity during transportation.  Packaging is required not 
only for preservation and protection but it also has multi-func tional role of value addition, an 
assurance of quality and quantity/number, a conveyor of conveni ence and ultimately a tool 
for marketing food products. 
 19 
 
 
These are the references  for further study. Thank you. 