1 
 Post-Harvest O perations and Processing of Fruits, Vegetables, Spices and Plantation 
Crop Products  
Professor H N  Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 30  
Quality and Safety Aspects  
Quality Eval uation  
 
 
Hello everyone , namaskar , today in this thirtie th lecture of the course, we will discuss about 
various qual ity and safety aspects of juice s and concentrates. Particularly we will discuss about 
the evaluation of quality attributes . The quality attributes;  physical, chemical , rheological and 
microbiological quality ; how they are determined in various fruits and vegetables , juices and 
concentrate, we  will discuss  in the next half an hour or so.  
2 
 Quality and Safety  
 
So, let u s see fi rst: what do you mean by quality ? Quality comprises both subjective and 
objective characteristics and can be ter med as  fitness for consumption . A good quality material 
is good fo r consumption . It is fit for consumption . So, the term quality has  been defined as the 
totality of features relative  to the ability of a produce to fulfill its requirements as determined 
by the producer , manufacturer or consumers . So,  whatever the q uality standards are set by 
either regulators or industry or producer or manufacturer, a product should  meet those 
standards.  And, how do we know that the product meets to the standard ? We go to analyze it 
either in laboratory or in some other way (that is the standard protocols are there ). 
So, along with the quality, anot her very important attribute i s safety.  A food may be good in 
quality, but it may be unsafe for consumption . So,  the safety is a very (very) important 
prerequisite  of quality of any food . So, what does safety mean?  Its absence of any harmful 
substance  in the food  at the time of its consumption . When it has been consumed, it should not 
contain any harm ful or any toxic component  whether it is  microbiological, chemical or any 
other aspect (any other toxic agents ). So, the evaluation. N ow we wi ll talk a bout evaluation of 
food quality. B asically, it is a quality system as I told you that these are the various attri butes 
(earlier classes also we discuss ed).  
So, those attrib utes make the quality system. T he quality assurance and quality control are the  
two important  aspect s of this quality system . Quality system is a bigger umbrella and within 
this are the  quality assurance and quality control . So, the quality is evaluated in two ways , one 
is the subjective  method of eval uation ; other is the objective o r instrumental method o f the 
evaluation . In the subjective method (like) sensory characteristics like taste, aroma, flavor, even 
3 
 sometime  size et cetera , color , all those things ; we evaluate subjective devices , sensory (using 
our sensory attributes ) and for this, there again are the standard protocols , that is , the traine d 
panel of judges  are selected , that is , those  judge s panelist , they are first trained about the 
product which is to be evaluated (that is for example suppose t omato, tomato paste, tomato 
juice color is or its taste ).  
So, the panelist who is evaluating it , he or sh e must know what actually a good color of the 
tomato is; what a good color of tomato  concentrate , tomato paste is ; (what) a (good)  flavor  (is). 
So, they are the consumers panelists . They are trained and there are some sensory record. D ata 
record  sheets  are prepared  using the standard protocol . The judges are  given the sample and 
they are asked to record t heir impression about the sample, v arious attributes and the data 
records it and then those data  are analyzed using various methods  (so, that is how that ) may be 
nine p oint hedoni c scale rating or other such statistical methods  are used to analyze the data ; 
sometime logic evaluation is also used to analyze the sensory data and to find out the goodness 
of a sample .  
So, that is in the instrumental method or of the objective method  like pH, water holding 
capacity , vitamins and  mineral content that such other attributes are determined .  
Quality Parameters of Juices and Concentrates  
 
So, basically, that in the next slides, we will discuss about what are the v arious physical, 
chemical, rheological  and microb iological quality attributes for  juices and concentrates and 
their determination methods .  
4 
  
So, in the physical quality when we talk about the juices , mostly the TSS, pH , color , turbidity 
become the important attribute among the othe rs. In the chemical components (chemical 
characteristic ) it is t he vitamin C because the fruits  are good sources of vitamin C . So, that is 
considered to be one major component . Vitamin C (ascorb ic acid ), titratable acidity , 
anthocyanin content,  total phenolic  content  which also gives the idea about antioxidant capacity 
(that what is the  antioxidant value of this particular fruit or vegetable juice or concentrate ).  
In the rheolo gical characteristics , normally steady shear analysis is done . How the viscosity , 
another rheological attributes are determined and these rheological attribute (basically they ) 
help in designing the food processing equipments et cetera . Then finally, in the safety attribute 
which you a re talking about that the microbiolog ical quality. M icrobiological quality that is a 
what is aerobic mesophilic  counts , total plate count , coliform count , yeast and  mold count : 
these are some standard method which  every laboratory  and in the depending upon the type of  
product all has to use.  There are also methods for  determining specific toxic that is what is  the 
toxicity value or LD50  value of microorganisms et cetera  and toxic contaminants and all those 
things can be evaluated .  
5 
 Physical Properties   
Total Soluble Solids (TSS)  
 
So, let us see first, we  go for the physical property determination : total soluble solids. T he total 
soluble solid value is defined as the amount of the sugar and soluble materials present in the 
product. Generally,  fruits and vegetables contain more sugar particularly fruits they contain 
more sugar than the other solid constituent or  soluble constituents and hence, the degree Brix 
provides the useful guide of the TSS or sugar content . The TSS is reported in degree Brix and 
the measure it is measured by as a refractometer, as a hand  refractometer or abbe  refractometer .  
Hand refractometer and Abbe’s refractometer  
 
So, a refractometer measures the TSS concentration based on the principle of refraction of 
light. In a B rix refractometer , the refractive i ndex is calibrated into degree B rix readings.  The 
6 
 refractive index depends on density of solution . Measurements have to be made at a specific 
temperature particularly normally it is done at 20 degrees Celsius temperature and then a 
suitable concentration is applie d if the temperature is high or low then (some ) it is multiplied 
by some factor and accordingly the actual value is determined .  
 
 
7 
  
 
 
8 
 So, you can see that in the figure  how t hat the hand  refractometer is being  used as it is being 
sample , it is cleaned and then the data is that is the standard scale in the hand  refractometer.  
 
 
9 
  
 
 
10 
 So, the scale  is standardized and now the person , after that , is using (that some ) proper glass  
distilled water (your water is being rubbed while it  is being cleaned ).  
 
 
11 
  
 
And after cleaning, now the sample that is used (sample or consulted sample ) is put  (as) a drop 
of that.  It p ut the cover is closed after that  the lady  adjust it is the head that is the scale there 
is inside it will give directly the degree Brix reading. That is about how the hand refractometer 
works.  
12 
 Determination of pH  
 
Now let us see  the determination of  pH. It is a quantitative measure  of the acidity or basicity 
of the sample. Fruit juices have different pH l evels. They can be measured by t he pH meter . In 
the slide here I have shown that what are the various : that tomato j uice, it has a pH of around 
4.3, apple juice, maybe it has  pH of 3.3 and so on . So, the pH is a quantitative measure of the 
acidity or basicity . The pH meter measures the change in the electrochemical potential 
established by the hydronium ion concentration across a semi permeable glass membrane or an 
indicator electrod e.  
 
13 
  
 
 
14 
 You can  see in this electrode , how these are the electrodes : first the equipment is calibrated , 
pH meter is  calib rated using some base  that is  buffer solution  of a lower buffer  maybe in the 
buffer four  rather than buffer  nine and reading it once after the pH meter is calibrated.  
 
 
15 
  
 
Then the sample is taken into the beaker and then this electrode is put there . The electrode 
measures the potential that is hydroge n ion concentration there is a g lass and the gradient 
difference in the hydrogen ion concentration inside the electrode and t he outside in the 
environment . If the difference is that it is negative or positive on the basis of that, that is,  what 
are the  hydrogen  ion gra dient , it is determined , and then  it is represented in the form of  pH in 
the indicator, s o, accordingly that actual pH of the  commodity .  
Colour Measurement  
16 
  
Next with the color of measurement, the color of the fruit juice and concentrate is determined 
using a spectrophotometer . In the spectrophotometer, there is a light sour ce and this light is a , 
that is , monochromatic light which passes through the , that is , the cuvette  what is used and this 
light that is absorbance  what is the light absorbed  that is absorbance  is read in the 
spectrophotometer. T he colorime ter is an instrument which measures an amount of light that is 
sample absorb  basically .  
The colorimeter works by passing a light beam through a sample to measure the light intensity 
of the  sample and this e quation  one can use.   
∆E=√(L2-L1)2+(a2-a1)2+(b2-b1)2 
And these are normally told as  L, a, b value you can see  in the color scale tha t is a value is 
when it is  minus it is considered to be green when  it plus it is considered to be a red . Then 
similarly, b value in the positive  side is considered yellow or negative side it is considered blue , 
when L is  equal to zero it is black or when L is equal to 100 i t is white. T his was , these are the 
color scale accordingly L, a, b  value  are determined  using the colori meter and then this in  delta 
E that is  color value is calculated using this equation. The principle is shown here also  in the 
schematic diagram .  
Turbidity Measurement  
17 
  
Then turbidity measurement is another . Turbidity is the cloudiness or  heaviness of a fluid 
caused by a large number of individual particles that are genera lly invisible to the naked eye. 
It is they are similar to smoke in a ir. In case of juices and concentrates, this is caused by 
micro organisms, yeast,  molds , bacteria, thei r presence  or even polysaccharide particles, 
protein , tannins , anthocyanins are sub crystals of other foreign matters such as filter fibers, 
filter aids or sand . So,  other things might be present in the smaller quantity : the colliders 
suspended part or these particles may be , so they may give the juice  turbidity . So that turbidity 
of the juices is de termined using turbidity meter .  
 
18 
  
 
 
19 
  
 
 
20 
 Consid er the principle of how it is turbidity  meter works past the equipment is calibrated. Again 
that is this reading put the zone and the reading is brought ze ro the n rotate  the calibration knob 
to the next to the center position. A djust the zero knob , so that they now it is showing  zero.  
 
 
21 
  
 
 
22 
 Then now place the 100 NTU calibration solution and again now is adjust t he knob rotate the 
knob adjust to 1 00. So, the first it was calibrated to zero then it is calibrated to 100.  
 
 
23 
  
 
 
24 
 So, now actual solution is put into the juice or concentrate and it will give directly the reading 
it will give . Now, this has the 126 NTU is the turbidity of this sample . So, this way one can 
find out the turbidity sample .  
Chemical Properties  
Total Phenolic Content  
 
Now, we will discuss chemical properties . In the chemical properties total phenolic content is 
very very important . The fruit juices and concentrate ve getable juices concentrate et cetera : 
they are known for their antioxidant potential and these antioxidant value are due to the 
presence  of various phenolic components . So,  the total phenolic total phenol content of the 
sample is analyzed and it gives an idea about the antioxidant capacity of the component .  
Phenolic compounds are important plant constituents . So,  the hydroxyl group in  the plant 
extracts are responsible for facilitating the free radical scavenging as a basis phenolic content 
can be measured using Folin -Ciocalteu  reagent in the extract . So, that is about 500 microliter 
plant a crude extract is taken and in this 300 microliter  of hydrogen peroxide maybe 1.5 m olar 
is used and it  is properly what extent mixed uniformly and after that it is  put on the FC assay . 
Then FC assay , you can see that to each of the  microslit  will add about 1.5  µL of the plant 
crude extract treated  with H2O2 or 240  µL of water , 15 microlitre of 0.25 N  F-C agent, wait for 
3 minute and then add 30 microliter  of 1 N Na2CO 3. Incubate it for 2 hours in the dark and then 
read the absorbance spectrophotometer  at 760 nm and these absorbance  readings are then  
match ed with the standard curve  one can then find out the total phenolic contents.  
Total Flavonoid Content  
25 
  
And total flavonoid content accordingly . Flavonoid help reg ulate cellular activity and fight off  
free radicals  causing  oxidative stress on the body . It helps in body functions more efficiently 
while protecting it against everyday toxins and  stressors. Flavonoids are also powerful 
antioxidant agents. Examples of flavonoids are naringin,  quercetin, kaempferol, hesperidin, 
neohesperidin  and poncirin present in the different types of fruit juices et cetera . So, these are 
total flavonoid  content, but their  determination method is given briefly described here in the 
slide .  
You can take 200 milligram of sample , extract it under reflux with 40 ml of ethanol , 60 percent  
volume by volume and filter it that you get the whatever that extracted there again it is reflux 
with 40 ml of ethanol, 60 percent value for 10 minutes and both are mixed you get the complete 
volume 100 ml and then this is tested . Test solution and com pensation solution . Finally, the  
spectrophotometer  reading is observed at 401 nanometer after 30 minutes using the either  test 
solution method o r compensation solution method that is the process is given here you can 
read.  
So, this is abso rbance spectrophotometer reading recorded and for  always spectrophotometer 
reading one has to also prepare a standard curve and the data obtain if  the sample is read 
compared with the standard curve.  
Ascorbic Acid  
26 
  
Then ascorbic acid determination . L-ascorbic acid is a reducing agent. If a solution of iodine  is 
added to a solution containing ascorbic acid, then it will reduce the iodine  which is brown in 
solution to colorless or the colorles s iodide ions  you can see here the equation  that is iodine 
which is brown after reduction it becomes to iodide  which is a  colorless . So, in this process the 
ascorbic acid is oxidized and this reaction can be used to estimate concentration of ascorbic 
acid in a sample .  
So, normally you take around 10 ml of the juice sample or concentrate sample which can be 
concentrated can be diluted, then add 15 ml of the distilled water , take 5  ml of 1 M hydrochloric 
acid, 2 ml starch  and titrate against iodine  solution . So, this is the starch iodine reaction and 
you get in color is gives the endpoint and then one can calculate how much this can be 
considered there. Alternatively, that 2, 6-dichlorophenol indo phenol, visual titration  method  is 
also used for the estimation of the vitamin C  content in fact, the more frequently used the 
method in the chemical laboratory in the food industry , which is the  2, 6-dichlorophenol 
indophenol .  
So, this is also the principle of this is also that this dye is reduced by the ascorbic acid and once 
first one has to calculate the dye factor that is a dye solution of standard known concentration 
is titrated with the known concentration of ascorbic acid and the dye factor is calculated and 
then in the unknown sample, it is evaluated using the titrated using  the dye and then one can 
find out calculate the vitamin C content or ascorbic acid content in the sample .  
Amount of vitamin C (mg) in 50 mL of juice  
27 
  
So, in this slide I have  given this is the figure that is the formula of ascorbic  acid and normal 
vitamin C content in the common fruit juices like orange , litchi , guava, pineapple are  that is 
mixes  fruit juices . It may range from around 15. 38 milligram to about 38 or 40 milligram like 
litchi  juice contains around 38.46 milligram and t hat the pineapple juice  may contain 30 
milligram or so. T he ascorbic acid is a very important component, if it is a deficient  in our diet, 
it causes various problems like scurvy, the major disease caused by the deficiency  of ascorbic 
acid, it’s  symptom may be fatigue, mood change,  weight loss , joint and muscle ache, bruising, 
dental conditions , may be wet or dry hair and skin infections  et cetera . These might be the latter 
problems .  
Similarly, sometimes if you take excessively more amount of ascor bic acid that may also 
sometime  cause some problem like redness or the flossing and face that formation  of stones in 
kidney , indigestion and heat burn et cetera  and so on.  
Titratable acidity  
28 
  
Then the titratable acidity is another important quality attributes . It is a measure of the amount 
of acid  or acids  present in the food sample . It should not be confused with pH  which is the 
measure of the concentration of hydrogen and pH is the measure of concentration of hydrogen 
ion whereas titratable acidity  gives an idea about the amount of acid present . It is an important 
parameter in determining fruit maturity and sour taste in the citrus foods. Juices with a high 
titratable acidity are difficult for saliva to neutralize and are thus potentially particularly 
damaging to the teeth .  
So, pure fruit juices have high titratable acidity and immature fruit juices will  normally have a 
low sugar to acid ratio. So, these are other fruits  that is this is just  standard that is the acidity is  
found  out by normal titration  with a standard sodium hydroxide solution and the acid value is 
calculated that is based on the particular acid like in the case of apple , pear it is  the standard 
acid is used as a malic acid ; in citrus fruit it is citric  acid.  
In this strawberry also citric acid , in the grape it is the tartaric  acid, so their equivalent weight  
of these acids is used to calculate that is the tartaric  acid will be good at reading to convert it 
into the percent acidity  and the acidity of the fruits and vegetable juices , their concentrates are 
always expressed in terms of a particular acid that is as I told you in the gra pes, it is percent 
tartaric acid , in the a pple percent  malic acid , in tomato percent  citric acid and so on .  
Anthocyanins  
29 
  
Then anthocyanin content . They are anthocyanins are m ember of flavonoid  groups of 
phytochemicals, which is a group predominant fruit juices , concentrates and vegetables and 
this can be found in berries like black  currant , elder berries, blueberries, strawberries et cetera  
and they are juices as well as in the red wine , anthocyanins are the  positive  component . So, 
these anthocyanins are rich in antioxidants and are thought to be anti inflammatory and help to 
boost the immune system .  
Antioxidant activity  
 
In the table, I have given certain subtotals anthocyanin, total polyphenol , then antioxidant 
activity and what  is the  how the TA, TP  ratio influences the antioxidant activity in the 
commodity . So, for the determination of antioxidant activity there is a  it is quantified generally 
in terms of total phenolic content like TPC or that flavonoid , radical scavenger activity that is  
30 
 RSA or 1, 1-diphenyl -2-picryldrazyl  that DPPH assay value and even total flavonoid  content 
are also determined . And the method  is given here either DPPH  assay  or FRP assay  is used and 
in the case of DPPH assay  using the standard protocol, one can go and read the absorbance at  
around 51 7 nm and in the FRAP  method FRAP assay  absorbance is read at 700 nm .  
And the se absorbance value  then using the standard curve , the total antioxidant capacity is 
known  and here in the some of the common foods  like blueberry , vegetable juice et cetera . That 
is the percent antioxidant  of DPPH assay  or the TEAC  value that is trolox e quivalent 
absorbance capacity or what ox ygen radical absorbance capacity,  ORAC  value is shown  after 
different juices, which gives that a good fairly good idea of the antioxidant potential .  
Rheological Properties  
 
Now the rheological property . We will discuss that rheology the science of deformation  of flow 
behavior of a fluid and particular ly in the concentrate and juices is an important property 
discussed in the main parameter of the fruit juice in the rheology . This is affected by the 
produce and system parameters. The rheology helps in the designing of equipment, juice 
acceptance by the consumers and flow properties . So, they normally product parameters like 
clarity, soluble  solid content and extraction method s are used as system parameters, shear rate 
and temperature and all these influence viscosity .  
And this viscosity data helps in equipment design and as I told you is t he oth er basis are  this 
one can find out whether acceptability sometime viscosity  of the material. I t gives an important 
that is the consumers acceptance et cetera  are flow property which is dedicated .  
Different measuring configuration for viscosity of fruit juices  
31 
  
So, the different measuring  configuration for viscosity of  fruit juices  is shown  here that is the 
for the juice s and concentrate  starting from the low viscosity going  towards high very high 
viscosity either coaxial cylinder or coaxial cylinder with recessed bottom , double gap geometry 
that is this device o r pin rotors or vane  rotor they can be used for to  measure the  rheology   that 
is the system to measure this viscosi ty and then a curves  was that is the  viscosity and  shear rate 
can be drawn you can see here in this figure that different solutions that the  juices are 
concentrate  which  either the y are dilatants or pseudoplastic . Newtonian  that is Newtonian is  
just you se e the parallel with the x  is the  or it may be plastic or pseudoplastic with yield stress 
so various behaviors  and the data the viscometer  one can use the various models are there like 
power law model , Williamson  model , Sisko  model , Carreau  and so on .  
There are various models and these data can be used and regression modeling then again  graph 
can be generated and this gives the rheological various values can be calculated accordingly .  
Effect of the total soluble solid and temperature on rheological properties of juices and 
concentrates  
32 
  
So, this is here the effect  of total soluble solids and temperat ure on the rheological properties 
of the juices and concentrate is shown in this figure. T he increase in the temperature as you can 
see in the figure it will causes  the decrease in the viscosity of the fruit juices. And this 
relation ship generally followed Arrhenius  concept which written as : 
𝜇=𝐴0𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝐸𝑎
𝑅𝑇) 
Where, µ is the viscosity at a particular shear  rate, A 0 is a pre exponential factor, Ea is the 
activa tion energy and R is the universal gas constant, T is the absolute temperature .  
So, the increase in the total soluble  solid increases the viscosity of the fruit juice  and therefore,  
if the viscosity is more or total soluble salt content is  more the fruits becomes more dense . So, 
the concentrates normally they have higher viscosity.  
Microbiological Properties  
33 
  
Then you come to  the microbiological properties. T he type of microorganism in juice is 
generally influenced by the type of microorganisms in the respective  fruit and vegetable from 
which juice was e xtracted  and this there may be in the microbiological quantity i s not good that 
it may be fruit maybe  of, if the juice is prepared from the inferior quali ty of the fruits, then 
extraction of the  juice from the bad quality of the fruit or utiliz ation or discarded fruit after 
harvest.  
If for the  juicy extraction  non-processed  water is used to mak e up the juice or  application o r 
pre-contaminated water for the  juice then also it may give that microbiological higher microbial 
count . So, these are there is  the bad quality of water used maybe another factor then mechanical 
damage in the fruits also sometime the re is th e damaged fruits have higher chances of spoi lage 
or it compromises the quality of the end product et cetera . Even market diseases, market 
diseases  like blemish and decay  that develop during the transit , storage and marketing like soft 
rot, beetle injury , et cetera , they also influence  the microbiological properties, have  more 
microbial count and then they may lead to the toxic metabolites generation .  
Microbial determination method  
34 
  
So, for the determination of the microbial number, in the laboratory , in the fruit cardinal such 
laboratory normally that is aerobic mesophilic  count which we also can say that total plate 
count that is just  spread plate methods on plate count agar  media is  used. So,  then to total 
coliform count is also used by multiple tube fermentation techniques or a plate count method 
also is use d for coliform count determination.  But the media is a special , in this then yeast and 
mold count here also a  spread plate method u sing Sabbauad  Dextrose Agar. So, all these things 
that is spl it plate methods can be used, but using a specific media and even the same method 
can be used a similar technique can be used or getting measuring specific microorganisms also, 
pathogens,  et cetera  using  standard media and standard incubation conditions .  
So, a serial dilution method is normally used where that sample is taken and it is diluted easily, 
so, that you can get a statistically countable number in the plate . So, the plate in this region 104, 
105, 106 dilution region that is the serial dilution is used. And then there i s a category that 1 ml 
of these various diluted samples are used in the taken and the particulate in the particulates 
especially media use and then media that has  some  solidified agent like Agar -Agar  are there .  
Then it is this o nce the sam ple is prepared in the laminar  air flow chamber that is sample is 
poured or media is poured and then it is once the it is solidified it is put into the incubator for 
incubator which is set at particular temperature that is required for the micro org anism  like with 
a coliform count or t otal counter aerobic mesophilic  count et cetera  for aerobic media 
mesophilic count normally with a 35,  37 °C is there, for coliform maybe that at 28  to 30 degree , 
for yeast and  mold count also same 25 , 28 °C and for the  required duration and after that .  
35 
 So, basically we are taking a sample with unknown amount of these microorganisms and then 
it is given with the microbial media for the  microorganisms to the food of the microorganisms  
put into the plate and the plate is kept in the incubator means in proper environmental condition 
is given for the growth of the , so, whatever  that numbers are there in the solution sample,  the 
each organism grows there a s a individual colony and t hen these colonies are read by  colony 
counter they are counted and then the data is expressed in number of colony forming unit per 
100 ml or per 100 g ram as the case may be .  
 
So, this gives that normally t hat the color values et cetera  that it should  not be every community 
there are given a specific number for this amount that as they  should not have more than this 
much and under the regulatory agencies, they have specified normally like in the last class I 
told you that there should be nil coliform count. If  the coliform count is found in any sample it 
indicates that the sanitary conditions are not properly maintained in the production processing 
and so  on.  
Summary  
36 
  
So, this gives now, the, I will summarize that is  quality parameters are very very important 
aspects and this should  be standard laboratory methods and protocols should  be used to analyze 
the various quality attributes , both physical chemical, microbiological and then many a times 
either as a processing aid or these values are written on the label , how  to meet the requi rement  
of the regulatory agencies to have the more sale value this quality analysis is done and quality 
this data of these various attributes ar e used as per the requirement.  
References  
 
So, these are the references which I have  used in this lecture. With t his thank you  very much 
for your  attention.  
