1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation Crop 
Products  
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 01 
Course Introduction 
 
In the first lecture, a brief i ntroduction of the course follow ed by a concise discussion on the current 
scenario particularly the produc tion statistics, consumption pa ttern, and market insights along with 
the associated issues and challenges in the horticultural and p lantation crop sector in India will be 
emphasized.  
 
 
This is a 12 week course having 60 lectures of 30-35 minutes ea ch. There will be 12 assignments, 
most probably one at the end of e very week. There will be one o nline examination at the end of the 
course. The broad areas that will be covered in this course inc lude novel and emerging methods and 
technologies for post-harvest ha ndling transportation processin g and packaging of major fruits, 2 
 vegetables, spices and plantatio n crop products. In addition, t he course will also illustrate on the 
minimal processing strategies for producing high quality ready to eat, ready to serve products and 
hurdle technology concept for manufacturing of novel intermedia te moisture foods and high moisture 
fruit products. Different smart p ackaging technologies, modifie d atmosphere packaging, edible 
coating, control atmosphere storage for extending the shelf lif e of whole as well as cut fruits and 
vegetables will be discussed. Also towards the end of the cours e, the application of environment 
friendly green technologies as we ll as the approaches for near zero waste processi ng and utilization 
of by-products and waste streams will be discussed. 
 
The topics that will be cove red in this course include: 
In the first week, various aspec ts related to composition, nutr ition and health values of fruits, 
vegetables, spices, and plantation products will be discussed. In the second week, the post-harvest 
handling and storage aspects followed by processing and preserv ation principles will be covered in 
the third week. A brief overview on the primary process operati ons both on farm and in plant will be 
emphasized on the fourth week and the fifth week will cover the  minimal processing strategies and 
hurdle technology. The 6th and 7th weeks will involve the developmen t and processing of juices an d 
concentrates and dehydrated and s nack food products, respective ly. The processing of  plantation crop 
products and the science and tec hnologies involved in spices an d condiments will be discussed in the 
eighth and ninth weeks, respectively. The 10th week will be devoted on plant-based fermented foods 
and beverages. The overview on the smart packaging and storage of the fruits and vegetables, spices, 
plantation crop products will be taken up in the 11th week and finally the last week (12th week) will 
include a brief insight on the  green technologies, by products and waste utilization. 
A list of the suggested readings  i.e. the books which might be useful for this c ourse is given here. 
 Handbook of Vegetables and Vegetable Processing by Muhammad Sid diq & Mark A. 
Uebersax 3 
  
 
 Handbook of Fruits and Fruit Proc essing by  Nirmal K. Sinha et al. 
 Handbook of Post-Harvest Technol ogy by A Chakraverty et al. 
 Fruit and vegetable processing:  Improving quality by Wim Jongen  
 Post-Harvest Technologies of Fru its & Vegetables by H S Ramaswa my 
 Chocolate, Cocoa and Confectiona ry: Science & Technology by Ber nard W. Minifie 
 Handbook of Herbs and Spices by K V Peter 
 Food Processing Technology Princip les and Practice by P. J Fell ows 
 Elements of Food Technology by N. W. Desrosier 
 Principles of Food Science Part  1: Physical Methods of Food Pre servation by Owen R 
Fennema 
 Food Packaging Technology by Ric hard Coles, et al. 
Horticultural status in India: 
India is the second largest producer of horticulture crops with  18% of area under cultivation. 
Horticulture contributes 33% to the gross value addition in agr iculture. Horticulture production for 
India was of 331.05 million tons i n 2021 which is the highest e ver recorded. 4 
 
 
Global horticulture export share  of India is about 1.7% for veg etables and 0.5% for fruits. Also, India 
imports fruits and vegetables worth Rs, 15,700 crores every yea r. Post-harvest losses of fruits and 
vegetables in India range to the tune of 20 to 44% on the accou nt of inadequate infrastructure and 
value addition produce of the produce according to the report o f FAO, 2021.  
 
Major fruits of India 
Fruit is the matured ovary and associated parts of a flower. In dia being the largest producer of fruits 
is known as fruit basket of the world. Major fruits grown in th e India include banana, mango, 
mandarin, papaya, guava, grapes, watermelon, apple, pomegranate , jackfruit, pineapple, and sapota. 
The data for the production of t hese fruits given in the slide has been taken from the National 
Horticulture Board Database (2020). 5 
 
 
The major production states of fruit in India include Uttar Pra desh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat,                 
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. India ra nks first in the production of 
banana (26.08%), papaya (44.05%), and mangoes including mangost eens and guavas (45.89%). The 
area under cultivation of fruits  is about 6.66 million hectares  in the country. India is also a major 
exporter of fruits to the world. Recently, India has exported 6 09612.91 metric ton of fresh fruits other 
than grapes and mango. The value of the export produces were to  the tune of around Rs. 2233.23 
crores during the year 2021.  
 
Major vegetables of India  
Vegetables are the edible portions  of a plant. Vegetables are u sually grouped according to the portion 
of the plant that is eaten for example leaves (lettuce), stem ( celery), roots (carrot), tubers (potato), 
bulbs (onion), and flowers (bro ccoli). India is the second larg est producer of vegetable in the world. 6 
 The major vegetables produced include potato, cabbage, tapioca,  onion, cauliflower, chili, eggplant, 
okra, radish, peas and tomato.  
 
The major production areas of vege tables in India include Uttar  Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, 
Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Maharash tra and Gujarat. India is the l argest producer of ginger and okra 
among the vegetables. India ranks second in the production of p otatoes, onions, cauliflower, brinjal, 
cabbages. The area under cultivati on of vegetable is to the tun e of around 10.35 million hectares. 
India exported vegetables wor th Rs. 4969.73 crores during the y ear 2020-21. 
 
Major spices of India  
Spices is a dried seed, fruit, root, bark or vegetative substan ce primarily used for flavoring coloring 
or preserving a food. In 2021, the percentage share of differen t spices of total production in India 
contributed as: garlic: 30%, ch ilies: 20%, seed  spices: 19%, gi nger: 18%, and turmeric: 10%. The 7 
 production data of the major spic es like garlic, coriander, car damom, chilies, fenugreek, tejpata, 
ginger, tamarind, turmeric, fe nnel, cumin, and pepper are given  in the slide.  
 
The percentage share of production of spices (in the area wise) : about 48% i.e. half of the area under-
spice cultivation contributes to the seed spices followed by 16 % belonging to chilies, garlic and mint 
share 9 and 8%, respectively, and 6% of spice cultivation belon ging to turmeric and so on. India is 
the world’s largest producer, consumer and exporter of spice. 7 5 out of the 119 varieties of spices 
listed by ISO are produced in India, which accounts for half of  the global trading in spices. In the 
financial year 2020, spices worth US$ 3.62 billion were exporte d from India.  
 
Major plantation crops of India 
Plantation crops are high value commercial crops which play a v ital role in the agriculture economy 
and export trade of many developing and developed countries. Th e crop which come under the 8 
 plantation crop include tea, co ffee, cocoa, coconut, areca nut,  oil palm, palmyra and cashew. The 
production data of all these plan tation crop products is given in the slide. 
 
Major production areas of plantation crops in India are mainly confined to the hilly areas of southern 
part of our country i.e. mainly Kerala (27%), Karnataka (27%), Tamil Nadu (24%), and Andhra 
Pradesh (9%). The major parts of  the coconut or other plantatio n crop products are produced in these 
four major southern states. Assam, West Bengal, Tripura, Arunac hala Pradesh are along with the 
southern states the major t ea producing states in India. 
 
Horticulture, spice and plantation crop production pattern 
The area under cultivation, production, and productivity of hor ticultural crops, spices and plantation 
crop in the year from 2004-05 to 2018-19 and 2019-20 is given i n the table, which indicate that total 
horticulture production in the 2019-20 was estimated to be 3.12 % higher than in the year 2018-19. 
Increase in the production of fruits, vegetables, flowers and s pices are seen whereas there is a 9 
 decrease in the plantation crops, aromatics, and medicinal plan ts is registered over 2018-19. The fruit 
production is estimated to be 102.03 MT as compared to 97.97 MT  in the 2018-19. The increased 
production of vegetables was estimated to be around 188.91 MT a gainst 183.17 MT in the year 2018-
19. 
 
Consumption, export and processing data 
Export of fruits is estimated to be around 835,000 tons which v alues at Rs. 5,496.38 crores. 
Similarly, export of vegetables is estimated to be around 1931 thousand tons valued at Rs. 4617.34 
crores. Around 76% of the fruits and vegetables are consumed in  fresh form, 20 to 30% is wasted, 
and 2% of the vegetable production and approximately 3% of the fruit production are being 
processed and converted into value-added products. For spices, the export is around 1193.44 
thousand tons which is valued at Rs. 25642.04 crore. Export of spices contributes to 41% of the total 
export earnings from all horticul tural crops. The plantation cr op is exported 84.37 thousand tons of 
cashew nuts which is valued at Rs. 4018.35 crores in the year 2 019-20. The tea production in India is 
around 254.80 thousand tons which is valued at Rs. 5851.11 cror es and for coffee, the production is 
around 257.03 thousand tons that va lued at Rs. 5236.76 crores.  
Market insight of fru its and vegetables 
To reduce wastage as well as to add value in the fruits and veg etables processing traditional methods 
such as like canning, dehydration, pickling or provisional pres ervation and bottling are adopted. 
However, the percentage of processing of fruits and vegetables is currently less than 3%, which is far 
less for a country with the second largest production volume in  the world. In the year 2019, 
approximately 8.31 million tons of fruits and vegetables were p rocessed in India which is expected to 
reach about at 16.39 million tons by 2024 expanding at a CAGR o f approximately 15% during the 
year 2020-2024. Indian fruits and vegetable processing industry  experiences a conducive growth 
environment owing to the abundant supply of raw materials and t he favorable government policies 
like Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY).  10 
 
 
 
From the market share of different fruits, it can be clearly ob served that banana contributes the 
highest i.e. 33% followed by mango (21%), citrus fruits (13%), papaya (6%), and guava (4%). 
Similarly, among vegetables potato contributes the highest perc entage of market share (26%) 
followed by onion (12%), tomato (11%), brinjal (8%), cabbage (6 %), and cauliflower along with 
tapioca (5%).  
The graph represents the progressive increase in the sales valu e of processed fruits and vegetables in 
India from the year 2012-20. In the year 2017, the total sale v alue of fruits and vegetables was 
estimated as around 228.4 million US dollars. In 2020, amid COV ID period the total sale value of 
fruits and vegetables was around 232.2 million US dollar. 11 
 
 
Key players of fresh fruit and vegetable market in India includ e Reliance fresh, Safal, Nature's 
basket, Heritage fresh and Big bazaar. They operate either thro ugh contact farming or sourcing 
directly from the farmers. Major key players, major players of the processed fruits and vegetables in 
India include Kissan, Nestle, Par le Agro, McCain, Ruchi, MTR, H eritage and LT foods Ltd.  
 
Market insight of spices and its products 
The India spice market grew at a CAGR of about 15% during years 201 5-20. The Indian seasoning, 
dressing and sauces sector is led by herbs, spices and seasonin gs category in both value and volume 
terms. Dressing category is forecast to register fastest value growth during 2021-2026. Hypermarkets 
and supermarkets are the leading channels for distribution of s easonings, dressings and sauces 
products in the country. Tata sons limited, Unilever, and Nestl e are the top three companies in the 
Indian seasonings, dressings, and s auces sector in  the year 202 0.  12 
 
 
Market insight of plantation crops 
Plantation crops are the potential sector with lot of opportuni ties of employment generation, foreign 
exchange earnings and overall s upporting livelih ood sustenance of mankind at large. These plantation 
crops are considered as cash crops in the country. Coconut prod ucts market size was valued at 11.5 
billion US dollar in 2018 and is estimated to reach 31.1 billio n dollar by 2026 registering a CAGR of 
13.6% from 2019 to 2026. In 2018, the coconut oil segment accou nted for more than half of the total 
coconut products markets share. The current major key market pl ayers in the coconut industry 
include The Coconut Company (UK), Marico Ltd., Vita Coco, Sambu  Group, Metshu Exports (Pvt) 
Ltd, Cocomate, Klassic Coconut, Cocotana Coconut Products, Univ ersal Coco Indonesia, Thai 
Coconut Public Company Limited. The Indian cashew market is pro jected to register a CAGR of 4% 
during the forecast period 2022-2027. India has been the top ex porter in the global shelled cashew 
trade, accounting more than 15% of the global cashew export in the last 4 years.  
The India chocolate market reached a value of US 1.9 billion do llar in 2020 with the country 
currently representing one of the  world fastest growing market for chocolates. The Indian chocolate 
market is expected to exhibit a CAGR of 11.3% during 2021-2026.  Some of the major players in 
India in the chocolate sector are  Mondelez, Ferrero, Nestle, Ma rs international etc.  
In India, the tea market is projected to witness a future growt h of CAGR of 4.2%. In fact, Indian tea 
particularly Darjeeling tea is known worldwide for its flavor a nd aroma. In 2026, the tea industry in 
India is expected to attain 1.4 million tons. The ready to drin k segment has the potential to witness a 
healthy increase. The industry will also be driven by the incre asing innovation in packaging and 
flavors in the coming years. 
Major players in the tea sector in the country include Tata con sumers product limited (Tetley tea and 
Tata tea), Hindustan Unileve r Ltd. (Lipton and Brookebond), Wag h Bakri Tea Group etc.  
 13 
 
 
 
The total coffee export was US  377.65 million dollar in April 2 021 to August 2021 and for the august 
2021 it was US dollar 76.71 milli on. In the financial year 21, the total coffee e xport accounted for US 
dollar 719.5 million and for March 2021 it was US dollar 97.41 million. The coffee segment amounts 
to 808 million US dollar and is expected to grow annually by 8. 9% CAGR in 2020-2025. 
HUL's bru and Nestle's Nescafe are the key players in the coffe e sector in India. In the slide, the 
revenue earned by coffee including roasted and instant coffee ( in the US dollar) from the year 2012 
to 2025 has been shown, which also represents the progressive i ncrease in the revenue earned by 
coffee annually.  14 
 
 
Post-harvest losses 
Post-harvest loss is a measurable  qualitative and quantitative loss along the supply chain, starting at 
the time of harvest till the pr oduce reaches to the consumer ta ble, it has to pass th rough various stages 
and each stage in the value chai n, there is a significant quant ity of the product loss in India.  
FAO, 2011 reported that every year about one third of the food worldwide is wasted. Fresh 
information bureau data in the y ear 2016 reported  that India lo ses approximately Rs. 926 billion 
worth of food as post-harvest loss and a developing country lik e India cannot afford to such a huge 
loss or such a luxury of huge was tage of fruits, vegetables and  other important produces.  
The left hand side graph represent the post-harvest losses of c ommodities including cereals, pulses, 
oilseeds, fruits, vegetables, spices, and condiments with their  maximum, minimum, and average 
values indicating in red, blue, and green color, respectively. The right hand side plot shows the post-
harvest losses of vegetables at d ifferent stages (producer and retail) as well as total losses indicating 
in blue, red, and green c olor, respectively. 
Post-harvest losses of fruits a nd vegetables at different stage s in the value chain 
The value chain consists of diffe rent stages starting from the harvesting, washing, sorting, grading, 
packing, cooling, storing at col d storage, transportation to ex port, or directly to retail shop or 
processing unit followed by transporting to retail shop. In the  production stage about 28 lakh ton of 
the produce is getting wasted at the farm level. Then in the co ld storage and transportation section 
approximately 18.78 or approximately 19 lakh tons of the produc e gets wasted. Finally the fresh 
produce gets wasted (around 25 lakh tons) in the retail shop. T he wastage value at the farm gate is 
Rs. 2516.78 crores, during storag e and transportation around Rs . 2039 crores and in the retail shops it 
is around Rs. 3063 crores. The Ministry of Food Processing repo rted that there was 12 million tons 
loss of fruits and 21 million tons loss of vegetable, which acc ounted around approximate value of US 
dollar 4.4 billion in 2019.  15 
 
 
Issues and challenges 
Horticulture in India contribute s about one third of the Indian  agriculture GDP and its expenditure 
shares of the total Indian GDP are about 4.7%. Despite of the s ignificant production, average fruits 
and vegetable consumption in India is still relatively very low  and highly unequal due to 
underdeveloped supply chains for the distribution of fruits and  vegetables. It has been reported that 
huge quantity of fruits and vegetables produced in India are lo st in the supply chain between harvest 
and consumption. The major reasons are perishable nature and sh ort shelf life of the fruits and 
vegetables as well as the poor storage infrastructure, poor tra nsportation facilities and poor supply 
chain models. 
 
So, the major issues which need to be resolved are the perishab le nature and shelf life of fruits and 
vegetables, limited storage capacity in India and these can onl y accommodate 10% of the total 
perishable produced in the country. So, there is need to increa se the storage capacity, cold storage 16 
 chain for the horticultural and plantation crop or perishable c rop sectors. Also, there is a limited 
processing, lack of application of the novel technologies parti cularly at the commercial levels, lack of 
skilled labour as well as knowledge and practical skills on nov el processing techniques, low 
purchasing power, cultural barrie rs and personal preferences. S o, this course will provide sufficient 
knowledge, information and will be useful for the participant a nd it will help to create more 
entrepreneurs startups and e ven the existing industries. 
 
Summary 
India is the second largest producer of horticultural crops in the world. Irrespective of the highest 
production, only 2-3% of the produc ers are processed. So there is a need for skill development and 
application of novel processing  technologies t o capitalize the opportunity and fulfill the demand. This 
course will be helpful to gather knowledge for improving or mod ernizing the storage and processing 
facilities in order to add value to the product so that the lev el of processing is increased, losses are 
minimized and the industry is able to give quality products whi ch good nutritional value because 
fruits and vegetable are the  hub of the micronutrients.  17 
 
 
 
The references for this lecture are given here for further stud y. Thank you. 