Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 
Lecture 45 
Condiments Technology 
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:29) 
 
Hello, everybody. Namaskar. Today we will discuss Condiments Te chnology. The aspects 
that we will cover in today's lecture include what are the cond iments, then major condiments 
like salt, honey, maple syrup, etc., and process technology for  making the condiments and 
their food applications. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:42) 
 Condiments  
So, let us see what the condiment means. Condiments are prepare d food compounds 
containing one or more spices, or spice extracts, which when ad ded to the food after it has 
been served, enhance the flavour  of the food. Condiments have b een used since ancient times. 
It is derived from the Latin word condiment, word condiment is derived from Latin, which 
means pickle. 
Condiments are generally available  in concentrated single forms  or they are used as or they 
are available as a mixture of i ngredients. Salt and sugar are t he most directly used condiments 
and are the basic ingredients fo r most condiments. Condiments o riginated in different 
cultures of the world and ca n be found in liquid, semi-solid, a nd solid forms. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:49) 
 
Condiment vs Spices 
If we have a comparison between spices and condiments, in earli er classes we have seen that 
spice is an aromatic or pungent part of the plant, which is use d to flavour or season a food 
dish during its preparation. Spi ce is usually a single unprepar ed material. Whereas 
condiments are simple or compound spice mixtures that it chiefl y added to give a specific 
flavour, to improve the flavour , or to supplement the dish. 
Condiments are preparations uti lizing a blend of herbs and spic es that creates the final dish 
seasoning for easy consumption. Condiments are added to food im mediately before 
consumption. Whereas spices are also used in curries to produce  safe food. Spices are added during the cooking process of the food. But the condiments are generally added before the 
food is consumed and it involves its preparation of course befo re use. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:13) 
 
Condiment categories  
The condiments categories if you see there are about five non-i nclusive categories in 
condiments. One is salt, it is often a condiment ingredient in many other condiments. It is 
employed in a wide range of food including vegetables, and many  other products. Sweetener 
is another type of condiment, where sugar and honey are used di rectly in the beverage, such 
as coffee, tea, toppings or break fast cereals, sugar and honey are also employed in making 
other condiments, such as jam, jelly, preserves, etc. 
Hot condiments include spicy or hot food such as black pepper, chilli pepper, mustard, garlic, 
horse radish, onions, and so on. The pickle dates back to the a ncient world in Europe as well 
as in Asia. Common pickle food items such as condiments today i nclude ginger pickle, 
cucumber, and so on. And then the compound condiments include s auces, ketchup, 
mayonnaise, etc. (Refer Slide Time: 04:30) 
 
Simple condiments  
Salt 
Now, we will discuss briefly these condiments one by one. Salt is the most commonly used 
seasoning across the globe. The extracted salts are subjected t o washing, shifting, grading, 
and other purification processes. The salt is sourced through t hree main methods the 
evaporation of seawater, sa lt mining, or salt brines. 
So, once sourced, the sodium chl oride can be subjected to vario us rounds of processing, 
resulting in salt with differing textures, flavours, and proper ties. Even purified salts are mixed 
or ground together with spices to make flavoured salt, or spice -infused salt like garlic salt, 
onion salt, etcetera. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:25) 
 Sweeteners 
Honey 
Honey is another condiment that comes in the category of sweete ner. It is composed 
primarily of fructose, that is about 38 percent of the honey is  fructose and 31 percent glucose. 
In addition, that maltose, sucrose and other complex carbohydra tes are also present in honey. 
The other component includes vitamins, minerals, acids, pollen,  and enzymes, which make 
honey a unique ingredient i n many food preparations. 
The enzyme glucose oxidase is found in bees’ stomachs, which wh en mixed with nectar 
produces gluconic acid and hydrogen peroxide. It contributes to  the acidity and antibacterial 
properties of honey. Mono-floral honey has distinctive flavours  and colours due to 
differences in nectar sources. Honey is graded on the basis of its colour and optical density 
using a scale called the Pfund s cale and this Pfund scale range s from 0 to 114, i.e. scale of 0 
is for water white honey as we ll as 114 scales of the Pfund is known as dark amber honey. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:58) 
 
Processing of honey 
In the processing of honey, there are various stages, first is the formation and the deposition. 
Here, wooden boxes with frames provide the foundation for bees to build their combs. 
Foraging bees collect the flower nectar and convert them to hon ey using their gastric 
enzymes and stored them in the honeycomb cells. Then, these honeys are collected  from these cells, it involves pacifying the bees with smoke 
followed by uncapping which is a removal of the wax seals from the comb. Frames are spun 
in a centrifuge forcing the honey out of the comb. Then the hon ey is heated to around 66 to 
77 degrees Celsius to decrease its viscosity prior to filtratio n. The heating process also 
reduces the moisture content, del ays crystallization and destro ys yeast cells, enhancing the 
shelf life of honey. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:02) 
 
After it is heated then it is subjected to filtration treatment  and the primary purpose of 
filtration is to retard crystallization and to produce a clear product. Honey is typically 
subjected to microfiltration, maybe using the microfiltration m embrane of the pore size 0.1 to 
10 microns. Even diatomaceous earth  is also used in honey proce ssing to remove wax, pollen, 
bacteria, etc. 
Then, ultrasonication treatment a lso is given to the honey, her e it destroys most yeast cells 
non-thermally and inhibits crystallization by eliminating the e xisting crystals. Ultrasound 
treatment involves a temperature of about 35 degrees Celsius an d it treatment is given for a 
time maybe less than 30 seconds or so. Due to this, there is a lower temperature and a very 
short time duration there is gr eater retention of aroma and fla vour in the sonicated honey as 
well as also there is less browning. 
Creaming is another very importa nt operation in honey processin g, where the honey is passed 
through a controlled process for controlled crystallization. Cr eamed honey contains a large 
number of small crystals, which prevents the formation of large  crystals. It has a smooth, spreadable consistency. So, the honey is creamed or processed t o get a controlled rate of 
crystallization and give a smoot h consistency to the product. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:48) 
 
Maple syrup 
We will see another sweetener condiment popularly used maple sy rup. Maple syrup is a 
natural sweetener which is obtained from the xylem sap of maple  trees. Maple syrup is also a 
better source of nutrients and it is a very good source of phen olic compounds. You can see 
here in the table, the antioxidant potential of maple syrup, it  has the tocopherol equivalent in 
micromoles maybe 400 micromoles per 100 grams. 
It has a good antioxidant potenti al. It contains one of the low est calorie levels compared to 
the other sweeteners and has been shown to have healthy glycemi c qualities i.e. its glycemic 
value is lower it is healthy, it can be consumed even by people  who are having a little higher 
level of glucose. 
 
 
  
 (Refer Slide Time: 10:50) 
 
Processing of maple syrup 
As far as the processing of the maple syrup is concerned, you s ee that the first step is the 
harvesting of the sap of the maple tree, you can see in the fig ure, that just from the tree this 
shape is collected and then these are collected sap is concentr ated by suitable processes most 
commonly that is recommended process is the reverse osmosis fol lowed by evaporation. So, 
during the evaporation of the sap, the Millard reaction takes p lace. The amino acid in the sap 
reacts with its sugar which produces the unique flavour of mapl e syrup, along with its desired 
colour, aroma and antioxidant properties. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:40) 
 Compound condiments 
Pickled food 
Let us discuss the compound condiments and there are pickled fo ods. Pickling is defined as 
the process of preserving food by either anaerobic fermentation  in brine or immersing it in 
vinegar. Pickling can add a special flavour to food by themselv es mixed with other foods, the 
process of pickling is also known a s brining, and the resulting  food is known as a pickle. 
Pickles usually refer to vegetable products, but sometimes even  fish, egg, meat or other such 
products are also subjected to the  pickling process. It is basi cally a process to extend the shelf 
life of the product by controllin g or increasing the acidity or  lowering down the pH. So, achar 
and kimchi are Indian and Korean variations of pickled foods, w hich include many other 
spices along with the salt a nd the fermentation process. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:50) 
 
Types of pickled foods 
So, type of pickled foods, there are various categories. One is  the quick-pack or quick-
process pickles, here acetic acid from the vinegar is involved in the preservation process 
instead of the lactic acid fermentation. So, the commodity may be added to the acetic acid 
directly. Fermented or brined pr oducts, the vegetables are cure d in the brine solution for 
several weeks for fermentation to take place. In relishes, low-acid vegetables  are finely chopped, acidified and canned. Freezer pickles 
include some pickle recipes that call for enough vinegar maybe 5 percent acetic acid. This 
can be stored safely in the refrigerator at 5 degrees Celsius f or up to 1 month. These pickles 
do not require heat processing bu t they must be kept refrigerat ed. These are known as freezer 
pickles. Sun pickles, that it i nvolves combining vegetables, pi ckling spices, salt, and either 
water or vinegar and then setti ng the jar out in the sun for ab out 3 days to ferment. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:04) 
 
Here the process of mango pickle manufacture as well as kimchi making is shown in this 
slide. In the mango pickles, mature green mangoes are taken aft er washing and peeling, they 
are sliced suitably and then slices are put into the jar where there are mixed with the 
sprinkling salt and oil, etc. Salt, spices, oil another ingredi ent, all those things are mixed as a 
smear in the sliced mango and then this is filled into glass bo ttles or glass jars. These glass 
bottles or jars are obviously pre viously sterilized. So, after filling, spices and oils are added 
into the bottle or jar. They are shaken well twice a day and mi xed with salt, etc. The jar or 
bottle is sealed and stored at the ambient temperature so it ta kes some time for the 
development of the proper fla vour and texture of the pickle. 
In the kimchi-making process, Kor ean cabbage is taken. It is sa lted in 15 percent brine for 5 
to 10 hours, then washed twice with fresh water and the water i s drained. The material & 
other spices like shredded re ddish, red pepper powder, garlic, green onion, ginger or even 
sometimes fermented fish or oyster are mixed in this salted cab bage or the cabbage leaves are 
stuffed. These stuffed cabbage leaves with spices are put in jars which are called kimchidok . Here this 
container or dock pot or the pot  is buried 80 percent almost un derground, only the top portion 
is there above the ground and the top portion is pressed with a  stone weight and covered with 
a jar lid and left in an open environment. Fermentation takes p lace for about 1 to 2 months in 
the winter season and then it is consumed for the next 3 to 4 m onths until the next spring. So, 
this whole process of kimchi pr oduction is very popular in Kore a. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:43) 
 
Sauces 
The other condiments include sauces, which are hot or cold, and  liquid or semi-liquid 
products, which when added to foods, as it is being served, add  to their acceptance by 
improving their appearance, aroma, flavour or texture. There ar e various types of sauces, as 
you can see in the picture available in the market. 
Seasonings 
Seasonings are compounds containing one or more spice extracts,  which when added to food 
either during its manufacture or in its preparation before it i s served, enhance the natural 
flavour of the food and thereby increase the acceptance of the food by the consumer. (Refer Slide Time: 17:30) 
 
Dips 
Dips are commonly used for finger foods, appetizers and other f ood types. Thick dips based 
on spice are added to sour cream, milk, yogurt, mayonnaise, sof t cheese, or even beans and 
they are thinner than the spreads. 
Dressings 
Dressings like solid dressing contain a minimum of 30 percent v egetable oil, 4 percent egg 
yolk ingredients, vinegar or lem o n  j u i c e ,  a n d  s p i c e s .  T h e  t a s t e  is more piquant than 
mayonnaise and also is often used a t the base for other solid d ressings. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:15) 
 Mayonnaise 
Mayonnaise is a smooth, creamy, semi-solid emulsified dressing,  consisting of vegetable oil 
i.e. about 65 percent vegetable oil and eggs, acidified with vi negar or lemon juice and 
delicately spiced. No other emulsifiers are allowed in this pro duct. It is often used as a base 
for other dressings.  
Mustard 
The name mustard is derived from the Latin word must which was an unfermented grape 
wine made potent and fiery with the addition of ground mustard seed. So, that is the mustard 
sauce. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:58) 
 
Process technology for dry condiments 
The major operations include drying, cleaning, and grinding. Dr ying is a key processing step 
we have discussed in earlier classes. Drying enhances the shelf -life of the finished product by 
slowing down microbial growth an d preventing biochemical reacti ons that may alter sensory 
characteristics. 
Cleaning is an important operatio n at the industrial production  level, magnet, sifters, and 
various types of mechanical separ ators are used to separate the  foreign compound from the 
plant material based on their shape and density. Grinding using  appropriate size reduction 
equipment, the material is ground to fine particle size. To mit igate the volatility problem during grinding that care should be taken so that the temperatu re of the material does not 
exceed 90 degrees Celsius during the grinding process. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:09) 
 
Technology for soy sauce manufacture 
It is another very popular condiment. In soy sauce, soybeans ar e about taken 50 percent and 
wheat 50 percent are taken. Soybean is first soaked, cooked and  cooled i.e. soaking for about 
40 to 45 minutes and then cooked in a pressure cooker for 6 to 7 kg per centimetre square. On 
another hand, the wheat is roast ed at 150 degrees Celsius for 3 0 to 45 seconds and then 
crushed at atmospheric pressure. 
So, you have roasted wheat flour and soaked, cooked and cooled soybeans. These are mixed 
in 50-50 ratio and this mixture is the starter. A mixed culture  of starter of a molds Aspergillus 
oryzae  and A. sojae  are added into the mixed wheat  and soybean, incubated at aroun d 23 to 
35 degrees Celsius for about 72 hours and then, it develops int o some sort of mold mixture 
koji. Here, salt of about 20 percent is added to 200 parts. The  mixture is called moromi mash, 
which means it is properly mixed or sprinkled with salt as a sp rinkling. It contains 
approximately 17 to 20 percent salt. So, it is the mold with ko ji, the salt is sprinkled, and then 
the lactic acid bacteria , pedioccocus halophilus  causes the lactic acid fermentation. It may 
take about 12 months at ambient temperature or even 1 month at 15 degrees Celsius. 
After this bacterial fermentation, the yeast fermentation is al lowed to continue where 
zygosaccharomyces rouxil  or candida sp.  yeast etc. are inoculated for 4 months at 28 degrees Celsius or 1 month at 15 degrees Celsius. Finally, the fermente d material is pressed and 
filtered and pasteurized at 70 to 80 degrees Celsius and obtain  soy sauce is obtained.  
The residue remaining after pressing and filtration is the cake  which is used as animal feed. 
So, the critical control points in soy sauce manufacturers incl ude first in the selection of the 
best strains of the microorganism, controlling the salt level w hich should be more than 18 
percent during the koji prepara tion to exclude undesirable micr oorganisms, controlling the 
growth rate of the microorganisms in brine fermentation and con trol of the product 
temperature during the koji fermentation process. So, by this p roper control, we get the 
desired characteristics of the  soy sauce, as you can see here i n the picture. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:00) 
 
Technology for mayonnaise manufacture  
The FDA defines mayonnaise as the emulsified semi-solid food pr epared from vegetable oil 
i.e. minimum of 65 percent, acidifying agents like vinegar, lem on, and lemon juice and the 
minimum level should be two and a half percent by weight, calcu lated as the acetic or citric 
acid, egg yolk or egg yolk contai ning ingredients and finally, there may be also optional 
ingredients like salt, nutritive carbohydrates, sweeteners, any  spice or natural flavouring, etc. 
can be added. Even, monosodium glutamate or some sequestrants, etc. can be added. The 
ingredient formulation given in the table is used in making the  mayonnaise. (Refer Slide Time: 24:59) 
 
Mayonnaise manufacturing process 
After receiving all the raw materials like eggs, oils, spices, etc. are held in the different tanks 
followed by the addition of whole egg in the pre-emulsion tank,  addition of water and sugar 
in the pre-emulsion tank. Mixing starts at the first operationa l speed, maintaining the 
temperature at about 6 to 14 degr ees Celsius. Then it is follow ed by the addition of oil slowly 
and slowly to the mix in a way that the final product should ha ve around 65 to 85 percent fat 
content by weight. The vinegar, salt, lemon juice, etc. are add ed, and even spices if required 
are added. These are all finally properly mixed. Mixing at the third operation speed continues 
in the mixer, and then it is sent to the homogenization where i t is properly homogenized and 
the mayonnaise is f illed into the jar. (Refer Slide Time: 26:17) 
 
So, this is a setup machine where in these tanks various ingred ients such as liquid and solid 
ingredients are mixed at a controlled rate. The Control panel i s used for setting and 
controlling the parameters. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:30) 
 
Technology for mustard sauce preparation.  
Mustard sauce is whole, ground, cracked, or bruised mustard see ds. These are mixed with 
water, vinegar, lemon juice, wine or other liquids, salt and of ten flavourings and spices. 
These are all mixed to create a paste or sauce ranging in colou r from bright yellow to dark 
brown and are generally th ick with a sharp taste. The ingredients include by weight or a percentage like mustard powder maybe 20 percent, 
white vinegar to 10 percent, white sugar to 10 percent, salt, t urmeric, paprika, etc. to 10 
percent, citric acid to 0.5 per cent and cyclodextrin 0.5 percen t and water 19 percent. All 
ingredients are added into the c leaned mustard seeds, then blen ded followed by the addition 
of seasoning, heating for 2 t o 3 hours at 80 to 90 degrees cent igrade, and packaging.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:51) 
 
Machinery for mustard sauce manufacturing   
The machinery required for mustard sauce preparation is a washi ng and cleaning machine, 
roasting machine, grinding, sauc e preheater, bottle filling, mi xing and storage tank, 
evaporator, preheater pasteuri zer, vacuum evaporator, and bottl e filling machine. All the 
necessary ingredients are roasted, pulverized and ground, mixed  in sauce preheater and 
pasteurized and packaged. (Refer Slide Time: 28:27) 
 
Recent developments in the condiments processing technology 
Advanced method or novel methods of drying like microwave, infr ared drying or combined 
method such as microwave combined with freeze drying, vacuum dr ying, fluidization drying, 
etc. gives a better product. For instance, mayonnaise or other such condiments are prepared 
that contain flavours and other bioactive substances which need  to be retained. The 
technology of drying, grinding or f ermentation should be such t hat these flavouring 
compounds are retained. In grindi ng, the superfine technology i mproves the area of a specific 
surface, oil binding ability, water holding capacity as well as  water retention capacity of 
ground material. Cryogenic grinding  operates at a very low temp erature generally below 50 
degrees Celsius with the assistance of cryogenic fluid, so that  the flavouring potentials or 
characteristics are retained to the maximum. Fermentation may b e either solid-state 
fermentation or high-salt liqui d fermentation. The high salt li quid state fermentation produces 
more abundant aroma and flavour compounds like methyl trisulphi de ethyl acetate, etc. (Refer Slide Time: 29:56) 
 
Sterilization   
It is an important operation for sterilizing condiments.  Recen t developments or innovative 
technologies like ohmic heating, r adiofrequency heating and irr adiation are encouraged more 
and more. Depending upon the type or combination or formulation  which is used in the spice 
manufacture, the process paramete rs are properly selected and o ptimized to have better 
retention of flavouring potential. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:43) 
 
 
 Uses of condiments  
Condiments provide additional flavour, aroma and taste to food that enhances the palatability 
of the food. Seasonings are rich  sources of phytochemicals and immunity-boosting 
components that enhance the nutritional value of the food. Cond i m e n t s  c a n  a c t  a s  a  
preservative due to their antimic robial properties and improve food safety. 
Most spices present in the condiments possess certain therapeut ic and disease-prevention 
properties. They can be considered health-boosting or health-pr omoting components. It also 
improves the digestibility of the foods. Condiments can be used  as a delivery agent of 
micronutrients and also in f ood fortification programs. 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:43) 
 
Summary 
So, finally, I will summarize this lecture by saying that the v arious mixtures of spices and 
their extract are prepared in a specific manner to impart chara cteristic flavours, tastes and 
t e x t u r e s  a n d  t h e s e  p r o d u c t s  a r e  g e n e r a l l y  k n o w n  a s  c o n d i m e n t s .  T h e y  m a y  b e  s i m p l e  
condiments or compound condiments. Salt is the most common and widely used simple 
condiment. The other condiments may include sugar, honey, maple  syrup, etc. The main 
processing technology for making condiments includes cleaning, drying, grinding, 
fermentation and sterilization. T hese processes and process par ameters for grinding, and 
technology for sterilization need  to be standardized. The emerg ing technologies as far as 
possible either hurdle technology concepts or the processes suc h as high-temperature short 
time (HTST) or ultra-high temper ature (UHT) should be used. The  non-thermal process can be used for these operations so that the flavouring, taste, fla vour, texture, etc. of the product 
is preserved to the desired category at the same time product h as a good mouthfeel and a 
good shelf life. So, accordingly, the products should be proper ly packaged as well. Packaging 
material and packaging technology are important. These products  are packed using an FFS 
machine i.e. fill and seal machines either in PET bottles and g lass jars or even in pouches, 
etc. 
(Refer Slide Time: 33:38) 
 
 
These are the references that are used in this lecture. Finally , thank you very much for your 
patience in hearing. Thank you. 