1 
 Post Harvest  Operations  and Processing  of Fruits,  Vegetables,  Spices  and Plantation  
Crop  Products  
Professor  H.N.  Mishra  
Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  Department  
India n Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  15 
Irradiation  of Fruits,  Vegetables  and Spices  
 
 
This lecture covers  radiations  and ionizing  radiations , food irradiation  technology , different  
irradiation  sources  and its characteristics , effects  of irradiation  and microbes , and changes  in 
foods  particularly  in fruits , vegetables  and spices  during  the irradiation  process .  
 
2 
  
Radiations  
Several radiation types have the characteristic ability to ionize individual atoms or molecules, 
thereby producing an electron and a positively charged ion.  When the high energy photon  
bombards an atom , then it transfers its energy on the electron. The photon with reduced energy 
goes out and when energy in the outer orbital electron is increased above a certain level , it 
comes in the excitatory state and finally it ejects the orbital electron, so a posit ively charged 
atom and negatively charge d electron is formed.   
                          M    M+ + e- 
Where, M is an atom or molecule  
               M+ is positively charged ion  
                e- is electron  
Ionizing radiations  
Ionizing radiations interact with an irradiated material by transferring energy to electrons which 
are thus raised to a high energy or excited state. If the  transferred energy is large enough, the 
negatively charged electron can leave a molecule with the res ult that a +ve ion is formed. The 
ejected electron moves through surrounding material and loses it energy by creating further 
excited molecules and +ive i ons. Eventually the electron is captured by a +v e ion or is trapped 
by a structure to form a –ve ion which i n turn combines with a +ve one. It is this ability to 
create +ve and –ve ions that characterizes the  ionizing radiations.  
 
 
3 
  
 
The electromagnetic radiations such as gamma rays, x rays and β-rays have low linear energy 
trans fer (LET) are sparsely ionizing. T he linear energy transfer (LET) is a measure of the 
energy dissipated per distance travel in the biological material, so this because of their high 
penetration power they can travel deep into the material so that the energy is d issipated over is 
a long path. So accordingly the per distance tr avel energy is dissipated is less and therefore 
they are less ironizing, whereas alpha particle and protons they have high LET value and 
therefore they are densely ionizing.   
The dose of radiation  is the quantity of radiation adsorb ed by the food (in term s of rad). Rad is 
the deposition of 100 ergs per gram in the irradiated sample . So 1000 rad is equal to 1 k rad, 
but recently another unit grey has been used in the food irradiation technology, so 100 rad is 
equal to 1 grey  (Gy) . Accordingly 100 kilo rad w ill become 1 kilo grey.  
4 
  
Effects of radiation on living organisms  
The dose of radiation required to produce a lethal effect varies with the complex ity                           
of the organism.  The most complex organisms tend to be  the most sensitive to radiation.  A dose 
of few hundred rad is lethal to human but destruction of some microorganisms  require millions 
of rad.   
 
The ionizing radiation against microorganisms works on the two principles. In the direct  action  
mechanism  there  is a chemical  event  as a result  of the energy  deposition  on the target  molecule  
(DNA etc.) . It is considered  that the ionizing  radiation  directly  hits the genetic  material  of the 
organism  in the genetic  component  like DNA,  RNA  etc and it produces  the change . Whereas , 
in the indirect  reaction , the radicals  formed  from  the radiolysis  of water  or other  reactions  
originating  outside  the cell. Living  cells causes  sprouting  and spoilage . The DNA  damage  
delay s spoil ing and prevents  sprouting , it promotes  longer  self life, etc.  
5 
  
In food irradiation, food is exposed to controlled energy (ionizing radiation).  Ƴ-rays produced 
normally from 60Co source , x-rays with energies up to 5 MeV  or electrons up to 10 MeV, they 
are used in the food processing operations for various purposes such as killing the 
microorganism s without reaching the temperature of the food.  Contamination can occur post 
treatment. Rappertization is a higher dose application of 4.5 Mrad and used for sterilization by 
killing all bacteria and viruses. It is based on the destruction of spores of Cl. botulinum . 
Radurization is a medium dose application in the range of 100 -1000 krad, where vegetable 
sprouting, fruit ripening, insect sterilization, etc is taken care of by radurization.  Radicidation 
is a further low dose may b e 400 to 600 k rad which kills most of the pathogens and many food 
spoil microorganism insects and parasites etc.  
 
Food irradiation sources  
Radio isotope source  
6 
 60Co having energy values of 1.33 and 1.17 MeV , and 137Cs having energy value of 662 KeV  
are commonly used. 60Co emits two gamma rays per disintegration  and has half life 5.27 years . 
Plaque source consisting of flat strips which may contain more than 10,000 cu per strip.  
Number of strips are assembled by remote controlled operations.  The source is immersed in a 
25 ft. deep storage pool of water when not in use.   
Machine  source  
Machine generate beta or x -rays.  It produces no waste outside of the machine used to produce 
the radiation.  A beam of electrons is accelerated by an electron gun sim ilar to a TV tube, 
accel erating electrons towards the screen.  It can be turned on or off since it uses no radioactive 
material.  Electron beams can only  penetrate about 1” into material.  
 
The low dose (< 1 kGy) is used for sprouting inhibition of  potato, onions, garlics,  and to delay 
in the ripening of the fresh fruits and vegetables . The medium dose (1 -10 kGy) is used for 
reduction of spoilage microorganisms, reduction of non spore pathogens, and microbial 
reduction in dry products. The high dose  (10-50 kGy) is used for sterilization of the diet meals. 
The very high dose (10 -100 kGy) is used for elimination or reduction of virus contamination.  
 
7 
 Effects of irradiation  
Irradiation prevents food poisoning by killing  E. coli  157:H7 , Salmonella , Campylobacter  and 
other parasites, p revents spoilage by destr oying molds, bacteria and yeast, c ontrols i nsects and 
parasite infestation, i ncreases shelf -life by slowing ripening of fresh fruits and vegetables.  Food 
may be stabilized by inactivating the mic roorganisms and enzymes present, and  by protecting 
the stabilized food from recontamination and access to oxygen.  The stabilization of foods with 
IR involves two major considerations  including the food charactertistics, and a sutable radiation 
source.  
 
Microbial death kinetics  
Death of microorganisms when exposed to radiation can be evaluated by plotting the 
logarithms of the fraction surviving organisms against dose.  A plot of ln (n/ no) is linear with 
dose and it is obvious that for equal doses the microbial population decreases by a given factor.  
Relationship between radiation effects to dose can be described  as:  
n=noe−DDO⁄ 
Where, n   = Number of live organisms after irradiation , 
  no =  Initial number of organisms , 
 D = Dose of radiation received ( rad), 
              Do = Constant depending upon ty pe of organism and environment factors; causes death 
of 63% organism,  
             D10 = A value causing a reduction in numb er by a factor of 10.  
8 
  
Factors affecting radiation sensitivity of microorganisms  
Environmental factors during irradiation as well as physiological and genetic differences 
between strains and cultures of microorganisms can affect radiation sensitivity.  Types of 
radiation has n o significant direct effect on dose response whether it is e lectrons, X -rays, or Ƴ -
rays.  Dose rate (Intensity of radiation)  does not seem to affect sensitivity except as i t affects 
other environmental factors such as temperature.  Presence of oxygen  does not have a 
significant effect as do the pH and type of medium in which the microorganisms are irradiated.  
 
Irradiation i n the frozen state reduces radio sensitivity of some organisms.  Sterilization through 
radiation of foods in frozen state minimizes chemical and flavour changes in food.  However, 
greater dose is req uired for sterilization in frozen state.  Temperature has significant effects on 
sterilization requirements.  This effect forms the basis for potential combination processes                                             
utilizing both heat and radiation (Therm o radiation).  Very high temperature adds its own lethal 
effects.   
9 
  
Changes in food constituents during irradiation  
Irradiation is a cold process referred to as a cold pasteurization or cold sterilization process.  It 
can accomplish the same objective as is  done by thermal pasteurization/ sterilization processes 
in food.  There is v ery little or no change in physical appearance , no textural or color changes , 
and p ossible chemical changes  such as off -flavour and tissue softening. Ionizing radiations are 
capable  of initiating a vast array of chemical changes in gaseous, liquid and solid systems.  It 
may include radiolysis of water or the e ffect on macromolecules & other components  such as 
proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, vitamins, and enzymes.  
 
Radiolysis of water  
Ionizing radiation split, or as it is more technically called radiolyze water.  Since most foods 
are aqueous systems, this effect of IR on water is of key importance.  The passage of ionizing 
radiation through water results in the formation of the inte rmediates  such as Excited water 
(H2O)*, free radicals OHᵒ and Hᵒ, ionized water molecules (H 2O)+, and  hydrated water 
molecules e-aq. These species then react among themselves or with other components of the 
system.  In pure water, and in the presence of air, they produce  hydrogen gas (H 2), hydrogen 
10 
 peroxide (H 2O2), water (H 2O), h ydronium ion (H 3O+), and h ydroxide ion (OH-). The reactions 
that these intermediates can undergo with food components are too numerous to list.  
 
Effect of irradiation on hydrocar bon chain  
Hydrocarbon chains are present in lipids as well as in many polymers of food packaging 
materials. In direct actions of IR on hydrocarbon chains, a number of primary events can occur.  
The most important event is the abstraction of  a hydrogen and the concurrent formation of a 
free radical.  The hydrocarbon radicals can undergo a very large number of reactions  such as 
among those involving the reactions with atmospheric or dissolved oxygen, cross linking, 
condensation, polymerization so many reactions can take place.  
 
Effect on vitamins  
The extent of vitamin C, E, and K destruction depends on the dosage used. Thiamine is very 
labile to irradiation.  The losses are low with low dose.  Ascorbic acid in solution is quite labile 
to irradiation but in fruits and vegetables seems quite stable at low doses of treatment.  Vitamins 
11 
 (antioxidant activity), such as A, B 12, C, E, K, and thiamine, are degraded when irradiation is 
carried out in the presence of oxygen.   
 
Effect on enzymes  
Enzymes in foods must be inactivated prior to irradiation because it is much more resistant to 
radiation than microorganisms.  Complete inactivation of enzymes requires about 5 –10 times 
the dose required for the destruction of microorganisms.  The D values o f enzyme can be 50 
kGy and almost four D values would be required for complete destruction.  Irradiated foods will 
be unstable during storage due to their susceptibility to enzymatic attack than non -irradiated 
foods.   
 
Effects on food constituents can be minimized by lowering of water content as less free radicals 
will be formed beca use of less radiolysis of water, less aerobic conditions as o ff flavors & odors 
are minimized due to lack of oxygen agenc ies necessary to fo rm peroxides, reducing 
temperature as s ub freezing radica ls or immobilized free radicals, addition of free radical 
scavengers as f ree radicals react with scavengers and are then removed or bound and are                              
12 
 not available for reacti ons, and simultaneous distillation for removal of volatile off flavors or 
off flavor precursors.   
 
Wholesomeness of irradiated foods  
Induction of radioactivity  
The induction of radioactivity in foods depends on  the type of radiation and its energy , the dose 
applied to the food, and  the abundance of specific elements in the food.  In addition, half life of 
the induced isotopes is important since if it is very short these isotopes disappear before 
reaching the consumer.   
Herschman equation  
Q=30 x D x E x n
T 
Where, Q is radioactivity in micro micro curie , D is total dose in Mrad , E is energy of radiation 
(MeV) , n is decay constant , T is half life of the isotope formed .  
Gamma irradiation facility for food processing  
The facility includes unloading area, loading area, control console, radiation room, source pass 
mechanism, source hoists, radi ation shield, and storage pool.  
 
13 
  
 
Scope of irradiation in food processing  
The irradiation can be effectively used for disinfestation, shelf -life extension, decontamination, 
and product quality improvement in order to minimize the food loss, improve public health, 
increase international trade, avoid chemical fumigation, and increase energy saving. India has 
already  signed  an MOU  with the US that is the Singh -Obama  agreement  under  this the alphanso  
mango  is irradiated  in bark and then it is shipped  to US irrigated  mango  is available  it to 
improve  public  health , minimize  food losses , etc.  
14 
  
Effects of irradiation onfresh  fruits and vegetables  
Irradiation is able to alter the production of substrates and enzymes involved in ethylene 
biosynthesis.  Low irradiation doses delay the postharvest ripening of many fruits  such as the 
dose of 0.2 -0.4 kGy is sufficient for bananas, less than 0.9 kGy for apple and pear etc. At higher 
doses (˃1 kGy), irradiation can significantly modify the microstructure of vegetable tissues and 
consequently their barrier properties and susceptibility to postharvest dehydration.  The changes 
in these p roperties can favour or reduce the postharvest weight loss.  Weight loss in grape fruit, 
navel oranges, and other fruits with cracked peels increases with the irradiation doses.  Fruits 
having thick peels showed decrease in weight loss.  
 
A decrease in firmn ess is manifested immediately after an irradiation, and can be obs erved at 
low irradiation doses (<1 kGy) in raspberries, kiwis, blueberries, some apple varieties, some 
pear varieties, papaya, oranges, lettuce and among others.  At low irradiation doses, the firmness 
loss does not exceed 10% of the initial firmness.  The direct alteration of the structure of cell 
wall polysaccharides (e.g., pectic sub-stances) is likely the major cause of softening 
15 
 immediately following irradiation.  Color of fruits and vege tables, as visually evaluated, is 
generally not altered significantly by irradiation.  Instrumental evaluation showed change in                       
tristimulus colour i.e. decrease in L* (lightness) due to darker external surface . These change 
are consequ ences of  direct alteration of pigments , modulation of enzyme activity/                                             
biosynthesis & ethylene production.  However, in most cases the irradiation -mediated changes 
in pigments is not manifested in tristimulus colo ur values.  Irradiation can increase or reduce 
the content of sugars in fruits, depending on the fruit.  The lower dose (< 1 kGy) causes small 
increases or decreases in TSS . Very low (0.075 and 0.3 kGy) dose applications d o not alter the 
content of glucose, fructose, and sucrose in lemons, cucumbers, nectarines, zucchinis, etc. , 
cause slight but significant increases in the glucose content in Custard apples , decrease  in 
glucose and sucrose in mangoes and Imperial mandarins.  The higher dose (> 1 kGy) 
applicati ons d o not alter the content of individual sugars in pummelos.  Irradiation alters 
contents of some vitamins (A, B1, C, E) mostly as a consequence of the free radicals generated 
by irradiation.  There is 10% decrease in vitamin C at dose of less than 1 kGy, whereas 18 -47% 
loss occurs at a dose of 1 -6 kGy. Less than 1 kGy  causes no effect on vitamin E, dose of 1 kGy 
causes 40% loss of vitamin E  in tomato. The dose in the range of 0.2 -1 kGy increases thiamine 
and riboflavin in peas, at 0.75 kGy , there is an inc rease in riboflavin in papayas.           
 
16 
  
Low dose of gamma radiation (0.06 –0.15 kGy) inhibit sprouting in potato.  The left hand side 
figure shows the u nirradiated and irradiated ‘Kufri Sindhuri ’ tubers (S -1: irradiated 5 d after 
harvest) and stored for 120 days at 22 ◦C. The right hand side figure shows the u nirradiated and 
irradiated ‘Kufri Sindhuri’ tubers (S -2: irradiated 30 d after harvest) and stored for 120 days at 
22 ◦C.  
 
Effects of irr adiationon spices  
Irradiation is done in spices for microbial decontamination. Gamma irradiation at 10 kGy can 
eliminate microbial load without any significant organoleptic or chemical alteration.  A dose of 
2.5 kGy  reduced the fungal and bacterial load by 2 log cycles, and 7.5 kGy eliminated the 
fungal population of ground or whole pepper.  A dose of 0.15 kGy in garlic can inhibit sprouting 
and reduce weight loss, however, the flavour compound diallyl disulphide decr eases.  Low 
moisture (10%) products are prone to the formation of free radicals which lead to an increased 
production of oxides and alcohols.   
17 
  
Sensory attributes and consumer acceptance of irradiated spices  
Low-moisture foods such as dried herbs, spices, seasonings, and seeds are generally not 
affected in sensory quality even at relatively high irradiation dose levels.  The free radicals 
generated by irradiation can influence the components that are responsible for texture, taste, 
and appearance.  It seems that small differences caused by low doses on sweetness, color, 
flavor, and aroma are often not perceived by consumers.  More obvious changes in appearance, 
such as browning, pitting, and softening, are more perceptible and may cause negative impac ts 
on sensory quality.  Consumer acceptance of irradiated foo ds has always been a challenge. The 
acceptance by the consumers is further hindered due to a lack of understanding of how 
irradiation works and its effects on food. Several studies have shown that  when you ask a                        
consumer a direct question about their perception of irradiation, a majority will respond with a                              
negative view.  However, positive shifts in the attitudes of consumers toward irradiation ca n be 
achieved by presenting the information regarding the nature and benefits of irradiation.  
 
18 
 The FDA requires that irradiated foods bear the ‘radura’ label and state on the label ‘Treated 
with radiation ’ or ‘Treated by irradiation’. Many coun tries have their own regulatory 
requirements for food irradiation. There is no statutory requirement specific to irradiation in 
many countries.  
 
These are some  of the picture  of the irradiated  strawberries  and sugar  cane sticks  showing the 
difference between the irradiated and non -irradiated forms.  
 
In summary, Food irradiation has versatile applications but has not been utilized to its full 
potential.  Ionizing radiations are high energy radiations, hence along with desirable effects, are 
also expected to produce  certain undesirable changes by their interaction with different 
struc tural and chemical components.  At higher doses, irradiation is used to prolong the shelf -
life of foods by destroying vegetative cells of yeasts, fungi and non spore forming bacteria.  
Irradiation in low doses (below 1 kGy) is effective in inhibiting sprouting of potatoes, onions 
and garlic and delaying ripening in fruits, both to extend the shelf - life. 
19 
  
These are the references for further study. Thank you.   
