1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Processing of Fruits, Vegetables, Spices and Plantation 
Crop Products  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture 28  
Aseptic processing and packaging  
 
In this lecture a very important aspect of processing and preservation of fruits and vegetable 
products, particularly juices, paste, concentrates, beverages etc. is covered i.e., Aseptic 
Processing and Packaging.  
 
Aseptically processed and packaged produ cts, fruits, and vegetable products, have gained 
popularity in the market as well as in the consumer mind in the recent past. In this lecture, the 
2 
 topics covered are aseptic processing, components of aseptic processing systems, and finally 
the sterilizatio n of the aseptic packaging materials and equipment are discussed.  
 
Aseptic processing & packaging  
Aseptic processing and packaging are methods of preservation , which refers to heating of the 
liquid food product i.e., commercially sterilized and holding at an elevated temperature 
followed by cooling and filling it into a sterilized package and hermetically sealing with a 
sterilized closure in a commercially steri le environment. It can be seen from the figure that 
there are two lines, one is the product line and another is the packaging material line. So, both 
the products and packaging material are the specific systems. The product and the packaging 
material are s terilized separately. After that, they are brought to the filling room and packaging 
room, which are maintained under a sterile environment or in an aseptic environment. So, 
processing and packaging and then finally, filling and sealing are all performed i n the aseptic 
environment. Since, in aseptic processing and packaging, very high temperatures are employed 
(130 or 170 °C), these processes are generally referred to as ultra -high temperature processes 
i.e., UHT processes. Processing at these temperatures require that the product sterilization 
process be based upon the enzyme inactivation, because under these high temperature ranges, 
it had been seen that enzymes give a higher resistance than the micro -organisms. So, most of 
these processes are generally ba sed upon the enzyme inactivation kinetics.  
3 
  
Components of aseptic processing system  
The figure shows the components of aseptic processing system. Aseptic processing is normally 
used for liquid food or even concentrator paste. There is a feed tank. Either pulp or paste or 
juice, whatever it is, is brought from a manufacturing unit, extraction unit and concentration 
unit. Any two of these are taken in the feed tank, in the aseptic processing line. From the feed 
tank, there are suitable pumps, which can feed these materials to the heat exchangers.  
Through the appropriate pumping system, the material from the feed tank, is taken to the heat 
exchangers, where it is exposed to the calculated time and temperature combination, that is 
required for giving the desir ed commercial sterility. Once the material is brought to the specific 
temperature, then it is taken to the whole tube, where it is held for the desired time, so that the 
complete sterility is obtained.  
Finally, the product is again from the hold tube, is conveyed to the cooling line, where it is 
cooled, plot down and then sent to the filling and packaging line.  
 
Feed Tanks  
4 
 The feed tank is the product supply tank provided with a  mixer to keep the product suspended 
while feeding the system. Here, the proper mixing is required, so that there is not settling or 
solids etc. Therefore, a homogeneous uniform mixture is going out. The outlet of this bulk tank 
is connected to a pump. The level sensor on the tank is used to control the level in the tank , so 
that the pump does not run dry and cause unnecessary damage to the pump. Temperature in the 
feed tank can be controlled by having a jacketed tank or having a steam coil. Coolants (water 
or ethylene glycol) can be circulated to keep the product under re frigeration or steam can be 
used to keep the product at an elevated temperature.  
 
Pumps  
The figure shows the schematics of the different pumps and how they work. Food grade pump 
for the aseptic systems is used to push the product throughout the system an d because of the 
process design and lethality requirements in the hold tubes, positive displacement provides a 
constant flow rate and hence, a defined fluid velocity and the residence time in the hold tube. 
Each stroke or revolution of the pump pushes a fi xed amount of fluid regardless of the other 
factors; thus, it positively displaces a fixed amount of fluid in the system.  
 
Heat exchangers  
5 
 Then from the pump process, the material goes into the heat exchanger. The heat exchangers 
are the systems, which a re the product sterilization and cooling systems. They may be of direct 
or indirect heat exchangers type. Heat exchangers equipment used in the aseptic processing 
line include scraped surface heat exchangers, plate heat exchangers, tubular heat exchangers,  
equipment involving direct steam injection etc.  
Heat transfer can be calculated by using the following equation . 
Q=mh Cph (Thi − Tho)=mc Cpc (Tho−Tci) 
where Q is the heat transfer rate (kW), m h and m c are the mass flow rate of the hot and cold 
liquid (kg/s), C ph and C pc are the specific heat of the hot and cold liquid (kJ/kg °C), T co and T ci 
are the temperature at the exit and inlet of the cold liquid (°C) and T ho and T hi are the 
temperature at the exi t and inlet of the hot liquid (°C). Accordingly , using this equation one 
can calculate the heat transfer rate and accordingly, the heat required to get the desired sterility 
can also be calculated.  
 
Sterilization of product  
In the aseptic processing, the  design to achieve commercial sterility is based on the well -
established principles of thermal bacteriology and integrated effect of the time or temperature 
treatment on the spores of the microorganisms. Pre -sterilization of a product usually consist of 
heating the product to the desired UHT temperature, maintaining the temperature for a given 
period in order to achieve the desired degree of sterility, with subsequent cooling usually at to 
ambient temperature and some time to an elevated temperature to achi eve the right viscosity 
for filling. Heating and cooling should be performed as rapidly as possible to achieve best 
quality depending upon the nature of the product. A fast heat exchanger rate is desired for cost 
reasons. Since the UHT process is of the or der of seconds, the residence time must be precisely 
controlled to avoid any under processing.  
6 
   
Characteristics of the heat exchange systems used for aseptic processing  
The table shows a comparison of various types of heat exchangers. In case of steam i njection 
or steam infusion heat exchanger, the product quality is excellent, but there is no aroma returns 
i.e., most of the aroma get destroyed. Energy savings in this case is also poor. Its capital cost 
is high, space requirement is fair. Turn down is th e capability of the system to process at 
different rates to accommodate a different number of pillars or different packaging sizes etc. 
This turn -down is also fair for steam injection or ste am infusion heat exchanger. In case of the 
tubular heat exchanger, like small tubes or large tubes, the product quality is medium to poor 
and the aroma retain. Energy saving is also fair to poor in this case. The capital cost in the small 
tubes is medium an d in large tube is low. The turn -down here also is good. In case of plate heat 
exchangers, they give fairly good product quality, aroma retention is also good, energy saving 
is excellent, cost required is also less. Space requirements in this case is also excellent. The 
turn-down period is good.  
 
Holding tube  
7 
 It can be seen from the figure; a holding tube is an unheated section of the piping system that 
leads the fluid from the heat exchangers for heating to the heat exchanger for cooling. So, from 
the he at exchanger, the holding tube holds the material for desired period and then it sends to 
the cooling. The holding tube is where the product achieves the predefined lethality. Additional 
heat cannot be applied in the holding tube, but it can be insulated t o protect the heat from 
ambient cooling. Flow rate, diameter and length of the hold tube dictate the minimum 
temperature at the end of the hold tube that is needed to achieve the targeted lethality.  
 
Time of residence  
The time of residence is set by the volume of the holding tube and the rate of fluid flow 
delivered by a positive displacement pump. Time of residence can be represented by the various 
equations .  
tavg= AcL/Q 
tavg=L/Vavg    Vavg=Q/Ac 
Here, t avg is the average fluid residence time (s), Ac is the cross -sectional area of the holding 
tube (m2), L is the length of the holding tube (m), Q is the volumetric rate of the flow (m3/s) 
and V avg it the average velocity (m/s). When the product quality is the main consideration, the 
holding time must be based on the mean velocity rather than the fastest particle velocity. The 
measured mean residence time is twice the residence time for the fastest particle to travel 
through the holding tube under laminar flow c onditions. For turbulent flow, the maximum 
velocity i.e., V max is assumed to be 1.25 times the average velocity i.e., V avg. In the laminar or 
viscous flow (as in non -Newtonian fluids like sauces, pulps, and concentrates) the V avg is one 
half of the V max.  
8 
  
Air Filtration  
Sterilizing air by filtration is used to maintain the commercial sterility in critical areas of the 
aseptic system. Critical areas are those in which the air contact the sterile product or sterile 
packaging environment, which are therefore  a potential risk for microbial post -process 
contamination. The critical locations , where sterile air is needed in the aseptic process facility 
include overpressure of the aseptic process tanks, overpressure of the sterile zone of the aseptic 
packaging equ ipment, heating or drying of the packaging materials, headspace injection into 
packages or blowing performs and transport of the bottles.  
 
The cartridge filters or HEPA filters can be used for air sterilization. HEPA (High efficiency 
particulate air) fil ter generally gives 99.97% efficiency at submicron -sized (0.3 µm) particles 
in air , which provide air free of viable microorganisms in aseptic filling lines.  
9 
  
Packaging materials  
Commercially sterile products are expected to have an extended shelf life. Hence the packaging 
material should be impermeable to gases, water, and other vapours. It should provide effective 
barrier in transmission of light. Inert, i.e., it should not impart any flavor or taints to the 
packaged products. Resistant to chemicals, ra diation and heat treatment needed for sterilization 
of the packaging material. It should be capable of hermetically sealed to provide barrier against 
microbial contamination. It should withstand insert damage. It should resist deterioration 
changes, relati vely less expensive. it should be easily disposable.  
 
Metal container  
In use from the beginning of the commercial development of the aseptic sterilization process, 
it has almost all the intrinsic properties mentioned earlier. The limitations of their use  relate to 
the package geometry and relatively high cost.  
10 
 Glass containers  
They are very similar to those of the metal containers with the additional disadvantage of 
fragility and high density.  
Polyethylene and polypropylene  
They provide various consumer attractive packages, flexible packages, in different forms etc. 
Flexible packaging material like polyethylene, polypropylene etc. are being thermoplastic are 
used for producing bottle packs. The bottles may be either preformed or made just before filling 
in the blow -fill and seal equipment.  
 
Co-extruded laminates  
 As no other single plastic material has all the desirable characteristics listed earlier, co -
extruded laminates of one or more plastic materials having complementary characteristics are 
used. Al uminum foil is used in lamination with plastic films, which improves the barrier 
characteristics of the package. Paper provides the physical resistance to the package.  
11 
  
Aseptic packaging systems  
The aseptic packaging systems are various paperboard systems, carton systems or bottle 
systems, cup systems, pouch systems. All these are prepared by different setup either using a 
form -fill machines or there are fill -seal preformed systems etc., which are  used.  
 
Paperboard carton systems  
The preformed brick cartons, or sleeves, are manufactured from the packaging factory by being 
die cut, creased, completed sealed longitudinally and distributed at the plat form. The fill -seal 
aseptic filler is used to pr ocess aseptic food products in the carton type. When packages are fed 
into the filler, the sleeves or lay -flat-form of the cartons are shaped and sealed at the bottom 
just prior to filling step. Both outside and inside carton surfaces are sterilized by the  
combination of 35% solution of vapor H 2O2 and hot air.  
12 
  
Form -fill seal carton  
In these systems, the paperboard carton enters the aseptic form -fill-seal machine in the form of 
roll stock (web). The web paperboard carton is fed into the aseptic machine an d is sterilized by 
a H 2O2 bath (30 to 35% concentration of hydrogen peroxide). It is then formed to the box by 
the longitudinal seal. Hot -air is used to remove H 2O2 from the material surface before filling.  
 
Bottle systems  
Blow mold -fill-seal bottles   
A dry decontamination sterilization technique is applied to a sterilized PET performs before 
transferring to the blowing station with lower amount of H 2O2 vapor. This results in much 
lower consumption of H 2O2 per bottle as compared with preformed bottle syst ems. Heat from 
the oven of blow molding process provides the opportunity to remove H 2O2 residue from 
13 
 material before harming the container. This system is a continuous process for which it is more 
complicated to maintain the aseptic zone than comparable wi th other aseptic filling machines.  
 Fill-seal preformed bottle   
HDPE or PET can be pre -formed as a ready to use containers. They are sterilized using H 2O2 
vapors. In this aseptic system, packaging geometry, amount, and uniformity of H 2O2 vapor 
delivered f rom each nozzle and the flow distribution through the bottle interior are very 
important factors to be considered.  
 
Cup systems   
Thermoform -fill-seal cup   
In this system, roll stock of high impact polystyrene (HIPS) is fed into the aseptic filler to 
thermoform the container shape and then filled with the sterile product before sealing with 
sterile leading fill. Shelf -stable coffee creamer and cold brew coffee in the cup style container 
are processed from this system.  
Fill-seal pre -formed cup  
 It is the s imilar to the aseptic fill -seal preformed bottle, the plastic cups, which are already 
formed as a container are used for filling and sealing process. 35% concentrated H 2O2 is used 
as a sterilizing agent and it is used for fruit conserves with fruit pieces.   
14 
  
Pouch systems  
Fill-seal preformed pouch  
Preformed pouch is typically made of multilayer or aluminum laminated films. They are 
completely sealed (all sides) under clean environment to minimize the microbial contamination 
and then pre -sterilized by irradiation process before shipping to food proce ssor. This flexible 
pouch is generally packed as a roll stock individual pouch on the rails.  
 
Fill-seal preformed pouch: Bulk packaging  
For aseptic bag -in-box systems, the preformed pouch, which is available in different gallon 
sizes with fitment attachment on the pouch to provide the convenience are used. These are 
normally pre -sterilized by irradiation. There are different fitment styles  depending on the 
application. The filling operation depends on the fitment styles. If the fitment is attached with 
a cup, the cup is removed after sterilization and recapped after filling. For the spout with double 
15 
 membrane, the filling nozzles punches th rough the outer membrane, fill the product inside the 
bag and then inner membrane is heat sealed by the machine.  
 
Form -fill-seal pouch  
Web-fed poly -laminates roll stock is used to fill and seal the aseptic pouches. Roll stock 
typically moves through a he ated H 2O2 bath to sterilize inner and outer surfaces of the pouch 
and then is dried with sterile air before it is formed, filled , and sealed in the aseptic zone.  
 
Sterilization of aseptic packaging materials and equipment  
Heat  
Only heat is used for the s terilization of the aseptic packaging system and the materials. The 
product supply lines and fillers are commonly sterilized by heat in the form of hot water or 
saturated steam under pressure. Dry heat, in the form of superheated steam or hot air, may also  
be used to sterilize equipment. However, due to the relatively high dry heat resistance of 
16 
 bacterial spores, the time -temperature requirement for dry heat sterilization is considerably 
higher than those for the moist heat sterilization. Systems employing moist heat are sterilized 
at a temperature ranging from 121 to 129 °C, while 176 to 232 °C is used for sterilization by 
dry heat. Sterilization of air by incineration usually is considered at temperatures ranging from 
260 °C to as high as 315 °C.  
 
Chemicals  
Hydrogen peroxide is the overwhelming choice for use as a chemical sterilant. Other chemicals 
which have been used as sterilant, primarily for use in systems for acidic food, including 
various acids, ethanol, ethylene oxide and peracetic acid etc . Hydrogen peroxide is not an 
efficient sporicide when used at room temperature; the sporicidal activity increases 
subsequently with the increasing temperatures. So, a combination of hydrogen peroxide and its 
temperature is used. Most aseptic packaging sys tems use hydrogen peroxide (30 to 35%) as a 
sterilant for packaging materials followed by hot air (60 to 125 °C) treatment to dissipate the 
residual H 2O2. 
Radiation  
Gamma radiation has been used for decades to decontaminate packaging materials for use i n 
the aseptic system for packing acid and acidified food. Due to the penetrating powers of the 
gamma -radiation, packages are treated in bulk at commercial irradiators. A dose of 
approximately 1.5 Mrad is commonly used to decontaminate containers for acid a nd acidified 
food. Doses required to sterilize containers for use with low acid foods are considerably higher 
than those required for the high acid or acidified food. Average microbial counts on a plastic -
food contact surface ranges from 0.3 to 10 organism  per 100 cm2.  
 
17 
  
 
On a polythene food contact surface of paper board -based laminates immediately after 
producing the packaging material, average total count has been reported as 2 -5/100 cm2 (10% 
yeast, 20 % mold and about 70 % is bacteria). Four to five dec imal reductions are considered 
necessary to ensure that the spoilage is not in excess of 5 in 10,000 containers.  
The risk of defective (R) can be calculated as follows.  
R=N0 𝑆 ×10−t/D 
 Here, N 0 is the number of most resistant organism per cm2 of the food packaging contact 
surface, S is the food contact area in cm2, t is the time of sterilization process and d is the 
decimal reduction time of most heat resistant organism.  
18 
  
Summary  
It can be said in summary that the aseptically processed and packaged materials are stored well. 
Although they have good stability under normal atmospheric conditions, but the sealing should 
be proper, the residence time in the sterilization must be ensure d, packaging should be properly 
sterilized. Both the product and the package should be properly sterilized. Then they are kept 
in the aseptic environment.  
 
The references used in this lecture are mentioned above.   
 
