1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 
Lecture 48 
Probiotic / Fermented Vegetable Products 
 
 
This lecture provides a discussi on about probiotic and fermente d vegetable products. The 
topics, which are covered that a re the probiotics and their hea lth benefits, fermentation of 
vegetables, fermented vegetable products, the bioactive compoun ds in fermented vegetable 
products, and finally, the micr obial spoilage of fermented vege tables. 2 
 
 
Probiotics 
The probiotics are live microorganisms, which when administered  in adequate amounts 
confer a health benefit on the hos t. Most of the microbial stra ins which have probiotic activity 
belong primarily to the Lactobacillus  and Bifidobacterium  genera. They may be consumed 
either as a food product like in the case of fermented food pro ducts (fermented or non-
fermented) or as a dietary supplement i.e., the products in pow der, capsules, or tablets forms. 
Various aspects concerning the safety, functional, and technolo gical characteristics must be 
taken into consideration while sel ecting the probiotic microorg anism. 
 
Probiotic foods 
The development of a food product with a probiotic effect has e merged as functional foods 
intending to provide health ben efits to the mankind. When the f oods are added with the 
probiotic microorganism, and when the foods are processed, vari ous aspects of the viability 
of this probiotic bacterium in  the food products during the pro cessing and even during the 3 
 post processing like during the st orage etc. has to be consider ed properly. Various factors, 
which influence the probiotic strains in the food product inclu de type of the strain, type of the 
bacteria, the method for preparation of the bacterial culture, state of the cell inoculum, 
oxygen level, storage temperature , processing conditions, facto rs during processing like 
temperature etc. The substrate  condition in the food, various n utrients concentrations are also 
very important because the probi otic bacteria should be metabol ically active at the time of 
consumption of the food with a population of mor e than 6-7 log CFU/mL or g of the products 
to fulfil numerous physiol ogical functions in human body. 
 
Health benefits of probiotic foods 
There are various reports on the health benefits of the probiot ic foods. In this lecture, mainly 
nondairy probiotic foods will be focused. Earlier it was stated  that only dairy products like 
milk, and milk retail products will support the growth of probi otic bacteria because milk 
contain beneficial microbe lact obacillus, and it was thought th at milk was a good substrate 
for probiotic bacteria. But now, various researches have conduc ted, which has proved that 
even nondairy materials like fruits, vegetables, etc. also cons titute a good substrate for the 
growth of probiotic bacteria. Va rious probiotic b acteria are se lected properly and added in the 
nondairy beverages like fruit juice, vegetable juice or even co ncentrate pulp etc. When this 
bacterium is added in the nondairy beverages, then there maybe changes in the component 
i.e., in the fermented nondairy beverage matrix. Therefore, thi s bacterium brings about some 
desirable changes into the nonda iry beverage. When this food co ntaining the probiotic 
bacterium is consumed, the probiotic bacteria in live form is g oing into the system and the 
material, which are being consumed and its components character istics are changed. The 
material becomes beneficial. it  gives a double effect inside ou r gut. This bacterium gets 
established inside our gut, where they modulate, and regulate t he functions. It has been 
proved that there is a secondary effect. The growth of pathogen ic bacteria, anti-inflammatory 
group are suppressed and desirable microflora grow. Various des irable effects are produced 
inside our system, which helps in digestion. This produces vari ous beneficial effects inside 
human body like suppression of dif ferent undesirable effects li ke anti-hyperglycemic, anti-4 
 fatigue, hypercholesterolemic, i mmunomodulatory, anti-diabetic,  etc. and beneficial effects 
are promoted. Accordingly, conj unction of probiotic bacteria an d probiotic food becomes a 
very good healthy ingred ient for human body.  
 
Common types of fermentation 
Different types of fermentation can occur. Fermentation may be either alcoholic 
fermentation, which is generally encouraged by yeast and it is knowingly prominent in 
alcoholic beverages like wines, beers etc. Another type of ferm entation is lactic acid 
fermentation, which is mostly done by lactic acid bacteria and here major product with the 
lactic acid and this type of fe rmentation occurs mainly in the fermented vegetables, fermented 
vegetable juices, etc. Acetic acid fermentation is another type  of fermentation, where acetic 
acid bacteria play a major role , which converts sugar into acet ic acid in the sugarcane juice 
and here, vinegar is the product. Alkaline fermentation is occu rred by bacillus species and 
these products are known for their amino acid content and this is mainly fermented soybean 
products. In case of fermented v egetable products, lactic acid fermentation becomes a 
dominating type of the f ermentation process. 5 
 
 
Fermentation of vegetables 
Lactic acid (LA) fermentation of vegetables and fruits is a com mon practice to maintain and 
improve their nutritional and se nsory characteristics. Fermenta tion is one of the oldest 
processing techniques, which ext ends the shelf life of the food . Availability of certain 
specific nutrients like vitamins, minerals, and acidic nature o f the fruits and vegetables 
provides very conducible medium for fermentation by lactic acid  bacteria. Vegetables, which 
contain oligosaccharides becomes a very good food for of the pr obiotic and they are 
considered prebiotic. Fruits and vegetables provide a good subs trate for the growth of both 
probiotic bacteria and other bact eria. Vegetables have low suga r  c o n t e n t ,  b u t  a r e  r i c h  i n  
minerals, and vitamins and have neutral pH and thus provide a n atural medium for lactic acid 
fermentation process. 
 
Advantages of vegetable fermentation 6 
 Vegetable fermentation helps in making the vegetable both nutri tious, and wholesome. It 
removes some of the anti-nutritional factors. It enhances the o rganoleptic and nutritional 
quality, retains the nutrients and colored pigments in the vege table to some extent. There is a 
prevention method to produce finished and half-finished product . It prevents several diseases 
such as diarrhea, cirrhosis, liver because of the probiotic pro perties. Fermentation based 
industries are important source of the income and employment in  several countries in Asia, 
Africa, Latin America etc. During the fermentation process, var ious metabolic and bioactive 
compounds are generated, which fur ther increases the nutritiona l characteristics. 
 
Process for fermented vegetable products 
Here, a general process flowchart is given for making the ferme nted vegetable products. The 
fruits or vegetables are subjected to the treatments like clean ing, washing, cutting, grading, 
sizing, etc. The whole fruit or whole vegetable can be peeled o r unpeeled. They can be 
fermented. According to the case, the fruits or vegetables are properly prepared. In the case of 
olives, there is size grading. These olives are given alkaline treatment, then washing and 
neutralization are perf ormed, which facilita te the fermentation  or growth of the bacteria. Then 
blanching, cooking, tempering, etc. are done and finally, juici ng is performed. In case of 
cabbage, shredding will be performed. These prepared materials are added with some time 
with water, or other ingredients like sugars, starter cultures,  sodium chloride, other 
ingredients like spices, cardamom, flavoring ingredients etc. A ll these together are properly 
mixed or smeared. In some cases, nitrogen purging is also done to avoid the oxidation related 
problems. Finally, it is subjected to the fermentation in suita ble environment, suitable 
container. After the fermentati on is over, the m aterial is unpa cked, maybe some times, even if 
required some brine can be added to infusion or even this it ca n be filled or poured directly as 
a fresh consume product or it can be subjected to the treatment  like blanching, canning, 
pasteurization. Pasteurized and fermented product packed in the  proper glass containers or 
other proper now pet pouches etc . are also used for its packagi ng.  7 
 
 
Technological factors of fer mented vegetable products 
To produce high quality fermente d products, the fruits and vege tables must be sound, 
undamaged and at the proper stag e of maturity. Raw materials th at are to be fermented whole, 
must be suitably size graded to achieve a homogeneous fermentat i o n .  T h e  f u r t h e r  p r e -
treatment depends on the partic ular vegetable and may include p eeling, blanching, cooking 
etc. In the case of green beans blanching becomes important. In  case of carrots, beetroot, 
celery etc., peeling is the better fermentation process. Here, for microbial action peeling is 
necessary. Alkaline treatment is appropriate fermentation proce s s  f o r  g r e e n  S p a n i s h - s t y l e ,  
olives. For fermentation, the pre- treated vegetables are placed  in suitable fermentation 
vessels, which may range from  100 L drums to tanks or up to sil os up to 100-ton capacity. 
 
In order to achieve favorable fermentation conditions, vegetabl es like cabbage should be 
shredded and must be salted very  homogeneously on the conveyor belt between the shredding 
machines and the tank or during filling of the fermentation ves sels. Whole fruits like 8 
 cucumbers, olives or tomatoes must be placed into the vessels c ontaining some brine in order 
to prevent a mechanical damage and to displace the air between the vegetable parts. In 
addition to the salt, other additives optionally may as necessa ry, such as spices, sugars, or 
starter cultures etc. The best products will be achieved at fer mentation temperatures between 
15 and 20 °C. The fermentation time depends primarily on the te mperature, the type of 
vegetable, the degree of disin tegration, and the desired acidit y of the final product. 
 
The fermentation vessel or process must be carefully monitored and in particular controlled 
for the development of total aci dity and pH. The growth of yeas ts and molds on the surface of 
the brine or within the fermenting products should of be taken care of to prevent microbial 
spoilage of fermenting vegetables.  
The addition of sorbic acid, tartaric acid, acetic acid and or benzoic acid is permitted in 
several countries. The final fermented product (pH ˂ 4.1) may e ither be distributed fresh, 
packaged, or unpackaged, or pasteurized in pouches, cans or jar s for later consumption. 
 9 
 Ecological conditions in the fermentation vessel  
The fermenting substrate is characterized by solids in a liquid  environment (brine). Whereas 
the microorganism as well as the salt and the released nutrient s can be distributed through the 
entire fermentation vessel. Pathogens such as salmonella , clostridia  o r  listeriae , as well as 
other undesirable microorganisms, are present in all probabilit y. In general, the raw materials 
used are rich in nutrients, grow th factors and minerals; howeve r, for microbial growth these 
substances must be released from the plant tissue into the surr ounding liquid. The 
environment should be maintained as per the requirements maybe water activity: 0.95 to 0.99, 
pH: 5.9 to 6.5 for cabba ge; 8.5 is maximum for olives. Temperat ure: 5 to 20 °C for vegetable, 
35 to 30 °C for vegetable juices, sugar content: maybe 25 to 10 0 g/kg of vegetables. 
Buffering capacity: 0.15 to 0.90 g of lactic acid/100 g of vege table. Sodium chloride content: 
0.6 to 2% for sauerkraut, 5 to 10% for brine of cucumbers. Thes e conditions will be properly 
adjusted depending upon the mater ials, and the requirements. 
 
Traits considered in a starter culture for vegetable fermentati on 
There are three aspects. One is the pro-technological aspect, i .e., the starter culture. All the 
possible technological efforts s hould be considered for selecti ng the starter culture. The 
velocity of the growth, velocity of acidification, salt toleran ce, low pH value tolerance, 
completeness of fermentation process, whether it is mild acid p roducing or high acid 
producing, its tolerance to high concentration of polyphenolics , because most of these fruits 
and vegetables contain high number of polyphenolics, all are to  be taken care of. Synthesis of 
antimicrobial compounds, pectinolytic activity etc. are also to  be taken care of. All these 
things are the pre-technological aspects, which are taken into consideration while selecting 
the starter culture. The second aspect is the sensory character istics. This may be the hetero-
fermentative metabolism. Then it produces various products or s ynthetics of aroma precursor 
compounds take place. Therefore, the various secondary metaboli tes, which are produced and 
how do they influence the sensor y characteristics of the produc t, are another very important 
considerations. The third aspect is the synthesis of nutritiona l and functional components like 10 
 biogenic compounds. Increase of the  concentration of free amino  acid, over production of 
vitamins, liberation of bioactive peptides, synthesis of the ex opolysaccharide etc. are also 
considered properly. If the starter culture, raw material, prop er conditions are maintained 
during fermentation, it will give a novel fermented vegetable p roduct. 
 
Probiotic vegetable beverage with anti-diabetic potential 
Bitter gourd, carrot, and bottle gourd have been taken. Bitter gourd has bioactive compounds 
present in it i.e., Polypeptid e-p-momordicin and it is known to  lower the blood glucose levels. 
Bitter gourd is a anti diabetic m aterial. Carrot is also rich i n bioactive compounds like 
carotenoids and dietary fibers a s well as natural antioxidants.  It encourages the growth of the 
probiotic bacteria, it provides a good substrate i.e., micronut rients for the bacterial growth. 
The bottle gourd is rich in vitamins and irons and minerals. It  is anti-diuretic. Combination of 
vegetables always provide suita ble substrate for growth of bact eria. 
 11 
 Optimum parameter value for the logistic model describing the g rowth of lactobacillus 
planetarum  in MRS broth and vegetable juice at 37 °C for 24 hours are giv en in the table. It 
can be seen from the table that the vegetable juices provide go od substrate for the growth of 
the probiotic bacteria. The final product has a good sensory qu ality and its self-life is found to 
be 60 days at 5 °C temperature. 
 
Process technology for the prepar ation of probiotic vegetable b everage 
Bitter gourd juice, carrot juice and bottle gourd juice are tak en first. 29% v/v bitter gourd 
juice, 41% v/v carrot juice, 30%  v/v bottle gourd juice are tak en.  The total solid (TS) content 
for bitter gourd is about 4.1% w/w, for carrot juice the TS con tent is 6.4% w/w and for bottle 
gourd juice it is about 3.68% w/w. These 3 juices are mixed fir st and finally inoculated with 
the Lactobacillus plantarum  NCDC 414. The inoculation level is 1% and initially the 
concentration is 7 log CFU per ml. it is then fermented. The fe rmentation is carried at pH 6, 
and temperature is 31 °C for 14 hours. Sometimes, there is addi tion of stabilizer like 0.25% 
w/v guar gum. After that, stirring is performed at 300 rpm for 15 minutes. Then salt and 
cumin seed powder are added in order to improve the flavor. The  storage is done into 
transparent glass bottles and kept at 4 °C. In this way, a heal thy and tasty probiotic vegetable 
beverage is produced. 12 
 
 
Probiotic carrot juice 
In this case, the ground carrot is heated for 5 minutes at 85-9 0 °C. Cooling is performed then. 
After that, inoculation is done with Lactobacillus plantarum  and it is incubated for 16-17 
hours at 35 °C. The fermented carrot mash is obtained whose pH is about 4.5. Then the 
addition of enzymes is done and it is incubated for 60 minutes a t  3 5  ° C  a n d  c i t r i c  a c i d  i s  
added here. Then this is pressed for getting the fermented juic e. The juice is bottled and 
finally pasteurized. Pasteurization is done for 15 minutes at 8 5 °C. It is cooled then and 
finally the pasteurized carrot juice containing probiotic is ob tained. 
 
Sauerkraut  
Sauerkraut is fermented cabbage. Mature cabbage is taken first.  Wilting is done for 2 to 3 
days, which is an optional step. Then removal of the outer and damaged leaves is performed. 
Washing and shredding are done.  Then salt is added to 2 to 2.5%  and it is ensured that this 13 
 salt should be mixed uniformly in order to avoid spoilage. Then  it is filled in vats and 
covered. The vats are covered with suitable cover and the cover  is placed by placing weights 
for water to ooze out. Then the fermentation process is carried  out for about 2 months at 20-
25 °C. After the sauerkraut is obtained. The cultures, which ar e used here are Leuconostoc 
spp., Lactobacillus spp. , Pediococcus spp . 
 
Fermented beetroot wine 
The beetroot juice is taken first and it is subjected to the fe rmentation process like the same 
steps e.g., fermentation, clar ification, pack aging, etc. 
 
Fermented pickles 
Cucumbers are sized and cleaned. The flowers are removed. The c ucumbers are washed. 
Then brine is added. Sometimes the whole mixture is acidified w ith acetic acid and purged 14 
 with nitrogen. Fermentation is done now. Salt stock is obtained  which is desalted. Acetic acid 
is added then and packaging is done. Even genuine as such packa ge and refrigerate or even 
pasteurized. 
 
Kimchi 
Cabbage is used in this process . It is the salted then. The cab bage is brine in 10-15% NaCl for 
10 hours at room temperature. The sub-ingredients like red pepp e r  p o w d e r ,  g i n g e r ,  g a r l i c ,  
onions, etc. are chopped and these are all prepared. The cabbag e and the other sub-
ingredients are mixed, and the fermentation is done. It is allo wed with the fermenting bacteria 
like Leuconostoc , Lactobacillus , Weissella , Lactococcus , etc.  
 
Other traditional fermented vegetables  15 
 Pao cai   
Chinese sauerkraut, is quite popular in Taiwan. Like Kimchi, th e major ingredient is cabbage 
and the minor ingredients are garlic, onion, radish, carrot, an d spices. They are pretreated and 
blended. They are then soaked in 6 to 8% brine for fermentation  at 20-25 °C for 6 to 10 days.  
Torshi 
Torshi is a salted, fermented product prepared from vegetables such as cauliflower, 
cucumber, celery, cabbage, Jerusalem artichoke, and leafy veget ables like parsley, basil, and 
tarragon. It is a spiced with min t, garlic, hot pepper, and oni on. The fermented vegetables are 
preserved in either vinega r or in the lime juice. 
 
Bioactive components in t he fermented vegetables 
 Several organic acids are produced. The lactic acid bacteria ( LAB) initiate a rapid and 
adequate acidification of raw m aterials through the production of various organic juice.  
The lactic acid and acetic acid are the commonly produced organ ic acids during this process 
that also lead to the increased shelf-life of the final product . Phenyl lactic acid is recognized 
as the major factor which is responsible for the antifungal act ivity that prolongs the shelf-life 
of fermented foods. Bacteriocins another very important bioacti ve component, that it 
produced during this bacterial growth with various lactic acid bacteria etc. They produce 
various biologically active com pound, biologically active prote ins, or protein complexes like 
protein aggregates, lipocarbohydrat e proteins, glycoproteins, e tc. Lactococcus , Lactobacillus , 
Pediococcus , Leuconostoc , Carnobacterium , Streptococcus , Enterococcus , Bifidobacterium  
are known to produce bacteriocins. Nisin is one such bacterioci ns which is the commercially 
used bacteriocin in sev eral food industry.  16 
 
 
Vitamins 
Several species of bacteria, y easts, fungi and algae may serve to produce folic acid, vitamin 
B12, vitamin K 2, menaquinone, riboflavin, thiamin e and other essential vitamin s.  
Bioactive peptides 
Short-chain peptides generally c onsisting three to 20 amino aci ds and these are also formed 
by degradation of the original p rotein by fermenting LAB. They have the health benefits. 
Exo-polysaccharides (EPS) 
 Most exo-polysaccharide producing lactic acid bacteria belong to the genera, Streptococcus  
Lactococcus , Leuconostoc , Pediococcus , and Lactobacillus. These exo-polysaccharides 
(EPS) are also present in their fermented products and which ac t as a prebiotic food for the 
probiotic bacteria.  
Enzymes 
Lactic acid bacteria synthesizes diverse types of enzymes that impact the compositional 
processing and organoleptic properties along with the overall q uality of the fermented 
products.  17 
 
 
Microbial spoilage of the  fermented vegetables  
During cucumber fermentation, the formation and damage associat ed with the bloaters is a 
serious problem. The problem increases with larger cucumbers hi gher temperatures for 
fermentation and higher CO 2 level in the brine. It is therefore important to keep the CO 2 
content in the fermentation mixture as low as possible. This ca n be done by careful control of 
any bacteria and yeasts that produce CO 2, and removing the CO 2 from the brine using 
nitrogen gas, circulation of the brine or limiting the growth o f hetero-fermentative bacteria, 
which produces more and more carbon dioxide.  
From the Table, it can be seen that in case of the fermented ve getable cucumber, there will be 
problems during the storage like white or grey internal spots, surface discolorations, 
softening, bloater formation, o ff flavor, butyric acid fermenta tion. In case of sauerkraut, 
discoloration, softening, off fla vor are there. In case of caul iflower, discoloration will be the 
result. For carrots, the bleaching, oxidized taste are the prob lems arise during the storage. 
Therefore, proper care should be taken to ensure that there is no microbial spoilage during 
storage. 18 
 
 
Synbiotic foods and culture 
Nowadays, new trends in devel oping functional foods have emerge d by incorporating more 
than one bioactive ingredient to promote more beneficial health  effects. The probiotic 
bacteria like L. farmentum , L. brevis , L. acidophilus , B. longum  and the prebiotic like 
oligosaccharides, inulin, galactooligosaccharide, fructooligosa ccharide, lactitol, lactulose is 
mixed to produce symbiotic food. While selecting a prebiotic, t he effort must be taken that it 
should not adversely affect the sensory characteristics. When t his synbiotic foods are 
consumed it means that the food is consumed along with the live  bacteria. Inside human gut, 
this microorganisms grow a nd provide a beneficial effect. 
 
Synbiotic beverage  19 
 Kombucha (also known as Kombucha  tea) is a nonalcoholic ferment ed beverage brewed from 
sweetened tea and with a symbiotic culture of acetic acid bacte ria and yeast, that is known as 
SCOBY, also known as tea fungus. The sucrose infused green tea or black tea is taken first. 
This sucrose and this yeast enzyme act. This converts it into a cetic acid bacteria. It has some 
action. The cellulose, gluconic acid, acetic acid, ethanol, car bon dioxide, which are present 
inside the microbe, will be pres ent in the beverage and they gi ve various effect. 
 
Preparation of stabilized kombucha/jun tea 
This technology has been develope d. The water containing sucros e and tea i.e., either black 
tea or green tea, which contains around 5 to 10 % sucrose has b een taken first. SCOBY is 
added then. SCOBY is a previously fermented tea. The tea fungus  SCOBY is 10 to 20 % 
fermented tea. These two are fermented then. The temperature is  around 20 to 30 °C. The 
fermentation is allowed to continue up to 7 days. Then Kombucha  or Jun tea is produced. 
Removal of SCOBY, fermented tea, filter liquid etc. has been do ne. It can be bottled. Bottled 
Kombucha or Jun tea is stored, chilled, or pasteurized. After f ermentation, ultrasonication 
treatment maybe done at 750 W power, 27 kHz frequency for about  20-40 minutes. This 
process gives a stabilized Kombucha or Jun tea. It can be store d up to 15 days at ambient 
condition. It is a very good healt hy and tasty tea drink i.e., fermented tea drink. 20 
 
 
Summary 
In summary it can be stated that novel preservation technologie s have been used in 
combination with fermentation for certain fermented products an d there is still a lot of scope 
for research and development in this area. Fermented fruits and  vegetables contain a wide 
group of prebiotic components, w hich attract and stimulate the growth of probiotic etc. Basic 
understanding about the relations hip between food, and benefici al microorganisms, the 
beneficial effects of its constituents, the processing conditio ns, during processing their 
behavior, the influence in sensory characteristics by the post processing conditions of the 
probiotic containing food, its storability etc. should be there . The amount of food ingredients 
and additives in fermented foods, such as sugar, salt, and mono sodium glutamate, should 
conform to the accepted standards established by the target mar kets. 
 21 
 The references used in this l ecture are mentioned above. 
 
 