1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 41 
Processing of Spices 
 
 
The concepts covered in this lecture are spices process operati ons, drying and 
decontamination techniques for spices and also the processing o f major spices like pepper, 
cardamom, turmeric, cloves, gi nger, garlic and cinnamon. 
 
Spices 2 
 Spices are the vegetable products or mixtures which are free fr om extraneous matter and they 
are used for flavouring, seasoning and imparting aroma in foods . India is known as “The 
Land of Spices” throughout the world. It adds a unique flavour,  aroma, taste, appearance, 
nutritional values and medicinal functionality to foods. Howeve r, the quality of the spices or 
herb and condiments is closely r elated to the processing techni ques. The major spices of India 
are clove & cumin, pepper, fennel & fenugreek, cardamom, cinnam on, coriander, mustard, 
garlic, ginger, chilli, turmeric and so on. 
 
Spice processing  
As far as the processing of spi ce is concerned after the commod ity is harvested, it is subjected 
as usual in case of any horticultural and plantation crop, here  spices are subjected to various 
treatments like washing, peeli ng, cleaning, then blanching, cur ing, threshing, drying, grinding 
and packaging, etc. depending upon the type of spice and its na ture, its size where the curing 
and blanching these two operations  are important; also the dryi ng and grinding. 
The dried spices can be packaged in the dried form and are avai lable in the market as the 
packaged whole spices or alternatively, these dried spices they  can also be pulverized or 
ground using appropriate technology for producing spice powders . All these spices or the 
spice powder, they can be subjected to various other treatments  for extraction of essential oil, 
oleoresin, etc.  
Post harvest operations of spices  3 
 For spices, the process, the purpose or principle or descriptio n of the process and application 
or example i.e. what are those major spices on which these oper ations becomes very 
important have been given in this table. 
 
Washing: It is used to remove t he adhering mud and dirt and nor mally either soaking water or 
pressure water washing etc. can be done. Different washing oper ations have already studied 
in the case of fruits and vegetables in earlier lecture. So sam e things can be applicable here 
also. For example, in the case of roots and rhizomes, the spice s such as ginger, turmeric, 
angelica, onion which are dug out of the so il, this washing ope ration becomes very important. 
That is the washing as we ll as the decontamination. 
Peeling: It is a prerequisite f or efficient drying operations. Peeling operation is important for 
ginger, onion and garlic or cassi a and cinnamon bark etc.  
Pricking is done to reduce the time of drying and for better re tention of colour and overall 
quality of the spice and this is i mportant in the case of chill i, capsicum, red paprika, etc. 
Blanching: It is used for the inactivation of enzymes. It minim izes microbial contamination 
and gives attractive colour to cer tain spices like turmeric, bl ack pepper, but it is normally not 
done in the case of chili and ginger. 
Curing is important for generating the characteristic flavour o r aroma of the spices as it is 
very important for cinnamon, cassia, garlic, saffron, turmeric and vanilla beans. 4 
 Threshing is the process of removal and separation of fruits or  seeds from the unwanted 
flowers as well as damaged or immature material and this proces s becomes most importance 
in the spices like pepper s pikes, cumin and fennel. 
Drying is done obviously to reduce  the moisture content and to make the spices shelf-stable 
by bringing down the moisture below the safe moisture content, to extend its shelf life. It is 
used in pepper, chillies, vanilla, cardamom, cinnamon, turmeric , ginger, garlic, leaves or 
flowers etc.  
 
Grinding gives easier mixing in t he final products like white p epper powder, cardamom 
powder, capsicum, chili, pepper, paprika, turmeric. All these s pices, their dried form is 
ground into fine powder. So they are  available in the market. 
And then ultimately packaging. Packaging either in the form of whole spice or dried spices or 
in the form of powder or other m aterials is important. This is done to prevent deterioration of 
the product quality and it also gi ves protection against the ex posure to pest attacks. Packaging 
materials should be non-polluting, clean, dry and in undamaged condition. Most common 
packaging materials are PET , LDPE, even wooden pallets, polypro pylene sheets, plastic bags, 
etc. Cardamom, chilies, coriander, clove, saffron etc., almost all spices are packaged in this. 5 
 
 
Drying techniques for spices 
The drying techniques mostly used for spices are done tradition ally. Drying is considered to 
be the value addition process, a scribed to increasing shelf lif e with yielding of the strong 
flavour, pungency, and colorant in dried spices. Spice drying i s done by either solar drying or 
even now some progressive manufacturers they also use air dryin g, such as the convective air 
drying. But the direct drying i. e. sun drying or conventional d rying even sometimes 
ultrasonic-assisted irradiation or vacuum drying in order to ge t the better quality of the 
product. Depending upon the specific spice, one has to control the process parameter in the 
case of air-drying or any other drying, the temperature is very  important parameter because 
these spices mainly contains the essential or volatile oils, so  high-temperature drying should 
be avoided. 
 6 
 Decontamination of spices 
Most of the spices are grown in close proximity to the soil. So , their bacterial load on 
untreated spices are generally high maybe to the tune of 104 to 107 c f u / g  a n d  a l s o  t h e s e  
spices, even dried spices are likely to be attacked by insects or pests. The foodborne illness 
outbreaks linked to Salmonella  and other bacterial pa thogens had been attr ibuted to the spice s 
as per FDA (2013). So it becomes very important that the spices  are exposed to suitable 
treatment to decontaminate them. 
The commonly used decontamination includes fumigation with ethy lene oxide (EtO), 
propylene oxide, irradiation, and vacuum-assisted steam etc. ar e used. Ethylene oxide has 
been known to significantly re duce microbial population and it is considered one of the best 
as per the efficiency of the pro cesses concerned. However, ther e are certain technological or 
toxicological issues with ethylene oxide. There may be some los s of volatile components due 
to the low pressure needed to remove the EtO. Even, sometimes u ndesirable changes in the 
flavour and colour of some spices may also take place if the de contamination process is not 
properly conducted. 
 
Use of ethylene oxide: it is an efficient antimicrobial agent, absorptive-ethylene oxide 
residues decreases continuously dur ing storage. In addition to the ethylene glycol, ethylene 
chlorohydrins may be formed during the ethylene oxide fumigatio n and the fumigation 
represents a significant occupational health hazard for humans and toxicological misgivings 
in spices. 7 
 Vacuum-assisted stream processing is used with greater frequenc y due to greater consumer 
acceptance of this process than the ethylene oxide or irradiati on. The decrease in quality due 
to high-temperature generation m aybe there, it is also associat ed with the reduction of volatile 
oil content and some discoloration of spices may be there due t o the effect of the high 
temperature. 
Overall, this undesirable effect of high temperature need to be  taken care of by having 
alternative methods of heating, advanced heating technologies, or alternative heat generation. 
 
Irradiation  
Irradiation technology is an old process and it is used for dec ontamination of spices. Even in 
I n d i a ,  t h e r e  a r e  a  f e w  r a d i a t i o n  p l a n t s  w h i c h  a r e  u s e d  f o r  i r r a diating spices particularly to 
fumigate them or to avoid fumiga tion and control the insect, pe s t s  e t c .  T h e  c a r e  h a s  t o  b e  
taken that the dose of ionizing radiation has to  be properly se lected which gives the beneficial 
effect, otherwise if they chooses higher dosage it may have som e effect on the changes in the 
physical properties, even antioxi dant potential of the spices, etc. may be adversely affected. 8 
 
 
Pepper 
Pepper i.e. Piper nigrum , known as the king of spices. It is a flowering vine and belon gs to 
the family Piperacea e. Pepper is native to India and is cultivated in tropical regi ons. Pepper 
takes about 7 to 8 months after flowering to reach full maturit y.  
Optimum maturity at harvest for different pepper products is di fferent and can be seen in the 
table.  
Product Stage maturity at harvest 
 Canned pepper  4 - 5 months 
 Dehydrated green pepper  10 -15 days before maturity 
 Black pepper  Fully mature and 1 - 2 berries start turning from 
yellow to red in each spike 
 White pepper  Fully ripe 
 Pepper powder  Fully mature with maximum starch 
 Oleoresin and essential 
oil  15 - 20 days before maturity 9 
 
 
Processing of black pepper 
As far as the processing a pepper is concerned after harvesting , they are subjected to de-
spiking or threshing where the berries are separated from the s pike traditionally by trampling 
with the human legs or mechanical threshers and then they are b lanched in boiling water for 
about 1 minute followed by suitable drying using appropriate me thod either sun drying or 
mechanical drying and the moisture content is brought to safe l evel i.e. 10 % wet basis. 
Drying is followed by cleaning and then grading. Even for the g rading, sieves of 3, 3.5 3.8 
and 4.8 mm are used and finally, the clean jute bags with food grade polyethylene liners or 
multi-layer paper bags are used for packaging. So, particularly  during the drying operation, 
the enzymatic browning sets in and the phenolic compounds are o xidized by atmospheric 
oxygen under the catalytic influen ce of the enzyme phenolase an d eventually the pepper turns 
black. So, by the enzymatic oxidation the black colour of the p epper develops particularly 
during the drying operation. 
Dehydrated green pepper 
The process for making dehydrated green pepper or canned green pepper is shown. In the 
dehydrated green pepper, slightly immature green pepper maybe 2 0 to 30 days prior to full 
maturity is harvested, cleaned and then blanched in boiling wat er for about 10 to 30 min 
which tends to inactivate the en zyme that is responsible for bl ackening and washing of 
polyphenols out of the berries. After blanching, the berries ar e immediately cooled and 
subjected to sulphiting in potassi um metabisulfite solution to fix the green colour and this is 
followed by washing and drying in cabinet dryer at around 50 to  55 °C temperature for 10 to 10 
 15 h. Here the KMS solution dripping, it fixes the green colour  and you get the dehydrated 
green pepper. Its final moistur e content maybe around 8 % or so . 
 
In the canned green pepper, a des piked and cleaned berries from  the earlier process are used, 
they are immersed in water containing 20 ppm residual chlorine for about an hour and then it 
is followed by immersion in 2 % hot brine solution containing m aybe 0.2 % citric acid and 
then it is exhausted at 80 °C. They are sealed properly and pro cessed in boiling water for 
about 20 min and then finally it is canned and cooled immediate ly under running cold water 
to get the end-product li ke canned green pepper. 
 
 
 11 
 Processing of white pepper 
White pepper is the white inner corn obtained after removing th e outer skin or pericarp of the 
pepper berries and ideal varietie s for making white pepper incl ude Balankotta  and Panniyur 1  
w i t h  l a r g e - s i z e d  b e r r i e s .  F o r  m a k i n g  w h i t e  p e p p e r ,  t h e  h a r v e s t e d berries are subjected to 
various treatments like water steeping where the fresh berries for 7 to 8 days and dry berries 
for 10 to 15 days are carried out. Then it may be subjected to steaming for about 15 min. 
Even sometimes berries are packed in gunny bag and they are pla ced in pit which is covered 
with soil or even chemical treatment can be given where steepin g with 5 times by 4 % 
sodium hydroxide solution and boiling. So either of these treat ments is done. The treated 
berries are deskinned, subjected to the deskinning process foll owed by washing and then 
finally they are further treated with bleaching powder for 2 da ys followed by draining, drying 
and cleaning to get the white pepper.  
 
Cardamom 
Cardamom plants start bearing 2 or 3 years after planting sucke rs or seedlings, respectively. 
The capsules ripen within a period of 120 to135 days after its formation. The two main types 
of cardamom are true or green cardamom or when bleached they al so become white 
cardamom. This comes from the species Elettaria cardamomum  and is distributed from India 
to Malaysia. The black cardamom also known as brown, greater, l arge, longer, or Nepal 
cardamom, it comes from a species Amomum subulatum  and is native to the eastern 
Himalayas and it is mostly cultivated in Eastern Nepal, Sikkim and parts of Darjeeling 
districts in West Bengal of I ndia and also in southern Bhutan. 12 
 Both forms of cardamom are used as flavourings and cooking spic es in both food and drink 
and also as a medicine. E. cardamom  i.e. green cardamom is used as a spice, a masticatory 
and in medicine. It is also smoked.  
 
Processing of the cardamom 
After harvesting, cleaning i.e. washing is done to remove the s oil particles and other dirt, etc. 
Then it is given pre-treatments like it is soaked in sodium bic arbonate 2 to 5 % solution for 
10 min to retain the green col our followed by drying or curing to safe moisture level up to 10 
% either by sun drying or by artificial drying. Then, this drie d cardamom is subjected to 
polishing treatment where the dr ied capsules are rubbed on wire  mesh to remove the stalk and 
the dried portion of flower from the capsule. Grading is done u sing sieves of 7, 6.5, or 6 mm 
dimensions but that is precise s ieve size and then it is packag ed in 300 Gauge black polythene 
lined gunny bags and stored. 
Equipment used in processing of large cardamom powder 
Traditional Bhatti for curing and drying. Modified Bhatti i.e. there are some big bricks and 
cement which are used in these Bhattis, Also, the gasifier syst em can be used for drying. 
Pulveriser which is used for grinding the dried cardamom. Dryer s  e i t h e r  s o l a r  d r y e r  o r  
mechanical radar and vertical filling machine and labelling etc . These are some of the 
equipment which can be used f or processing as well as making po wder of the cardamom. 
 13 
 
 
 
Processing of turmeric 
Turmeric i.e. the fresh turmeric rhizome is harvested and then it is subjected to washing 
treatment to remove soil particle s and other dirt followed by b oiling where cooking of the 
fresh rhizome is done until it becomes soft maybe boiled for ab out 45 to 90 min. This process 
destroys the vitality, avoids r aw odour, reduces the drying tim e and also yields uniformly 
coloured products. Drying is done traditionally i.e. sun drying  i s  u s e d  w h e r e  r h i z o m e s  a r e  
spread in a thick layer of 5 to 7 cm for 10 to 12 days. However , the artificial drying can also 
be used. After drying, the polishing or colouring is an importa nt operation which improves 
the appearance by polishing 7 to 8 %. This polishing also helps  in removing the wrinkles 
from the dried material. Then cleaning and grading is done wher e fingers of 2.5 to 7.5 cm 
length and about 1 cm diameter; bulbs that the central mother r hizomes, oval in shape, shorter 14 
 in length and larger diameter or splits that the splitted bulbs . So they are graded in this either 
fingers or bulbs or splits a nd finally they are packed.  
 
Process flow diagram for the con ventional turmeric processing c hain  
By this process the rhizome, i.e. dried rhizomes they are pulve rized using appropriate 
grinding machines into powder and this powder will be treated w ith the extraction techniques 
like solvent extraction, maceration, or hydro-distillation and then this product like turmeric 
drops, turmeric oleoresins or e ven curcumin powder by extractio n is obtained. 
 
Turmeric’s biorefinery from clean emerging technologies  
These conventional extraction techniques nowadays is being repl a c e d  w i t h  t h e  o t h e r  
advanced technique, particularly to get maximum antioxidant pot ential and other bioactive 15 
 properties, functional properties and these processes like supe rcritical fluid extraction or 
pressurized liquid extraction, mi crowave-assisted extraction or  ultrasound-assisted extraction 
are used and the products like turmeric oil, curcumin, or vario us fractions of the rhizome like 
starch, fibres, protein for a pplication in other food products etc. as flavour enhancers or for 
other purposes are produced a nd available in the market.  
 
Processing of ginger 
I n d i a  i s  t h e  l a r g e s t  p r o d u c e r  o f dry ginger. It contributes abo ut 33 % to the world’s 
population. Indian ginger has high esteem in the world due to i ts characteristic flavour even 
sometimes that it gives a lemon-like taste. It is majorly grown  in southern states like Kerala, 
and also in the northern part in Assam, Meghalaya, Orissa, and Himachal Pradesh as well as 
in West Bengal. Pungency of ginger is mainly due to the presenc e of 6-gingerol while the 
aroma is due to its volatile oil like lisabolanme, zingiberene,  and zingiberol.  
As far as the processing of the ginger is concerned, there are steps after it is obtained from the 
field then it is subjected to v arious treatments like sorting, washing, peeling, drying, 
polishing, cleaning, grading a nd then finally storage. 
Sorting involves the separation of good rhizomes from the shriv elled ones and extraneous 
matter is removed. Then in the wa shing, harvested rhizomes are either soaking in the water 
overnight or even by spraying the water the outer skin is scrap ed off with a bamboo splinter. 
Peeling is done to remove scaly e pidermis and to facilitate dry ing. Peeled rhizomes are 
washed before drying. The moisture content almost 80 % during h arvesting is brought down 16 
 to 10 % after the drying. Polishing is done to remove the dry s kin and wrinkles which are 
developed on the surface during drying process. It is done by a brasive tools. Cleaning is done 
to remove the undesirable matter and the dried peels attached t o the rhizome surface. Grading 
is done for obtaining rhizomes with good quality and commercial  v a l u e  a n d  f u l l y  d r i e d  
rhizomes are stored in airtight  containers, HDPE, etc. or they are sent for the various process 
operation- preparation of powder , extraction of essential oils,  oleoresins and so on. 
 
 
Machinery for ginger processing  
Normally, brush cleaning machine is used for cleaning and the p rinciple of its operation is 
friction and there is water pipe to spray the water and high-pr essure spray water to clean the 
ginger skin. Slicing and cutting machines are used to cut the g inger into multiple sizes by 17 
 changing the cutter head. The machine can cut the ginger into s hreds and diced shapes. 
Drying machine is used for dehydration of the ginger. Machine u ses an intelligent control 
panel to control the entire drying process. Air stream should b e con tro lled to get the dried  
product with maximum retention of  the volatiles and other bioac tives. 
 
Grinder- a multifunctional ginger grinder is used where high sp eed relative motion between 
the movable and fixed fluted discs to crush the material and it  works on the principle of 
impact and friction. The sifter c ustomizes different screen fin eness for sieving the ground 
ginger powder. The sealing strip ensures that the machine has a  good sealing performance 
and reduces the dust emission from the system. And then finally  the packaging machine. The 
filling, sealing packaging machine is used for both powder as w ell as the ground material or 
even other products can be used.  
 18 
  
Value-added products made from ginger   
Ginger splits, bleached ginger, dry ginger, ginger powder, ging er preserve, ginger pickle, 
candies made of ginger, ginger oleoresin and ginger essential o ils. These are all available in 
the market. So ginger is one spi ce which is used for various va lue-added product making. 
 
Garlic processing 
Garlic is another important commodity. It is first harvested fr om the field then subjected to 
sorting into sorting machine with the brusher cleaning function . After sorting, the cloves are 
separated and these cloves i.e. garlic cloves unpeeled, they ar e sent to the washing machine, 
properly washed and followed by pe eling where the cloves are pe eled. Then, it is subjected to 
slicing or chopping machines where they are cut into smaller sl ices or may be converted into 
paste since garlic paste is available in the market. Slices or even paste, they can be sent to the 
appropriate drying method either  slices to a two-stage continuo us multi-pass conveyor dryer 
or this paste can be sent to the spreader, freeze dried, for ma king powder. The slices can be 
passed to the destoner, garlic flake skin removal machine from the dried if there is any. Then 
it is subjected to the dried garlic vibrator classifier, magnet ic separator, colour sorters, metal 
detector, particularly for the dried garlic chips. The paste, a ccordingly the paste or powder 
also are suitably pack aged and then kept. 
 19 
 
 
 
Processing of cloves 
It is a small, reddish brown unopened flower bud of the tropica l evergreen tree Syzygium 
aromaticum . The trees begin to yield from 7 to 8 years after planting and  t h e  b u d s  a r e  
harvested when the base of calyx has turned from green to pink in colour. India produces a 
significant amount of the cloves and these cloves are known for  their essential oil, eugenol 
content. Eugenol is a very good raw material for pharmaceutical  companies for the medicine 
for teeth, etc. Clove is extracted either using appropriate sup ercritical fluid extraction 
technology, eugenol is extracted f rom it or alternatively even sometimes that is the oil 
distillation tank, a solvent dis tillation can also be used to t ake out the clove oil and remaining 
the solvent extracted as supercritical extracted clove is sent to the market for the use as 
spices. 20 
 
 
Cinnamon 
 The term cinnamon refers to many products made from the cinnam on inner bark. There are 7 
most widely known cinnamon products like tube, stick, cigarette , split, broken, powder, oil, 
etc. There are two varieties of c innamon being procured like Ca ssia and Ceylon cinnamon. 
The two types have stark differenc es in their features, price r ange and production capacity. 
As far as the harvesting is concerned, for Ceylon cinnamon, the  trees are usually harvested 
when they are 3 years old. However, 15 years is the most ideal stage as the cinnamon bark 
will be in its prime quality. In this stage, farmers usually ha rvest cinnamon twice a year after 
the rainy season, as humidity will make the bark peel off more easily.  
 
 21 
 Cinnamon processing 
It is a purely labour-intensive operation and about 60 % of the  cost of the cinnamon is its 
processing cost. For obtaining cinnamon sticks, cinnamon bark m ust be cut into smaller 
pieces with a width up around 3 to 3.7 cm to make sure they cur l into a round shape.  
Then they are dried. The removed barks are called quills and th ese quills are dried in shade to 
prevent losing their shape for a bout 4 to 5 days. Later, they w ill be placed in sunlight or in a 
mechanical dryer to become completely dry. 
 
Factories categorize cinnamon based on the bark’s thickness, ap pearance, and its essential oil 
content. After grading, cutting or grinding is carried out depe nding on the final product size. 
For instance, tube cinnamon is f rom 30 to 45 cm in length, whil e the figure for cigarette 
cinnamon is from 8 to 10 cm only. The final product maybe in th e powder form, the bark will 
be ground to form a fine powder.  
Cinnamon products are packed in moisture proof bags or polythen e plastic, PPE or PET 
materials and this would be s tored in dry, cool, clean and well -ventilated contai ners which are 
a w a y  f r o m  d i r e c t l y  s u n l i g h t  o t h e r w i s e  l i g h t  m a y  o x i d i s e  i t s  f l a vouring components. These 
containers should also be free from pests and insects to avoid undesirable damage to the 
cinnamon product. 
 22 
 
 
 
Summary 
Spices are very important commodity particularly in the Indian cuisine but after their 
harvesting, they should go to various processes and all the pro cesses should be conducted 
properly so that the value of the  spices particularly essential  oil, antioxidant potential, other 
bioactive functional, their medicinal value is retained. These spices are made available in the 
market for use in various products for direct use in the cookin g operation. These spices 
contain various anti-microbials, a ntioxidants, and oleoresins, essential oils that are extracted 
using appropriate extraction technologies. So they are very val uable. They add to the food 
taste, flavour and many other functional characteristics, etc. In fact, there are many spices 
which are reported in Ayurvedas,  these spices have the good hea ling properties, antibacterial 
activity. 23 
 
 
These are the references used. Thank You. 