1 
 Post Harvest Operations and  
Processing of Fruits, Vegetables, Spices and Plantation Crop Products  
Professor H. N. Mishra  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 32  
This lecture discusses the different  technologies for making food powders and premixes. These 
food powders and premixes will be studied in two parts.  
 
In the Part 1, the basic concept of fruits and vegetable powders and premix preparations will be 
discussed. In the Part 2, the methods and e quipment for powder and premix development, the 
drying processes like spray drying, freeze drying, roller and drum drying, belt drying will be 
discussed. At the end, concepts about food premixes will be provided.  
 
Food powders  
Food products in solid or li quid states are converted to powder form for ease of use, processing 
and keeping quality. Powders are particulate solid -state materials containing discrete particles of 
sizes ranging from nanometers to millimeters. Various terms are used to indicate the pa rticulate 
solids in bulk, such as powder, granules, flour, and dust. Based on their sizes, they are named as 
either powder or granule or flour or dust. Granular products have a dimension of the order of 
2 
 millimeter, while fine powder products are of average  size less than 100 µm. The bulk powder 
properties are the combined effect of the particle properties.  
 
Methods to produce and process powders  
The materials may be in the liquid or paste form like juice, pulp, concentrate, paste, puree etc. For 
these, spr ay drying, freeze drying, drum drying, or belt drying or foam -bed drying etc. can be used 
to convert them into the free -flowing powder form. In other case, the material may be in the solid 
state like the dehydrated fruits, dehydrated vegetables, spices etc . These materials can be converted 
into powder by appropriate size reduction technology, i.e., by, crushing, grinding, milling, 
pulverization, then finally granulation, and mixing. These are the processes used for the 
preparation of powders.  
 
Technology f or powder production  
Spray drying  
It is a very popular method being used for the conversion of liquids into free -flowing powders. In 
the spray drying process, it can be seen from the figure, that there is a drying chamber, and there 
are certain atomizers a nd with the help of these atomizers, the liquid is fed into the fine droplets. 
Within the drying chamber, hot air comes in. In this chamber, the fine droplets come in contact 
3 
 with the hot air and the material gets dried. Then moist air i.e., the air which absorb the moisture, 
goes through the cyclone, and the dried product is collected from the bottom of the spray dryer. 
There are basically three fundamental steps in spray drying, i.e., atomization, then mixing up the 
spray droplet with the heated gas strea m allowing the liquid to evaporate and leave the dried solids, 
and finally separating the dried powder from the gas stream, and collection of the powder.  
 
Atomization  
The prime functions of the atomization process are a high surface to mass ratio resulti ng in high 
evaporation rates and production of particles of the desired shape, size, and density. There are three 
basic types of atomizers, which are used commercially.  
Rotary atomizer  
It can be seen from the figure, that the fluid goes through this rotar y atomizer. It uses the energy 
of a high -speed rotating wheel to divide bulk liquid into fine droplets. Feedstock is introduced at 
the center of the wheel and it flows over and disintegrates into droplets, when it leaves the wheel.  
 
4 
 Pressure nozzle  
The other atomizer is the pressure nozzle i.e., atomization by pressure energy. It can be seen from 
the figure, that the liquid passes through a nozzle, i.e., the rotating fluid allows the nozzle to convert 
the potential energy of the liquid under pressure int o kinetic energy at the orifice. It forms a thin, 
high-speed film at the exit of the nozzle, and the range varies from around 250 to 10,000 psi.  
Two -fluid nozzle system  
Here basically, the principle is the atomization by kinetic energy. It can be seen from  the figure, 
that, it utilizes the energy of the compressed gas to atomize the liquid and the ability to produce 
very fine particles and to atomize highly viscous fluid.  
 
Mixing and drying  
Once the liquid is atomized, it must be brought into the intimate contact with the heated gas for 
evaporation from the surface of all droplets within the drying chamber. The heated gas is 
introduced into the chamber by an air dispenser, which ensures that the gas flow equals to all parts 
of the drying chamber.  
Drying cha mber  
The drying chamber must be of adequate volume to provide enough contact time between the 
atomized cloud and the heated glass. All droplets must be sufficiently dried before they contact a 
surface. This process is particularly used for fruits, vegetabl e juices drying etc. The conventional 
drying process like spray drying process is not suitable for liquid drying, since there, the drying 
time is in the fraction of minutes or few seconds. The temperature must be, in order to cause the 
complete evaporation . The temperature must be very high in the drying chamber. This process is 
not suitable particularly for the sugar containing juices drying. They are heat -sensitive. Their Tg 
value i.e., glass transition temperature value is less. If the temperature goes b eyond the Tg value, 
the product will become sticky and its removal from the tank chamber will become difficult.  
5 
  
Powder separation  
Spray -drying chambers have cone bottoms to facilitate the collection of the dried powder. When 
the coarse powder is to be collected, they are usually discharged directly from the bottom of the 
cone through a suitable airlock, like rotary valve. The gas stream having the evaporated moisture, 
is drawn from the center of the cone, above the cone bottom and discharged through a s ide outlet, 
which acts as a cyclone. This must be separated in the high efficiency cyclones, followed by a wet 
scrubber or in a fabric filter (bag collector). The fines are collected in the dry state (bag collector). 
They are sent to the larger powder stre am or even recycled.  
 
Types of spray dryer system  
6 
 In the co -current system, spray is directed into the hot air entering the dryer and both pass through 
the chamber in the same direction. Spray evaporation is rapid, and the temperature of the drying 
air is  quickly reduced by the vaporization of the water in this type of system. In the counter -current 
system, it can be seen form the figure, that the air is going from the bottom to the top. Air is 
introduced at the bottom, and the feed is introduced from the top. In the counter -current system, 
more rapid evaporation is there. There is higher energy efficiency than a co -current design. 
However, it is not suitable for heat -sensitive products like fruits and vegetable drying etc. In the 
mixed mode, the co -current  as well as counter current flow are combined. The air enters at the top 
and the atomizer is located at the bottom. It is also not suitable for the heat -sensitive product. So, 
in that sense, it can be said that, for fruits and vegetables dehydration, the c o-current system may 
be better.  
 
Recent advances in spray drying  
Ultrasound -assisted spray drying  
It uses ultrasonic atomization for generating the spray droplets. Ultrasonic nozzle atomizers are 
electromechanical devices that vibrate at a high energy to induce droplet formation. The vibration 
energy applied to the atomizing surface, spreads onto the surface, as the liquid passes through it 
and this leads to the formation of a thin film at the tip of the atomizer. As this film absorbs the 
vibrational energ y, capillary waves develop and break down into small droplets, once their 
amplitude reaches a critical height. The main atomization parameters viz. vibration frequency, 
vibration amplitude and area of the vibrating surface are adjusted according to the cha racteristics 
of the feed material.  
7 
  
Vacuum spray drying  
Here, the drying is performed under vacuum with the use of low drying temperature like 40 to 60 
°C. It is advantageous for the heat -sensitive material. The superheated steam acts both as the heat 
source and drying medium. It is supplied at 200 °C to the spray -drying chamber through a steam 
nozzle. Most of the superheated steam is recirculated and reheated. The excess of steam from the 
drying process can be used elsewhere in the process or plant.  
 
Dehumidified air spray drying  
Dehumidified air is used as the drying medium in this case. Dehumidified air is produced by an 
air dehumidifying system connected to the drying chamber. Low moisture content and relative 
humidity of the air improve the driving force for drying even at lowe r temperatures. Spray drying 
with the dehumidified air, substantially alleviates the stickiness problem and it improves the 
powder recovery compared to the traditionally spray drying. The powder also has a lower residual 
moisture content, higher bulk densi ty, and particles with a smooth surface.  
8 
  
Factors affecting the spray dried products  
There is feed characteristics, like feed composition, density, viscosity, glass transition temperature, 
heat sensitivity, addition of drying aids etc. or operating cond itions of the spray dryer like atomizer 
speed, inlet/outlet temperature, drying air flow rate, feed flow rate, feed temperature, residence 
time, humidity of the drying air etc. are the factors that affect the spray drying products. Spray 
dryer design, like  that flow type, like co -current, counter current, mixed flow, or atomizer type, 
like centrifugal atomizer, pressure atomizer, pneumatic etc. are all factors that affect the quality of 
the spray dried products.  
 
Spray -dried powder properties  
Here a compa rison has been shown. A comparison between the spray dried powder with freeze -
dried powder, and vacuum dried powder has been shown. The materials are the inulin or 
maltodextrin or a mixture of inulin and maltodextrin. Vacuum drying occurs at 50 °C, 70 °C a nd 
90 °C. Here the color difference can be seen at different conditions. Encapsulated sieve of corn 
juice powder is a very good example of spray -dried powder.  
9 
 The key properties of the powder are the uniform particle size, its spherical particle shape, 
excellent flowability, improved compressibility, low bulk density, better solubility, reduced 
moisture content, increased thermal stability and even if properly controlled, there should be least 
loss of the nutrients. If there is high temperature, there will be some losses.  
 
Freeze drying  
It is an ideal method for drying of heat -sensitive materials. For fruits, vegetable, juices etc., even 
for the instant coffee, the freeze -drying process is used. The freeze -drying diagram has been shown 
in the figure. In the  freeze drying, the material is first frozen and then the ice or water in the ice 
form is sublimed directly. If the triple point is maintained, then directly, a solid can be removed in 
the form of a gas. Freeze -drying occurs in two stages. One in the subli mation drying stage, in 
which the sublimation of the frozen water like ice crystals occurs normally. Most of the water in 
the food is removed at this stage. Then, also there is a second stage, the desorption drying stage, 
where water absorbed on the solid matrix is removed. Freeze drying is carried to a final moisture 
content of about up to 1 -3%. 
 
Rate of the freezing affects the quality of products as well as rate of the drying process.  
10 
 Rapid freezing produces small ice crystals, which do little damage t o the structure of the product, 
but they leave behind very small pores and capillaries and offer a greater resistance to the passage 
of the vapor. Whereas, the slow freezer produces large crystals and they make rapid drying 
possible, but the large crystals  damage the cells, produces separation and denaturation of the 
protein etc.  
 
Heat and mass transfer in the freeze drying  
Heat can be delivered to the subliming front by two most common mechanisms. One is the 
radiation from the hot surfaces, i.e., where he at is delivered to the exposed surface of the dry zone 
by radiation, and then travels through the dry zone to the sublimation front, mainly by conduction. 
The water vapor released travels through the dry zone, in the opposite direction, from the 
sublimatio n front to the surface and then from there to the condenser. The second way is the contact 
with a hot surface. It can be seen in the figure that the material, the frozen mass is in direct contact 
with a hot surface. The trays containing the frozen material  are placed on the heated shelves, heat 
is transferred to the sublimation zone by conduction through the frozen layer and water vapor is 
transferred through the dry layer.  
11 
  
An assumption can be done, that an incremental thickness dz of the slab is dried i n a time increment 
of dt. It is shown in the figure. There is a frozen layer, dry layer. Heat is supplied from the frozen 
layer, water -vapor directly, ice in the vapor form, it goes out and the thickness of the layer is z. 
The rate of the sublimation i.e.,   
dw
dt=A ρi (wi− wf)dz
dt 
Here, A is the slab surface area. ρ i is the density of the frozen food and w i and w f are the initial and 
final water content, respectively. At steady state, the rate of sublimation must be in accordance 
both with the rate of the heat transfer to the sublimation front and with the rate of mass transfer 
from the sublimation front.  
 
Heat tr ansfer  
12 
 The rate of conductive heat transport from the slab surface to the sublimation front through the dry 
layer . 
q=A k (T0 − Ti )
z 
where q is the rate of heat supply, k is the thermal conductivity of dry layer and the T 0 and T i are 
the temperature at the slab surface at the sublimation front, respectively. The rate of heat supply, 
q, is equal to the rate of sublimation multiplied by latent heat of sublimation. This is according to 
the equation (3). Integrating equation (3) withi n the limits z is equal to from 0 to z, at t from 0 to 
t, the drying time (t) can be obtained .  
t= z2(wi− wf)
2 (T0−Ti) (ρi λs 
k) 
 
Mass transfer  
A steady state, the rate of sublimation must be equal to the rate of removal of vapors by mass 
transfer through  the dry layer. This can be represented by the equation (4). The integrating equation 
(4) within the limits z is equal to 0 to z, at t from 0 to t, the drying time, (t) . 
t= z2(wi−wf)
2 (pi− p0) (ρi
π) 
where π is the permeability of the dry layer to water vap or, and p i and p 0 are the water vapor 
pressure at the sublimation front and at the slab surface, respectively. Using this equation, the 
drying time can be calculated.  
13 
  
Freeze dried pomegranate powder  
Here, a case study has been in the figure. In case of f reeze -dried pomegranate powder, the fresh 
material i.e., the pomegranate is taken first, converted into the juice, and it is concentrated. The 
concentrated juice is put into the freeze dryer. It is dried then. It is in the thick -form. It is further 
pulveri zed. Then freezing is done at -30 °C. Then under the low pressure, once it is heated, ice 
evaporates, and the water is added to a dried product, it is restored to its original condition. The 
advantages of this process are minimum damage and loss of the act ivity in the heat labile materials. 
There is creation of pores. A friable structure can be obtained. Speed and completeness of the 
rehydration occurs. However, the major disadvantages are like it is a very high capital cost of the 
equipment. High energy co st is required in this process. It requires a lengthy process time, and 
possible damage to the product occurs in this process.  
 
Roller and drum drying   
The product may be placed in its natural or condensed form in a vacuum pan or evaporator. There 
is a drum. These drums are internally heated. It may be single drum, twin drums, three drums etc. 
Feed material of the feed tray of suitable consistency is put and the drums move. After that, it takes 
the material and the drum is internally heated, so heat transfer takes place. Finally, there is a doctor 
14 
 blade, a sharp hard flexible knife, scraps out the dried material, and the then the material is taken 
in a con veyor belt. The product is pulverized. In some vacuum units, the product is accumulated 
in a tub or tray, and then removed periodically, first from one side of the enclosed chamber to the 
other side, while maintaining a vacuum and on the drying unit. A hoo d must be placed over the 
drums with a stack of vapours to move out of the area.  
 
The factors considered for the drum drying  
Vacuum  
For vacuum drum drying, the vacuum between the drum and the housing surrounding the drum is 
maintained between 69 to 74 cm  Hg vacuum. The product temperature approaches the temperature 
of the steam heating medium. In the case of vacuum, the inside of the drum is heated with the 
steam with a low pressure.  
Size and speed  
The diameter of the drum may be up to 61 to 122 cm, and length may be up to 3.6 m. Speed may 
be from 6 to 24 rpm. However, it is adjustable. It has to be adjusted depending upon the material 
characteristics. The speed of the drum is an important factor as it affects the thickness of the film 
as well as the time  the product is on the roll. The speed of the drum may be varied according to 
the concentration of the product and the dryness desired.  
15 
  
The other factors include product contact, uniform film feeding, mounting, spacing etc. In 
mounting, the one drum of a  double drum drier is mounted on a stationary bearing; the outer drum 
is mounted on a bearing, which can be moved to provide the desired clearance between the drums. 
The spacing between the drums of a double cylinder dryer is about 0.05 to 0.1 cm when the drums 
are cold.  
 
Factors affecting production from a drum drier  
The factors, which influence the production from a drum dryer, can be the feed temperature, drum 
gap, drum speed and steam pressure etc. If the feed temperature is high, then drying rate will  be 
high. The rate of drying increases proportionally at about 2.2 % for each 5.5 °C increase in the 
feed temperature. Similarly, the clearance between the gap, the speed at which the drum rotates, 
stream pressure, all these influences the production from drum driers.  
16 
  
Advantages and disadvantages of the drum drying  
The drum drying along with the spray drying processes have many advantages including minimal 
energy consumption, and residence time dispersion. Drum dryers are also capable of generating 
exclus ive powder properties, further enhancing their applicability etc. There are disadvantages like 
the dry product may have a scorched flavor and solubility is much lower because of the protein 
denaturation. The product may be damaged as heating occurs due to powder scrapping off from 
the drums. The product may be damaged and scorched, if there is uneven feed supply, incomplete 
removal of film or imperfect roller alignment etc.  
 
Belt drying  
The drier comprises a feed hopper, evacuated chamber, a belt, heaters,  vacuum pump etc. The belt 
material should be Teflon -coated conveyor belt, so that it is a non -sticky material. In case of 
heaters, a radiation plate 23 cm wide and 100 cm long is located above the belt and spanned the 
length of the conduction heating plat es. Vacuum pump is a pump, which maintains the desired 
pressure inside the system.  
17 
  
Case study  
Manufacturing process of strawberry powder  
The figure shows the strawberry crushing, washing vat etc. The unwanted and bad quality material 
is removed. The juic e is prepared, and it is concentrated and after that, it is either spray dried or 
freeze dried. Finally, the sprayed or freeze -dried powder is prepared and it is packaged suitably.  
 
Premixes  
When different food powders or ingredients are mixed together in  a specific proportion, then the 
premix powder forms. It is generally customized blend of nutrient -rich powders in precise quantity 
as per the requirement. It reduces food processing sourcing time, storage space, and handling 
procedures during the specific ation to the finished products.  
Formulations  
18 
 Formulations can be optimized using mathematical models to find best solution with respect to 
some evaluation criterion from a set of the alternative solutions. These solutions are defined by set 
of mathematica l constraints, may be mathematical inequalities or mathematical equalities etc.  
 
Linear programming models  
There are several mathematical models which are available, which are proposed. The linear 
programming model is one. Linear programs are constrained,  optimization models, that satisfy 
three requirements. One is that the decision variables must be continuous, they can take on any 
value within some restricted range. The second one is that the objective function must be a linear 
function and the third one  is that the left -hand sides of the constant must be linear functions. The 
figure shows the minimize or maximize of any particular value z.  
Maximize or minimize Z= c1x1+c2x2+⋯+ cnxn 
Subject to  a11x1+a12x2+⋯+ a1nxn=≥≤ b1 
a21x1+a22x2+⋯+ a2nxn=≥≤ b2 
where x i values are the decision variables, and c j, aij and b i values are constants. This is called 
parameters or coefficients, that are given or specified by the problem assumptions. Most linear 
programs require non -negative decision variables.  
19 
  
Steps to be followed for optimal formulation  
The steps to be followed for formulation are identifying and define the defining variable for the 
problems, defining the objective function and finally, identifying and expressing mathematically 
all the relevant constraints  and implementing implicit assumptions. Implicit assumptions may be 
proportionality i.e., the contribution of the individual in the objective function is proportional to 
their value, additivity i.e., the total value of the objective function and each const ant is the sum of 
the individual contribution from each variable, divisibility i.e., the decision variable can take on 
any real numerical values within a specified range, and finally, certainty i.e., the parameters are 
known.  
 
Summary  
In this lecture, th e different methods of making food powders, and particularly fruits and vegetable 
juice powder, fruits and vegetable pulp powder are discussed. Since, the heat -sensitive components 
have the low Tg values, they contain low melting components, use of low tem perature or vacuum 
is advisable to preserve them. They should not be subjected to very high temperature in the drying 
process. Whether it is spray drying or drum drying or belt drying, they will create a problem of 
20 
 stickiness. Therefore, the proper care ha s to be taken in these kinds of drying processes. When the 
powder is obtained, this powder, using appropriate formulas and techniques, can be blended 
together in a definite proportion in order to get the desired product. This process is used for 
preparatio n of various soup premixes, various ready to serve vegetables juices etc. They are 
available in the market and they can be prepared by using these techniques.  
 
The references used in this lecture are mentioned above.  
 
