1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Processing of Fruits, Vegetable, Spices a nd Plantation 
Crop Products  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
 
Lecture 08  
Holding and Transportation  
 
 
This le cture covers various issues related to handling and transport ation of fruits and 
vegetables, handling of different fruits and vegetable at different stages , transportation and its 
various model s, refrigerated vehicles , temperature control and air circulati on systems in 
vehicl e, and loading consideration and patterns  with a view to prevent damage during the 
transportation and handling of the produce.  2 
 
 
Handling of  Fruits and V egetables  
Improper handling of fruits and vegetables is the major cause of deterio ration and post-
harvest losses . So,  careful and proper handling of the produce at each stage is necessary to 
protect its quality as well as enhance its  shelf  life. The different stages duri ng the handling of 
the commodities  are: (1) A t the time of harvest at the field , (2) A t the time of loading and 
unloading , (3) A t the time of transportation,  (4) A t wholesale market , (5) A t retail market , 
and (6) A t the consumer end.  
 
Handling in the field  
The use of dirty containers which can incre ase the load of micro organisms should be avoided. 
The produce should be handled gently to avoid mechanical injuries w hich could results in 
defects. Harvest ing of  the produce should be done at its optimum maturity.  Proper handling 
in the primary operations such as washing, clea ning, dressing, sorting, grading & packaging  
must be e nsured. T he handlin g during loading and unloading may be done at di fferent places 3 
 like at the pack  house , at the field , at the retail market or at the wholesale market. Some 
precautionary measures shoul d be taken during loading and unloading such as the packs 
should not be thrown, the pack ets should be handled gently , hooks should be avoided for 
picking the bags and crates, t orn bags and broken crates should not be used , and different 
grade package s shou ld be  kept separately.  
 
Handling during the transport ation  
The produced leaving the field or fi rm for the market or storage should arrive in the same 
condition as it left the field or the firm.   
Some  preventive measures that should be taken during transpo rtation are:  
(1) Safe driving at the field as well as on rough fa rm tracks to avoid  compress ion and 
damage to the produce thus it helps in maintaining the quality .  
(2) Careful loading of the produce in the container s to avoid s hifting or collapse of the 
load.  
(3) The bulk load or open top containers should be covered to prevent excessive 
dehydration in hot weather and protect the produce in wet weather . 
(4)  Critical supervision at all stages of the transportation must be ensured to minimize 
the chances of physical injur y to the produce .  
While handling in the wholesale market, the produce  may get damage d during unloading, 
hence it must be handled gently . During storage it may get damaged , thus,  the store should be 
cool, clean and in shade. To avoid damage of the produce during l oading for the retail 
dispatch , they must  be handled properly .  4 
 
 
Handling at retail market  
At the retail market  to avoid mishandling of the produce, only required quantity  should b e 
kept at display and other remaining materials  should be kept in  proper  place . Periodic 
spray ing of water  on leafy vegetables to maintain its quality for longer period. T his process 
helps in keeping the commodity fresh . Also, the produce which is not kept in display should 
be sto red in controlled environment.   
Handling a t consumer end  
The produce can be kept fresh for a longer period at low temperature by wrapping green leafy 
vegetable in wet cloth , by keeping b eans, brinjals , cauliflower s, cabbage, radish, c arrot , chilli, 
capsicum and r ooty vegetables in polythene b ags a nd before keeping in the bag  extra 
moisture should be removed . Commodities  like a pple, guava , onion, and garlic should  not be 
kept together with the other vegetables due to their typical flavor and aroma to prevent the 
transfer of flavor from one vegetable  to the other.  
 5 
 Transportation  
Fruits and vegetables are transported and thereby handled several times before they reach to 
the point of the sale . Proper selection, packaging,  handling and maintenance of optimal  
temperature during all stages  of distributi on prevents physical damage and retards na tural 
deterioration process. Quality losses of the produce are minimized during journey if the 
transport vehicles are well designed and properly constructed, if they ar e properly loaded 
with well pre -cooled produce , and the vehicle  should  be maintained at optimal  temperature.  
 
There is a gaining consumer’s  demand of fresh produce of  good physical quality or 
appearance which is safe to eat . Quality loss is the result of improper handling , storage and 
transportation . Some issues in transportation are poor temperature management , lack of 
appropriate transport system, lack of refrigerated transport, poor loading and unloading 
practices and storage infrastructure. The recommendations to overcome the stated issues are 
creating awareness on proper transport system management , use horticultural value chain 
vision , provide financial incentives both in the terms of front and back ends, encourage 
investments , provide laws that  give investors the assurance of  security .  
Differe nt modes of transportation are rail, road, marine , and air. Roads are  generally used in 
intra continental shipment , and the produce which has a short shelf  life. It has a moderate cost 
of transport a nd the types of vehicle that are recommended for the road  transportation  
included refrigerated trailer /vans and intermoda l containers . A r ail transport is also used for 
intracontinental shipment , and the communities which has  medium shelf life. T he cost of the 
transport is moderate to low and the types of vehicl e recommended are ice refrigerated 
railcar, mechanically refrigerated rail car, refrigerated semitrailer on  flatcar or intermodal 
containers . Marin e and air transpor tation can also be used for the i ntercontinental shipments  
with produce having long shelf -life and very short -life, respectively.  Marine transports are  
considered to be one of the most economical mode of transportation and the types of vehicles 
include  conventional refrigerated ships  and containe r ships. Conversely, air shipment is quiet 
expensiv e and it requires specially modified wide -bodied jets or general cargo.  6 
 
 
 
Refrigerated vehicles  
The schematic diagram of a light duty liquefied natural gas chilled refrigerated vehicle is 
show n in the figure. It has one LNG tank provided with valve boxes , a cold energy recovery 
heat exchanger , induced draft fans that helps in blowing the cold air into the vehicle , 
superheater , engine, and  refrigerated vehicle body . The liquefied natural gas is composed of 
more than 98 %  methane . The v olume of LNG is about  600 time i s smaller than its value in 
gaseous form . Its temperature generally varies from -140 ℃ to -120 ℃, operating pressure 
from 5 to 8 bar an d enthalpy is 900 kJ/kg .  7 
 
 
 
Temperature control system s 
Most widely used method for temperature control is mechanical refrigeration which operate  
on Vapor -Compression -Refrigeration Cycle (VCRS).  It has di fferent components  as follows:  
(1) Evaporator: Allows for the evaporation of the refrigerant by absorbing                                                                                                                                           
thermal energy f rom the environment to be cooled (cooling effect).   
(2) Compressor : Compresses the refrigerant from the minimum pressure of the cycle 
(evaporator) to the maximum pressure (condenser) by absorbing mechanical energy 
from an external source.   
(3) Condenser: Allows fo r the condensation of the refrigerant by rejecting thermal ene rgy 
to the external environment .  
(4) Expansion device: A llows the pressure drop from the condenser level to the 
evaporator level .  8 
 Cryogenic system  
Cryogenic system may  be direct or indirect system . In the direct system, d irect injection of 
cryogenic fluid in refrigerated compartment where it evaporates absorbing thermal energy, 
and then released into the external environment during the door openings.  So, there is a 
decrease O 2 concentration in the compartment and it is more efficient and it cools the 
commodity quickly. Conversely, in indirect system,  cryogenic gas is expanded in a heat 
exchanger, in which it absorbs thermal energy from the recirculated indoor air. The gas is 
then dispersed into the atmosphere.  Cold air is c irculated in the compartment  that avoids 
problem of reduced oxygen concentration. But it takes comparatively more time in cooling 
down.  
 
Calculation of  the required cooling capacity  
The refrige ration system must be capable of  removing the all  heat entering the vehicle from 
outside , all heat generated within the vehicle , and any heat contained in the vehicle.   
Total cooling capacity,  
 
  
Where, Q Total is the total cooling capacity,  Qi is internal heat load, Qe is external heat load , 
and Qres is residual heat load.  
 
 
The internal heat load (Q i) is the r espiratory heat  generated (Qr, kJ) by the produce that 
depend s upon type of commodity. It is l ess than  normal at freezing temperature. Any field 9 
 heat (Q f, kJ) that remain s within the product. It depends on the product mass, m (kg), s pecific 
heat, C p, (kJ/kgK) , and d ifference between initial and  desired transport temperature, △T (K) .                           
 
External heat load  (Qe) 
It is the heat conducted  through the fl oor, walls and ceilings of a transport vehicle due to 
temperature difference between the inside and outside air . Solar radiation will increase the 
temperature of  outside surfaces where the trailer body is exposed to the sun. I nfiltration  heat 
from warm air  entering through small holes , cracks, drainage holes , and broken door seals 
and also when doors are opened during the journey  may heat up the vehicle .  
 
Where, Q e is external heat , U is overall heat transfer coefficient (kJ/h m2 K), A is sur face are 
through which heat is leaked inside the container  (m2), △T is temperature difference                           
between inside and outside of the container (K) , t is time of exposure (h). 
Residual  heat load (Q res) 
Residual heat from the air inside the trailer, and heat in the insulation and inner lining of the 
trailer.  10 
 
 
Air circulation system  
Top air delivery system is the most widely used in  mechanically refrigerated semitrailers and 
railcars. In this system, the refrigeration unit  in front of the vehicle  blows cold air along the 
ceiling . The cold air circulates above the cargo  from the front to the rear of the vehicle . A 
typical top air delivery system is comprised of an air delivery duct along the ceiling , 
horizontal floor duct , and a return -air bulkhead.  
 
Bottom air delivery system  
In this system th e most air movement is vertical, the refrigeration system blows cold air in the 
T beam  floor of the container . This air flows from the front to rear of the vehicle and is forced 
upward through the cargo .  
When t he air reaches the ceiling of the container, it flows from the rear to the front and 
returns to the refrigeration unit through the bulkhead openings . The loading pattern should be 
such that entire floor is covered to force air up and through the cargo . Any uncovered floor 11 
 space, for example , between pellets , the last pellet and the real doors must be filled with 
empty boxes , blocks or insulation to prevent cold air from short -circuiting to have better 
efficiency of the system.  
 
 
Preparation for loading  
The refrigeration system should  have sufficient refrigeration capacity to maintain proper 
temperature of the intended product load . The vehicle should be inspected for proper 
sanitation  to prevent the bacterial, chemical and other contamination  of the  food product 
loads . Vehicle maintenance improves vehicle ability to maintain desired product tem perature 
during transit. There is a needs to attain  desired transit temperature for the produce . It reduces 
chances of overloading the refrigeration system . The con dition of the inside of the 
refrigerated trailer affect s its ability to maintain the desired temperature during the transit . 
Therefore , handler s should inspect the trailer before loading and check out the various 
feature s like the presence of air delivery chute, no damage of the door seal, tightness of the 
side door seal, installation of bulkhead, and cleanliness of the floor and floor drains.  12 
 
 
Loading conside ration s 
Some loading considerations should be taken like the  type of air delivery  (i.e. top air  delivery 
or bottom  air delivery ), type of shipping containers (eg. stacking based on the type of 
containers such as wooden boxes, corrugated fiberboard boxes, or wooden baskets ), type of 
the produce  (i.e. frozen  or non -frozen  produce ). The type of food decid es the refrigeration  
capacity . The shipment consisting of two or more produce together must have the desired 
transit temperature  and relative humidity, within reasonably close range . And the length of 
transit period affects the loading decision, for exampl e, for same  produce, denser loading 
pattern can be adopted for overnight shipment compared to 2 weeks.   
 
Loading pattern s 
In hand  stacked loads  produce  transpo rted in cartons should  be stack ed so as to allow 
adequate air circulation through out the load. T he figure illustrates cross -wise offset loading 13 
 of the parcel telescopic containers . On the floor of the truck pellets or other support should be 
used to keep the cartoons out of the direct contact with the floor .  
 
Use of proper channels  when cartons of various sizes are to be loaded together, the larger 
and heavier containers should be placed on the bottom of the load . Parallel channels should 
be left for the air to move through the length of the load.  
 
Pigeon hole pattern  has boxes stacked in alternat ing solid and open layers and channels are 
left down both sidewalls. T his pattern provides channel for proper air circulation that is air 
circulation lengthwise through  the load and it allows every box to be in direct contact with 
the refrigerated air.  14 
 
 
Pallets and slip shee t loads   
The containers should be loaded so that they are away fro m the sidewalls and the floor of  the 
transport vehicle  in order to minimize the conduction of heat from the outside environment. 
The use of pellets keeps the cartons of f the floor while center -loading leaves an insulating air 
space between the pa llet loads and the outside wall s.  
 
Bracing  the load  
There should  always  be a void  between the last stack of produce and the back of the transport 
vehicle. T he load should be bra ced to prevent sifting against the rear door during transit. If 
the load shifts, it can block air circulation and fallen cart ons can present a great danger to the 
worker s who open the door at the destination market . A simple wooden brace can be 
constructed  and installed to prevent damage during the transportation.  15 
 
 
 
Factors affecting quality of the produce in transportation and the remedial solution  
(1) Initial quality:  Defective  or damaged produce are more susceptible to disease and  
physical damage . So,  selection of varieties (harvested at optimal maturity) that are 
more resistant to pathogens, physical injuries, and atmospheric variations  should be 
done.  
(2) Produce temperature : It influenc es the metabolism and determines  deterioration 
rate. Increase in tempe rature increases perishability and overcooling causes chilling 
injury. Hence, it must be ensured that a desired temperature is maintained throughout 
the journey  and subsequently check refrigeration capacity .  
(3) Humidity and water loss:  Low relative humidity increases the water loss and  
produce undergoes wilting, shriveling, toughening, and loose flavor. Therefore, high 
relative humidity around the produce should be maintained. Water permeability of the 16 
 produce’s surface can be reduced by applying wax to the s urface or providing only 
sufficient air movemen t to remove heat up respiration.  
(4) Gas composition : Extremely high/low levels of O 2/CO 2 gas can develop 
physiological disorders on some fruits and vegetables . This can be prevented by 
providing  adequate ventilat ion or by using  CA/MA storage system . 
(5) Physical injuries : Rubbing, compression, impact, and vibration during transport 
causes bruising, crushing, or puncture . Physically damaged produce shows higher 
respiration rate, generate more heat and ethylene . Damaged  tissue decay more rapidly 
and this decay may spread and ruin other produce . It can be averted by using proper 
packaging materials, stacking or loading produce carefully in the vehicles, and secure 
the cargo within the vehicle by using a luminum or wood loa d locks , Fiberboard 
honeycomb fillers , wood blocking and nailing strips , inflatable kraft paper air bags,                                        
cargo nets and straps, or wood load gates .  
 
Mixed load and transport conditions  
Different groups require  different temperature, relative humidity  during transportation  like 
group 1 consisting of  apple, a pricot , berries, cherries, fig, g rapes , peaches , pears, plums, 
prunes, pomegranates and quinces require  0 to 1.5 ℃ temperature  and 90 to 95 % relative 
humidity. The atmosphere that is normally used on berries  and cherries are 10 to 20 % CO 2. 
The commodities in this group should never be brought in contact with the ice. 
Similarly,  in the group 2, there are a vocado , banana, olive, fresh p apaya , pineapple , tomato , 
green t omato , pink, w atermelon , etc. T he required temperature is around 13 to 18 ℃, relative 
humidity  85 to 95 %. T he commodities should never come in contact with the ice. Group 3 
comprises of  cranberries, lemon, lychee, oranges, tangerines, and cantaloupes . The required 
temperature 2 .5 to 5 ℃ and 90 to 95 % relative humidity .  17 
 
 
 
Group 4  consists of beans, snap, lychees, okra, peppers, green (not with beans), peppers, red 
(if with green peppers, temperature adjusted toward top of range), squash, summer, tomatoes, 
pink, watermelons . They require  a tempe rature of 4.5 to 7 .5 ℃ and relative humidity  around 
95 %. In group 5 consists of  Cucumbers, Eggplants, Ginger, Grapefruit, Potatoes (late crop), 
Pumpkin and squashes, winter Watermelons . The required temperature is 4.4 to 13 ℃ and 
relative humidity  85 to 90  %. Group 6a  contain  the artich okes, asparagus, beets, red carrots, 
endive and escarole, figs, grapes, greens, leeks, lettuce, mushrooms, parsley, parsnips, peas, 
rhubarb, salsify, spinach, sweet corn, watercress . The required temperature is  0 to 1.1 ℃ and 
relative humidity  95 to 100 %. Similarly , group 6b comprises of  broccoli, brussels sprouts, 
cabbage, cauliflower, celeriac, horseradish, kohlrabi, onions, greens (not with rhubarb), figs, 
grapes, mushrooms, sweet corn, radishes, rutabagas, turnips. the required temperature is 0 to 
1.1 ℃ and relative humidity 95  to 100 %. Ice contact is acceptable for all  commodities groups. 
Group 7 consists of Ginger, P otato , and Sweet P otato, which require comparatively higher 
temperature i.e. 13 to 18 ℃, relative humidity 85 to 90 %. They  should never be in contact 18 
 with ice . In the group 8, there is  Garlic and onion which requires temperature about  0 to 1.5 
℃, relative h umidity around 65 to 75 % .  
 
In summary, proper and careful handling of fruits and vegetable is essentia l at every stage to 
reduce pos t-harvest losses and maintain quality . Temperature control and air circulation are 
important aspects of the transportation  of fruits and vegetable s, irrespective of mode s of 
transport. C areful loading preparation  and pattern  ease in the smooth  delivery of the produce 
at any level of supply chain . Different combinations of produce can be transported in the 
same vehicle  product if the temperature and relati ve humidity are reasonably closer .  
 
These are the references for further study  lecture . Thank you .  
 