1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Processing of Fruits, 
Vegetables Spices and Plantation Crop Product 
Professor H N Mishra 
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
Lecture 52 
Smart Packaging 
 
In this lecture smart packaging will be discussed. The concept that will cover include smart 
packaging, active packaging systems, like active scavenging and  adsorbents, active emitters, 
antimicrobial agents or intelligent packaging like sensors, tim e-temperature indicators, 
microbial indicator, O 2-CO 2 indicators. Finally, some cas e studies will be taken up. 
 
Smart packaging 
Smart packaging is an advanced packaging technology offering ad ditional functions apart from 
the traditional packaging. The smart packaging offers benefits such as, it prevents the microbial 
2 
 growth and oxidation of food. It indicates the on-time quality of the food. A smart packaging 
senses and gives information related to the internal or externa l conditions change. It also 
indicates seal integrity and act s against counterfeiting. It co mmunicates additional food 
information to the user and respond to food condition changes o r package environment. Smart 
package system, acts upon the interactions between the food and  the food package. The 
packaging material characteristics regulate the environment ins ide the food package. Depending 
upon their interaction with the f ood inside, the shelf-life of the food extends.  
 
Smart packaging classifications 
The smart packaging systems can be classified into two categori es. One is the active packaging 
that extends the shelf-life based upon the interaction between the food characteristics, 
environment inside the package, and the packaging characteristi cs. Another one is the intelligent 
packaging system that communicates with the consumer. It tells us the food inside is not good 
or good, its quality is fresh or not. It provides the informati on about the material inside the 
package.  
 
Active packaging 
Active packaging is a type of packaging, where certain componen ts are incorporated into the 
packaging system that release or absorb substances from or into  the packaged food or 
3 
 surrounding environment to prol ong the shelf-life, the food and  sustain the quality, safety, and 
sensory characteristics of the food. It can be described as a t echnology devoted to controlling 
the rate of respiration, the gro wth of microbial, delayed oxida tion, moisture migration with the 
main purpose to enhance the food quality, shelf-life, freshness , safety. Active packaging basic 
concept is integrating specific substances in the food packagin g, in order to control or extend 
the quality and enhance the shelf-life of food.  
 
Active packaging system 
In the active packaging system, many kinds of natural and synth etic active compounds like plant 
extracts, essential oils, peptides, enzymes, organic acids, met al ions, metal oxides, nanoparticles 
etc. are used in the packaging materials which imparted differe nt functionalities, such as 
releasing or emitting of antioxidants, antimicrobial, sulfur di oxide, preservatives, ethanol, 
flavors.  It may also act as absorbent or scavenger of carbon d ioxide, oxygen, ethylene, flavors, 
moisture, and UV light. It acts as  a blocking or barrier agent,  or it controls the microbial growth, 
or temperature and qua lity of the foods.  
 
Routes for obtaining an active packaging system 
4 
 The roots for obtaining the active packaging system are may be incorporation of external 
d e v i c e s  i . e . ,  t h e  l a b e l s ,  p a d s  o r  sachets loaded with some acti ve compounds etc. into the 
package. Here either emitter or absorber are in the calculated amount. The quantity of these 
absorbents or emitters is calculated based upon the known chara cteristics i.e., respiratory 
behavior, transpiration, and the permeability of the packaging materials, permeability to oxygen 
etc. All this data can be used to calculate the test and extend  the self-life. Alternatively, these 
absorbers or emitters can be coated with the active compound on to inner surface of packaging 
material like antimicrobial substances etc. They are interior o f the packaging material. They are 
coated, so this comes in contact with the surface of the food m aterial during united package. 
Then surface microorganisms are inactivated or killed and the s helf-life of the food is extended. 
This system is useful for heat-sensitive components or incompat ible and immiscible with the 
polymeric matrix. Immobilization of active compound in the inne r layer of the packaging 
material through ion or covalent linkages. It is important to h ave the presence of functional 
groups on active compounds and polymer to get immobilization. T he direct addition of the 
active compound into the packaging material matrix and the pack aging material is being made 
like this, so that some antioxidants or some other functional c omponents, can be added or 
incorporated into the packaging material. This becomes function al packaging. The materials are 
antioxidant, rich packaging material etc. And this when used fo r packaging, it extends the 
desirable properties. By using polymers with some active functi ons like chitosan to develop the 
composites or multi-layer materials for use in the pack.   
 
Active packaging agents 
Different kinds of active packaging agents are used with the di fferent roles in the active 
packaging of fruits and vegetables. The major ones include oxyg en scavengers, carbon dioxide 
scavengers or ethylene scavengers. The case may be antimicrobia l release or antioxidant release 
etc. 
 
5 
  
Active scavenging and absorbents 
Oxygen scavengers 
O2 scavengers could be employed effectively to reduce the food qu ality loss due to oxidation 
of sensitive foods or prevent microorganism growth due to prese nce of oxygen. The O 2 level 
inside the packages should be maintained at minimum required le vel to allow the aerobic 
respiration at the slow rate as possible. Calculated amount of O2 scavengers is added for that 
purpose. Various O 2 scavengers are iron, ascorbic acid, enzymes, salts, fatty acid s such as 
linolenic acid, or photosystem dye etc.   
CO 2 scavengers  
CO 2 scavengers were employed for CO 2 removal, because when the fruits and vegetables 
respire, they release carbon dioxide.  A particular concentrati on of carbon dioxide should be 
maintained inside the package. The scavengers can be added into  the active packaging system 
to absorb the CO 2. Some of the known CO 2 scavengers include Ca(OH) 2, which reacts with 
CO 2 at high humidity to create CaCO 3 inside the food packaging etc. 
 
6 
 Ethylene scavengers 
Ethylene causes the fruit and vege table yellowing; it is a ripe ning hormone. It relates lettuce 
russet spot and has a shelf-life reduction effect of many fruit s and vegetables. Potassium 
paramagnet is  used to scavenge ethylene, that oxidizes ethylen e to produce ethanol and acetate. 
Thus, reduces the ethylene conten t inside the package. By reduc ing the ethylene content one is 
reducing the risk of ripening rate and the a shelf-life of the food material is extended. Similarly, 
in order to enhance the ripening of the fruit, then inside the packet some ethyl ethylene releases 
can be used. 
Flavour and odour absorbers 
The odour and flavour absorbers can be used to remove undesirab le flavour substances, 
produced due to various oxidative and biochemical processes occ urring in the food. By the 
removal of such undesirable flavour components, acceptability o f the fresh fruits can be 
improved. 
 
Moisture adsorbers 
This moisture absorbers are very commonly used inside the packa ging materials. Moisture 
control is required to prevent condensation, when fresh horticu ltural produces respire. This is 
very important in the case of equilibrium hemorrhagic packaging  (EHP). If the equilibrium 
humidity inside the package and outside the package is not unif orm, then there will be 
condensation of moisture beneath the packet and it may encourag e a microbial growth, fungal 
attacks, etc.  The moisture control inside the package should b e precisely regulated. Excessive 
moisture loss can lead to shrinka ge and toughening of the textu re. Desiccants are being 
successfully used for a wide range of foods, such as chips, nut s, candies, gums, spices, fruits, 
vegetables, etc.  
7 
  
Active emitter 
CO 2 emitter 
The CO 2 emitter has a direct antimicrobial effect, it increases lag ph ase and time during 
logarithmic phase. CO 2 is produced inside the packages by the food reaction with sodi um 
carbonate and citric acid mixtures inside the dip pad.   
Ethanol emitter 
Ethanol emitters are extensively employed, due to the capabilit y to retard or slow down the 
process of mold growth in the food products. The sachets compos ing 55% ethanol and 10% 
water, which were absorbed into the 35% SiO 2 powder, then filled into a sachet of a paper 
ethylene vinyl  acetyl copolymer w ere used for antimicrobial ef fect on food packaging. 
 
Antioxidant release 
Antioxidants are integrated into the packaging or coated on the  packaging material surface to 
8 
 control oxidation of the fatty components and pigments etc. Pla stic films like poly olefins are 
impregnated with antioxidants for making a stable polymer and p rotect against oxidation. The 
antioxidative activity could al so be found in plant extracts an d spice extract that consist of 
polyphenols, which can also be impregnated with the packaging m aterial.  
 
SO 2 emitter 
Then SO 2 emitters work based on the metabisulfite hydrolysis mechanism and the reaction of 
calcium sulphite with moisture. SO 2 emitters have been used for grape packaging to prevent 
mold developments. A polym er has to be applied for SO 2 control release to obtain inactivation 
of fungi without the undesirab le effect on the foods.  
 
Antimicrobial agents 
There are various antimicrobial agents like nisin is a bacterio cin in the  plant extract, alicin 
thiosulfinates, proteins, or gel atin agents like EDTA, enzymes  peroxidase, enzymes, fungicide 
etc. There are various antimicrobial agents and this anti-micro bial activity in active packaging 
can be classified as blocking or barrier functions that prevent  m i c r o b i a l  g r o w t h  i n  f o o d  
packaging. Antimicrobial food packaging can be classed into fou r antimicrobial packaging 
types i.e., the antimicrobial agents are impregnated into a sac het and attached to the package or 
antimicrobials absorbed or coated into the surface of the polym er. Antimicrobial agents are 
integrated into the packaging film directly or packaging materi als having a matrix that consist 
of an antimicrobial agent.  
9 
  
Intelligent packaging 
Intelligent packaging continuously monitors food quality during  distribution, storage, and 
selling, or even to the end customers. It informs the customer about the quality and other 
parameters of the food inside. In side the intelligent packaging , various sensors are used, they 
work on the principle of detection of biological compounds like  enzymes, DNA etc. and 
chemical compounds like reagent dye, pH indicators etc. There a re freshness indicators which 
work on the principle of detecting biological and chemical comp ounds like ethylene gas  
detection, pH detection, or integrity indicators, i.e., the O 2 and CO 2 indicators, leak indicators 
etc. Time temperature indicators are indicators, which work on diffusion, enzymatic, microbial 
and photochemical reactions etc. RF ID or radio frequency techno logies used for tagging the 
material. RFID tags are used to  trace the product during being transported or shipping etc.  
 
Sensors 
A sensor can be defined as a device or tool used to quantify en ergy of matter as a signal for a 
chemical or physical property de tection or measurement to which  it responds.  
Components of sensor 
Various components of a sensor include a receptor or the sensin g part of a sensor is the part 
which comes into contact with the analyte and produces a physic ochemical signal. Transducer 
10 
 element, which transforms the physico chemical signal from the receptor into a useful analytical 
signal. Signal processing unit, where the transducer output is processed to get t he output form. 
The display unit, where quantifia ble results are displayed eith er in analog or digital form. 
 
Types of sensors 
Various type of sensors may be either chemical sensors, gas sen sors or biosensors are there. 
They all have the transducers either optical, electrochemical, or electrical devices like metal 
oxide, semiconductors, etc. or thermometric, magnetic devices e tc. These are the various 
components of the sensors.  
 
Time temperature indicators   
Time temperature indicators (TTI) are small and inexpensive dev ices attached to a packaging 
material that provides time temperature history of the food pro duct during storage, thus, 
estimating the remained shelf-lif e in the non-destructive manne r. It can be seen that the time 
temperature labels are there depending upon the exposure times.  Various enzymatic reactions 
occur and the pH changes. Then the pH indicator will change the  color. TTI label may be a 
microbial load indicator, moistur e indicator. It can be designe d to have at a particular content, 
the quality of the color of the sensor will change, TTI level w ill change. In this way TTI level 
11 
 indicators are formed. They can be classified based on their fu nction like critical temperature 
indicators, critical temperature  time indicators, time temperat ure indicators. They may be based 
on the operation principle like mechanical, geometric, chemical s, microbiological etc. or they 
may be based upon the history of the temperature like partial h istory indicators or full HD 
indicators etc. Thus, various type s of TTI indicators are used in the intelligent packaging.  
 
Microbial indicators 
The information on the food quality is usually based on chemica l changes on microbial growth 
within the food. Microbiological q uality is indicated by the re action of the indicator with 
microbial metabolites. There is food quality, there will be ind irect indicators that the critical 
temperature indicators, time-temperature indicators, leak indic ators etc. When there is a leakage 
inside the package, the gaseous composition will not be properl y maintained. Thus, the shelf-
life will be adversely affected. The direct indicators may be l ike pathogenic bacteria count or 
biogenic amines, ATP degradation, aroma compounds etc. Various volatile compounds, CO 2 
nitrogen etc. also can be determined. Their values inside the p ackage can be directly indicated 
by the labels. Once the level goes beyond a certa in limit, it c an be said that the food is good or 
bad.  
 
O2 and CO 2 indicators  
The shelf-life of the fruits and vegetables depends upon the ra te of respiration, that can be 
12 
 expressed as O 2 consumed or CO 2 evolved, which further causes changes in the food colour. 
When the respiration rate is increased, the production of ethyl ene is increased. These properties 
can be employed as marker or indicator for the freshness and th e quality the food. The indicators 
must be in direct contact with the gaseous environment immediat ely surrounding the food in a 
container. The presence of O 2 may indicate that the package was sealed incorrectly either 
leaking or damaged. Plastic optical fluorescent films are highl y sensitive for the detection of 
the gases and dissolve CO 2 etc.  
 
Smart packaging systems for fruits and vegetable freshness  
It allows continuous monitoring of the quality of packaged frui ts and vegetables. Fruit freshness 
sensors are on package indicators that monitors environment ins ide or outside the packet. it 
allows consumers to make informe d decision about the quality of  the fruits. The sensor is the 
signal light in the food packaging systems. But one need to cal ibrate the signal and then this 
sensor signals in the sensor inputs finally. The signal is rele ased in the output by the color, 
fading, voltage etc. in various forms and from that one can inf er the quality of the food inside.   
 
Case study: Active packagi ng of fruits & vegetables 
Action of self-generating chlorine dioxide (ClO 2) gas for fruits and vegetables packaging 
systems containing moisture activated ClO 2 gas releasing label. ClO 2 gas lowers the metabolism 
of fresh produce, which helps in maintaining weight and firmnes s of the fresh produce during 
their storage period. ClO 2 gas prevents fruits from softening, associated with its capabil ity to 
13 
 prevent protein synthesis in cell walls. Compared to the contro l sample, a lower weight loss and 
a lower firmness value were noticed in tomatoes packaged in ClO 2 gas. It can be seen in the 
picture the sources of ClO 2. NaClO 2 plus acid and moisture and all these three give ClO 2 gas. 
There is a ClO 2 releasing label. ClO 2 gas comes and this automatic release of ClO 2, that extends 
the shelf-life. They are put outside in the packaging material.  In this way, the quality of the 
tomato or other fruit is accordingly increased.  
 
 
Case study: Application of f reshness indicators for apples 
It can be seen in the picture, the pressures indicators of the apple. The red line indicates the 
degree of sensory ripeness and the black line shows the ethylen e concentration in the package. 
Thus, a relationship between et hylene concentration and degree of ripeness is shown here. The 
changes are with the storage time in days. Ethylene emission of  apples can be detected through 
the ripeness indicator. This indicator is based on the reductio n effect of ethylene causing color 
changes in selected metal ions. The used molybdenum (Mo) chromo phores change under 
impact of ethylene in color spectrum from white/light yellow to  blue because of partial 
reduction in Mo(VI) to Mo(V). The color changes from white to b lue in the ripeness indicator 
labels on the apples were clearly visible over the studied time .  
 
14 
 Case study: Application of f reshness indicators for apples 
A novel packaging nanopackaging was synthesized in the study by  coating the polyvinyl 
chloride (PVC) film with nano- ZnO powder. On investigating its  effect on the preservation 
quality of fresh cut ‘Fuji’ apple nanopackaging significantly r educed the fruit decay rate. Both 
the polyphenoloxidase and pyrogall ol peroxidase activities were  decreased in nanopackaging 
fruits. The initial appearance of apple slices was retained and  the browning index was preserved 
in nanopackaging samples. These  results indicated that nano-ZnO  active packaging could be a 
viable alternative to common technologies, for improving the sh elf-life properties of ‘Fuji’ 
apples as a fresh-cut products.   
 
Summary 
Smart packaging is a combination of both active and intelligent  packaging systems, that 
increases the shelf-life of the food. These monitor the shelf l ife, extend the shelf-life of the food, 
and they also monitor the quality , and improve the quality as w ell as inform the condition of 
the food inside in terms of its p articular quality maybe color,  flavor, microbiological value, or 
in terms of shelf-life. It may say that whether it is spoiled o r is fresh. Thus, any system can be 
used to indicate the role of the smart packaging. Active packag ing systems consists of absorbers, 
emitters, barriers and controlling systems. Intelligent packagi ng continuously monitors and 
communicates food quality through sensors, freshness indicators , time temperature                       
indicators etc. 
              
15 
  
So, these are the references used  in this lecture with this lec ture. 
