Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products  
Professor H N Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 47 
Fruit Wines and Ciders 
Concepts covered 
 
Hello everybody, Namaskar. Today in this lecture we will discus s about fruit wines and 
ciders. We will study what is wine, what are different types of  wines, process for the 
manufacturing of wine and also t he microbial dynamics in wine f ermentation. We will also 
discuss non-alcoholic wine and apple cider and finally the heal th value of fruit wines and 
ciders. 
Wine  
You know that in the earlier lec ture we discussed about various  aspects of fermentation 
technology, fermenters, etc. So this wine is basically an alcoh olic beverage which is made 
from fruit juices using the fermentation technology and mostly the grape is used for 
production of wine in fact this wine “w i n e” is considered to  be a product of wine that is the 
“v i n e” vine. 
Grape wine is produced from crushed grapes by using various typ es of yeasts and mainly the 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae  are more commonly known as Brewer’s yeast is used in this 
fermentation. Different types of wines which are available in t he market include red wines, 
white, rose or pink wines and spa rkling wine, fortified wine, d essert wines or table vines. 
Red Wine 
 The red wine is prepared from obviously the red coloured grapes . Outer skin of the red 
coloured grapes contains various pigments, red pigments which a re mainly anthocyanins. So, 
this skin is used in the juice during the fermentation technolo gy. The fermentation is done by 
keeping the skin and juice in contact with each other. 
Fermentation proceeds at around 21 to 27 degree Celsius tempera ture for about 12 to 14 days 
and they tend to carry conside rable amount of tannins. These re d wines have more amount of 
tannins. White wines: even the green coloured grapes can be use d to prepare the white wines, 
but even red coloured wines are a lso used to prepare white wine s. 
And in this case before the juice is subjected to fermentation the skins are separated 
beforehand, because the coloured component is there in the skin s, so the skins are removed 
and then the juice without skin is subjected to the fermentatio n process. It takes longer 
fermentation time. 
Rose or pink wine, as you can see in the figure here, looks ver y delicate. It is typically made 
from the red wine grapes. For some time the skin is allowed to remain in the juice during the 
fermentation process, may be for one to three days and then ski ns are separated initially 
maybe even before the fer mentation has started. 
So, in the extraction the juice and skins are allowed to be the re and this facilitates the 
extraction of part of the colouring pigments into the juice. An d then this fermentation process 
goes there. So, accordingly red win e, white wine or rose wines are produced by the industry.  
Sparkling Wine 
 Sparkling wine, it contains considerable amount of carbon dioxi de like champagne, etcetera. 
Dessert wines are those which are fortified sweet wines. Fortif ied vines contain added 
alcohol, they are also made by th e distillation of wines like b randy. Brandy can be considered 
as a fortified vine. So, alcohol content in most of the fortifi ed wines may be up to 19 to 21 
percent. 
Table wines have low alcohol content and there is no little or no added sugar. So, if you want 
to see the difference between still wine and sparkling wine: th e still wines retain no carbon 
dioxide in them, for example, c ider does not have carbon dioxid e whereas the sparkling wine 
contains considerable amount of carbon dioxide. 
Dry wines contain no or little unfermented sugar in it, whereas  t h e  s w e e t  w i n e s  c o n t a i n  
significant amount of unfermented sugars or even sometimes the sugar is added into the wine 
just before packaging, in orde r to give a sweet taste. 
Wine Production 
 
So, let us now discuss about the wine manufacturing technology.  A n d  b e f o r e  I  g o  t o  t h e  
process details let me tell you th at fermentation process is th e heart of the wine production 
technology. So, the fermentation must be carefully controlled t o ensure proper reactions that 
are desirable reactions. 
Sulfur dioxide is added to inhib it the natural microbial popula tion which convert alcohol to 
acetic acid, vinegar, etcetera and they are most responsible fo r the spoilage of the wine. 
Because there is a wine grapes when they are harvested from the  crop prevailing the situation in the field they are likely to be contamin ated with various ty pes of microorganism, even wild 
yeast and all those things. 
So, these all should be properly taken care of by appropriate c leaning process. These 
unwanted microorganisms, wild yeast, etcetera should be removed . So, the fermentation 
process is initiated by the addition of selected strains of yea st as I told you Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae . And at completion of the fermentation wine is siphoned severa l times to separate 
juice from the sediment and then it is aged in oak barrels, fil tered for clarification and finally 
bottled. 
Process for grape wine manufacturing 
 
So, as far as the exact process of wine making is concerned as I told you grapes are harvested 
at proper maturity, then it is sorted and washed, that is washi ng and cleaning is very 
important operation and sometimes this is added with some sanit izing agents, cleaning 
solution, washing solution. etc. 
Then crushing and pressing, so w ith that you get the grape juic e. In earlier classes we have 
discussed about what are the technology of crossing and express ion and getting the various 
fruit juices. The same holds true here as well. So, now that ju ice is obtained, there are two 
important things. One is that it is treated with the sulphur di oxide at about 100 ppm, etcetera 
to suppress the growth of  wild yeast, etcetera.  
And we will see little later that it is in this is juice that a mount of final alcohol content in the 
wine depends upon the initial con tent of sugar present in the j uice. So, the next important step is, after the juice is extracte d, is that the juice should be a nalyzed for its TSS (total soluble 
solids) content and it should be approximately in the range of around 20 to 24 percent and its 
pH is tested, so pH should be 3.2 t o 3.3 in this range for opti mum fermentation. 
So, if there is a variation that is if the sugar, total sugar c ontent is not in this range then 
maybe sugar may be added to increase the TSS levels or either b y using tartaric acid or by 
using sodium bicarbonate, etcete ra the pH should be adjusted su ppose the pH is to be reduced 
or pH is to be raised accordingly that acid or some salt sodium  bicarbonate or tartaric acid 
may be used. 
So, important thing is that the juice is adjusted to its proper  TSS and proper pH and then this 
adjusted juice is called grape must and this grape must which h as around 20-24 degree brix is 
now then inoculated with the Saccharomyces cerevisiae  yeast and then it is given the proper 
fermentation time. Maybe in general this yeas has optimum tempe rature for its better activity, 
best activity is around 20  to 25 degree Celsius. 
So, this fermentation period may last accordingly for about 8 t o 10 days and the TSS reaches 
to 80 degree brix in the final fermented juice. Then finally, s iphoning, clarification, bottling 
and you get the grape wine. So, we will take up one by one thes e steps. 
Wine manufacturing (contd…) 
 
Now harvest: I told you that there are about 4000 variety grape s used in the production of 
wines and then the important thi ng is that the grapes are harve sted generally from early September to beginning of the November in India, but the import ant thing is that they should 
be harvested at proper maturity time. 
And in fact, proper variety of the grapes should be taken becau se variety and time of 
harvesting will influence the sugar and acidity levels in the j uice. In fact, in the industry there 
is a practice of vintage dating of the wine by providing the da ta that is from which season, 
from which place, which year that the grape was used for making  the wine. 
Then come grape selection and pre-treatment. As I told you grap e-must must be treated with 
about 50 to 75 ppm of free sulphur dioxide. Sulfating is done t o remove unwanted bacteria 
before the next step of the process. Equipment also must be pro perly sanitized and this is 
usually done with the oxygen base  caustic solution, water and t hen an antibacterial sulphide 
solution. Finally, another water  rinse is done. Approximately 1 0 gallons of good quality water 
is required or it is used for making 1 gallon of wine preparati on. 
Wine manufacturing (contd….) 
 
Then crushing and pressing: In the  crushing process, as the pre ssure of the machine increases, 
so does the amount of tannins pressed from the skins. Usually t he pressure is kept between 0 
and 2 bar.  
Grapes are usually crushed with all parts together and then the y go straight to the 
fermentation, of course before that they are analysed. The skin  and the seeds are important to 
pass to tannin and the bitter taste unique to red wines and the  mixture is called must as I told 
you. Fermentation process is usually quicker for red wines and this is because red wines can be fermented at a higher temperature due to nutrient it contain s. Fermentation temperature is 
usually around 20 to 25 degree Celsius.  
Wine manufacturing (contd…) 
 
The fermentation process: In the earlier class we discussed the  details of the fermentation 
technology, even the fermenters: what are the various component s in the fermenters, so all 
those are applicable here. And the fermentation process for red  wine is initially open to the 
air. After the must is transferred to the fermentation tanks a “cap” is formed which prevents 
air from the reaching to the juice.  
And this air is basically require d initially before the yeast i s added for proper extraction of the 
colouring components from the ski n to the juice. And these skin s will normally float on the 
cap which is surface of the liq uid. And in big fermenters parti cularly this becomes a problem.  
So, what is done? As I told you a cap is created by solids and then they are pushed on the top 
due to carbon dioxide production inside when the fermentation h as taken place and gas is 
produced. So, this cap is kept i n  co ntact with  the ju ice as muc h as po ssible in  an  effort to  
retain the colour and tannins.  
So, this is done by punching the cap down manually or by pumpin g the cap over 
mechanically that is in larger fermenters from the bottom. Ther e are arrangements provided 
so that the liquid is taken and th en it is recirculated so in t he process the cap should always be 
properly inserted in the juice to facilitate proper extraction,  particularly in the making of red 
wine. And once the juice has been transferred to the fermentation tan k, the yeast is added and then 
oxygen is removed. Because the oxygen is removed this fermentat ion process is anaerobic 
fermentation and by removing the oxygen from the tank the oxida tion process is halted which 
prevents any bacterial growth a nd facilitates th e normal fermen tation reaction. 
Fermentation (contd….) 
 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae  is the species of the yeast that is used in the fermentation p rocess. 
This yeast species has been acclimatized to the effect of the f ree sulphur dioxide which has 
been added into the juice. Other species of the yeast which are  known commonly wild yeast 
which might be initially present  in the grapes they are killed in the cleaning process. 
The fermentation tank: some wines use wooden barrels to introdu ce a flavour into the wine. 
Conventional tanks are made of stainless steel. Tank sizes can vary considerably. However, 
commonly used sizes are about 300 to 1200 gallons. 
Fermentation (contd…)  
The length of the fermentation process may be about 10 days to 30 days depending upon the 
temperature and other conditions i n the reactor. For red wines the process is shorter than that 
for the white wines. And the temperature of the fermentation pr ocess, maintenance of proper 
temperature is very important because this reaction as you see that glucose or sugar is 
oxidized by the yeast to ethanol  and carbon dioxide; it also re leases lot of heat energy. 
So, this fermentation is exothermic process, so temperature con trol is very important. 
Temperature is kept as close as possible to 25 to keep the yeas t in a good environment to give 
the proper condition for the proper growth environment. So, the  solution that results from 
fermentation finally contain s around 12 to 15 percent ethanol. 
You have seen the earlier that th e sugar level TSS level is abo ut 22 to 24 percent, so normally 
it should give in general around 12 percent ethanol depending u pon the sugar content. The 
maximum alcohol content in the wine may be about maximum you ca n say 15 percent 
because if ethanol content goes more than fifteen percent its c oncentration becomes 
inhibitory to the yeast and yeas t will die as yeast cannot surv ive in an environment which has 
more than 15 percent alcohol. 
So, another important thing for every gram of sugar that is con verted about a half a gram of 
alcohol is produced and therefore to reach, to achieve about 12  percent alcohol concentration 
in the wine, the starting materi al (the juice) must contain abo ut 24 percent of the sugars. 
Fermentation (contd…)  
Malo-lactic fermentation is a secondary fermentation which usua lly take place in the wine. In 
this, malic acid is converted into lactic acid and carbon dioxi de. It changes the flavour of the 
wine from crisp to creamy buttery and also it reduces the amoun t of acidity, that is increases 
the pH by a factor of 0.3 to 0.5 units. And this can be introdu ced or it can happen naturally 
and monitored by testing with the paper chromatography, etceter a or such other standard 
protocols. 
So, controlling the pH of the fe rmenting juice around pH 3 is b est. High pH will result in less 
flavour production in the wine. To lower the pH, tartaric acid is added at the beginning of the 
fermentation process as required but either by addition or depe nding upon what is the initial 
pH of the juice that is either suitable acid or tart salt shoul d be added but the pH should be 
brought in this range. 
The oxidation process: acetobacter  bacteria will react with the oxygen to convert the wine 
into vinegar and that should be stopped that is why oxygen supp ly is stopped once the wine is 
produced.  
Wine manufacturing (contd…)  
Then after the fermentation next step is aging. Aging process b egins after the fermentation is 
complete. Aging period is not necessary step in wine production . However, it could last for 
several years if desired. Aging is most commonly done in red wi nes. After the aging process 
is complete, the wine is filt ered and sent to be bottled. 
So, in fact, during aging, the ripening of wine takes place tha t is the mellowing because this 
tannins, etcetera they are bitter tasting compound so during th e aging process the flavour and 
even the texture, colour, etc. i mprove and the wine is said to be mellowed. 
Wine manufacturing (contd…) 
 
Then filtration or clarification: Many processes use cold filtr ation to remove as much 
sediment as possible because durin g the aging also some of the f i n e  p a r t i c l e ,  w h i c h  m i g h t have come from the filter, they get settled so the temperature are reduced to close 
approximately to -3 degree Celsius for 1 to 2 weeks and this al so results in the settling of the 
finally suspended particles. 
And often if it is not done and wines are stored cold, settling  can occur in the bottle 
consisting of potassium acid tartrate. Also white wines are uns table; it needs to be stabilized 
before the bottling process and this instability of the wine ha ppens when certain proteins are 
present into the fermented juice. Proteins are removed in the h eat stabilization process by 
adsorption to bentonite. 
Filtration / Clarification (contd….) 
 
After the cold filtration and stabilization process, the wine p asses through large filters to 
separate dead cells and other sed iments. These filters may be m ade of cellulose or paper; they 
can use a gravity filter, however, this is slow process and the  wine is exposed to air which 
induces the oxidation process. S o, gravity filters generally ar e avoided. So, wines pass 
through smaller filters to remove the residual sediments; usual ly they use the membrane 
filtration process. And sometimes fining agents are also used f or clarification purposes. 
Wine manufacturing (contd….)  
Then bottling, right before the bottling a small amount of sulp hide is added to help preserve 
the wine and prevent further fer mentation. Bottles are sealed u sing a cork. The air in the head 
space of the bottle is removed immediately before inserting the  cork and heat sink capsule is 
then fitted over the cork. 
Storage 
 
During the storage, care should be  taken that bottles are store d upright for about 3 days and 
then at an angle or on t heir side in o rder to keep the cork wet . If the cork is not  kept wet it can 
introduce air through th e tiny holes which can introduce oxidat ion process. It can also allow 
some bacteria to go into the wine a nd contaminate the wine and initiate spoilage reactions. Also the percent humidity can affect the performance of the cor k. About 60 percent humidity 
is desired. Some wineries are now switching to screw caps or sy nthetic corks in order to 
avoid this effect. So, the bottles should be kept out of the di rect sunlight as a precaution. 
Some wines affected by sunlight are bottled in coloured glass b ottles. Sunlight exposure 
causes oxidation and breakdown of the wine. The optimum storage  temperature for red wine 
and white wine is about 12 to 13 degree Celsius. 
Microbial dynamics in wine fermentation 
 
Then let us discuss some of the microbial dynamics in wine ferm entation like particularly 
post fermenting microbiota. You can see here the figure: the ti me after fermentation and brix 
value. The process of alcoholic f ermentation does not completel y deplete the wine of carbon 
and energy sources, because in the wine there will be carbon so urce, energy source, so if the 
microorganism is present there then it will grow and multiply, see other organisms are able to 
persist and proliferate partic ularly if oxygen is available. 
So, in malolactic fermentation, you have seen earlier the conve rsion of malic acid to lactic 
acid also is conducted by the members of the lactobacillus. In this process the bacteria obtain 
energy from ensuing proton motive force generated by the conver sion of malate to lactate. 
Microbial dynamics in wine fermentation (contd…)  
Also the spoilage microbiota may grow if they are not properly controlled during the cleaning 
process. During the wine aging m icrobial activity may bloom in the winery or in the bottle 
post bottling. Species of Candida , Pichia  and particularly Brettanomyces  can be found in the 
wines in the barrel and can l ead to cosmetic or organoleptic de fects in the wine. The two most 
important spoilage yeasts are Brettanomyces  /  Dekkera  and Zygosaccharomyces , so these 
should be taken care properly. 
Wine quality 
 
Then wine quality: quality of the  wine is determined by the gra pes and other starting material. 
As I told you, initially, quality  is also affected by weather d uring the growing season, the soil 
and the way the grapes are prune d. The process of harvesting gr ape and its processing also affects the wine quality like mechanical harvesting usually giv es less quality wines. 
Clarification, stabi lization and aging pro cesses also contribut e to the wine quality. 
Problems in wine manufactu ring affecting its quality 
 
Now, we will discuss little problems in wine manufacturing affe cting its quality. During 
fermentation, the most harmful b acteria that can grow is the ge nus acetobacter . However, this 
bacterium is sensitive to the free sulphur dioxide that is why the cleaning process is very 
important. So, if acetobacter  is available, it will convert wine into alcohol, so care shoul d be 
taken. 
There may be burnt match-smell, that is the sulphur dioxide lab els if they are very high (more 
than 40 ppm) then it may affect adversely the smell or flavour of the wine. Overly sweet 
wine: the fermentation can be restarted to convert the residual  sugar into alcohol, if the sugar 
content is high and fermented suga r in the wine then it may giv e sweet taste.  
Problems in wine manufacturing  affecting its quality (contd….)  
Hazy coloured wine can result fr om using iron, copper, zinc or aluminium in the fermentation 
tanks that is if the fermentation tank material is this. So, if  it is resulted from the iron or 
copper, a few drops of citric acid will remove the haze. Filter ing can also be done to remove 
haze although this will also remove some of the taste.  
Fining agents can also be used to  reduce the cloudiness of wine  that is a fining agent is one 
that possesses a charge, may be positive or negative, and it ca n remove cloudiness with the 
opposite charge. Most commonly used  fining agent is gelatin. Ot her agents include animal or 
fish products, bull’s blood, PVPP,  which is a dairy protein der ivative, skim milk powder and 
so on. 
Problems in wine manufacturing  affecting its quality (contd…) 
 The major cause of wine failure is lack of proper sterilization  procedure and the practices. 
Corkiness, an unpleasant flavour in wine; its possible causes m ay be bottling with a defective 
cork; not a complete seal and the outside air allowed to enter into the bottle or inferior quality 
cork. 
There may be soapiness: the soa py taste in the wine is develope d. The possible causes for this 
might be equipment, carboys and fermenters are not properly cle aned and rinsed so the 
sterilization of the equipmen t should be properly done to ensur e this. 
Different fruit wines 
 
Then other fruit wines: different fruit wines like apple wines and jamun wine have been 
developed. Apple wines are hard a pple juice but c ontain about 8  percent are more alcohol and 
it is essentially the grape appl e juice that has gone through t he same process as grape wine. 
The acidity and sugar content are suitably adjusted; the proces s parameters are also 
accordingly. 
Then jamun wine also the therapeutic wine developed from the co mmon Indian blackberry 
that is called jamun, it has proved to be beneficial in the tre atment of diabetes mellitus and 
the process here also is simila r to the grape wine manufacturin g. 
Non-alcoholic wine  
Non-alcoholic wines like sometimes they are also known as alcoh ol free or dealcoholized 
wine. These refer to the wine or beverages which have had the a lcohol content removed. The 
production of alcohol free wine can  be carried out by altering the fermentation process or by 
using the immobilized yeast. Normally the membrane processes su ch as reverse osmosis, 
osmotic distillation and perva poration seem to be promising for  obtaining low alcohol wines. 
So, pervaporation is a processing method for the separation of mixtures of liquids by partial 
vaporization through a perm-selective membrane. Many industries  a r e  c o m m e r c i a l l y  u s i n g  
this pervaporation process for making alcohol free wines, remov ing the alcohol from the wine 
but the taste, it remains there. So, the permeate obtained afte r the process is spirit that is the 
alcohol and the retentate is  the alcohol free wine. 
Non-alcoholic wine  
So, here actually it is a schema tic of laboratory-scale pervapo ration equipment. You can see 
that there is a membrane. The juice is continuously flown to th e membrane and where the 
conditions are maintained the alcohol is collected separately a nd the permeate which is 
separated juice, alcohol free wine collected. 
Non-alcoholic wine (contd….) 
 
And this is also almost similar. It is a schematic of a 2 stage  pervaporation pilot scale unit and 
in the one stage from feed tanks it is sent to the membrane and  then again it was sent to the 
second stage membrane separation.  So, this basically ensures be tter efficiency. All the 
components of this setup are listed here. 
Apple cider production  
And apple cider is an alcoholic drink made from fermented apple  juice. Dry cider is fully 
fermented apple juice with littl e or no residual sugar. It is c alled as dry or hard cider as it 
contains an alcohol around 6 to 7  percent. Then sparkling cider  contains considerable amount 
of CO2, 3.5 percent al cohol is there. 
And champagne type cider is produced in a similar manner as tha t used in the preparation of 
champagne. Here also the microorganism is yeast that is Saccharomyces cerevisiae . 
Apple cider production 
 
So, the process also is similar to that of wine production from  grape. Apples are machine 
washed and sorted by for appearance to remove rotten fruits, th en they are crushed into smaller pieces, pressed to lift a nd settle; then juice is subje cted to the fermentation process. In 
stage 1 oxygen flow is beneficial  for natural flora to develop the fruity aroma. 
And then it in the second stage it is conducted by the Saccharomyces  for 1 to 3 months at a 
moderate agitation speed and fi nally aging, clarification and b ottling process si milar to that of 
the grape wine. 
Health value of fruit wines and ciders 
 
These red wines particularly may get their health benefits from  their antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory and lipid regulating effects that is the red wines  made from crushed dark grape 
is relatively a rich source of resveratrol which is a natural a ntioxidant in the skin of the 
grapes. 
And you know that antioxidants reduce the oxidative stress in t he body, so these red wines 
are very health promoting. But it should be consumed in limit, if you take excessive then 
alcohol may also have undesirabl e effect but if it is taken in limit in a proper quantity, there is 
no better medicine than the red wine that is, see energy conten t in this, nutritional value per 
hundred gram of the wine are 3.5 ounces.  
That is it contains around 85 kilo calorie heat energy, 2.6 gra m carbohydrates, sugars 0.6, fat, 
protein are negligible but alcohol around 10.6. So, 100 gram wi ne is approximately 100 ml 
sugar and alcohol content can var y. Even apple cider one cup th at is 8 ounces of apple cider 
contains around 120 calories and 0.3 gram fat and 0.3 gram prot ein. Summary 
 
So, finally I will summarize this lecture. The fermentation is a major process but for making 
good quality, healthy wines and this fermentation temperature r eceptors, fermentation process 
conditions should be properly cont rolled and the raw material s hould be proper quality, 
proper maturity, proper cleaning and sanitization processes sho uld be done and obviously the 
wines are rich sources of antioxidant and other health promotin g components they are very 
good for human health. 
But very important is that microbial dynamics must be properly understood and all the steps 
should be taken. Proper steps should be taken during pre-proces sing, processing or post 
processing, bottling and storage to avoid unwanted reaction sec ondary fermentation, etc. If 
unwanted reactions happen or oxidation bacteria grow, they will  adversely affect the quality 
of the wine. 
Nowadays the trend is increasing to get the alcohol free wine, that is, people want to have the 
taste and flavour of the wine but  just not the alcohol effect. So, for that the membrane 
processes such as reverse osmo sis, pervaporation, etc. seem to be promising for obtaining low 
alcohol wine. 
References  
These are the references use d in this lecture. Thank you very m uch for your patient hearing.  