1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetable, Sp ices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 09 
Supply Chain Management and Storage 
In this lecture supply chain management, a nd storage of fruits and vegetables will be covered. 
Various aspects of supply chain management, supply chain models , various linkages such as 
backward, forward, sideways, and cold chain management will be explained. 
 
 
Food Supply Chain 2 
 The food supply chain is the network of stakeholders which are involved in growing, 
processing and selling of the produce that the consumers eat. I t includes all operations 
between from the farm to the table. It involves the raw materia ls, suppliers, manufacturer, 
distributor, retailers, and consumers.  
Part of the supply chain management is to organize and oversee all of the areas of the supply 
chain that can help to mitigate against food loss and waste sta rting from the raw material until 
it reaches the consumer. All possible efforts should be made fo r the material to reach in 
proper condition with minimum to no wastage. The purpose of the  supply chain management 
is to make certain that any goods sold to retailers meet the ne cessary regulations set by the 
health regulators as well as the government officials.  
 
Value Chains 
In the value chain, raw material is transformed for final consu mption as it moves through the 
chain and increases in value. The stakeholders in the value cha in include the input suppliers, 
producers, processors, distributo rs, consumers, government orga nizations and NGOs, 
regulators, logistics companies and functional organizations. T he input suppliers supply raw 
material to the food production pr ocess. The producers are invo lved in growing and 
producing of the commodity in the field. The processors are inv olved in processing, 
manufacturing and marketing. The  distributors include wholesale rs and retailers, and the 
consumers are involved in shopping and consuming of the product s. The government and 
NGOs create policies and programs for food sustainability and s ecurity. The regulators are 
involved in monitoring and regula ting. Logistic companies are i nvolved in moving and 
storing the material and the fin ancial organizations are involv ed in providing funding to the 
entities. Thus, the food supply c hain should be viewed as a val ue chain system.  3 
 
 
Supply Chain Models 
There are 6 models of food supply chain, but they all fit into one of the two categories that is 
efficiency or responsiveness. All the supply chains contain bot h elements but the primary 
focus will be the driving force of the businesses supply chain model. The 6 supply chain 
models are agile model, flexible model, fast chain model, effic ient chain model, continuous 
flow model, and custom configured model. When a business deals in specialty items they use 
the agile supply chain management. In flexible management, the supply chain has the ability 
to be flexible, which is a bonus especially in the food supply chain. It gives business the 
opportunity to meet their demands with ease. Manufacturers who work with products that 
have a shorter life cycle will benefit from fast chain models. This model is better suited for 
fruits and vegetables. 
 
In competitive markets the efficient model is go-to of all the supply chains. It represents an 
end goal that is premium level of competition in the market pla ce. Businesses that want to 4 
 gain a competitive edge over others can opt for an efficient ch ain model and this model aims 
at achieving efficiency. The continuous flow model offers stabi lity with high demand 
production. This model is ideal for food manufacturer who produ ce food products that do not 
vary often that there is consiste ncy in the product manufacturi ng line. So, the c ontinuous flow 
model is one of the traditional supply chain models and is the best option for commodity 
manufacturing. Continuous flow m odel is most traditional of all  the supply chain models 
used. Models that are customized is the focus of the custom con figured supply chain model. 
Almost a hybrid of the agile and continuous flow models. The in tention is set during 
assembly and production. Processes before configuration of the product are handled by 
continuous work model whereas downstream processes are managed by the agile supply 
chain. 
 
Linkages 
Linkages is a phenomenon which measures the capability of an in dustry to generate demand 
for the products of the other i ndustries. For development strat egy, linkages are one of the 
essential features of an industry. The linkages maybe forward l inkage, backward linkage or 
sideways linkage.  
Backward Linkages 
Food processing industry increases demand for raw materials. Fa rmers produce more to meet 
the demand and agricultural production increases. In the proces s, farm labor becomes more 
productive. Finally, wages and pr ofits of the farmer increases.  Farmer’s income increases and 
with increase in income, rural  demand of the indu strial product  also increases.  
Forward Linkages 
In case of forward linkages, when base food processing industry  is established, there is 
establishment of upstream and downstream industries for food, b everage, juices, et cetera. 
There is increase in demand of marketing, advertisement and oth er associated industries. The 5 
 result of all these will be increase in employment generation a nd increase in income and 
growth of the economy of the country.   
 
Sideways Linkages 
Sideways linkages are mostly delivered or derived from the use of byproducts and waste 
products of the main base industrial activity. For example, pro cessing of industrial waste into 
fuel, biofuels, paper pulp and fertilizer. The wastes from frui t and vegetable processing 
industries can be used for extr action of bio-actives and variou s other purposes.  
 
Supply Chain Model for Horticultu re and Plantation Crop Sector 
The supply chain model for horticulture and plantation crop sec tor is suggested where there 
are farmers and producers producing raw materials. There will b e both backward and forward 
linkage by either a contact farming or by having a self-help gr oup (SHGs) of the farmers, 
producers company with farmers as stakeholders. The model sugge sted is used in the dairy 6 
 industry by Amul.  That similar model can be done in the fruits  and vegetables by collecting 
the commodities from farmers and producers in various collectio n centers. From the  
collection centers, the commodities can be routed to the primar y processing center (PPC) and 
transferred to the Central Processing Center (CPC) from where i t can be added value and 
distributed to wholesaler, supe rmarkets, processors, and export ers.  
 
Supply Chain Management Strategies 
One of the major issues with the fruits and vegetables industri es in India is the scattered 
production and high perishability of the materials.  There is r equirement for proper 
management system to collect the produces in different collecti on centers with proper 
refrigerated storage. The materials will be handled in a contro lled environment and 
transferred to primary processing center, where various primary  operations like sorting, 
grading, cleaning and packing can be done.  
From primary processing centers, few of the materials can be di rectly channelized to fresh 
food supermarkets. Remaining materials can be sent to the secon dary processing units where 
the fresh produce will be converted to value added products lik e jam, jelly, juices, paste, 
pickles, intermediate moisture food and high moisture fruit pro ducts. The value added 
products can be sent to the superm arkets or retails for sale. 7 
 
 
Activities and Infrastructure at CC, PPC and CPC 
The collection centers should have facility for aggregation of produce for at least three days. 
It should also have infrastructur es such as dry warehouse, cold  rooms, precoolers or reefer 
vans, CA vans, and chambers. Th e collection centers should have  proper arrangements for 
record keeping, SHGs office, and meeting rooms. The primary pro cessing centers should be 
equipped with facilities to carry out activities like cleaning,  grading, sorting, weighing, 
packing. It should also be provided with cold rooms, ripening c hamber, mobile precoolers, 
reefer vans, and collecting vans. The central processing unit s hould have common facilities 
such as cold rooms, QA, QC setti ngs, processing unit for value addition such as 
concentration, dehydration and dryi ng. It should also have amen ities for incubation center.    
 
Involvement of farmers, SHGs & e ntrepreneurs in the supply chai n 8 
 The backward linkage includes raw material standardization and employment generation for 
upliftment of farmers and villag ers. It involves farmers by pro viding inputs to the farmers on 
seed quality and other best practices to ensure standardized ra w material quality, involve 
farmers or producers as stakehold ers and organizing farmers in SHGs cluster approach. The 
possibility of formation of the producer’s company involving SH Gs or farmers can be an 
option. Collection center can be managed even by the self-help groups and entrepreneurs and 
there are possibilities of contr act farming. In the forward lin kage, the farmers team should 
forge linkage with wholesale trader, supermarket, processors, a nd exporters. The ministry of 
food processing industry has crea ted various schemes for creati on of backward and forward 
linkages. It has approved about 68 projects including on ready to eat foods, honey, spices, 
coconut, marine products, horti culture products, poultry and mi lk and milk products. The 
schemes have benefited more than 4.2 lakh farmers. 
 
Wastage across Supply Chain 
Huge wastage across the supply ch ain leads to lower level of pr ocessing and hence lower 
value addition. The losses incurred from field to fork are fiel d losses due to pest, diseases and 
rodents, etc., pre-processing losses such as harvesting, drying  and milling losses, transport 
losses such as spillage and leakage, storage losses such as tec hnical deficiencies, processing 
and packaging losses such as excessive peeling and washing, mar keting losses such as 
spoilage, rotting in stores, and wastage by consumers such as o vereating and food wastage. 
Developing countries suffer highe r losses in the initial stages  of the value chain whereas, in 
rich countries incur high losses at the later stage in the food  value chain.  
The level of processing in fruits and vegetables sectors is low  in India due to poor processing, 
storage infrastructure and trans port facilities. India processe s about 2-3% of fruits and 
vegetables produces while other c ountries like USA, Philippines , and China processes about 
63%, 78% and 23% of their produces, respectively.  The four key s to success are proper 9 
 facilities and infrastructure f or processing, packaging, storag e, distribution, marketing and 
retail. 
 
Supply Chain: Weak Link 
The weak links in the supply chai n are unorganized production s ector, bulk of production in 
small & marginal holdings, producers getting only 30 % of produ ce value, trade 
intermediaries getting rest 70 % without any value addition, su pply line unreliability, lack of 
infrastructure at the production sites, absence of credible ins titutions to streamline supply 
chain and producers not li nked to the processors. 
 
Storage and Distribution 
On the supply side, the fragmentation across the chain results in significant wastages which 
reduces the availability of fresh produce and impacts amenabili ty of the produce for 
processing. The wastage occurs because of multiple points of ma nual handling, inadequate 10 
 packaging, and lack of temperatur e control. Integrated cold cha in or shelf life monitoring and 
inventory management should be done to ensure the quality durin g transportation and 
storage.  
 
Storage Facilities 
The following conditions and re quirements should be applied dur ing storage such as, blower 
units within the cold storage shall be installed according to t he temperature mapping, air 
circulation from blower units shall be free flow and unhindered , there shall be adequate space 
between food storage units to allow cold air to circulate, stoc k control and identification 
system shall be adopted. The indi vidual cold store shall have a  temperature monitoring 
system according to the temperature mapping established. There shall be defined intervals for 
checking of temperature. Smart store houses uses inbuilt temper ature sensors, IOTR, AIML, 
et cetera to routinely monitor a nd maintain the storage tempera ture. 
 11 
 Cold Chain Management 
A cold chain managemen t system is an integrated system in which  food is kept cold in chilled 
or frozen form in an unbroken link from the initial chilling or  freezing of freshly produced 
food at a farm or processing establishment throughout the stage s   of transportati on, storage, 
distribution and retailers. In case of fruits and vegetables, t he produces should be precooled to 
remove the field heat before transportation. It is important to  maintain the freshness, shelf 
life, quality including nutritional value and sensory character istics, and safety of the food 
products. It effectively controls the growth of spoilage and fo od poisoning bacteria as well as 
slows down quality deterioration.  
 
Cold Chain Conditions 
The general requirements for cold chain are to maintain good ma nufacturing practice at all 
stages, ensure foods are transferred in a continuous operations , segregate cooked and 
uncooked foods, frequent and systematic temperature checks usin g appropriate and calibrated 
instrumentation, ensure retail di splay cabinets are not overloa ded and ensure that all 
personnel are trained and persona l hygiene is maintained. 12 
 
 
The cold chain conditions for storage of apple are 1-4 °C, humi dity 90 to 95 percent and 
storage life ranges from 1 to 12 months. Its freezing point is -1.7. Similarly, berries like 
blackberries, raspberri es and strawberries, have a storage temp erature of 0°C and relative 
humidity of 90 to 95 %. In case of strawberries, it can be kept  for 3 to 7 days while raspberry 
and blackberry for 2 to 3 days. Vegetables like cucumber should  be stored at 10 to 13°C, and 
peppers at 4-10°C. Other vegetables like broccoli, lettuce, mus hroom, and peas green require 
0°C and 95-96% RH. The temperature, relative humidity, storage life and freezing point of 
common fruits and vegetables are provided in the table given. T emperature measurement and 
recording devices consist of a se nsor (placed in the cold air) and a read-out or recording 
system. The system should have an accuracy of 1 °C within the m easuring range -20 °C to 30 
°C. 
 
Classification of Cold Stores 13 
 The classification of cold stor es are bulk cold rooms, controll ed atmosphere stores, 
multipurpose cold stores, small cold stores, frozen food stores  and mini units or walk in cold 
stores. Bulk cold stores are for  storage of a single commodity on a seasonal basis like stores 
for potatoes, chillies and apples, etc. The controlled atmosphe re stores are is designed for 
certain fruits and vegetables. Multipurpose cold stores are for  storage of variety of 
commodities, which operate pract ically throughout the year. Sma ll cold stores with the pre-
cooling facilities are for fresh fruits and vegetables, mainly for export-oriented items like 
grape et cetera. Frozen food stores are designed for with or wi thout processing and freezing 
facilities for processed fruits and vegetable. Mini units/ walk  in cold stores are located at 
distribution center. Not sensitive to cold produces like vegeta bles are stored at 0-4°C, 
moderately sensitive to cold produces such as mangoes, oranges,  potatoes and tomatoes are 
stored at 4-8°C, and cold sensitive produces like pineapple, ba nana and pumpkins, are stored 
at more than 8°C. 
 
Fundamentals for implementi ng a cold storage project 
 The fundamentals for implementing a cold storage project are p rocess layout, planning 
drawings and application, design  drawings and specifications. F ood project using insulated 
envelopes is to determine the pr ocess layout of the operation w hich is to be housed by the 
envelope. After conducting the process layout, a planning appli cation can be made when the 
dimensions of the envelope and the supporting buildings can be frozen. The design drawings 
and specifications, includes process layout, elevations and sel ections, the refrigeration system 
layout, mechanical and electrical system reticulation and light ing layout, et cetera. Detailed 
specifications are required including the contractual requireme nts, building specification, 
refrigeration specification, insu lation panel supply and erecti on, electrical requirements, 
mechanical services et cetera.  14 
 
 
Bottlenecks in Cold Supply Chain 
The bottlenecks in the cold suppl y chain include the lack of co ld storage warehousing 
facilities, inadequate or insufficient capacity, improper cold chain management, irregular 
power supply, poor cold chain t echnology, poor infrastructure, poor cold storage network, 
and poor transportation facilities . Prompt measures are require d by the government and other 
stakeholders in India to improve the state of cold chain and to  reduce the huge losses of the 
fruits and vegetables.  
 
Processing Requirements 
The conditions and requirements for processing are cold chain s hall have no breakage at any 
stage of the cold chain linkage s, operations of the processing and packaging rooms shall 
maintain good hygienic practices, design of the processing and packaging rooms shall be well 
planned. Processing and packaging rooms shall be located next t o rapid chilling or freezing 15 
 and cold rooms. Food preferably shall not be exposed to the pro cessing room temperature for 
more than 30 minutes and frozen foods shall be allowed to be te mporarily defrosted for 
minimal processing. Room temperature of the processing and pack ing room shall be 
maintained at specific temperatu re. After processing the food s hall be rapidly chilled or 
quickly frozen. 
 
Export 
Strategies to improve export ar e ongoing export promotion progr am should be strengthened, 
marketing intelligence should be streamlined, marketing researc h should be strengthened, 
standards development, testing facilities and enforcement mecha nism should be in place. 
Training programs for farmers and entrepreneurs should be under taken.  
Quality aspects of the export to be considered are increase in health consciousness increasing 
the demand for quality produce. International standards such as  Codex Alimentarius 
Commission, WHO, FAO, WTO, UN, European Union and Indian organi zations such 
FSSAI, AGMARK and other relevant necessarily standards should b e properly implemented. 
There is need for popularization of the standards among growers  and processors as well as 
need for better infrastruct ure for quality testing.  
Farm to Fork 
Good harvesting practices should be followed while harvesting t he produce, followed by 
better post-harvest handling. The produces are subjected to gra ding and sorting using 
techniques such as computer visi on. RFID tags are used during t ransportation to ensure 
temperature-controlled distribut ion. The produces are pre-proce ssed, processed and 
packaged. HACCP and GMP should be implemented during processing  to ensure hygienic 
and safe production of the food products. The produced products  are then distributed to 
retails to reach the consumers. A t every in the value chain pro per care must be implemented.  
 16 
 
 
 
A complete food supply chain from farm to fork is explained usi ng the value chain of apple 
from farm to fork. Apple after harvesting is loaded and sent to  the manufacturing plant, 
where they are unloaded, proce ssed into value added products li ke juice, puree and packaged.  
The packaged product is ready for distribution to warehouse. Fr om the warehouse the 
products will be distributed to retail stores and supermarkets to be scanned and displayed. 
Similarly, the value chain is sp ecific and complex for each com modity. 17 
 
 
Summary 
The food supply management organize and oversee all of the area s of the supply chain that 
helps to mitigate against food losses and food wastage. There a re six models of food supply 
chain including agile, flexible, fast chain, efficient chain, c ontinuous flow and custom 
configured. For development strategy, linkages are one of the e ssential features of an 
industry. A cold chain is a temperature-controlled supply chain  comprising of refrigerated 
production, storage and distribu tion facilities supported by eq uipment that can constantly 
maintain the required l ow-temperature range. 
 
These are the references  for further study. Thank you. 