Page 1 of 25 
 Post-harvest Operations and Processing of  
Fruits, Vegetables, Spices and Plantation Crop Products  
Professor H. N. Mishra  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 60  
Course Summary and Summing-Up  
 
 
Hello everyone, we are in the last lecture of the course i.e. s ummary of the course. We will sum 
up the course that what we discussed during the entire course. So, let us discuss today about 
post-harvest management and proc essing, challenges and opportun ities and the way forward.   
 
I will elaborate briefly on Ent repreneurship and start-ups. In the end, we will discuss the R&D 
activities of my laboratory, the  Food Chemistry and Technology Laboratory at IIT Kharagpur.  
 
Page 2 of 25 
  
India as a global sourcing hub 
You know that India is a global sourcing hub.  There are about 20 agroclimatic z one/conditions, 
52 percent cultivable land, and 46 out of total 60 soil types a vailable in India. India is the second 
largest food producer in the world, and seventh larger in the a rea and it has a very long coastline. 
There is about 31 percent of the  consumption basket is spent on  food, 7.68 percent of the total 
global agriculture output and more than that, Food and Grocery have more than 60 percent of 
the Indian retail sector (2014 data). Agriculture and Food Proc essing Sector, particularly the 
Food Processing, if everything goes as per the plan, by 2024 it  will employ 9 million people.   
So, all this data shows that the re are huge opportunities in th e agriculture and food sector in 
India. 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 25 
 Agri food ecosystem 
Let us discuss the Agri-food ecosy stem. Food processing involve s right from crop production 
till it comes to the consumer tab le. The food has to undergo di fferent stages where various 
operators are involved like the food producers, primary food pr oducers and manufacturers, 
secondary manufacturers, wholesal ers, retailers, food service o perators, caterers etc. The food 
manufacturing company have to make a proper balance and each an d every stage adopt standard 
practices.  Standard operators should take care of the statutor y and regulatory body on one hand 
and consumers' preferences or consumer demands on the other.  S o, this whole makes the Agri-
food ecosystem.   
 
Agriculture food sectors 
We can divide the Agriculture and Food Sectors into 5 major cat egories. One is the durable 
crop sectors which include grain, cereals, legumes, oil seeds, etc. Second is the perishable sector 
i.e. fruits, vegetables, dairy products, meat, fish and poultry . The third category may be the 
commercial crop sector which includes tea, coffee, cocoa, and s o on. There is another sector 
which is considered an unexplored  underutilized cr op sector lik e non-timber forest produces 
and millets. Finally, the health-value crops include spices, co ndiments and many health-
beneficial fruits and vegetables.   
So, in this course, we considered  mainly the perishable foods i .e. fruits and vegetables, the 
commercial crops tea, coffee, cocoa etc., and the health-value crops like spices, condiments and 
other beneficial fruits and vegetables. So, this constitutes a major section of the agriculture and 
food sector.  
Page 4 of 25 
  
Major challenges in various sectors  
Different sectors have different  challenges. Look at these thre e sectors which we have covered 
in this course. In fruits and vegetables, the major challenge i s how to increase their shelf-life. 
Because of the shorter shelf-life fruits and vegetables are per ishable in nature. There is a fast 
deterioration of nutritional and sensorial characteristics. The  other challenges are the lack of 
modern harvesting practices and c old storage infrastructure, in appropriate post-harvest 
management, etc.  
If you look at the health value crop sector, there are lack of technical skills, the toxicity of 
residual agrochemicals used for pest management, a lack of valu e addition and quality 
upgradation and improper post-harv est practices. In the commerc ial crops sector, climatic 
hazards, prevalence of diseases and pests, difficulties in the clearing of dense vegetable cover 
and soil erosion due to over-exploitation.   
Page 5 of 25 
  
 
Reducing supply chain losses  
In the post-harvest management of fruit and vegetable, reducing  the supply chain losses is a 
major challenge because, in these categories, huge losses of fr uits and vegetables occurs, in 
some cases as high as 35 to 40 per cent losses in perishable ha ve been also reported. In the 
supply chain, there are 2 stages i.e. the upstream stage like a griculture which involves 
production, post-harvest handling and storage, and the downstre am stage, the processing and 
packaging, and distribution and consumption are involved.   
 
So, the appropriate plant processing infrastructures in the ups tream stage and efficient 
processing and storage and dist ribution in the downstream stage  are the best strategies to reduce 
supply chain losses and these are  very important in the consump tion and utilization of fruits 
and vegetables concerned.  
Page 6 of 25 
  
Post-harvest management: Challenges as Opportunities  
In post-harvest management, one has to take the challenges as o pportunities. Like farm-level 
processing, promote more and more ventures for minimal processi ng of fruits and vegetables. 
Farm-level minimal processing means grading, sorting, packaging , etc. Local manufacture of 
primary processing machinery i.e. the make-in-India concept is very important for farm-level 
processing and it should be enc ouraged. Cold chain and preserva tion infrastructure facilities are 
to be established without any br eak from the farm gate to till it comes to the consumer.  
Furthermore, shortening the distr ibution chain by having more a nd more B2B Ventures to 
reduce as far as possible the di stribution cycle,  distribution chain should be encouraged. The 
value addition of fruits and vegetables like intermediate moist ure, high moisture fruit products, 
and fermented products can be done. Finally, by-product utiliza tion where extraction of bio-
actives, biofuels, functional f oods preparation, etc. should be  explored.  
 
Page 7 of 25 
  
Way forward – What should be done? 
Utilization of the information and knowledge generated through ongoing farm practices to 
develop novel technologies in the different parts of the countr y can be studied and this should 
be used to develop the novel technologies and finally, applicat ion of novel technologies for 
enhancements of shelf life and adoption of zero waste or near z ero waste processing strategy 
can be explored.  
Pilot studies of these technologies, modelling and the upscalin g of the process should be 
conducted. Another important strategy should be adopted for the  establishment of technology 
or product demonstration units and facilitation of the technolo gy transfer. Entrepreneurship 
development and start-up promotion are important activities whi ch should be encouraged.  
Knowledge dissemination and awar eness creation among farmers, c onsumers, process, and 
entrepreneurs will be inferred some means to be used to communi cate and in fact, this course 
had been one such means, where we tried to disseminate the info rmation to various users.  
Page 8 of 25 
  
Holistic approach: Farm to fork 
There should be a holistic approach from farm to fork i.e. star ting from the harvest till it reaches 
the consumer. In the post-harvest handling, grading and sorting , the temperature-controlled 
distribution system, and computer  vision systems should be used  in pre-processing, processing 
and packaging. The HACCP and good manufacturing practices are t o be followed carefully and 
finally, the distribution in retail and to the consumer. So, at  each and every stage proper care 
should be taken, and every possibl e effort should be taken to m ake sure that the product is safe 
and it is of good quality.  
 
 
Aspects covered in the course  
Various aspects are covered in this course, and novel and emerg ing methods and technologies 
for post-harvest handling, transportation, processing and packa ging of major fruits, vegetables, 
Page 9 of 25 
 spices, and plantation crop products were discussed in the cour se. Even minimal processing 
strategies and other methods of producing quality ready-to-eat,  ready-to-serve foods and 
beverages and even hurdle technology concepts for preparing int ermediate moisture food, high 
moisture crude products, dehydrated fruits, juices, paste, and fermented products from fruits 
and vegetables were taught.   
Various methods for extending the shelf life of whole as well a s cut fruits and vegetables such 
as CA storage, modified atmosphere storage, edible coating, etc . were taught in this course. 
Also, the environment-friendly gr een technologies and approache s for reducing the carbon 
footprint in the environment used  by the fruits and vegetable p rocessing industries were 
discussed. The novel approaches for the near-zero waste process ing and utilization of 
byproducts and waste streams into the value-added product and i ngredient preparation for the 
food industry etc. were studied. The focus of the course was on  the creation of wealth from 
waste or byproducts, and their utilization. So, all these aspec ts have been covered in this 12-
week course.   
 
4 Keys to Success  
So, I will finally summarize the course by saying that there ar e 4 keys to success i.e. processing, 
packaging and shelf life extension, storage and distribution, a nd marketing and retail. These are 
essential in any food processing line, but because of the peris hable and short shelf-life of fruits, 
vegetables, plantation, and horticulture crop products, they pl ay a particularly significant role 
in these industries. At present only a 2 to 3% processing rate only. We have to take every 
possible effort to increase the processing, convert them into a  value-added product, packaging 
and shelf life of the whole processed product and cut fruits an d vegetables.  
Page 10 of 25 
 Proper supply chain management should be adapted for storage an d distribution. Finally, 
equally important, the marketing and retail i.e. the entreprene urship and the startup promotions 
should be encouraged as far as possible. So, let me little bit elaborate about entrepreneurship 
and startup promotion also.   
 
 
What a start-up needs? 
It needs the customer to know how, i.e. who are the customers, what they want, etc. There is a 
need for some capital and sector knowledge, then the location o r some facilities, or place etc. 
and other infrastructure resources. Finally, control over the i nformation of the regulations, 
legislations and regulatory requi rements etc. So, this is the i nformation which a startup must 
regenerate before going to the business or a startup processing . They should have a clear 
understanding of all these things. 
 
Page 11 of 25 
 Steps in setting up a business 
For setting up a business i.e. the step-by-step, requirements i nclude a clear business plan, 
appropriate or proper funding for doing that business, products , operations, production line, 
operation staff, machinery, etc. and finally licensing and mark eting.  These are the various steps 
in chronological order that are involved in setting up a busine ss.   
 
 
The business plan  
A business plan is a very important document for any startup or  any entrepreneurship activity. 
It means communicating your vision to the outside world to help  you attract talent and money 
to your enterprise. This is a plan a document that tells one wh o reads this document to 
understand your vision. The quality of a business plan is measu red by its ability to hire 
employees, gain contracts from potential customers and negotiat e money investment from an 
investor who is interested in solely making a profit.   
Expectations from a good business plan: It should be a well-tho ught-out document and can be 
easily visualized. This should ar ticulate the strength and the vision of your business; this will 
clearly outline the risk associated with this business and it w ill present clear evidence of the 
validity of the venture. In fact, it should compel the action a nd get investors excited i.e. the one 
who reads your business plan  should get excited to associate with your business either in an y 
form or to give the funding to join it in a suitable way.  
Page 12 of 25 
  
 
Government schemes  
There are various Government of I ndia schemes, particularly in the past few years, the 
Government of India has been very proactive to promote start-up  and entrepreneurship-
developed activities, etc. It has introduced over 50 plus start -up schemes in the past few years. 
Each start-up scheme is missione d toward boosting the Indian st art-up ecosystem. Various 
schemes are launched by different government agencies like Niti  Ayog, NSIC, Sidbi, MSME, 
NSERB India, Ministry of Food pr ocessing industries, AIM or eve n the department of heavy 
industries. Various departments in the Ministries of the govern ment in agriculture, the 
RAFTAAR scheme, and NABARD provide  funding also to agriculture and food start-ups and 
provide seed money and other loans.  
 
 
List of licence required  
So, to start a business or a f ood business, there are certain r equirements like licenses,  which 
Page 13 of 25 
 are required. Number one is the FSSAI Food licence which is an important and mandatory 
requirement. For making a product processing plant, FSSAI provi des a licence for doing 
business that and if one is not taking the licence and doing th e food business, heavy penalties 
may be imposed. So, to get these licenses, one has to visit the  FSSAI website etc., wherein all 
the details are available, then one has to obtain the trader li cence i.e. food business is usually 
granted Trade Licence as an “Eating House” under the Municipal Corporation laws of the 
respective State in India.   
Registration of companies should be done at the Register of  Co mpanies or under the business 
SSI at the local DIC office. GST registration can be easily don e on online websites. Every owner 
of a shop or commercial establishm ent having more than 10 emplo yees must obtain a shop and 
establishment registration from t heir respective State Labour D epartments. A no-objection 
(NOC) from the fire department is required to run the food busi ness. So, NOC from the fire 
department is required to run the food business and at present,  there are no fee requirements for 
taking the NOC. 
 
 
     
 
   Food Chemistry and Technology Laboratory, IIT Kharagpur  
Now, let us discuss the Food Chemistry and Technology Laborator y. This is the website logo, 
you can if you are interested, you can visit our lab website at  www.fctliitkgp.co.in. This is a 
research and development laborat ory where we conduct research i n the area i.e. new product 
development, process and machinery development. About 75 percen t i.e. three fourth of our 
activity in the laboratory is focused towards process and machi nery development and one-fourth 
is new product development. If  you look at the specific area i. e. sector-wise, we concentrated 
around about 20-22 percent on the fruits and vegetable technolo gies and equally about 21 
percent are ready-to-eat produc ts i.e. extrusion technology sec tor. About 30 percent we are 
Page 14 of 25 
 developing functional foods which again include from fruits veg etables, spices etc. Roughly 
around 14 percent to 15 percent, the dairy foods, as well as th e extraction and purification of 
various bio-actives fro m ingredients from the various raw, prod uce materials.  
 
 
 
    
 
 Novel Food Products Developed at FCTL, AgFE, IIT Kharagpur 
These are some of the major products which have been developed in our FCTL laboratory at 
Kharagpur. This includes various  ready-to-eat products, algal f ood biotechnology, tea 
processing where we filed a patent for black tea, green tea and  green tea tablets,  antioxidants, 
oil processing, ready-to-eat hea lth foods, Oat based ice creams , low cholesterol dairy cream, 
black tea powder, green tea powder, probiotic vegetable juice, extruded traditional ready to eat 
snack foods and traditional health foods, etc.   
Most of these are patented and some of these have also been tra nsferred to various laboratories. 
So, we will take up at least some of the important processes ar e indeed developed particularly 
in the last 5-6 years. 
 
     
 
Page 15 of 25 
  
Ready-to-Eat Therapeutic Food (TF-RTE Food) 
Let us discuss ready-to-eat the rapeutic food for severely acute ly malnourished children. This is 
a patented process and received the GYTI appreciation award in 2018. In this process basically, 
various locally produced agricul tural materials like peanut, so ybean, maize etc. are taken and 
these grains are made to ready- to-eat form by roasting, grindin g and de-skinning, converting it 
into powder form. These grain powders, peanut paste, vitamin an d mineral premix, edible oil, 
sugar, and milk powder in appropriate proportions are mixed. Th e formulations are developed 
using linear programming. We have developed 5 formulations from  these commodities. Each 
formulation meets the requirement set by the FAO or WHO for a s everely acute malnourished 
child. This is finally packaged or it is in the form may-be rea dy-to-eat, ready-to-serve form, or 
in the party pouches, etc. So, the mother cuts and open these p ouches and just feed the child, 
because, in severely acute malnourished management i.e. normall y for children which are up to 
six months to six-year, there s hould no need for further prepar ations. It is hygienic form and is 
consumed directly and liked by the children. So, this is one pr oduct which we have prepared. 
 
Page 16 of 25 
  
Micronutrient fortified rice for mitigation of anemia 
Another important product that we have done and again it is a p atented process, is a 
micronutrient fortified rice for mitigation of the anemia. Here , we are using the extrusion 
process because the extrusion is  considered to be the most prom ising technology, where the 
broken rice is taken, pulverized, and vitamin-mineral premix as  per the FSSAI requirements are 
mixed. Then broken rice flour-vitamin & mineral mix was conditi oned. It is fed to the twin 
screw extruder where which is gi ven the shape of the rice kerne l i.e. fortified rice kernel. These 
fortified rice kernels then are mixed into normal rice for whic h we have developed a normal 
rice-FRK mixing unit wh ich gives the fortified rice the require d composition.   
The fortified rice has a higher level of Iron, folic acid and v itamin B 12 and we have also 
established the pilot scale unit which has a 100 kg FRK  produc tion per day capacity in our 
departmental premises. This is  all about fortified rice kernel manufacturing. 
 
   
 
  
Page 17 of 25 
  
Micronutrient fortified rice noodles  
The same pilot plant we are using for the manufacture of noodle s, just by changing the die in 
the earlier fortified rice kernel. Now here, the rice die is re placed with a noodle die. In India, 
anaemic children and ladies are more and they may like to eat n oodles than rice. So, the rest 
process is the same as that of FRK. One more thing also which w e have done here that we have 
also developed a process to replace the fortified premix by usi ng natural ingredients to increase 
the vitamin and mineral content in the fortified rice noodles.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Low glycemic rice for diabetic persons  
The other product is low glycemic rice for diabetic persons. Th e linear programming technique 
was used where broken rice, barnyard millet, foxtail millet and  quinoa in appropriate 
proportions were taken for formulation. These grains were mille d, sieved, and mixed to get 
multigrain flour. This multigrain flour is moistened and condit ioned to be fed the same extruder 
where the rice die is used. The  dried low-GI rice is good for t he diabetic person because the 
Page 18 of 25 
 proper combination of barnyard millet, foxtail millet and quino a maintain a low glycemic index 
i.e. more resistant starch content.  
 
Essential amino acid balanced nutria dal 
Another product is the essential amino acid balanced nutria dal . This dal resembles the natural 
dal, it has a shorter cooking time and less anti-nutritional fa ctor. In an earlier case, the rice 
broken was taken and here the broken dals, by-products of the d al mill industry were taken in 
the appropriate quantity and converted into powder, mixed in th e appropriate quantity and fed 
to the extruder to produce the dal. Extruded dal is balanced in  essential amino acids i.e. all the 
essential amino acids meet the requirements as that of the egg.  If you take a 100-gram dal and 
a 100-gram egg, their essential amino acid composition will be comparable or similar. 
 
 
PUFA Enriched Vegetable Oil Powder 
PUFA-enriched vegetable oil powde r in which we are balancing th e MUFA and PUFA ratio. 
Page 19 of 25 
 The sunflower oil, sesame oil a nd some other vegetable oil are blended into proper proportion, 
so as to have a maximum antioxidant value, maximum unsaturation  level and also a properly 
balanced  MUFA and PUFA ratio. In this, certain wall materials are used i.e. homogenous 
emulsion is prepared and this emulsion is finally either spray- dried or microwave dried to get 
the powder. Oil powder can be used in replacing saturated fat e ither in bakery products or in the 
frozen dessert industry. This can  give a good healthy alternati ve to saturated fats.  
 
 
 
Microencapsulation of probiotics  
Another is the microencapsulation of probiotics. The probiotic bacteria powder contains 
GABA, gamma-aminobutyric acid which is a neuroprotectant and th e Lactobacillus plantarum . 
They were co-encapsulated using spray drying. Here the lactic a cid bacteria, GABA and the 
wall materials are taken into a  solution and ultrasonicated to form an emulsion which is spray-
dried or freeze-dried to get probiotic bacteria powder. This pr obiotic bacteria powder has very 
good stability i.e. more than 2 years, and its bacterial count is maintained even in refrigerated 
conditions. These probiotic bacter ia can be used  in various bak ery, and confectionery products 
as well as in beverages. 
 
    
 
Page 20 of 25 
  
Instant Soluble Milk Tablet 
The other product is instant soluble milk tablets. Here we have  designed the milk tablet-making 
machine. The skim milk powder is taken, conditioned, compressed  and converted into an SMP 
tablet. SMP tablets can be taken, and whenever required it is c onvenient to carry. It has good 
solubility and can be used instead of milk powder for making te a or coffee. This idea is done, 
now, the next part is antioxidant  powders, fruits and vegetable  juice powders, which can also 
be tableted. Tea powder gives antioxidants, so making it in a t ablet is one possibility. 
  
 
Membrane filtered & ozonised shelf-stable sugarcane juice  
We have Membrane filtered and ozonized shelf-stable sugarcane j uice where ultra-filtration and 
microfiltration processes are used to remove the bacteria and u ndesirable enzymes present in 
the juice followed by ozone treatment and packaging. You can se e here the raw juice and the 
processed juice. It had a shel f life of about 3 months under th e refrigerated condition.  There are 
Page 21 of 25 
 6 log cycle reductions in the bacterial count and 4 log cycle r eductions in yeast and mold count. 
Almost 97 percent reduction in P olyphenol oxidase enzyme activi ty was observed.   
 
 
RTD grain beverage  
In ready-to-drink grain beverages, roasted maize, Bengal gram, and ragi were taken. They are 
ground, sieved and passed through colloidal milling to make a s lurry and finally freeze-dried. 
So, in this instantized grain mix  powder, the probiotic is adde d in a calculate d amount to get a 
probiotic grain beverage.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Carbonated Aonla Beverage Premix  
There is another carbonated aonla beverage premix it is discuss ed in carbonated beverages 
lectures. So many other similar fruits and vegetable products w e have discussed in various 
lectures covered earlier. In this, aonla is blanched in hot wat er and microwave and aonla juice 
powder is prepared using a spray dryer. Carbonation powder is a lso developed.   
 
Page 22 of 25 
  
 
FCTL Publications 
These are some of the publications of our laboratory which incl ude food products and process 
innovations in different 2 volumes and functional foods. Many o ther lectures compendium, 
laboratory manuals etc. are published. These are available in s oft copies as well as hard copies.   
 
Acknowledgement  
Finally, now I come towards a very important component of today ’s part which is my duty to 
extend our acknowledgements and th anks to all those who contrib uted to this wonderful lecture 
in this course i.e. in prep aration for the course.  
 
 
Page 23 of 25 
  
Teaching Assistants 
So, first of all, I thankfully acknowledge the role of the teac hing assistants. Dr Chandrakant 
Genu Dalbhagat is the project officer. He did PhD in Food Proce ss Engineering, M Tech in 
Dairy and Food Engineering from IIT Kharagpur both under my sup ervision and  B Tech in 
Agricultural Engineering from MPKV Rahuri. Another teaching ass istants are Shubham 
Mandliya who is a Prime Minister Research Fellow, presently doi n g   P h D  u n d e r  m y  
supervision. He did M Tech from IIT Kharagpur with me, and B Te ch from JNKVV, Jabalpur. 
Mr Sidharth Vishwakarma under teaching assistant, is a  researc h scholar, GYTI Awardee, 
working on a PhD degree with me. He did also M Tech under my su pervision at IIT Kharagpur 
and B Tech from JNKVV Jabalpur.   
So, the contributions as I told you of these teaching assistant s, and there are other PhD research 
scholars of the Food Chemistry and Technology Laboratory who co ntributed immensely to this 
course. Everybody’s effort and cont ribution are thankfully ackn owledged and a special mention 
that it deserves to Miss Monalisha Pattnail, Misses Jayshree Ma jumdar, Miss Anjali Thakur, 
Miss Nithya Michael, Mr Sourav M isra and Mr Anas Sheikh. These are research scholars who 
are working with me for their Ph D degrees and deserve special m ention. They also contributed 
immensely to the preparation of v arious lecture materials. So, the contribution of teaching 
assistants and other PhD scholars is thankfully acknowledged. 
 
Page 24 of 25 
  
Video and lecture recording team 
I will be failing in my duty if I do not acknowledge the excell ent job done by our IIT  Kharagpur 
CC, video lecture recording team of NPTEL. Mr A. V.  Ramacharlu  who is popularly known 
as Ramu is the Project officer at NPTEL. He needs a  special me ntion, I acknowledge his 
contribution to the video, lecture and recording. Thankfully, g ratefully, I acknowledge the 
contribution of all his team members like Reetirupa Das, Sushan ta Mahapatra, Piyali 
Chakraborty, Sourav Bhattacharya, Kajal Kumar Guha, Ajay Malik,   Debopriya Chakraborty. 
Their efforts and contribution in the recording of this course are praiseworthy. I, of course, as 
course operator as well as on behalf of my team, extend wholehe artedly, thankfulness and 
gratefulness to all these video  and lecture recording teams. 
 
 
 
NPTEL 
 
Finally, the NPTEL, there are  many other people who are involv ed in various operations in the 
Page 25 of 25 
 NPTEL here at our institute IIT Kharagpur as well as in the nat ional NPTEL-Swayam 
implementing Institute IIT Chennai. So, the IIT Chennai NPTEL t eam, IIT Kharagpur NPTEL 
team and then finally IIT Kharagpur as an Institution and the M inistry of Human Resource 
Development, Government of India who develop this unique portal  and who are encouraging 
and contributing immensely to the knowledge generation and know ledge upgradation in the 
country.   
And Finally, I like to thank my department, the Agricultural an d Food Engineering Department 
for providing me with this opportunity and permitting me to giv e this course or to put it in the 
public domain. I have tried my level best and my team has tried  its best to put as much as 
information possible in the public domain with this course. I h ope you all will enjoy this. 
Finally, wishing the participants of this course, all the best in their future endeavours. Thank 
you and Jai Hind.  