1 
 Post Harvest  Operations  and Processing  of Fruits,  Vegetables,  Spices  and Plantation  
Crop  Products  
Professor  H.N.  Mishra  
Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  Department  
India n Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  14 
Processing  by Removal  of Heat  
 
 
 
The major  aspects  of this lecture  will be cooling  and its types,  refrigeration,  chilling  and 
freezing  technology,  freeze  drying , and freeze  concentration.   
 
2 
  
Cooling of fruits and vegetables  
Cooling is the process of removal of heat from the fruits and vegetable to lower their 
temperature to ambient or storage condition. It is also called as precooling , removal of field 
heat i.e. rapidly lowering the temperature of harvested produce to near st orage temperature. It 
is also called  as pre-cooling  or removal  of field heat by rapidly  lowering  the temperature  of 
post harvest  produced  to near storage  temperature.  The primary processing after harvesting is 
the cooling, which reduces the metabolic  activ ity, growth  of microorganism s, and slows  down  
spoilage . The benefits of the process are to reduce the changes  to the organoelectric  and 
nutritional  qualities of the product  and maintain the product safety. This process  is done  before  
the produce  is transported  to market  or also put into the cold storage .  
 
Different  types  of cooling  include  chilled  air cooling,  vacuum  cooling , and chilled  water  or 
hydro  cooling.  Chilled  air involves  passing  refrigerated  air on the fruits  or vegetables,  the loss 
of moisture  results  in reduced  weight  and wilting  sometimes.  Vacuum  cooling involves  placing  
the fruits  or vegetable  in a sealed  chamber  and reducing  the pressure  through  the vacuum  pump.  
3 
 It is suitable  for leafy  vegetables  like lettuce,  spinach  etc. The chilled water  cooling  or hydro  
cooling  involves  spraying  of chilled  water  on the produce  or by its direct  immersion  in the cold 
water.  Either  the chilled  water  can be sprayed  on the produce  or the produce  can be directly  
immersed  in the cold water,  however,  they do not lead to moisture  loss during  cooling  but there  
may be some  contamination,  etc if the water  is not of good  quality.  So disinfection  is the major  
problem  for which  the recirculated  water  or the water  which  is used for chilled  cooling  or 
hydrocooling  is chlorinated  or it is sometime  sanitized.   
 
Chilled air  
In chilled air cooling system, an exchange of heat is accomplished by changing the temperature 
of the air such temperature changes usually occur at constant pressure, the chilled air is passed 
inside the storage room or inside the package . The amount of sensible heat change in the air 
may be estimated by   
Qs= ṁ Cpa(T2−T1) 
 
Where, Qs is sensible heat exchange of air (kW) , 
             ṁ is mass flow rate of air kg s-1
 
             Cpa is specific heat of air (kJkg-1
K-1
) 
             T2-T1 is temperature difference between outgoing and incoming air, K  
4 
  
Vacuum cooling  
Vacuum  cooling  is based  on “evapour ation  cooling ”. Evapour ation  or boiling  process  requires  
energy  and this energy  is taken  from  the product  which  cools  down . As shown  in the figure , 
there  is a vacuum  chamber , which  is attached  with the cooling  coil condensates  vapour ized 
water  to separate  from  the vacuum  where  the pressure  is lower  than the water  vapour , the 
condenser  condenses  the water , condensed  water  is collected  and a vacuum  pump  is used to 
reduce  the pressure  or create  the vacuum  inside  the chamber .  
Energy is never lost in vacuum cooling.  So, Qreleased =Qtaken . In evaporation cooling the heat 
energy released from the object is taken by evaporating water.  Hence,  
Qreleased =mfoodcp∆T 
Qtaken =mwater ∆hv 
Where, Q = Heat (kJ), Cp = Specific heat (kJ kg-1 K-1),  ∆hv = Evaporation heat of water  (kJ/kg) , 
△T = Temperature difference (K) .  
Hydro cooling  
The graph shows the relationship between the decimal temperature differences  (DTD), minutes 
of active cooling , and time center temperature response of different fruits and vegetables 
marked in different lines (A -G). The graph is used to estimate cooling ti me for a particular 
produce. The DTD can be calculated as  
 
5 
  
DTD =Tf−Tw
Ti−Tw 
Where, T f is target produce temperature (K)  
             Ti is initial temperature of product (K)  
             Tw is chilled water temperature (K)  
From DTD, the the expected time  for cooling the produce  in minutes can be easily calsulated 
from the x -axis of the plot.  
 
Refrigeration  
Most pathogen growth is stopped at < 5 °C.  A few pathogens grow slowly under refrigeration.  
Pure water freezes at 0 °C but foods freeze at < 0 °C  because of the dissolved solutes in the 
food that lower down the freezing point .  No organism (pathogen or spoilage) grows below 0 
°C. Refrigeration also  slows down spo ilage microorganism growth, and slows chemical 
6 
 reactions that can lead to off -flavors.  In household  refrigerator  normally  the temperature  may 
be in the range of 0 to 8 °C, whereas the temperature in frozen storage is maintained at 0 to -
23 °C. So every  10 °C lowering  in the temperature  makes  the shelf  life of the commodity  almost  
double.  
 
Refrigeration load  
It is the amount of heat removed by the refrigeration system.  
Heat of respiration = Total weight (kg) × Heat of respiration of produce (J kg-1
 s-1
)  
Heat  removed  from  containers
=No.of containers  × Container  weight  × Cp of container  × T difference    
Time  required   
Heat evolved by operators and light = Heat produced by operator and bulbs per second  
Heat  loss  through  walls  and roofs  =kinsulation  × Area  × (Tambient  – Tchiller )    
Insulation  thickness 
Heat  loss  through  floor  =kconcrete  × Area  × (Tsoil  – Tchiller )     
Floor  thickness 
Total heat load = Sum of all above five heat loads  
 
7 
  
Chilling  
The fruits and vegetables can be preserved by removal of heat, which involves chilling and 
freezing process. Temperature range in chilling is -1 to 8 °C depending on the type of fruit & 
vegetable.  Chilling is an important unit operation to extend the shelf lif e of fresh as well as 
processed fruits and vegetables.  Sensory and nutritional properties are minimally affected by 
chilling.  It is convenient , easy to prepare , high quality and healthy products can be obtained by 
chilling technology , and can be kept  as natural and fresh for longer time by maintaining the 
chilling conditions inside the storage.  
 
To chill fresh  foods , it is necessary  to remove  both sensible  heat (also known  as field heat) and 
heat generated  by the respiratory  activity . The recommended  temperature  and RH for fruits  and 
vegetables  with their storage  life we have  discussed  earlier  in the lecture  8. The production  of 
respiratory  heat at 20 °C and atmospheric  pressure  is given  by this equation   
                         C6H1206 + 6O 2    6CO 2 + 6H 2O + 2.835 x 103 kJ kmol-1 C6H1206 
8 
 The table represents the rate of heat evolved (W/t) from fruits and vegetables at different 
temperatures. It is clearly observed that the rate of heat evolution increase s with increasing the 
temperature from 0 to 15  °C.  
 
Cooling rate and duration  
Cooling rate (CR)  may be defined as   
CR=dT
dt 
Where, CR is the cooling rate (°C/s) ,  
dT is the temperature difference (°C) , 
dt is the time difference (s) . 
So in this calculation several assumptions are considered to obtain the time temperature 
function like  product should be homogenous, t emperature is same at every point inside the 
mass , temperature of the cooling medium is constant , there is no mass transfer between product 
and medium , sensitive heat removed from product eq uals to the convective heat transfer from 
product to medium . Based on the assumptions,  
m.c.dT=−S.h.(T−T0).dt 
T=T0+(Ti−T0).e−h.S.t
m.C 
t=m.C
h.SlnTi−T0
Tf−T0 
Where, m and c are the mass and specific heat of fruit , 
h is the convective heat transfer coefficient , 
S is surface area,  
Ti & Tf are the initial & final temperature of product , 
9 
 To is the cooling medium temperature  
 
Chilling injury  
Fruits and vegetables grown in tropical and subtropical regions suffer from chilling injury due 
to cold storage.  The cold-sensitive temperature of subtropical fruits is 5 –8 °C, while that of 
tropical fruits it may be < 12 °C.  Chilling injury is different from freezing damage, in that it 
refers to the physiological damage of susceptible plant organs because of the exposur e to 
temperatures above the freezing point.  Chilling injury  in most fruits is not easy to detect during 
cold storage, and its symptoms will only appear when the fruits are returned to room 
temperature.  The biochemical mechanisms of chilling injury involve cell membrane damage 
hypothesis and reactive oxygen stress (ROS) hypothesis. These are the two hypothesis of 
chilling injury available, both destroys the memebrane function causing physiological 
metabolic disorders.  
 
10 
  
 
 
11 
  
So there  are different  types  of chilling  injury  in fruits  and vegetables , which  may be surface  
water  stains , generally  evident  in cucumber , kiwi fruit etc. or it may be surface  depression  and 
browning  in the case of banana , oranges , green  apple , which  is more  common  or the wooly  
texture  in peach  and nectarine  or the loss of ability  to mature  in case of tomato  and guava  that 
is more commonly  seen when  the cold room  temperature  is not maintained  to the proper  
recommended  conditions , or seed and calyx  browning , which  is more  common  in the sweet  
potato .  
 
Methods to control chilling injury  
Physical treatments:  Low temp conditioning ; Heat treatment ; Near freezing temp storage ; UV 
irradiation ; CA & edible coating . 
Chemical  treatments:  Ethylene & 1 -MCP; Oxalic acid ; NO and melatonin ; Calcium ion ; 
GABA etc.  
12 
 Biotechnological approach: Transgenic technology  which enhances the resistance through 
genes based on regulatory micro RNA . 
 
Freezing  
Freezing is a unit operation (temperature below -18 °C) that is intended to preserve foods 
without  causing significant changes to their sensory qualities or nutritional value.  It involves 
reduction in temperature of a food below its freezing point.  Water in food undergoes state 
change to form ice crystals.  The immobilization of water as ice and the res ulting concentration 
of dissolved solutes in unfrozen water lower the water activity (a w). It causes elimination of 
microbial deterioration, reduction in the rates of enzymatic and chemical reactions, improves 
handling and transportation of produces, incre ases the shelf -life, and also it is a convenient 
process.  
 
Freezing process  
13 
 There are several methods of freezing based on which quality may vary.  According to 
International Institute of Refrigeration (IIR), freezing is divided in three stages .  
Pre freezing – Freezing until the appearance of the first crystal.  
Freezing - Phase change (water into ice).  
Reduction to storage temperature - The last stage starts when the product temperature reaches 
the point where most freezable water has been converted to  ice, and ends when the temperature 
is reduced to storage temperature.  
The quality of the frozen product is mostly affected by the rate of freezing, while time of 
freezing is calculated according to the rate of freezing.  
 
Freezing curve  
A-S: Removal of sensible heat (no water -ice transformation).  
S: Supercooling where the water remains liquid below the freezing point.  
S-B: Temperature rises as ice crystal forms and releases latent heat of crystallization (λ).  
B: Initial freezing point is a function of nu mber of dissolved particles in solution.  
B-C: Water is crystallized (λ is removed) but due to increase in solute concentration, freezing 
point decreases.  
C-D: Solute becomes supersaturated and crystallizes out (λ is released) and temperature rises 
to eutec tic temperature for that solute.  
D-E: Crystallization of water and solutes continues. The temperature of the ice -water mixture 
falls to the temperature of the freezer.  
E-F: Ice formation and solute concentration continue until no more water can be frozen.   
14 
 F: The temperature at F is known as glass transition temperature of amorphous concentrated 
solution. Here unfrozen liquid is converted from viscoelastic to brittle, amorphous solid glass.  
 
Slow vs fast freezing rate  
The time taken for a temperature to pass through critical zone is known as freezing rate.  Slow 
freezing has 1 to 10 °C/h , commercial freezing have 10 -50 °C/h , and Fast freezing has > 100 
°C/h. In the slow  freezing  mostly  small  number  of ice crystal s of larger  sizes form. So, there  
may be dislocation  because  of this large  size of the ice crystal  and after thawing  there  may be 
certain  structural  dislocation  etc of the commodity  whereas  in the fast freezing  from  quality  
point  of view  it is good  as there  are large  number  of ice crystals  of a smaller  size form,  so there  
is no structural  or cellular  dislocation  inside  the cytoplasma , the structure  remains  intact , and  
there  is no damage , hence structural  change  is minimum  in the case of fast freezing .  
 
 
 
15 
 Plank’s equation to calculate freezing time  
Assumptions  
 Heat transfer is one dimensional.  
 Initial temperature of food is uniform.  
 Freezing air temperature is constant.  
 Latent heat of fusion is removed at a constant temperature.  
 Properties of food are constant above and below the freezing point but are different.  
 Heat transfer within the food is by conduction only.  
tf=ρfλf
Tf−Ta[Pa
h+Ra2
k] 
Where, ρf is the density of the frozen material (kg m-3),  
Lf  is the change in the latent heat of the food (kJ kg-1),  
TF is the freezing temperature (°C),  
Ta is the freezing air temperature (°C),  
h is the convective heat transfer coefficient at the surface of the material (Wm-2 K-1),  
a is the thickness/diameter of the object (m),  
k is the thermal conductivity of the fro zen material (Wm-1 K-1),  
P & R are constants.  
This P and R which are constants they depends upon the geometry of the material which is 
being frozen like for infinite slab P is 1/2 and R is 1/ 8, for infinite cylinder P and R are  1/ 4 and 
1/16, respectively, and  for sphere P is 1 /6 and R is 1 /24. 
Thawing  
When frozen food is thawed using air or water, surface ice melts to form a layer of water. 
Thawing is a longer process than freezing.  Due to lower thermal conductivity and thermal 
diffusivity of water than i ce, the surface layer of water reduces the rate at which heat is 
conducted to the frozen interior. This increases as the thawing progresses.  The plot representing 
the temperature change during thawing, the  significance of the curves as A-B: Due to the 
absence of a significant  layer of water around the food, B-C: When the temperature of the food 
is near to that of melting ice.  Drip loss occurs due to damage in cellular structure by slow 
freezing.   
 
 16 
  
 
Thawing time  
The thawing time can be calculated as per proposed by Cleland : 
t=dc
Efh(∆H10
Ta−Tf)(P1+P2Bi) 
 
P1=0.7754 +2.2828 ×Ste×Pk 
 
                                     P2=0.5 (0.4271 +2.122 ×Ste−1.4847 ×Ste2) 
 
                                                 Biot number: Bi=hdc
ku 
                                              Stefan number : Ste=ρucuTa−Tf
∆H10 
                                               Plank number : Pk=ρfcfTf−Ti
∆H10 
17 
  
Where, dc is the characteristic dimension (m) , 
Ef is shape factor (1 for slab, 2 for cylinder, 3 for sphere) , 
h is convective heat transfer coeff. (Wm-2K-1), 
ΔH10 is volumetric enthalpy change of product from 0 -10 °C (J m-3), 
Ta & Tf are the medium and freezing temperature (K), and  
P1 & P2 are constants.  
K is the  thermal conductivity (Wm-1K-1) 
             is density (kg m-3) 
            c is specific heat J kg-1 K-1 
 
Freeze drying (Lyophilization)  
It is a drying process where the wet product is first frozen to a solid phase and subsequently 
the product is dried by direct sublimation of the ice under reduced pressure.  Typically to a final 
moisture content of 1 –3%. It involves freezing the product followed by drying the product by 
direct sublimation under reduced pressure.  
Sublimat ion 
The figure shows the triple point of water, where solid, liquid, and gas phases co -exist at this 
particular pressure and temperature which is normally 611.73 Pa pressure and 0.01 °C.  Below 
these conditions, there is a d irect transition from solid to gaseous state without going through 
a liquid stage , known as sublimation process. It occurs only if the vapour pressure and 
temperature are below the triple point of water . 
 
18 
  
 
So, drying  takes place  in two steps  i.e. the primary  and secondary  drying . The primary  drying  
step involves  sublimation  of ice under  vacuum , whereas  the secondary  drying  steps  begins  
when  there  is no ice (from  unbound  water ) is in the product  and then moisture  comes  from  
partially  bound  water  in the dry material .  
Heat & mass transfer in freeze drying  
Heat by conduction, convection and radiation from the gas phase reaches the dried surface and 
is transferred by conduction to the ice layer.  The rate of sublimation is given by : 
G = A ( Pi −  Pc)
Rd+Rs+K1−1  
Where, G is the rate of sublimation  
 A is the sublimation area (ft2) 
 Pi is vapour pressure of ice (torr)  
19 
  Pc is condenser vapour pressure (torr)  
 Rd is the resistance of dry layer in the food  
 Rs is the resistance of space between food  and condensor  
 K1 is a con stant depending on the molecular weight of sublimation substance (ice)  
The heat of sublimation ΔH s must be supplied, and therefore  G = q / ΔHs , Where, q is the heat 
flux (Btu / h) .  
 
Heat transfer in freeze drying  
The interface between the frozen zone and dry zone is called as  ‘sublimation front’.  So, heat 
transfer to the sublimation front is by through the frozen layer, the rate of heat transfer depends 
on the thickness and thermal conductivity  of ice layer. The fi gure shows the heat transfer 
through dry and frozen layer.  
 
The rate of heat transfer to the sublimation front through the dried layer depends on the 
thickness and area of the food, the thermal conductivity of the dry layer and the temperature 
difference  between the surface of the food and ice front.  
20 
  
In the third  case there  will be heating  by microwaves  that is internal  heat generation , heat is 
generated  at the ice front  internally  and the rate of heat transfer  is not influenced  by the thermal  
conductivity  of ice or of the dry food or the thickness  of the dry layer  etc, because  here the heat 
is internally  generated .  
 
21 
  
 
Mass transfer rate in freeze drying  
The mass  transfer  rate in the freeze  drying  is affected  by pressure  in the drying  chamber , 
temperature  of the vapour  condenser  and temperature  of the ice at the sublimation  front . Drying  
time can be calculated  using  this equation : 
td=L2ρ(m0−mf)∆Hs
8k(Ts−Ti) 
The drying time  (td) depends on maximum permissible surface temperature (Ts) ( C), 
temperature at the sublimation front (Ti ) ( C), initial and final moisture contents (mo, mf),  bulk 
density of the solids ( ρ) (kg/m3), latent heat of sublimation ( ΔHs) (J/kg) , thickness of the slab 
(L) (m) , thermal conductivity of the dry layer (k)   (W/mK) .  
22 
  
Freeze concentration  
It involves the fractional crystallisation of water to ice and subsequent removal of the ice. This 
is achieved in a paddle crystalliser. It is a p otentially attracti ve method for concentration of 
fruit juices, coffee, tea and selected alcoholic beverages. The separation process of ice crystals 
is done in wash column.  This involves crystal nucleation followed by the crystal growth, 
separation of ice, and finally concentration.  
 
In summary, r efrigeration is used to stop the growt h of bacteria not to kill them. Cooling can 
be done through three ways – air cooling (chilled air), vacuum, and  hydro cooling (chilled 
water). Removal of heat is generally done in t wo ways – chilling & freezing.  Chilling requires 
temperature from -1 °C to 8 °C, whereas freezing requires -18 °C.  Fast freezing produces small 
but more nuclei which is better than slow freezing where large  but less nuclei’s are formed.  
Freeze drying is an important technique to dry the food product with minimal reduction in 
nutritional properties.  
23 
  
These are the references for further study.  
