1	
	Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation Crop 
Products 
Professor H. N. Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Te chnology, Kharagpur 
 
Lecture 5  
Plantation Crops  
In this lecture, composition, nutritional and health value of p lantation crops are discussed.  
 
The concept that is covered in this lecture, is the classificat ion, market, composition and health 
value of major plantation crop products like tea, coffee, cocoa , coconut, cashew etc.  
 
Tea ( Camellia sinesis ) 2	
	Tea ( Camellia Sinensis ) is the second cheapest beverage in the world next to water. A bout two 
thirds of the world population consumes tea. It can be seen fro m the figure, that the tea trees are 
evergreen shrub or trees. There are about 45 species of tea, th at are grown in the world, in which 
Camellia Sinensis  is the best one. China, India, Kenya, Sri Lanka, Turkey are th e top five tea 
producing countries of the world.  
Cultivator tea leaves are of two types. a) Indian type- These a re slow growing and large leaves 
containing tea plants. b) Chinese type- It can be seen in the f igure that the Chinese type is a fast 
growing and small leaves containing tea plant. Indian type has the higher yield than the Chinese 
type. In India, these bushes are pruned regularly, in order to encourage more and more leaf 
production. In India, about 5-6 tea plugging are made in a seas on. The top terminal bud and top 
terminal two or three leaves are  plugged and after that, they a re processed. 
 
Production & Classification of Tea 
The global tea market revenue in 2020 was 186.6 billion $, wher e India ranked third with about 
15.8 billion $. India is the second largest producer of tea, wi th a production of 1.2 billion kg tea 
in 2021 and the consumption of tea was about 1.1 billion kg.  
Total tea export of India is about 826.47 million $, in financi al year 2020 and 755.86 $, in 
financial year 2021. India makes different types of tea and the re are different tea products 
depending on the manner, in which they are processed. For e.g.,  fermented i.e., black tea or semi-
fermented oolong tea, unfermented green tea.  
Major tea brands in India includes Red Label, Wagh Bakri, Lipto n, Taj Mahal, TATA tea etc. 
The data shows in this figure, t he increasing the trend in the million-dollar values i.e., the export 
of revenue generated by the tea export.  3	
	
 
Composition & health value of tea  
Tea consists 3 major components. a) water soluble b) water inso luble compounds. The major 
components present in the tea leaf include caffeine, which prov ides i) energy or the stimulating 
action, ii) polyphenols, which help in digestion, managing diab etes, weight and cardiovascular 
diseases etc., iii) essential oil s, which provides aroma and fl avor.  
Chemical composition of green tea leaves 
It has polyphenols about 35-37%, carbohydrate 25%, protein 15%,  ash 5% and caffeine 3.5%. 
The health value of the tea can be seen in the figure. Tea, bot h green tea as well as black tea are 
remedies for various diseases like diabetes, eye disease. They reduce cholesterol levels, improve 
bone density, weight loss, lowering blood pressure, prevent can cer, protect heart health, improve 
memory, improve dental health etc . The negative effect of the t ea include insomnia.  
 
Coffee ( Coffea ) 4	
	C o f f e e  i s  t h e  t h i r d  m o s t  p o p u l a r  b e v e r a g e  i n  t h e  w o r l d  n e x t  t o  water and tea. Coffee is an 
evergreen shrub or small tree. It is indigenous to Central Afri ca and Asia. Three major varieties 
of coffee include Coffea Arabica , Coffea robusta  (C. canephora ) and Coffea liberica . So, this 
Coffea arabica  and Coffea robusta , almost supply the world’s largest part of the consumption of 
the coffee.  
 
Coffea arabica vs Coffea robusta 
If a comparison between Coffea arabica and Coffea robusta has been performed, then it can be 
found that Coffea arabica  is the largest and best quality beans, whereas Coffea robusta  g i v e s  
inferior or lower quality beans. Coffea arabica  has the milder and more aromatic and flavorful 
brew, whereas Coffea robusta  gives thick and strong decoction.  Coffea robusta is liked most in 
India. Coffea arabica ’s yield is low but Coffea robusta ’s yield is approximately doubled to that 
of Coffea arabica  variety. Coffea arabica  is indigenous to Ethiopia and was introduced to India 
through arabia, whereas, Coffea robusta  is produced in India due to lower elevation. Coffea 
arabica  grows at higher altitude (600 to 2000 m). Coffea robusta  can be grown at a 
comparatively lower attitude (600 m from sea level). Coffea arabica  is delicate and vulnerable to 
pest. Coffea robusta  is a longer living and disease resistant variety.  5	
	
 
Structure of coffee cherry 
It can be seen in the figure, that the coffee cherry, if it is very ripe, it is deep red or orange in 
color, depending on the plant species. It can also be seen from  the figure that, the cross section of 
coffee cherry shows that, it has two flattened beans inside. Th ese beans are valuable source of 
the coffee beverage that has been consumed. The outer part of t he coffee cherry is the husk or 
peel and it has two flattened beans inside.   
The internal structure of the coffee bean is covered by a silve ry skin i.e., testa epidermis, 
parchment, which is hull endocarp. Then there is a pectin layer , finally exists the pulp mesocarp 
and outer skin pericarp or exocarp. During coffee processing, e xcept the seed, the remaining 
things like pulp, skin, parchment etc. all are removed.  
 
 6	
	Market statistics of coffee 
As per the market statistics, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu are the major producers of coffee 
in India. India is the fifth largest producer and sixth largest  exporter of the coffee in the world. 
India accounts for 3.14% of the global coffee production, coffe e production during 2020-2021 is 
3, 42,000 million tons. Total coffee export is stood at 719.5 m illion $. Only 30% of the coffee is 
consumed domestically. The three major brands of coffee in Indi a are Nescafe, BRU or TATA 
coffee. 
 
 
Composition and health  value of the coffee 
Chemical composition of green beans 
The chemical composition of green beans (i.e., C. arabica  and C. robusta ) is represented in the 
table, in % on dry basis. They have polysaccharide around 44 to  48 %, protein about 11 % in 
both, lipid 16 to 10 %. Coffea arabica  h a s  1 . 2  %  c a f f e i n e  a n d  Coffea robusta  h a s  a  h i g h e r  
caffeine i.e., 2.2%. It is due to the higher caffeine content, Coffea robusta  g i v e s  a  s t r o n g  
decoction and a good stimulating action.  
Health value of coffee 
Coffee has a good energy value, it improves memory, relieves he adache, prevents Parkinson’s 
disease, protects liver, reduces diabetes, reduces cancer, redu ces heart diseases, burns fat and it is 
a storehouse for various medicines or agents, like health promo ting bioactive agents.  7	
	
 
Cocoa ( Theobroma cacao ) 
Cocoa is the dried and partially fermented fatty seed of the ca cao tree ( Theobroma cacao ) from 
which the chocolate is made. The cocoa tree is a long tree. In the branches, directly on the main 
trunk and directly on the branches, the flowers appear. This fl ower is finally converted into fruit, 
i.e., the cocoa fruit. This cocoa tree is a small tree to Ameri can tropics, now grown in all tropical 
regions of the world. The pods are 10 to 18 cm in diameter, hav ing thick leathery rinds 
containing 20-50 beans inside in rows. The beans are arranged i nside in the rows. The seeds are 
embedded in white or pinkish pulp. The beans or the seeds are i nside the cocoa pod, which are 
the valuable source of chocolate and cocoa butter. Chief cocoa producing countries in the world 
are Ghana, Nigeria, Ivory Coast and Brazil. Kerala, Karnataka a nd to some extent Tamil Nadu 
produce cocoa in India.  
 8	
	
 
Classification of cocoa 
Cocoa is a classified in three important varieties. That are Cr iollo, Forastero and Trinitario. 
Criollo trees are the most aromatic but highly sensitive to cli mate, resulting in lower yield. 
Forastero trees are disease resistance and have higher producti vity, thus around 90% of the 
world's product is made from these trees. The major disadvantag e of Forastero trees are its lower 
organoleptic properties. Trinitario is the crossbreed from Crio llo and Forastero.  
Market statistics of cocoa 
West Africa produces 70% of the world cocoa market. Cote d’lvoi re is the biggest producer of 
cocoa beans in the world, producing over 2 million tons, 40 mil lion of which is exported. 
Indonesia is the only one of the top five Asian country account ed for 0.66 million tons of cocoa 
in 2020. India ranked 16th in the cocoa production in 2021 with  a production of about 27,072 
tons. India earns foreign exchange worth Rs. 1108 crore through  export of cocoa beans and its 
products. The demand of chocolate industry and confectionaries in India is 50,000 MT (metric 
tons) of dry beans per annum.  9	
	
 
Composition & health value of cocoa 
Health value of cocoa 
Cocoa is a good source of Theobromine, which acts in similar wa y as caffeine, to enhance 
energy level and to delete blood vessels.  
Chemical composition of cocoa beans 
The moisture (%), fat (%), protein (%), carbohydrate (%), ash ( %) of the both unfermented and 
fermented cocoa beans are provided in the table. Both the unfer mented and fermented cocoa 
beans contain about 55 % of fat, which is a very good and valua ble quality to make cocoa butter. 
It is due to its eating characteristics, melting characteristic s and since it melts at room 
temperature, melts in the mouth, cocoa is used in various confe ctionary products or even savory 
products like ice cream, desserts etc.  
Health value of cocoa 
Cocoa improves mood, balances blood sugar, and prevents cancer.  It is used as antidepressant, 
improves brain function. It is goo d for heart, lowers cholester ol and it has a good effect on 
lowering down the blood pressure or maintaining the proper bloo d pressure.  10	
	
 
Coconut ( Cocos nucifera ) 
Coconut is an edible fruit, originated somewhere in Indo-Malaya  and is one of the most 
important crops of the tropics. Coconut flesh is high in fat an d can be eaten fresh or dried or 
processed into a variety of value-added products from milk to o il. Coconuts generally require 70 
to 80% humidity for optimum growth. A single coconut palm can p roduce 100 coconuts annually 
and each fruit required a year to mature. The Sanskrit name of coconut is Kalpavriksha , which 
means “the tree that provides all the necessities of life”. So,  far around 360 uses of coconut are 
reported in the literature.  
 
Classification of coconut 11	
	The coconut is classified into th ree major categories like tall  cultivars, dwarf cu ltivars and hybrid 
cultivars. Tall cultivars have about 60 years lifespan. They ar e around 15 to 18 m in height. 
D w a r f  c u l t i v a r s  h a v e  4 0  y e a r s  l i f e  s p a n  a n d  t h e y  a r e  a b o u t  5  t o  7 m in height. Tall cultivars 
produce higher quality and good qu ality oil. Comm only grown tal l cultivars in India are West 
Coast Tall, East Coast Tall, and Triptur Tall. Dwarf cultivars have thin and leathery copra and is 
low in oil content. The common dw arf cultivars in India are Cho wghat Orange Dwarf, Chowghat 
Green Dwarfs, and Gangabondam Green Dwarf. Hybrid cultivars sho ws earliness in flowering, 
have higher oil content, whi ch gives a better quality.  
 
Market statistics of coconut  
India ranks second in the global production of coconut in the y ear 2020 with a production of 14.7 
million MT. The production of coconut in the country stood at 2 1,207 million nuts during 2020-
21, which is 34% of the global production. The countries with t he highest volume of coconut 
consumption in 2018 were Indonesia (19 M tons). Philippines has  consumed 14 million tons, 
India consumes 12 million tons of coconut, with a combined 72% share of the global 
consumption. According to the global production of coconut in 2 020 (can be seen in the figure), 
Indonesia is a major grosser.  12	
	
 
Composition & health value of coconut 
Composition of coconut 
The table represents the nutritive value of coconut per 100 g o f the edible portion. It contains 
energy around 354 calories, per 100 g. It has around 80-81 % mo isture, 30 % fat, it has about 
4.5% protein, carbohydrate around 15-16%. It has a good quantit y of fiber i.e., 9%. Coconut is 
highly fibrous material. Its iron and calcium content are also good.  
Health value of coconut 
Coconut prevents heart disease. It enhances memory, strengthen immune system, improves 
digestion. It improves the moisture and hair and keeps our skin  moist. It maintains a good health 
of the hair and it balances blood sugar. So, coconut also has a  good health value. 13	
	
 
Cashew ( Anacardium occidentale ) 
It is an evergreen shrub or tree of the sumac family. It can be  seen from the picture, that the 
curved seeds are known as the cashew nuts. It is cultivated mai nly in Brazil and in India. The 
cashew tree produces a soft, shiny and juicy fruit known as cas hew apple, which bears a single-
seeded nut in its bottom covered with a hard grey shell. The pi cture shows the cashew apple, 
actually plugged from the plant.  After that, it is processed an d then particularly dried and inside 
shell there is the seed, which is a valuable material that is o btained. The cashew apple is 
processed into juice, jelly, jam, syrup etc. The cashew nut is the most valued product and is 
commonly consumed as snack or used in confectionary items or in  cooking various products.  
 14	
	Market statistics of cashew  
In 2020, 4.18 million tons of cashew nuts were produced globall y. India ranked second in the 
cashew production in the world, next to Ivory Coast. Maharashtr a is the leading estate in the 
country, in cashew production. Cashew nut production reached ar ound 7,43,000 tons in 2019 in 
India, according to the FAOSTAT. In the financial year 2020, th e total cashew export was 
566.82 million $. The country accounts for about 65 % of the wo rld's total exports of the cashew. 
The cashew companies in India are Vedoka, Nutraj, Happilo etc.  
 
Composition & Health value of Cashew 
Nutritive value in 100g of cashew nut  
100 gram of the cashew nut contain about 785 calories of energy . It has about 5 to 6 % moisture, 
64 % fat, 24 % protein, about 41 % carbohydrate, 1.3 % fiber. 
Health value of cashew  
Cashew helps in maintaining healthy bones, healthy nerves. It p revents gallstones. It is high in 
vitamins. it maintains healthy gums and teeth. It gives a pleas ant sleep. It lowers blood pressure, 
maintains blood pressure. It gives free radical. It helps in im provement in the hair and gives 
shining hair. It maintains healthy heart, helps in digestion. I t acts as antioxidants, helps in weight 
loss etc.  15	
	
 
Issues & Challenges Facing Plantation Crops Industry 
The major problems faced in almost all plantation crops sectors  a r e  t h e  s i m i l a r .  T h e  b i g g e s t  
challenge is the mechanization during harvesting process. Plant ation of crops are harvested 
manually, which requires manpower. There is a need and working of some robots etc. For e.g., 
Cocoa is a very high tree and specific setups are needed to plu ck the cocoa from the biggest tree. 
Coffee cherry are small shrub. There are some coffees, that are  in the same bunch, some coffee 
will ripe, some will remain green. So, it becomes a challenge t o pick up the ripe coffee from the 
bunches. Mechanical methods are generally used to collect the r ipe coffee from the tree.  These 
methods are operated manually. So, these are laborious methods.  S o ,  i f  s o m e  s y s t e m s  a r e  
developed, which can mechanize and pick up and choose the right  ripe and mature products from 
the trees, that will be really beneficial for the plantation in dustry, Shortage of labour, less wages, 
and welfare programmes for labourers are some major issues. 
Lack of policy push by the government in cashew, unorganized su pply chain and vulnerability in 
the pricing in the coconut etc. , these are the other major issu es in the industry.  
Incident of pest and diseases is another major concern. For e.g ., although, tea leaves contain the 
good amount of polyphenols, but they are susceptible to disease s. Many times, there is pest 
control. If the pesticides are sprayed, then their residue will  remain in the leaves and that may 
create problem, when the leaves are dried. So, there should be proper measure of these 
insecticides, that how they are used onto the major crops and t he diseases in the major crops are 
to be controlled. There should not be any extra pesticide resid ue on the leaves. With many 
challenges, many opportunities come in this sector. 16	
	
 
Opportunities & Market Potential  of Plantation C rop Products 
This sector is export oriented, accounting for 75% of the total  earning from the export of 
agricultural produce. The commodity of tea is expected to grow at a CAGR of 6.6 %, coffee at 
4.28 % CAGR, cocoa at a 5.48 % CAGR, coconut highest 13.6 % and  cashew 4.6 % CAGR.  
Coconut or other plantation crop are considered as cash crops a nd there is a big potential, big 
market and generation. But there are certain issues which are n eeded to be solved, like issues 
related to their processing, issu es related to their handling e tc. For e.g., coconut has a very hard 
covering, and the usable portion is inside. Recently, some mach ines are developed, which are 
used to remove the hard cover of coconut. But otherwise, they h ave to be cut manually, and the 
outer coverage also have to be removed manually, so that it aga in boosts the industry.  
There are also issues, in the processing of crops, which are to  be solved. For e.g., the cashew 
apple contains cashew oil, which is a very pungent oil. It is e ven very harsh in taste and it is very 
strong. This oil is removed by drying. It requires a special sk ill.  17	
	
 
Summary 
India is the second largest producer with 1.2 billion kg and th e largest consumer with 1.1 billion 
kg of the tea in the world. Coffea arabica  and Coffea robusta  are the most common varieties. 
However, due to lower elevation, Coffea robusta  is mostly grown in India and its decoction, also 
has found favor in the Indian market. Chocolate industry demand  in India is 50,000 MT. India 
also produces good and significant amount of cocoa, which is fu rther processed into beverage 
and chocolate and butter. India is one of the leading producer and exporter, consumer of coconut. 
Plantation crops are the major export revenue generator in agri cultural produce.  
 
The references used in this lecture are mentioned above.  