1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Processing of Fruits, Vegetables, Spices and Plantation Crop 
Products  
Professor H. N. Mishra  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur   
Lecture 33  
Powders and Premixes: Part II  
 
Hello, everybody , namaskar . In the second part of lecture on powders and  premixes today we will 
discuss some of the  major issues related  to food powders , the phenomena of agglomeration and 
granulation in the  powders , powder mixing , then properties of the food powder , physical , 
chemical , functional properties , handling of food powders and premixes . Finally , we will also 
discuss some important  aspects of packaging and storage of food powders . 
 
2 
 So, in the fi rst part of the lecture , I told you that depending upon the particle size the grounded 
materials are given  different terminologies . Like, the powders  have the fine particle size  in the 
range of 50 to 200 micron . Their characteristics is more cohesive . They are high in bulk density 
and the  examples of such powders may include coffee powder , spice powder , colorants and  so on . 
The granules are coarse  in the particle size  and their size may be 200 to 4000 micron . They are 
generally free  flowing and have low bul k density . The example of this may be instant coffee . Flour  
have a particle size in the range of 100 to 5000 microns . They have irregular shape , larger size and 
low fluidity . And the n ut flours  are the examples of this . 
And then the  another  category is the dust . They are v ery fine powders . Size may be up to 5 to 100 
micron . They are finer than the desired size , normally fly during processing and handling . And 
any powder , normally the by -product of the process like in the tea industry , is a f iner and dustings . 
They are tea dust,  very fine powders . 
 
So, the major issue related to the  food powders include , as you know , most of the food powders 
are not  directly consumed . They are usually mixed with water and other liquids or solids to produce  
wet or dry formulation like premixes , So, the prevention of contamination with microorganisms  
and undesirable chemical compounds is a huge issue for food powder  manufacturers . 
Other is sues while delivering the food powders include  the ability to handle and transport  
ingredient powders . If many powders are used as ingredients in  various food process operations , 
so how to handle and transport this . Dust problems . Dust fire and explosion hazards , allergy 
problems , creation of desirable powder particle properties , and more importantly , the ability to 
dissolve these powders when required . So, these are some of the issues that need proper 
consideration during  manufacturing of these food powde rs, particularly , fruits and vegetable 
powder .  
3 
  
Agglomeration . It is a very important phenomena . It is an unit operation  during which native 
particles are assembled to form  bigger agglomerates in which the original particle can  still be  
distinguished . Agglomeration is basically a physical phenomena and can be described as the  
sticking of particular solids which is caused by short range physical or  chemical forces among the 
particles themselves as a result of physical or  chemical  modification of the surface of the solid . 
The main purpose of agglomeration is to  improve certain physical properties of food powder such 
as bulk density , flowability , dispersibility and stability . Agglomerated products are easy to use by 
the consumers an d hence are preferred  over the traditional non-agglomerated  products that are 
usually non -flowable  in nature . 
 
Industrial agglomeration occurs in three  zones in fluidized bed , spray dryer , and you can see here 
in the figure , a schematic of a spray drying . So, normally for production of the agglomerates , spray 
4 
 drying , fluidized spread irons are more commonly used . So, you can see here in the Zone  1, weak 
agglomerates are formed by the droplet coalescence and contact between  the wet droplets and fine 
particles . 
Then, the particle further comes down in the  Zone 2. Here, fine dry particles recirculate before  exit 
so that sticky and dry particles can collide  and form agglomerates . Finally , in the Zone 3 , there is 
a formation and stab ilization  of final agglomerate . So, air temperature and velocity can be 
manipulated to  affect the agglomerate structure through further granulation . 
 
The particles size or the appearance of agglomerates are generally classified in  the three forms ,  
depending upon their particle size and how they are  formed , how they are assembled together . And 
they may be onion , raspberry and grapes . Grapes may be compact grape or lose grap e, as you can  
see here in the figure . 
The onions are formed when small droplets of high moisture content with fine particles is spread 
over the surface . Raspberry is formed when the large droplets of high moisture collide with  large 
amount of fines . The fines adhere to the surface but do not penetrate the  droplet , you can see here , 
the raspberry . So, they are adhering on the surface . 
The grapes are formed by the collision of similar  quantities of droplets and fine particles . So, 
normally , that if you see that onions  has maximum bulk density whereas the loose grapes  has the 
minimum bulk density . Onions has the highest mechanical  stability whereas the loose grapes has 
the lowest mechanical stability , and raspberry and compact  grapes  are in between . So, higher 
moisture content droplets result in compact  structure and high mechanical strength . The optimum 
dissolvable powder generally  obtained between compact and loose grape regions . 
5 
  
Now let us see powder mixing . This is very i mportant phenomena . It is one of the  most common 
operation in the industries which work on the powders . Mixing ensures production of dye powders 
with constant quality  as well as for the technological performance of a wide range of powders  like 
soup powders , spice mixes , juice powders  etc. These powders are commonly mixed individually 
or in combination  in powder mixers . The main objective of mixing is , in the food industry , to 
generate product homogeneity . 
 
The mixing quality is ma inly affected by mixer type , design of the mixer , that is,  size, shape,  
paddle  geometry rotational speed , mixing time , and finally , the type of powders which are being 
mixed , their particle size , their other characteristic , their properties , which we will discuss  a little 
later. So, mixing requires the  relative motion of the different particles making up the powder in 
order to reach the desired uniform and non-homogeneous  distribution . 
6 
  
The mixing mechanism may be , that is,  mixing may be  either by diffusion or by the convection . 
Mixing by convection involves  clumps of particles moving across the mixer . They are driven by a 
blade or by  centrifugal forces in a drum . Convection can quickly decrease the  scale and the 
intensity of segregation in the mixer . 
Mixing by diffusion occurs when a blade  moves a clump of particles if those situated at the frontier 
of the clumps  are rearranged under the effect of the gravity . Percolation of some fine particles may , 
between larger on es may also be occurred there , which allows some particles to leave their native  
clump to join another . And they are , in the process , mixed together . Shear mixing is induced by 
the momentum exchange of powders particles having different  velocities . And it is developed by 
the formation of slipping  planes in the bulk material . 
 
7 
 In the literature , various mixing indices are reported . Some of them , I have given  here. Like, one 
can conclude by these models  the mixing index , and then finally decide  the level of mixing of 
different powders . These are the reference , the model  and the researcher who developed these 
models . So, there are similar , many such models available in the literature , and you can use to find 
out the mixing  indices . 
 
Now let us discuss the powder properties . The properties of the powder may be  classified broadly 
into three groups , that is,  fundamental properties , functional properties and there are some  
characteristics which are considered as a defective property of the powder . So, the fundamental 
properties  include moisture , shape , surface composition , surface morphology , size and 
distribution . Even internal molecular and macro structure , bulk density , angle of repose and glass  
transition and melting . The functional properties include flowability , compressibility , 
reconstitution properties  and so on . Whereas dustiness,  stickiness , caking , specks, etc. come under 
the defective  properties category . 
8 
  
So, the moisture , obviously it plays a very  vital role in all aspects of the general handling of any 
type of powder . It is associated with increased  cohesiveness , mainly due to the inter -particle liquid 
bridges . Inter-particle films or bridges are responsible for spontaneous agglomeration of particle . 
The formation of liquid films or bridges at the surface of food powders may cause flow  difficulties 
and severe caking problems . 
 
In this  table , I have given som e common particle shapes , the name of the shape  as well as 
description . Like acicular,  there may be needle shape , or flaky , plate -like. Irregular shaped  
particles  lack any symmetry . Modular may be rounded , irregular shaped  or spherical , which is 
generally global shape.  So, there are various names of the  shape given , and their description , it is 
provided  and taken from the literature . 
9 
  
Then another important property of powder is the bulk density . Powders have lose bulk density , 
that is,  a measured density  after a powder is freely poured into a container . And compact density 
is known as the density after it is allowed to  compress by mechanical pressure , vibration and 
impacts . 
So, when a , when powders are poured into a container , the particles of a non -cohesive powder tend 
to occupy most of the available  volume,  and thus they have high density . Whereas , a cohesive 
powder  tend to produce an open structure supported by the  inter particle forces . And thus , they 
have generally low density . And you can see  here, in the non -cohesive powder , there  is a random 
void but structural  void in the cohesive  powders .  
 
True density can be measured by fluid displacement  method like pycnometry,  which are in 
common use in the industry . And in this , the displacement can be  carried out using either a liquid 
10 
 or a gas , and with the gas implied normally being  air. The two common techniques to determine 
true or apparent density when applicable are  liquid pycnometry  and air pycnometry.  The bulk 
density , compressibility and  flowability of a food powder are highly dependent on particle size , 
and its  distribution . Segregation will occur in a free-flowing  powder mixture because of the  
differences in the particle size . 
 
Hausner  ratio. This is  one of the standard method of evaluating the flowability of a particular 
system , is to calculate  the Hausner  ratio. And that is  done after tapping , so Hausner  ratio is defined 
as the ratio of a powder systems , that is,  the initial lose bulk  density to its tapped  density.  Or in 
other words , you can say ratio of loose volume  to tapped  volume .  
And Hausner  ratio HR, if it is in between 1 and 1.1, then it is a  indicated that powder is a free 
flowing powders . If the Hausner  ratio is found to be in between 1.1 and 1.25,  the powder is a 
medium flowing  powder . 1.25 to 1.4 is for the difficulty flowing powder . And Hausner ratio, it is 
more than 1.4 means the powder is a very  difficulty  flowing . 
So, the compression tests are useful in characterizing the  flowabili ty of powders because the inter -
particle forces enabling non -flowing  open structures strand is still in a powder beds , and they are 
crushed under  relatively low-pressu re. Adding a  small amount of fine powders  such as anti -caking  
agents  improve the flowability of the  powdered materials . So, the higher the compressibility , the 
poorer will be the flowability of  the powder . 
11 
  
Also, angle of repose , it is defined as the angle at which a material will  rest on a stationary heap . 
It is the angle theta formed by the heap  slope and the horizontal plane  when the powder is dropped  
on a platform . So, according to the literature reports , if angles of repose is up to 35 degree , it 
indicate s a free flowability of the powder . 
Angle of repose between 35 and 45 , there  will be some cohesiveness . Between 45 and 55 , the 
cohesiveness will be there , means there is a lo ss of free flow ability . And if  the angle of repose is 
55 degree and above , means there is a very high cohesiveness , and thus the powder is almost , it 
has very limited flowability  or non-flowable at all . So, the bulk solids when transported , treated or 
stocked, can flow like liquids , but they can also form a stable heap or pile due to  internal forces . 
 
Then, particle size . The particle size  distribution measurement is a common method in any 
physical , mechanical or chemical process because it is directly  related to material behavior and not 
12 
 the physical properties of the products . Size distribution is also one of the  factors affecting the 
flowability of food powder . 
As you can see here in this figure , there are four different particle  size distribution for  a given 
particulate materials depending upon the  quantity measured . Either it is measured by number or 
measured by length or by surface or measured by mass or volume . And the relationship between 
the k and fL (x)  
𝑓𝐿(𝑥)=𝑘1.𝑥.𝑓𝑁(𝑥)  
𝑓𝑆(𝑥)=𝑘2.𝑥2.𝑓𝑁(𝑥)  
𝑓𝑀(𝑥)=𝑘3.𝑥3.𝑓𝑁(𝑥)  
where the constant k 1, k2, k3 contain a shape factor which may often be particle size dependent , 
and x is the particle size . 
 
There are different analytical techniques for  measuring the particle size . Like, it may be sieving or 
microscopy , like optical  microscopy , transmission electron microscopy , scanning electron 
microscopy , or even flow classification , gravity  methods or centrifugal methods or even practical  
counters  or linear refracti on methods . 
So, there various methods  which are used for  measuring the particle size . The approximate size 
ranges which are  measured by these methods , and whether they are measured by mass , measured 
by number , all these details are  given here in the table . One can refer , and they indicate the particle 
size of the material . 
13 
  
Then the morphology . It is, again , when you  dry this powder , when we prepare this powder , 
depending upon the method of the preparation , the morphology of the material may get changed . 
And you can see here , there are four pictures . Number 1a is the microstructure of a raw fruit , raw  
strawberry food . And then  second one , b, is the microstructure as found from the  scanning electron 
microscope , is of freeze -dried s trawberry powder . c is the conventional dried and finally , the last 
one, d, is the spray dried strawberry powder . And you can see the difference in the structure . 
The powders obt ained from freeze dried and spray dried,  conventionally dried , their original 
porous structure of the fruit was largely destroyed . And this is  mainly as a result of grinding process 
because after the freeze drying it is found in the form of flake , or conventionally dried , it is in the 
form of flake  or seed . Then it i s, during grinding , the original structure is  destroyed . 
Freeze -dried  powders , they are , along with the destruction of the originally spongy structure , the 
valuable  properties of water absorption also , is affected . Spray -dried powder , here, the water was 
quickly , in the preparation of the powder  during spray drying , water was quickly evaporated at a 
high temperature with a high rotary atomizer speed , which resulted in the formation of round and 
oval shapes with some  concavity on the surface and multiple cre ases and other deformation . 
14 
  
Now, let us see the rehydration or reconstitution property . This is another very  important property 
for the  food powder because all the powders  or rehydrated fruits and vegetables , before 
consumption  they need to be rehydrated . And the rehydration  characteristics , this varies  according 
to the method used for the preparation  and drying methods.  
So, the reconstitutability is the rate at which  dried food pick up the moisture or absorbs water . It 
reverts to a condition which resembles the undried material  when put in contact with an excessive 
amount of this liquid . So, when water is added , then by the capillary forces , this water penetrates  
into the narrow spaces between the fine particles , and the particl e gets wet . 
And further increase in the water causes the diffusion of the particles , that is,  particles swells . It 
will, and finally , it will start dissolving and it will  form a thick gel like mass that resist further 
water penetration . And finally , a disp ersion  is formed . The dissolution  rate depends upon the 
surface area of the particle . 
Lumps containing dry particles in the middle will be formed requiring  strong mechanical stirring 
to be homogeneously dispersed or dissolve in the liquid . So, the particle  will be glassy state  or 
rubbery state . In the glassy  state, surface porosity is responsible for the powder hygroscopicity . 
So, high shearing , during  reconstitution , improves water entrance  through particle surface  porosity . 
Whereas in the case of rubbery state, various layers are resulting  from the water uptake during 
storage . In this case , in the r ubbery state , it does not improve the water  entrance at diffusion 
because the diffusion is the limiting step . So, in this case , that is,  the limiting step is  accordingly 
improved , the diffusion , by properly selecting , either the drying process parameter or  after 
dehydration , there are various treatment which can be given like some time ionizing radiations  et 
cetera , which  break the larger polymers , larger polys accharide  into a smaller one . 
15 
 And it improve s the reconstitution  behavior . So, there are certain methods . So, this should be 
followed to improve . But the important thing is that all these dehydrated materials or these 
powders , they should have a good  recon stitution property and that should be ensured by having 
proper method . 
 
Then come s, finally , handling of food powders , and many food powders contain  amorphous glassy 
component such as amorphous sugars . Particularly , this is in the case of fruits and vegetable 
powders . So, they contain monosaccharides  powders and they have low melting properties , low 
glass transition temperature , and they are very hygroscopic . 
So, above the glass transition  temperature for a given water content , as you can see here in this 
figure , this is a glass  transition line  and above  that, is the sticky zone . And then finally , comes the  
non-sticky  or lower viscosity zone . So, above the glass  transition temperature , the powder particles 
become sticky , and that  is called the sticky point  temperature . 
So, as I discussed in the earlier when we were discussing the  spray drying or  even d rum drying for 
preparation of fruit juice powder , care has to be taken  so that this material , particles temperature 
does not go abo ve its sticky point temperature or above its glass transition temperature . 
So, sticky point is typically about 10 to 20 degree Celsius above the glass transition onset 
temperature for low  molecular weight carbohydrates . Although , it depends upon the composition 
of the material . So, on moving  through the sticky zone , with increasing water content or 
temperature , the stickiness will first increase to a  maximum , after which it will then decrease due 
to the continuous  reduction in the  viscosity . 
16 
  
Then packaging and storage of food powders , very important aspect . The packaging has to be done 
and it is normally done for the  protection from moisture , light, oxygen and temperatures . And 
absorption  or desoprtion  of moisture can significantly affect the shelf life of dry powder , and also 
its usability . 
So, when they gain moisture , the powder become lumpy or converted into the form of cake  which 
may lead to the deleterious changes such as structural transformation , enzymatic reactions , 
browning reactions , oxidation depending upon the temperature as well as availability of the 
oxygen . 
So, the effectiveness of a package can be determined during shelf  life testing or  by combining 
information from break point testing , and knowledge about the characteristics  of the moisture 
permeability of the packaging material . So, generally , water activity less than  0.6 is considered 
sufficient to prevent the growth of microorganism , chemical  reactions and enzymatic changes . 
17 
  
So, the packaging material which are  normally used for powder packing are metal cans.  They have 
the excellent physical strength , durability , absolute barrier properties to moisture , oxygen , light. 
They are inert , they do not hav e any special flavor , odor,  and also , they are rigid . So, because of 
these properties , the bare steel is not  used because bare steel is susceptible to corrosion . 
So, it is commonly electrolytically coated with a very thin  layer of tin . So, tin coated metal cans 
are used . And in addition to  it, an organic  lacquer is applied to further protect the metal from the 
corrosion and avoid  metal food contact . Powders with a high fat content are more  susceptible to 
oxidation , and most powders are susc eptible to  deteriorative effects such as lumping and caking 
from the moisture ingress . 
So, it is very important that these materials , when they are packed,  they should be impermeable , 
fully impermeable to  oxygen , they should  be fully impermeable to moisture content . So, with 
adequately  constructed cans,  in the metal cans,  if it is properly made and  if it is properly packaged,  
there is inside no oxygen , it is flushed with the  liquid nitrogen or such other inert gas, then one c an 
expect the shelf life of food powders as high as 5 years . 
18 
  
Then multi layer pouches where aluminum foil , plastic film laminates  has been introduced as a 
replacement of the tin can . In the earlier  lectures when we were discussing about packaging of 
fresh produce or cut fruits  and vegetables , there we discussed these things , how these laminates 
are made . 
So, these flexible packages reduce the volume of traditional packaging . Aluminum  foil is capable 
of providing a , such a  close to absolute barrier with  built into a flexible material . And in this 
laminates , multi layer laminates , a sandwich construction with two plastic layers , one on the inside 
which may be LDPE,  so that the pouch can be sealed , and the other on the outside may be  BOPP 
or PET  to provide mechanical protection and also to carry the information and for  labeling . 
 
For pouches of shorter shelf life , the aluminum foil layer may be replaced with a high barrie r 
plastic film such as  copolymer of ethyl vinyl alcohol commonly known as EVOH  or 
19 
 polyvinyl idene  chloride , with the addition of a thin layer of  metal or silica oxide deposition to 
enhance its oxygen barrier characteristics . So, sachets  with larger capacity , that is,  in excess of 
250-gram , comprising a high  barrier plastic layer sandwiched between LDPE and BOPP or PET  
would be able to achieve a shelf  life to a similar s helf life  to an aluminum foil or sandwich portion 
pack pouch . 
 
So, finally  food powders  are very important fruits and vegetable powders . Many times,  they are 
important commodities,  they are used as ingredients or they are used in the  preparation of various 
mixes , the flours  or spices , so properly because this particle  size and other properties are very 
important . 
Almost all the properties , free flowability and other things , particle size and its moisture  
absorption , hygroscopicity so all this should be properly taken care of , and the powders or particles , 
when  they are  made , there is many time their agglomeration is done like in the case of coffee 
powder . That is to improve its  reconstitution behavior or to improve  its stability . Agglomeration 
technology is used for such  other thing s. 
But important thing is that this po wder should have a good  free flow nature , they should have a 
good reconstitution properties , they should be  properly able to be mixed into one another and 
homogeneously or uniformly . So, accordingly the proper conditions  of packaging , manufacturing 
technol ogy processes  should be used and  then its packaging also , is an important  step. 
So, proper care should be,  because most of these powders , they have that high hygroscopic nature . 
So, if they absorb moisture , they will lose  their free flow nature and their other characteristics  will 
change . Their mixing and other properties will be adversely affected . So, it is important  that they 
are properly packaged in a moisture proof material . Water vapor , air, oxygen and other gases  
should completely impermeable to  this. 
20 
  
 
So these are the references which are used in this  lecture . Thank  you very much for your patient  
hearing . Thank you . 
