Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 19
Soil Temperature
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:24)
In the last lecture, we talked about soil aeration, and we discussed about different, you
know, what is soil aeration and what are the different processes of soil aeration. We
talked about diffusion, we talked about mass flow of gases. And then, we talked about
different factors which affects soil aeration. And we started, you know, discussing about
the factors which affects soil aeration, and I will start from those factors today and I will
try to finish this by this lecture and then we will go ahead and start soil temperature
which is another important soil physical parameter.
So, we were talking about factors affecting soil aeration. So, one of the major factor
which affects the soil aeration is soil profile and you know that oxygen tends to decrease
in the soil with depth and vice versa trend can be found in case of carbon dioxide
because, carbon dioxide can be increased generally increased with the depth in the soil.And also we have found that a soil heterogeneity is also, we know, in fact, you know,
soil heterogeneity also influences soil aeration because, a long term tillage reduces the
aeration and clay soil has less aeration, and interped zones have more aeration than
within the peds. So, you can see that, we know, clearly in this graph that if you plot the
percentage of carbon dioxide in x axis and in the y axis, if we put the soil depth in a
meter you will see that the soil depth in centimeter, you will see that with the increase of
a with the increase in depth from 0 to you know; the depth is increasing from this 0 to
800 centimeter and as a result of that increase in the soil depth, percentage of carbon
dioxide in the soil air is increasing. And also, this increase in carbon dioxide in soil air is
higher in case of wet season than that of dry season.
And also, you know, as we can see from this picture that these are clays, you know, these
are soil which are showing the swelling and shrinkage properties as we have discussed in
case of vertisol. And in this inter ped zones this shows more aeration than within the
peds. So, this soil heterogeneity is also having an important function for controlling soil
erosion soil aeration.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:32)
So, let us go to the next slide and see what are the other important aspects. While
seasonal difference is one of the major factor for soil aeration. As we can see the that
obviously we will get poor aeration in wet season in this graph we will see that as in case
in case of monsoon season obviously which is denoted by this red solid line by June 20and then August 01 September 01 and November 15 obviously  the carbon dioxide
increase in the soil profile increases in the wetted season than that of a dry season.
So, poor aeration will get in the wetted season, because of all the pore spaces are filled
with water in the wet season. So, there, you know, ultimately creating very, we know,
small  chances  of  proper  aeration.  And  effects  of  vegetation  well,  vegetation  also
transpires, lowers the groundwater table and as a result of that due to the lowering of the
groundwater table, it improves the aeration status of the soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:53)
So, let us go to the next slide and see what are the other ecological effects of soil
erosion? Well, effects on organic residue degradation is one of the major ecological
effects on soil aeration. Because more oxygen, you know, helps in more decay of organic
matter however entire soil property depends on soil aeration. Now oxidation reduction of
elements is also important as you can see in this table these are different elements
starting from carbon nitrogen sulphur and then iron and manganese and you can see a in
the normal form in well oxidized soils and their reduced from found in waterlogged soils.
So obviously, in the normal forms of carbon in well oxidized soil is basically carbon
dioxides, in case of nitrogen there is nitrate, in case of the sulphur there is sulphate, in
iron it is Fe 3 plus or Ferric, in case of manganese it is Mn 4 plus or manganic. Whereas,
in the reduced conditions these forms will be changed into reduced from like methane
and ethylene in case of carbon. In case of nitrogen it will reduce to ammonium orelemental nitrogen, in case of sulphur it will reduce to either hydrogen sulphide or
elemental sulphide, and then F e 3 plus will reduce to F e 2 plus or ferrous, and in case of
Mn 4 plus it will reduce to Mn 2 plus, sometimes carbon will reduce to ethyl alcohol
also.
So, you can see these are different forms which are present as a result of aeration status
in the soil. Obviously, this oxidized form will be present when there will be more oxygen
in the soil, whereas in the reduced condition when there will be less oxygen and more
carbon dioxide specifics specifically in the water logged condition, there will be more
carbon dioxide. So, as result of that there will be reduced forms which are present in
these reduced conditions.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:52)
So, what are other important factors are, remember that oxidized zones have red color
while reduced zones have gray blue colour ; and these are characteristic features of water
saturated clay conditions. And remember that anaerobic conditions causes emission of
greenhouse gases like methane and nitrous oxides. And effects on activities of higher
plants, remember that poor aeration affects shoot growth more than the root growth, but
different plants have different degree of tolerance for the water logging.
Because, as you can see in the rice field rice can withstand a, you know, water logging
condition whereas most of the most of the field crops cannot withstand water logging
condition, and also low aeration affects the nutrient uptake by the plants. So, these areeffects of ecological effects of soil aeration which, you know, shows a clear impact on
the activities and for the growth of different higher plants.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:03)
So, let us go to the next slide and see ok. So, one of the more major important law which
governs the diffusion of gases in soil is Fick’s law. So, we have to learn the Fick’s law
and in next lecture of this week will be talking about different we know problem solving
different-different problems and we will be solving the problems using Fick’s law of
diffusion.
So, let us discuss about the Fick’s law of diffusion. Well, you know the diffusion process
in the soil can be described by Fick’s law. Generally the form of Fick’s law is qd equal to
this minus D into dc over the dx. So, where qd is basically diffusive flux which is mass
diffusing across unit area per unit time, in case of D it is a diffusion coefficient that is
area per time, C is a concentration which is mass of diffusing substance per volume, x is
the distance and dc over dx is the concentration gradient. And if partial pressure p is used
instead of concentration of the diffusing component, we get this formula that is qd equal
to minus D over beta into dp by dx. So, beta is basically the ratio of the partial pressure
to the concentration. So, we have already discussed what is partial pressure in the last
lecture? So, I will be going further I am not going to discuss it in details. So, this is the
general form of Fick’s law. And let us see; what are the further modifications of Fick’s
law?(Refer Slide Time: 09:46)
So, you know that considering first diffusive part in the air phase, I mean, if you consider
the first the diffusive path in the air phase, the diffusion coefficient which in the Fick’s
law that is Ds must be it must be smaller than that of the bulk air D 0, owing to the
limited fraction of the total volume occupied by the continuous air filled pored and also
the tortuous nature of these pores. So, what does it mean? So, basically you can see that
according to the Fick’s law that the diffusion coefficient Ds must be smaller than that of
the diffusion coefficient of D 0, that is the diffusion coefficient in the air in the bulk air.
So, why is that, because in the soil the diffusion is getting diffusion is not very simple as
that in case of a bulk air. Because, in case of soil, some pores space are filled with, we
know, some  pores  the total  volume  is  occupied  by the  continuous  air filled  pores,
because some pores will be filled by air and some pores will be filled by water. And also
there will be tortuous nature of these pores. So, as you can see here these are coarse
particles in any case of soil.
So, the path of diffusion is not very simple not very stretches just like here. So, this is
called tortuous nature of diffusion so, tortuous pathway of diffusion. So, as a result of
this, as a result of this phenomena, this Ds or diffusion coefficient in the soil has to be a
function of the air filled porosity air filled porosity. Now what is air filled porosity? You
know the total porosity. So, if you subtract the volume, we know, the volume of thepores which are occupied by the air from the total pore space, we will get the air filled
porosity which we denote by fa.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:04)
Now,  this  is  this  fa  is  very  much  important  because,  different  workers  have,  you
know ,have over the worker have over the years found different relation between these
Ds and the fa between various soils. For instance, Buckingham in 1904 reported the
following non-linear relation that is Ds over D0 equal to K fa square and this K is
basically constant. So, Penman further modified and found a linear relation that is Ds
over D0 equal  to 0.66 fa. So, that  basically  means  this  0.66 is basically  tortuosity
coefficient suggesting that apparent path is about two third length of the real average
path of the diffusion in the soil.
So, this is very important formula please remember this formula, because this will be
used for solving certain problems in the next lecture of our in the next tutorial.(Refer Slide Time: 13:06)
So, we have covered this Fick’s law of diffusion and this is the reference, the nature and
properties of soil by Nyle C Brady and Ray R Weil and so we have covered the all the
major aspects of the soils aeration. And so, we are wrapping up the soil aeration chapter.
So, let us go to another major important parameter that is soil temperature. This is the
very important soil physical parameter.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:26)
Now,  what  is  the  importance  of  soil  temperature?  Well,  because,  you  know,  soil
temperature is very important because it affects plant and microorganisms growth, it alsoaffects evaporation it affect soil aeration and many important soil phenomena, from
forest damage pipelines, and pavements to the spring awakening of biological activities
in soil is basically governed by the soil temperature. So, it is a very very important soil,
you know, physical parameter or I would say it is a very important soil physical property.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:59)
So, what are the processes that affected by soil temperature. So, the temperature of soil
greatly affects the physical, biological and chemical process occurring in that soil and in
the plants growing on it. Because, the different plant process, the plants are able to
extract the water and nutrient in a specific range of temperature we will discuss in the
next slide. And also microbial, the millions and billions of microorganisms which are
present in the soil they are active in specific range of soil temperature.
They cannot be active beyond a certain range of temperature so, that is also important.
Freezing and thawing, freezing and thawing is very important as you can see in this
picture this is called a permafrost condition, we will discuss this later. Now, in the
permafrost  condition,  considerable  portion  of  the  soil  remains  frozen.  And  this  is
basically you can see in the Tundra region of or in the hill in the mountainous region.
So, most of the part of the year you will see that these soils are, you know, are frozen
remain frozen. So, these are called the permafrost condition and, you know, soil heating
by  fire  is  also  very  important  process  which  affect  which  are  governed  by  soil
temperature. So, again these plant process different plant process that and the nutrientand water uptake by plants, and their microbial processes you will see that different types
of microorganisms are present in different conditions. You see in the compost pit, there
will be specific types of microbes, because they can they can withstand a specific range
of temperature. So, all these processes are very much important from the soil as well as
plant  growth  point  of  view.  And  these  all  are,  you  know,  governed  by  the  soil
temperature or the variation in soil temperature.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:00)
So, let us go head and see; what are the different ranges which are associated with a
variety of soil processes? So, this is a very informative slide. So, let us start from the
bottom. So, we can see that this in degree centigrade; obviously, this scale is in the
degree centigrade. So, below 10 degree centigrade, there will be almost zero biological,
we know, almost zero biological actions; so above 10 to.
So, the cryophilic microorganisms will remain in this temperature range and below and
from 10 to 20 or 20 to 30, this range I would say from 15 to 35 you will see mesophilic
microorganism will remain in the soil. And obviously, remember that this 30 to 35
degree  centigrade  range  is  optimum  for nitrification  which  is  one  of the  important
nitrogen transformation process which we will discuss later on.
And remember that below temperature at the below 0 degree centigrade temperature
there will be minimum biological activity and as a result of the minimum biological
activity there will be minimum nitrification. And nitrification is required for the growthof the plant because, plant  requires  nitrate  for their  growth and this  nitrate  can be
generated  through the  nitrification  process, and  obviously, ammonification  which is
another important process of nitrogen transformation. That occurs within the range from
35 to 40 degree centigrade.
And  also  you  see  from  45  degree  to  100  degree,  you  will  see  the  thermophilic
microorganisms are mostly prevalent because they are, they love higher temperature for
their  growth.  And  you  will  see  that,  we  know,  maximum  bare  soil  surface  in  the
maximum  bare  soil  surface,  you  will  see  the  temperature  range  around  50  degree
centigrade, and around from 55 to 65 degree centigrade in this range you see the most of
the soil microorganisms are getting killed because of high soil temperature.
Only  those  microorganisms  which  are  present  in  the  compost  pit,  compost  is  an
important soil manure we will discuss that later on. So, in the compost pit you will see
some  microorganisms  are  present  and  these  microorganisms  are  thermophilic
microorganisms they can only sustain in this higher temperature range. And above 80
degree you will see most weed seeds killed in the, you know, in minutes and obviously at
100 degree centigrade the water will boils. And also this 60 to around 60 to 100 degree
centigrade you will see the temperature at 2 centimeter during the brush or forest, you
know, brush or forest fire is in case of brush or forest fire you will see the temperature
will vary in this region obviously. And also this temperature region that is 55 to around
60 it will be maximum for soil solarization.
So, most weed seeds killed in this region around 55 to 60. And, we know, nematodes get
killed and pythium fungus get killed around 45 to 40 degree centigrade temperature. And
for germination for most of the crops optimum growth of the most of the crops, you will
see it grows in the range from 10 degree to around 30 degree centigrade. So, most of the
crops optimum growth of cotton and, you know, corn, peas, potatoes, grass, oats, rye,
rest everything can be grown most of them are grown optimally in this temperature
region. And below the 10 degree centigrade you will see flower bud vernalization. So,
what is vernalization will discuss in the next slide and also these are minimum for rye
peas and rice and peas germination.
So, you see that the temperature soil temperature is very very critical not only for the
growth of the crop, but also for the growth of the microorganisms and their and differentnutrient  transformation  process,  because  all  those  nutrient  transformation  processes
depends on microbial activity. So, if the microbial activity is low at a certain temperature
obviously, all the microbial mediated nutrient transfer process transformation processes
also get, we know, their rate also getting lower down.
 So, this is very important slide. So, please remember this temperature ranges and we
will discuss, you know, different different implication of the soil temperature ranges in in
coming lecturers. So, I hope that this slide is informative to you.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:56)
So, let us goes to let us go to the plant process. What are the important plant process? So,
most of the plants are sensitive to soil temperature and remember that soil temperature
affects the seed germination and the root growth. Seed will not germinate below a certain
temperature  or  above  a  certain  temperature.  So,  many  plants  require  a  specific
temperature to trigger the seed germination; and remember what is vernalization. We
talked about the vernalization in the last slide. So, the seeds of certain prairie grasses and
grain crops require a period of cold soil temperature which varies from 2 to 4 degree
centigrade to enable them to germinate in the following spring.
So, this process is called vernalization. And remember that root functions are sluggish in
the  winter  months  and  nutrient  movements  are  also  so  in  cool  soils  and  excess
temperature can also damage the roots. So, for most of the field crops a generally
temperature range from 15 to 35 degree centigrade is considered optimum for theirgrowth.  Some  crops  require  somewhat  higher  temperature  or  somewhat  lower
temperature.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:14)
So, so, we have discussed the plant processes. Let us go to the next slide and see; what
are the important microbial process. So, the microbial activity ceases the temperature
that freezes water we have already seen that less than 0 degree centigrade. And microbial
activities is far greater at warm temperature, and the rates of microbial processes such as
respiration  typically  more  than  double  for  every  10  degrees  centigrade  rise  in
temperature. And the optimum temperature for microbial decomposition process maybe
around 35 to 40 degree centigrade.
Remember that whatever, you know, remains dead in the soil and we are throwing any
dead bodies into the soil, that need to be decomposed. So, that, we know, the nutrients
and other organic matter can convert it to other beneficial forms.
Now, this optimum temperature for microbial decomposition process is 35 to 40 degree
centigrade. So, if it is less than a certain temperature you will see that accumulation of
more organic matter. So, that is why you will see in the cooler hilly region, you will see
there will be accumulation of more organic matter or in another words lower rate of
decomposition of organic matter.So,  in  environments  with  hot  and  sunny  summers  and  a  heating  process  called
solarization can be used to control pests and diseases in some high value crops. We have
already seen the soil solarization in the last slide.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:35)
So, you see that what is the impact of temperature in net nitrogen mineralization and soil
organic carbon losses? So, if you can see in this slide it is clear that at any given point of
time, the higher the temperature obviously the nitrogen net mineralizing rate is higher,
the similar the same thing is true also for soil organic carbon loss. So, that is how soil
temperature affects not only the nitrogen dynamics, but also the carbon dynamics in the
soil as well as their movement from soil to atmosphere.(Refer Slide Time: 24:22)
So, what are the effects on you can see also in this graph that, we are putting the soil
temperature in degree centigrade from 0 to 30 degree centigrade. And we are seeing that,
you know, different carbon, you know, different frames of carbon respired, nitrogen
mineralization  and  sulphur  mineralization.  So,  you  can  see  that  as  the  temperature
increase obviously all three processes are increasing this carbon. The amount of carbon
respired is continuously increasing from 0 degree to 30 degree centigrade,  nitrogen
mineralization is also increasing from 0 to 30 degree centigrade
So, likewise the sulphur also get increasing mineralized from 0 degree centigrade to 30
degree centigrade. So, this shows the effect of soil temperature and cumulative microbial
respiration. These are basically microbial respiration or carbon dioxide released and net
nitrogen and sulphur mineralization in surface soil. So, basically as the temperature
increases, the microbial respiration or carbon dioxide release also increases. Totally
carbon dioxide release, but also associated processes like nitrogen mineralization and
sulphur mineralization also increases.(Refer Slide Time: 25:46)
So,  what  is  freezing  and  thawing?  Now  remember  that  the  freezing  and  thawing
increases the structural stability. However, for soils with good aggregation to begin with,
freeze thaw action when the soil is very wet can lead to structural deterioration. An
alternate freezing and thawing can force objects upward into the soil a process called
frost heaving, we will see what is frost heaving in the next slide which is most severe
when the soil is silty in nature.
And freezing  also  can  have  shallow  foundation,  sorry,  freezing  also  can  heave  the
shallow foundation, roads and runaways, you know, runaways that have, you know, fine
material as a base. So, the foundation depth should be maintained that is 10 centimeter
for subtropical and 200 centimeter for very cold regions.(Refer Slide Time: 26:38)
So, let us see what is frost heaving? So, you can see is here in this slide at the beginning
there is a tap rooted legume here. So, we are also seeing a stone at a certain depth in the
soil and also there is a post set at concrete at certain depth. So, as the ice begins to
develop, there will be, you know, the ice lines is, you know, continuous to form and as a
result you will see there is slightly movement upward slightly upward movement of this
posts as well as this, we know, the stone.
And as ice lines continues to grow, the relative position of this post, ice and this, we
know, of this plant is, we know, increased. And after certain period of time, when the ice
melts, the melting starts from the top obviously, but as a result of that as a result of the
total melting after the total melting of the ice you will see there will be a relative
displacement upward displacement of all the objects starting from this post and this plant
as well as this stone.
So, this is called frost heaving and this is very very dangerous for any engineering
construction. So, that is why it has to be very very you may need to take care, you know,
you need to consider this very carefully while we are building any engineering structure.(Refer Slide Time: 28:21)
So, what is permafrost? We talk about permafrost a little bit. So, the thawing of arctic
permafrost the permafrost we discuss, permafrost is a condition where the soil remains
frozen for a considerable part of the year. And remember that the thawing of this arctic
permafrost  is  expected  to  further  accelerate  global  warming.  As  decomposition  of
organic matter, you know, organic materials long trap in the frozen layers of histels.
Histels mean histosol and gelisols. It is a combination of histosol and gelisol.
So, in this condition, obviously this, thawing of this arctic permafrost will release vast
quantities of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. So, generally this permafrost in this
permafrost condition, we know, they preserve the organic carbon into the earth. They
helps in, they help in basically carbon sequestration. However, due to the thawing of
arctic permafrost, a huge amount of this sequestered carbon in the form of organic matter
get decomposed. And as a result, it produces these different types of greenhouse gases
ultimately which leads towards the global warming.
So, in this lecture we have discussed some basic aspects of soil aeration, what are the
important factors of soil aeration. And then, we discuss about different aspects of soil
temperature. And so, let us wrap up here and we will try to finish the soil temperature in
our next lecture.
Thank you.