Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 17
Qualitative Description of Soil Wetness
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology and the topic of this
lecture is Qualitative Description of Soil Wetness. And in the previous lecture, we talked
about different types of flow, which occurs within the soil. We talked about saturated
flow, then we talked about unsaturated flow and vapor movement.
In  the  saturated  flow,  we  discuss  about  Darcy’s  law  and  how  it  affects  the  water
movement from one part of the soil to another part of the soil and what are what is
hydraulic as, you know, hydraulic conductivity and how we measure hydraulic, you
know, how hydraulic conductivity affects the movement of water and what are the
different types of factors which are responsible for changing the hydraulic conductivity
or the movement of water. Then we talked about unsaturated flow. 
Remember that, in case of unsaturated flow, it is mostly occur through micro pores,
because macro pores are drained out during this time. And then, we talked about the
water vapor movement from one part of the soil to another part of the soil due to
different  types  of gradients.  So today,  we will start  a new  topic  that  is  qualitative
description of soil wetness. (Refer Slide Time: 01:53)
So, let us start. So think of when you are having a totally, you know, saturated soil and
you want to want to dry that soil with the application of different, you know, matric
potential or suction. 
And as a result of that, it will undergo a series of gradual changes in physical behavior
and in relationship with the plan, because if you dry the initial water saturated soil ,you
will see that it will undergo a series of gradual changes. And we know these gradual
changes we will discuss and water remaining in the drying soil is found in small pores
and in thinner films or in smaller pore corners, where the water potential is lowered
principally by the action of matric forces.
So, in our previous lecture, we saw these 3 model for water movement and this is
basically water film thickness model. If you remember, there we talked about cylindrical
tube model or which basically shows different size differences of different pores. And
finally, we talked about this irregular angular pore model.
If you remember we discussed that when there is thick water film around a particular
surface and, you know, it is the water is present in saturated condition and ultimately the
potential will be high, and when we dry that particle or soil gradually, the thickness of
the water will go down and ultimately, with increasing suction or matric forces further
the thickness of the water film around the around the particle will go down and we know
one.So, thus the water will always move from a particle around which the thick water film is
present to a particle around which very thin water film is present. So, based on the matric
potential, water will move from one place to another place. Then in the cylindrical tube
model if you remember, we talked about that when we are draining the initially saturated
soil in the intermediate phase obviously, the first this macro pores will emptied out and
the micro pores will be still remaining filled with water and in the extreme dry condition,
both the pores will empty will be empty.
And the finally, you know, during the angular pore model we talked about some isolated
pockets of water when we dry the soil and water will start drying from the middle part
and there will be some amount of water at the corner of this angular pore because of
wearing about a matric section.
And ultimately some amount of water will still remain in these corners due to high
amount of matric suction. So, this happens when you dry a particular; you know, initially
wet saturated soil but matric potential therefore, accounts for an increasing proportion of
the  total  soil  water  potential,  while  the  proportion  attributable  to  the  gravitational
potential decreases. 
So, when we dry an initial initially water saturated soil with the application of matric
pressure or matric forces, the matric potential will be predominant and we know as
compared to the gravitational potential. And as a result you will see varying degrees of
soil wetness.(Refer Slide Time: 05:47)
So, let us see. These are different varying degrees of soil wetness. As you can see, in the
first condition is called saturated condition, second condition we call it field capacity,
third condition we call it wilting coefficient and finally, the hygroscopic coefficient. 
Now, in the saturated condition; obviously, you see the total water potential is 0 kilo
Pascal and obviously, all the macro pores and micro pores are filled with water. So, you
we are actually assuming that we are, we know, the weight of the soil is 100 grams and
40 ml is water is present to fill up all the micro pores and macro pores and it is a
saturated condition.
Now through the application of matric forces, if we start draining this water or when the
draining will start from this place; obviously, you will see that the water will first drained
out from this macro pores leaving only those micro pores filled with water. 
And as a result of that, we call it a field capacity. So, remember that in case of saturated
soil and in case of field capacity, the only difference is the water will move or water will
go away from this macro pores and this water is called gravitational water. So, after
removal of the gravitational water; whatever water is remaining in the micro pores and
this is called field capacity and this field capacity the potential around the field capacity
is variable, generally it is not very much we cannot definitely say, but it generally varies
from minus 10 kilo Pascal to minus 30 kilo Pascal. And further when we are dry the soil from the field capacity, we will see the water is
further going down and ultimately a very thin layer of water will remain around the soil
particles and we will call this water content as wilting coefficient or permanent wilting
coefficient. And this permanent wilting coefficient generally the potential  is around
minus 1500 kilo Pascal and we call it permanent wilting point because at this point, plant
will start, the plant wilt cannot be further recovered. 
So, this is a permanent in nature. Although, the water will still be present into the soil,
plant  cannot  extract  that  water.  So  whatever  water  is  present  in  between  the  field
capacity and permanent wilting point is called available water or available water holding
capacity of the soil. So, this is the amount of water that plant can efficiently use. And
whatever water is present below the wilting coefficient or permanent wilting coefficient
plant cannot use.
Now, if you further dry the soil below the permanent wilting coefficient, you will see
that at the extreme matric potential there will be further, we know, only extreme matric
potential, only the structural water or the water which are strongly absorbed over the clay
surface will remain. And at this condition, we will call it hygroscopic coefficient and
remember the hygroscopic coefficient occurs at a matric potential of or the soil water
potential of minus 3100 kilo Pascal.
So, again you can see we are starting from a saturated soil when all the soil pores are
filled and then we are applying the suction. And, as a result the gravitational water is
draining out and further it reaches the field capacity with a potential of minus 10 kilo
Pascal to minus 30 kilo Pascal. And then, we further dry the soil ultimately reaches to
wilting  coefficient  at  minus  1500 kilo Pascal, and the difference  between the field
capacity and field capacity and wilting coefficient is called the available water content of
the soil which is plant available water, I would say and below the wilting coefficient at
hygroscopic coefficient, only few amount of water is structurally attached to the soil, you
know, the clay particles.
So, these are different, we know, these are different stages of soil wetness. So, let us see
and discuss them individually. (Refer Slide Time: 10:19)
So, let us start with this water saturated condition. We call it maximum retentive capacity
of the soil, because all the pores spaces are filled, both macro pores and micro pores are
filled in this condition. Now, the matric potential in this case is close to 0, nearly the
same as the that of free water because here we will assume most of the time the total
water potential will be almost 0, because all the soil pores are filled with water.
Now, the volumetric water content is essentially the same as the total porosity, because
whatever water will, we know, present that will saturate all the micro pores or macro
pores and the total porosity total pore is equal to macro pore and micro pores. So, all the
macro and micro pores are, all the macro and micro pores are filled with the water. So,
the volumetric water content is essentially the same as the total porosity. The soil will
remain at maximum retentive capacity only so long as the continuous daily filtrate.
So, when the infiltration stops obviously, the gravitational water from the macro pores
will drain out due to the influence of gravitational forces. And these movement, we
know, that the gravitational water will percolate downward mainly under the influence of
gravitational forces. We have already discussed what is percolation in our last lecture. (Refer Slide Time: 11:51)
So, I am not going into details of percolation. So, let us talk about the field capacity.
Now in the field capacity, once the rain or irrigation has ceased the water in the largest
soil pores will drain downwards quite rapidly, we know we know, in response to the
hydraulic gradient and mostly by the gravity. This is what we called gravitational water
and after 1 to 3 days, this rapid downward movement will become negligible and this
matric forces play a greater role in the movement of the remaining water, with the with
the movement of the remaining water and at this condition, we will call that the soil is at
its field capacity.
Now remember that in this condition, water has move down from this macro pores and
air has move into take, air has moved in to take its place at the macro pores and the
micro pores or capillary pores are still filled with water and can supply plants with
needed water So, the matric potential in the field capacity may vary from minus ten to
minus 30 kilo Pascal. So, it is not definitive. It can vary between minus 10 to minus 30
kilo Pascal.(Refer Slide Time: 13:13)
So, if you see what I have told in the last slide, basically is depicted by, this picture is
basically depicting this. So, here is the plot showing the relationship between days after a
rainfall and water content what is basically volumetric water content.
So, if you see that when the days after the rain fall after 1 to 2 to 3 days after almost 2 to
3 days, the volumetric, the water content will, we know, will go down. So, at the 0 day
just after the rain fall obviously that will contain the highest amount of water, because all
the pores spaces will be filled and further it will go down and ultimately we will see that
after 2 to 3 days, it will reach the field capacity. 
So generally, after a flush of rainfall it takes around 2 to 3 days of draining to reach the
field capacity and attaining a, we know, moisture content which is equivalent to the field
capacity. (Refer Slide Time: 14:27)
So, again what is gravitational water? Gravitation water is the portion of soil water, that
readily drains away between the states of maximum retentive capacity and field capacity
and most soil leaching occurs as gravitational water that drains from the larger pores
before field capacity is reached. And remember gravitational water; therefore, includes
much of the water that transports chemical, such as nutrient ions, pesticides and organic
contaminants into the groundwater and ultimately into streams and rivers.
So, this gravitational water which drains readily from the macro pores after a flush of
rainfall and reaches the field capacity after 2 to 3 days, this gravitational water includes
much of the water that transport chemicals; for example, nutrient ions, pesticides and
organic contaminants in the groundwater ultimately into streams and rivers. So, this is
very  important  for  planning  the  irrigation  schedule,  we  know,  for  planning  the
application  of different  fertilizers,  how you have to manage your fertilizer  dose by
considering this gravitational water mediated movement ok.(Refer Slide Time: 15:41)
So, what is the relationship between field capacity and plant, why field capacity is
important for plant growth? 
So, remember that at field capacity, soil is soil is holding the maximum amount of water
useful to the plants. If you remember that the difference between field capacity and
permanent wilting point is called the available, soil available water and this is the amount
of water that is available to the plant for their growth. So, another important thing I
would like to mention that you remember when we discuss our soil consistency lecture,
we discuss about several atterberg limits and those several atterberg limits were we
talked about liquid limit. Then we talked about plastic limit and then we talked about
shrinkage limit and all these things.
So, we also talked about the differences between this liquid limit and plastic limit we call
it plasticity index. So, it is a range in which the soil behaves like plastic. So, it says that
in case of field capacity, it basically is equal to the lower plastic limit.
So, plastic limit is equal to field capacity and above the field capacity, above the field,
we know, field capacity the soil will behave like a plastic putty like material that easily
turns into mud at water contents above the field capacity. And below the field capacity
that is the plastic limit, the soil behave will behave like a crumbly semi solid and it will
help in tillage excavation.So, for tillage  I would say that field  capacity  approximates  the upper limit  of soil
wetness. So, we should maintain  the field capacity and we should not apply water
beyond  the  field  capacity  for  tillage,  because  it  will,  we  know,  resists  the  tillage
operation because it will produce the mud.
So, we always should tillage do the all the tillage operation below the field capacity, and
at field capacity sufficient pore space is filled with air to allow optimum aeration for
most aerobic microbial activity and for the growth of the most plants. So, field capacity
is very much important as far as the plant growth is concerned. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:07)
So, let us see what is permanent wilting point. Now, permanent wilting point or PWP,
that as the soil dries, the rate of plant water removal may fail to keep up with the water
losses. So, then what is the way through which plant remove the water? We know, the
ways transpiration through stomata. So, at this time, where the soil further grows, we
know, dry, the plants will close the stomatal opening because the soil water is not further
available. So, when they will close the stomata, their growth will stop and as the grow
stops, it will start wilting. 
However, at minus 1500 kilo Pascal soil water potential or minus 15 bar soil water
potential, the soil wetness will reach the permanent wilting point, because below which
the soil the plant cannot regain its original growth and it will be permanently wilting.So,  again  the  difference  between  the  field  capacity  and permanent  wilting  point  is
available water capacity. In this case, this is if you consider the field capacity, at the field
capacity there is 20 ml of water is present and at the permanent wilting point only 10 ml
of water is present, so the difference between 20 ml to 10 ml. So, in this case available
water content will be 10 ml for this particular soil.
So, now you have the basic idea about the implication of field capacity and permanent
wilting point as far as the growth of the plant is concerned.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:57)
So, let us go back and see as a summary. This slide will show difference between
saturation,  field  capacity  and  permanent  wilting  point.  As  you  can  see,  in  case  of
saturation all the pores are filled with water, there is no air and there will be rapid
drainage of water and as the soil further dries, there will be no rapid drainage of free
water, because free water is already been drained out and leaving only the micro pores
which  are  filled  with water and macro  pores  will  be  emptied  and occupied  by air
sometime.
So, permanent wilting point is the point where all the water, most of the water is being
removed and ultimately the plant is permanently wilted. So, this slide shows a very good
summary of whatever we have discussed so far.(Refer Slide Time: 20:53)
So, let us move forward and see the formula of available water holding capacity.
So, the difference between the field capacity and the permanent wilting point is the
available water content. And if we volumetrically express it, it is theta a equal to theta fc
minus theta pwp, and theta pwp. So, this is called the available water content and. So,
this picture will also give you a good idea about this differences.
So, if you see at the time of saturation, there is a so the below beyond the saturation,
there will be flooded condition and at saturation the potential is 0 and below at from the
saturation to field capacity obviously, we are getting the gravitational water which is
drainable  and  below  the  field  capacity  to  permanent  wilting  point  there  is  a  plant
available water and this permanent wilting point to hygroscopic coefficient.
Remember that, hygroscopic coefficient occurs at around minus 31000 kilo Pascal, I am
sorry, it occurs at around 3100 kilo Pascal and so. And basically it will be further, the
water which is present below hygroscopic coefficient is unavailable water and at the time
of air drying and at the time of oven drying, there will be practically no volumetric water
content. 
So, I hope that now it is, all the terms are clear to you. And these are the volumetric
moisture content at saturation, field capacity and oven dry condition and as well as
permanent wilting point. (Refer Slide Time: 22:57)
Now, hydroscopic coefficient, hydroscopic coefficient is remember that although plant
roots do not generally dry the soil beyond the permanent wilting percentage, if the soil is
exposed to the air, water will continue to be lose by evaporation and water molecules in
this  case remain, are very tightly held, mostly being adsorbed by the colloidal  soil
surface and as I have told you, the water potential will be minus 3100 kilo Pascal at this
hydroscopic coefficient. 
And the water is thought to be in films, thought to be in the films only 4 to 5 molecules
thick and it is held so tightly that much of it is considered nonliquid and can move only
in the vapor phase. And this is basically unavailable to the plant. So, this hygroscopic
water which is presented at the hygroscopic coefficient is unavailable to the plant. (Refer Slide Time: 24:01)
So, this slide basically shows the relationship between the soil moisture potential in kilo
Pascal, which is presented in the log scale and in the x axis and soil water content;
obviously, it is a volumetric soil water content, so, of a particular type of soils, as we can
see as we are increasing the, as we are decreasing the soil water potential from high to
low; obviously, the soil will dries down and this is the water the soil water curve. And
you can see at this point there will be maximum water retentive capacity. And since it
after removing the gravitational water, it will reach its field capacity, and the field
capacity is expressed in terms of the shaded area to indicate that there is no clear cut
definition or clear cut demarcation of the field capacity. It varies from soil to soil, it
varies from minus 10 to minus 30 kilo Pascal and after we remove further water from
field capacity, it will reach the wilting coefficient and further to hydroscopic coefficient. 
So, the difference  between  the again  the  difference  between  the  field  capacity  and
wilting point is the available water and this is the optimum water zone. And remember
that whatever water is present inside the, we know, for the for the for the availability to
the plant is basically most in the most of it is capillary water and hygroscopic water
below  hygroscopic  water  occurs  at  around  minus  3100  kilo  Pascal  and  below  the
permanent wilting point the water is called unavailable water.
So, again available water is field capacity to permanent wilting point, unavailable water
is below permanent wilting point, hygroscopic coefficient occurs minus 3100 kilo Pascal,capillary water is mostly present between the hygroscopic coefficient to field capacity.
And the most optimum water efficiency can be found within the field capacity and
permanent wilting point. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:13)
So, what are the factors which affects the available water content? Well this slide shows
the  relationship  between  the  fineness  of  textural  affect  for  the  soil  water  content;
obviously, you can see that as we are going from sandy soil to sandy loam to loam and
clay loam soil; obviously, their field capacity increases. The field capacity increases up
to silt loam and then levels out, but in case of clay; obviously, their wilting point is quite
high, the wilting point is quite high. So, the plant available water is low in case of clay as
compared to the silt loam soil.
So, increase in available moisture storage from sands to loams and silt loam can show
you this increase in field capacity. However, in case of very fine textured soil like a
clayey soil due to their increase wilting coefficient, the plant available water is also low
as compared to silty loam soil. (Refer Slide Time: 27:13)
And obviously, there are some, water content is very much important and, we know,
plants growing on sandy soils are more apt to suffer draught than that of those growing
in a silt loam at the same area. The influences of soil texture at depth of plant available
water holding capacity can be seen in this picture. As you can see, the spatial distribution
between this dry zone and the greenish zone and when we excavated the when the site is
excavated, the soil below it you can see the uneven thickness of silt and sand.
So, this is at the boundary between this silt and sand; obviously, silt will have higher
water holding capacity than the below sand. And as a result of this uneven thickness of
silt content or silt mantle, there will be uneven distribution of water holding capacity or
available water content because silt can hold more water then sand. And as a result of
that, you will see some spatial variation in distribution of this dry zone and green zones. 
So friends, we have covered a considerable portion of this different soil water content
and then we discussed about their different terms and what are their implication for plant
growth, what are the field capacity and permanent wilting point, all these things. So, let
us wrap up here. In the next lecture we will start from here and we will try to finish this
topic in the next lecture and then we will start a new topic that is soil aeration in the next
lecture.
So till then thank you and goodbye, and we will again meet in the next lecture of science
and technology.Thank you.