Soil Science and Technology
 Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 18
Soil Air
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:14)
Welcome friends, to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology. And we will start
from the slides where we left in the last lecture. And we were discussing about different
volume, we know, different qualitative or different, we know, moisture content of the
soil  and  how  it  can  term  them.  We  talked  about  field  capacity,  we  talked  about
permanent  wilting  point, we talked  about hygroscopic coefficient;  what is available
water  content,  plant  available  water  content.  What  is  unavailable  water,  what  is
gravitational water and then we discussed, you know, what are the factors which affects
this available water content in the soil. 
So, we talked about soil texture. So, now we shall start about; we shall also talk about
some other factors and then we will move to our next topic. So, you can see that also in
this  picture  we  can  see  the  different,  you  know,  the  effect  of  soil  texture  in  the
volumetric soil water content. And obviously, in case of clay soils where, we know, if
they are frequently provide less available water, then do well granulated silt loams since
the clay tends to have a higher wilting coefficient, we have already talked about in thelast lecture. So, as you can see; obviously, as you are going from sand to sandy loam to
loamy soil to silkt loam, there is a continuous increase in soil water volumetric soil water
content ultimately levels off.
And obviously, the wilting coefficient also increases and it reaches maximum incase of
clay soil, because of high moisture retentive capacity of the clay soil in their macro
pores. So, obviously, the difference between this field capacity and wilting point here at
clay soil is smaller than this silty loam soil. So obviously, the silty loam soil will have
more available water content than that of the clay soil. However, also well granulated
soil will have higher, we know, well granulated silty loam will have higher moisture
content, available water content than that of clay soils. So, soil organic matter it is also
very  important.  Soil  organic  matter  exerts  both  direct  and  indirect  influences  that
contributes increased soil water availability. 
Because incase of direct effect, it, we know, high water holing capacity, volumetric
water holding capacity of organic matter also adds to the water content of the soil. So,
when we add organic matter from outside to the soil; obviously, is total water holding
capacity increases. And also indirectly when we apply soil water holding capacity soil
organic matter into to the soil, it helps in binding the soil particles, improving the soil
structure. When it improving the soil structure a well aggregated soil; obviously, it will
increase  the  water  holding  capacity.  So, as  a  whole  the  water  holding,  you know,
application  of  organic  matter  seems  to  increase  the  water  holding  capacity  or  the
available water content of the soil.(Refer Slide Time: 03:48)
So obviously, in this slide it is also clear that as we increase the percent of soil organic
matter by weight, and soil water content and what is the relationship with the soil water
content.  So, you will see that as the percentage  of organic matter  is  increases,  the
differences between field capacity and permanent wilting point continuously increasing.
And as a result of that, the plant available water or the available water content increases
by addition of organic matter.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:24)
Then finally we shall talk, we should talk about the compaction effect which is very
important. Remember that when we compact the soil; obviously, it reduces the amount of
water that plants can take off by crushing the macropores into micropores, and also when
we do the compaction ultimately it increases the bulk density. So, when there is a high
bulk density, it always limits the root penetration and finally, when we increase the bulk
density, it decreases the total pore space.
So, by these three different ways, you know, compaction can harm the, we know, the
water holding capacity of the soil and obviously, it limits. Higher compaction always
limits the water filtration into the soil and the water movement into the soil. So friends,
you know, we have finally, finished this topic of, you know, qualitative moisture and
then, we know, qualitative moisture, we know, different, different, different, different,
different moisture content of the soils and their qualitative types. And so, I hope that you
have learned something new, and let us move to our next topic that is the Soil Air.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:51)
The soil air is very much important. Soil air or the process is called the soil aeration. Soil
aeration is very much important and it is basically the exchange of water, and exchange
of water and carbon dioxide between  the atmospheric  air and the soil air. So, soil
aeration facilitates the exchange of gases between the soil and atmosphere; as we can
see, the oxygen is getting entered into the soil and carbon dioxide is getting, we know; itis released from the soil to the atmospheric air. So, these interchange or these exchange
of air between the soil and atmosphere is called the soil aeration.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:38)
So, we know, soil aeration, we know, in case of soil aeration, the oxygen availability in
soil is basically determined by three factors. One is macro porosity, second is the oxygen
consumption  by organisms, and thirdly  and the  most importantly  that  is  soil  water
content. Now, you can see that in case of porous and there are three different condition,
one is porous and permeable condition and is porous and non permeable condition and
non porous and non-permeable condition.
So  obviously,  in  this  case,  in  the  porous  and  permeable  condition,  there  are
interconnected pore space. However, in case of porous, non-permeable there are non
inter  connected  pore space  and  in  the  third  condition  that  is  non  porous  and  non-
permeable, there is no pore space. So, obviously, the first condition here there will be
more oxygen availability and there will be more gaseous exchange. Second is important
is  oxygen  consumption  by  organisms.  Now,  you  know  that  plant  roots  also  does
respiration and as a result of respiration, it consumes the oxygen and releases carbon
dioxide and this carbon dioxide increases its partial pressure into the soil air and we will
discuss that later on.
So, oxygen consumption by organism is very much important for oxygen availability in
the soil layer and finally, soil water content; obviously, the soil water content you willsee in this in this in this graph; obviously, we can see the relationship between oxygen in
soil air and soil depth. And obviously, you can see the differences between the oxygen in
soil air before heavy rains and after heavy rains. Obviously, before heavy rains there will
be higher amount of oxygen whereas, after heavy rain there will be lower amount of
oxygen because filling of the pore spaces by water removing the air.
So, this is the difference between before and after heavy rains. And these differences is
maximum at, we know, at the upper layer of the surfaces you can see. There is a, we
know, the change in oxygen in the soil air is drastic in the upper layer of the soil, just
after a heavy rain fall.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:08)
So, another important term another important is, we know we know, function is soil
water content for oxygen availability  as you can see here, these are individual  soil
aggregates which are covered by the, we know, thick films of water. And these thick
films of water, creates some anaerobic zone and as a result of this anaerobic zone and
thick water film, the air cannot diffuse from the atmospheric air to the soil air because
diffusion of air through the water is 10,000 times slower than that of diffusion through
air.
So, as a result of; if the soil has got more interconnected macro pores the air will or
oxygen will diffuse into the soil atmosphere, more readily than that of when water whenwater is present. Because what you do through the water medium, oxygen diffuses very
very slowly.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:26)
So, we know: what is the implication of water content for soil aeration or the water or the
oxygen condition oxygen content of the soil. Now, let us see what is the effect of the, if
there is an excess moisture. Obviously, when there is an excess moisture, the all the pore
space will be filled by the water and leaving no air filled, you know, air filled pores and
as a result of that, some plants are very much sensitive to this condition.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:29)
So, as you can see some place dry out permanently, some plants damages permanently
however,  having  said  this  there  are  some  plants  which  have  made  their  own
physiological adaptation for this water logging condition.
So,  when  there  is  a  flooded  water  over  the  soil  surface,  we  call  it  water  logging
condition.  And  in  water  logging  condition,  some  plants  specially  you  will  see  the
mangrove will grow, because they have made some own physiological modification.
First  of  all,  the  one  of  the  physiological  modification  they  have  made  is  called
aerenchyma,  which  are  basically  cells  which  supply  the  oxygen  to  roots  from  the
atmosphere, some hollow aerenchyma structure and then hydrophytes.
Hydrophytes are the plants which are adapted to grow in water logged condition and they
have above water roots to supply their oxygen. So, as a result they can survive in this
water logging condition. Especially you will see this type of plant or hydrophytes present
in mangrove forest. So, this type of adaptation plant has made for dealing with the
dealing for poor aeration condition into the soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:07)
So, what are the different processes of gaseous exchange? Well there are two major
processes of gaseous exchange, one is called mass flow and another is called diffusion.
Now mass flow is always caused by fluctuation of soil moisture content, that force air in
or air out.So,  I  mean  when  there  will,  you  know,  mass  flow  basically  occurs  through  the
fluctuation of soil moisture. For example, before rain fall, after rain fall, after a heavy
rain fall water enters into the soil and removes the air. So, this is a called mass flow of
water from as a result of rain fall. However, in diffusion movement of gas and its
direction  is governed by partial  pressure of the gas. This  is  very important,  partial
pressure.
Now, partial pressure what is partial pressure? Partial pressure is the pressure exerted by
an individual gas in a mixture of gases. So, if you can see this picture. This picture shows
how diffusion takes place within the soil and atmosphere. So, if this is a soil surface and,
we know, soil pores, if this is atmosphere these are the soil pores; obviously, these
hollow, you know, these are called these are the oxygen molecules and these solid
spheres are the carbon dioxide molecules. As you can see, the proportion of carbon
dioxide is quiet high in the soil air as compared to atmosphere, and it is the opposite
trend can be found for oxygen. 
And it is very expected why? Because in soil air, millions of microorganisms are present,
in the, we know, millions of microorganism, we know, undergoes respiration and as
result of respiration,  they consume these oxygen molecules  and they produce these
carbon dioxide molecules. And as a result of that, the partial pressure and I would say,
the  proportion  of  carbon  dioxide  is  quiet  higher  in  the  soil  air  as  compared  to
atmospheric air. And as oxygen is being consumed by the, you know, macro organisms
like or aerobic organism like, you know, the plant roots and other aerobic organism;
obviously, the proportion of oxygen is lower in soil air as compared to atmospheric air.
So; obviously, you can see the proportion of these two gaseous are different in different
condition and as a result, their partial pressure will also vary. And as a result of changes
in partial pressure; obviously, you will see the partial pressure of carbon dioxide will be
quiet high in case of soil air, than that of atmospheric air and as a result of this partial
pressure gradient, the carbon dioxide will diffuse away into atmospheric air and in case
of oxygen, this trend is opposite. Because, the partial pressure of oxygen in atmospheric
air is higher than that of partial pressure of oxygen in soil air. And as a result, oxygen
will diffuse inside the soil.So, partial this is called partial pressure gradient and this partial pressure gradient is the
force that drives the gases to be diffused away from atmospheric air to soil air and soil
air to atmospheric air.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:51)
So, how we express partial pressure? Well let us see an example of partial pressure of
oxygen. So, if we consider let us assume that air pressure is basically 100 kilo Pascal or 1
atmosphere, and the concentration of oxygen in air we will talk about the atmospheric air
is around 21 percent or volumetrically we can say 0.21 liter per liter by volume. So, the
partial pressure of oxygen will be 21 kilo Pascal. So, you can see that, this is how we
calculate the partial pressure of a particular gas in a gaseous mixture.(Refer Slide Time: 16:35)
So, how we can characterize soil aeration? The characterization of the soil aeration we
can first let us see what is the gaseous composition of soil air. Well the soil air is
composed on various gases and soil air has the same amount of nitrogen which is around
78 percent in the atmosphere. So, both soil air and atmospheric air has similar amount of
oxygen, that is 78 percent and oxygen is somewhat less, it is generally less than 20
percent or almost 20 percent in soil than atmosphere.
In case of atmosphere, it is around 21 percent. So, as a result the partial pressure of
oxygen in atmospheric air is higher than that of partial pressure of oxygen in soil air.
And carbon dioxide is more in soil remember that, this is very this is the major difference
between soil air and atmospheric air. In case of soil air, the carbon dioxide is more that is
0.35  percent  which  is  10  times  more  concentrated  then  atmosphere.  In  case  of
atmosphere you will see, the concentration of carbon dioxide is around 0.03 percent. 
So, we are getting 10 times and though the absolute quantity is not so high, but if we
consider the relative change between the soil air and atmospheric air, the concentration
of carbon dioxide changes 10 folds. And this concentration change is mainly responsible,
I mean this concentration change of carbon dioxide incase in the soil air basically results
from high amount of respiration activities by different macro fauna, macro flora and
micro fauna and micro flora which are aerobic in nature.And lack of oxygen; obviously, causes anaerobic conditions and under such condition,
concentration of, we know, methane, we know, hydrogen sulphide and ethylene all these
gases increases. So, the gaseous composition  now you have a basic idea about the
gaseous composition of soil air, and how it differs from atmospheric air.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:53)
So, gaseous composition of soil air and secondly, the air filled porosity is also important.
As I have told you that just after the heavy rain fall, we know, the water enters into the
soil, and dries back all the air from the pore spaces and as a result, the water, we know,
the water filled pore spaces increases and air filled pores pore spaces decreases. And air
filled pore spaces are better for aeration because it helps in oxygen diffusion. In case of
water filled water filled pore spaces, there is no good aeration and obviously, oxygen
diffuses because, oxygen diffuses 10000 times lower through water filled pores than in
the air filled pores.(Refer Slide Time: 19:46)
And let us see another very important term that is oxidation reduction potential or redox
redox potential.  Now, redox potential  basically  shows  the tendency or potential  for
electrons  to  be transferred  from one substance  to another  substance  and  this  redox
potential we generally term in terms of E h. So, this redox potential generally it is in case
of there should be a reference. So, in case of higher redox potential; obviously, there is a
oxidized condition, lower redox potential generally, you know, indicates the reduced
condition.
So, there should be some reference. So, in this case hydrogen; obviously, the redox
potential is 1 and redox potential basically determines which compound, you know, is
present in the soil at a particular time and its concentration and oxidation state. So, we
will see that later on in the next slide probably.(Refer Slide Time: 20:47)
Yes so, redox potential; so, living organisms basically releases, we know, the basically
electrons while oxidizing carbon for energy. So, in the soil; obviously, there are some
organic carbons organic matter and organic matter contains huge amount of organic
carbon. So, this living organism releases electrons while oxidizing carbon energy and
these electron is accepted by oxygen. So, oxygen acts as an acceptor of electrons. So, it
is or in other words it is an oxidizing agent.
So, once all oxygen is depleted by this process, anaerobic zones is created. So, let us see
an example. So, if you go back and see an example; obviously, if you see this iron oxide,
where the oxidation number of iron is plus 2, when it reacts with water it oxidizes to
form this FeOOH and this electrons. And this electrons is basically being absorbed or
being accepted by this oxygen which is further reduced into water will see that later on.
So, as the reaction process to the proceeds to the proceed to the right each Fe(II) losses
an electron as you can see here and becomes an Fe(III) and forms H plus ions by
hydrolyzing the H 2O. And these H plus ions lowers the pH of the soil. And when the
reaction proceed to the left this FeOOH acts as an electron acceptor and the pH rises, as
H plus ions are consumed. Because it is a you can see the reaction can go in both
direction. And the tendency or potential of electrons to be transferred from one substance
to another in such reactions, is termed as redox potential or E h. And basically we measureEh by platinum electron which is attached to a millivolt meter and generally redox is
calculated in terms of millivolt or volt.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:55)
So,  living  organisms  as  a,  you  know  let  you  know,  that  living  organisms  releases
electrons while oxidizing carbon for energy and this oxygen, acts as an acceptor of these
electron or in other words oxidizing agent. And in terms this oxygen get reduced that that
all the oxygen reduced by this process anaerobic zone created. So, this oxygen acts as a
oxidizing agent accepting electrons, which is related which is released by this living
organisms by oxidizing carbon for energy ultimately produces the water. 
So, oxygen basically is reduced to water while FeO you know oxidized to FeOOH. So, if
we combine both two reaction will get overall effect of oxidation reduction, ultimately
we will get the FeO will produce FeOOH. So, this is an example where oxidation
reduction potential plays a significant role and it basically, we know, basically indicates
the oxidation reduction of, we know, of some different substances.(Refer Slide Time: 24:10)
So, what are the different values of oxidation reduction potential? So, in a well aerated
soil with plenty of gaseous of gaseous of oxygen in present, the Eh is in the range of 0.4
to 0.7 volt, and as aeration is reduced and gaseous oxygen is depleted, the Eh declines to
about 0.3 to 0.35 volt, and if organic matter rich soils are flooded under warm condition
Eh values as low as minus 0.3 volt can be reduced. And remember that when there is a
high  amount  of  organic  matter  present  in  a  flooded  condition,  all  the,  you  know,
remember  in  the  flooded.  So,  in  flooded  condition,  all  the  air  filled  pores  will  be
occupied by water. So, there will be no oxygen available for aerobic organisms to further
oxidize this carbon.
So, these anaerobic or facultative anaerobic organisms will further act in this condition
and these organisms will use some other compound like nitrate, sulphate as in at the
electron acceptor instead of oxygen. And as a result of using those nitrate, sulphates and
all this different molecules as electron acceptor, they will create a reduced condition or
anaerobic condition. And in the anaerobic condition you will see that the Eh will reduced
to negative that is minus 0.3 volt. So, different types of anaerobic reaction occurs and as
a result of anaerobic reaction in the in the water logged soil, methane and other gases are
formed.(Refer Slide Time: 26:09)
So, this slide basically shows that the relationship between the days a wet soil permitted
to dry, days a wet soil permitted to dry in oxygen soil air. So, as you can see after a wet
soil that is the saturated soil we allow it to dry, after passing of couple of days the redox
potential increases because oxygen will enter into the pore spaces from which the water
get evaporated and obviously, you know, as you can see from this curve and as a result
of  that,  redox  potential  increases  simultaneously.  So,  increase  of  redox  potential
indicates oxidation, decrease of redox potential indicates reduction condition.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:59)
Now, this graph basically shows the relative order of reduction in redox condition, you
can see we have presented here the relationship between pH and redox potential and
obviously, when the reduction will start. Obviously, it will sends it will tell us in which
order the different components which are present in to the soil, will undergo reduction.
Now you can see in all this reaction, they are the reaction can go in both direction.
So, in the right side; obviously, the reduced step and the left side that is the oxidized
step. So, oxidized stage; so, as the redox potential goes down obviously, the oxygen will
be reduced to water followed by nitrate to nitrate will be reduced to nitrogen, gaseous
nitrogen.  Manganese  dioxide  will  reduced  to  Mn  2  plus  and  ferric  hydroxide  will
reduced to Fe 2 plus and so on so forth and ultimately you will see that formation of
methane is there.
So, that is why the water logged condition as reduction is going on ultimately there will
be release of methane. So, this chart this graph basically shows us the order through
which the different, you know, different, you know, component of a soil will undergo
reduction  and obviously, remember  that  that  the reaction  always  occur from top to
bottom. So, if we conceder what pH 7 if we if we conceder while in pH 6.5; obviously,
the nitrate will undergo reduction to nitrogen first and followed by MnO 2 to Mn 2 plus. 
And this as basically shows the same thing and this also shows the changes in Eh, when
one, we know, oxygen is converted to its reduced form, nitrogen is converted to its
reduced form that is nitrate to elemental nitrogen then Mn 4 plus to Mn 2 plus, Fe 3 plus
to Fe 2 plus, sulphate to H 2S and carbon dioxide to methane. So, all this reduction
processes and you can see the Eh is continuously growing down and ultimately reaches
negative when there is a high anaerobic condition.
So, this is also a called Winogradsky column and this Winogradsky column is basically
shows a clear division between oxidized zone which you can see here and the bottom at
the top, and at the bottom there will be reduced zone. So, basically this, you know,
Winogradsky column, we generally insert mud and, we know, mixed with different
organic matter and then put some water. And, as a result a iron wire we iron wire can be
inserted  here  to  show,  you  know,  to  show  different  changes  due  to  the  oxidation
reduction.As you can see as at the top, we know, oxidized zone can be formed; however, at the
bottom there will be reduced zone. So, here iron is, you know, we are iron wire. So, at
the bottom  you can see it is  producing the iron sulfide  due to reduction  condition
ultimately producing the black color. However, at the top it is oxidized and producing
this red color or orange color zone. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:58)
So, what are the factors, which affects soil aeration? There are several factors which
affect soil aeration first of all drainage of excess water. So, drainage of gravitational
water out of the profile and concomitant diffusion of the air into the soil takes place most
readily in macropores you know that and it is basically depended on soil texture, bulk
density, organic matter content. 
Rates of respiration into the soil because it depends on organic matter content and more
organic matter will be there and more microbes will use them and releases gases into the
soil. So, more organic matter, more microbes will use and releases more gases. So, rate
of respiration will also affects the soil aeration.(Refer Slide Time: 31:41)
Soil profile as you can see oxygen tends to decrease with depth and carbon dioxide tends
to increase with the depth and also soil heterogeneity takes part in, we know, in soil
aeration. Obviously, in case of long term tillage reduces the aeration and clay soil has
less aeration and obviously, remember that the interped zones have most aeration that
within the peds.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:09)
And seasonal differences also influences the aeration status; obviously, poor aeration you
can see in the in the wet season, because all the pore spaces will be filled by water. So,aeration or water air movement will be slowed down. Effects of vegetation; obviously,
vegetation, we know, transpires through their stomata and lowers the ground water table.
And further as a result of this transpiration, it improves the aeration because they are
removing the water from the soil creating more pore spaces, which can be occupied by
air. And also there is some ecological effects of soil aeration.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:44)
Now, let us wrap up here will start from here from the next lecture and will try to finish
this topic and then will move to a new topic. But I hope that you have learned something
new in this lecture and if you have any question feel free to email and feel free to ask me
any question. So, let us meet in the next lecture with more discussion in soil aeration as
well as we will start a new topic that is soil temperature. 
Till then thank you and good bye.