Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 13
Soil Consistency and Soil Water
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:17)
 Welcome friends to this new lecture of a Soil Science and Technology and today we
will be discussing from the slide where you left in the last lecture. So, in the last lecture
we started discussing about soil consistency and I told you that soil consistency is the
ease with which we can mould soil to any shape. 
And soil consistency is basically the manifestation of soil cohesive and adhesive forces
and  you  know  this  wet  soil  consistency  is  basically  expressed  in  terms  of  by  the
stickiness or plasticity. And in the lecture I have discuss about different stickiness classes
starting from you know very sticky to moderately sticky and highly sticky in low and
less sticky and all these things.
So, today we will discuss about the plasticity; now plasticity the definition of plasticity is
the degree to which the puddled or reworked soil can be permanently deform without
rupturing. So, it is an important that is the soil cannot be ruptured and basically we
evaluate these thing by forming a 4 centimeter  long wire of soil at a water content where
maximum plasticity is expressed. So, let us see what are the different plasticity indices. (Refer Slide Time: 01:43)
So, this is called Atterberg limits and in this Atterberg limits we can see we are seeing
the plasticity be changing in the plasticity behavior of soil with increasing moisture
content. So, you see that here you can you can see there are five different steps; five
different stages or states I would say.
First of all this is the solid state, then semi solid state there are plastic state and viscous
liquid state. So, as you are moving from dry soil to very wet soil the state of the soil is
continuously  changing.  And  accordingly  there  are  different  limits.  So,  there  are  4
different limits you can see starting from dry limit and then shrinkage limit and then
plastic limit and finally, liquid limit.
So, let us discuss them one by one. So, in the liquid limit is basically the lowest water
content above which the soil behaves like liquid and it behaves like a viscous liquid you
know viscous liquid state. And generally it is less than 100 percent moisture content.
And another important limit is plastic limit or PL and it is basically the lowest water
content at which the soil behaves like a plastic material. And it is basically you know
occurs at around in the 40 percent of moisture or lower than 40 percent of moisture. 
And there  is  a  another  term  called  plastic  index  and  plastic  index  is  basically  the
difference between liquid limit and this plastic limit. Another limit is there that is called
shrinkage limit and shrinkage limit is basically defined as the water content below which
the soils do not decrease their volume any more as they continue to dry out. And sobelow the shrinkage limit you will not see any further you know decrease in the soil
volume as you are going continuously removing the water.
So, this is called shrinkage limit and this is very much important from the point of view
of bricks and ceramics industries. So, these are 4 different limits which are important for
which are called Atterberg limits and which are basically showing the different states of
soil with increasing moisture content or in other words it is basically shows different
plasticity conditions. So, let us see what are the different plasticity; what are the different
types of plasticity classes?
(Refer Slide Time: 04:40)
So, generally we see there are 4 different plasticity classes starting from non plastic then
slightly plastic then moderately plastic and very plastic. So, non plastic is when we
cannot form a 6 millimeter dia 4 centimeter long wire or if found it cannot support itself
if head on end. So, basically what happens we take a small amount of soil and then we
start to roll it to form a wirelike structure and in this case the wire diameter should be 6
millimeter. And if we can if we can you know in the non plastic case; the length of the
wire cannot be 4 centimeter.
So, it will break down before it reaches the 4 centimeter or if it is form it cannot hold it;
you know it help you know if it is a form it cannot held itself in one end. So, this is
called  non plastic condition,  another is  called  the slightly plastic  condition  and the
slightly plastic condition where 6 millimeter dia and 4 centimeter long wire supportsitself. So, we can make these 6 millimeter dia and 4 centimeter long wire by rolling the
soil with our hand.
However, if we make a 4 centimeter long wire with 4 millimeter dia; it cannot be made.
So,  in  case  of slightly  plastic  soil  we  can  create  a  4  centimeter  long wire  with  6
millimeter  of  diameter;  however,  we  cannot  make  4  centimeter  long  wire  with  4
millimeter diameter. The third one is called moderately plastic and the moderately plastic
is we can create 4 centimeter long wire with 4 millimeter diameter; however, we cannot
create 4 centimeter long wire with 2 millimeter diameter.
As you can see as we are going from non plastic to slightly plastic to moderately plastic
to very plastic; the diameter is continuously going down. And finally, in the very plastic
condition we can create 4 centimeter long wire with 2 millimeter diameter; so, these are
4 different plasticity classes. So, by rubbing and creating a wire I mean two to form a
wire with the soil we can generally we can literally define their plasticity classes. 
So, by this we have completed this soil porosity and consistency lecture and hope you
have learnt something new. And we will be dealing you know will be discussing several
numerical problems of this porosity and other soil bulk density and soil particle density
in the coming lectures. 
So, let us wrap up this porosity and soil consistency lecture here. And let us start a very
important topic today that is called soil water it is  very very important you know you
know topic as for as the soil is concerned. (Refer Slide Time: 08:08)
So, in the you know will we will first try to give you an idea about soil and it is
important properties as for as the you know soil water in and it is different interaction is
concerned. And then we will talk about the soil water energy concept and then we will
try to talk about different you know different ways to measure the soil water content. So,
let us start with the soil water why we need to know; why you need to learn about soil
water. Well soil water is extremely important for soil physical, chemical and biological
processes you know a water is a very important physical force for creating physical
weathering. 
And also it creates it is an indispensable for chemical or and biological weathering and
also for you know sustaining different microorganisms and macroorganisms into the soil.
And also water is very much important for weathering of the minerals and decomposition
of  soil  organic  matter.  So,  without  water  the  weathering  of  the  minerals  and
decomposition of organic matter cannot be achieved. So, in the soil water shows some
bizarre characteristic; for example, you can see the soil water can flow up as well as
down. And also plant may wilt and die in soil whose profile contains a million kilograms
of water in 1 hectare. 
So, this is another bizarre characteristics of soil water. And thirdly you will see a layer of
sand or gravel in a soil profile may actually inhibit drainage rather than enhance it. So,these are some so you know bizarre characteristics of soil water and we will discuss their
reasons later on. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:51)
Another importance of soil water is the soil water interaction influences you know water
loss by leaching as well as; water loss by leaching then you know leaching  is the
downward movement of salts through the soil solution through the soil solution. And
then  surface  runoff  ET  is  basically  evapotranspiration  evapo  transpiration  which  is
basically a combination of evaporation from the soil surface and transpiration from the
plant surface. 
So, evapotransportation and also air and water balance in soil pores; we will discuss that
later on and rate of change in soil temperature and the rate and kind of metabolism of soil
organisms and capacity of soil to store and provide water for plant growth. So, these are
very much the soil water interaction influences all these important processes. (Refer Slide Time: 11:05)
So, let us see the structure of water and their important properties. So, if you see there is
a two dimensional structure of soil water and it is a two dimensional representation of
soil water molecule showing a large oxygen atom and two much smaller hydrogen atom
hydrogen atoms. So, you know you can see here the H  O H angle is 105 degree. So, this
105 degree angle between these oxygen nucleus and two hydrogen nucleus creates a
asymmetrical arrangement. 
And as a result of this asymmetric arrangement one side of the water molecule that with
the two hydrogen for example this side shows positive you know electropositive nature
electropositive behavior; however, the other side showing the electro negative behavior.
So, as a result of creating this electropositive side and electronegative side soil water;
sorry water shows dipolar characteristics. So, this is the asymmetrical structure which is
responsible for polarity of water all right.(Refer Slide Time: 12:29)
So, the important properties  as we discuss the important properties of the soil; soil
polarity is very much important and also the second important is hydrogen bonding.
Now, what is hydrogen bonding? Hydrogen bonding is a bond which forms between the
hydrogen  atom  of  one  water  molecule  and  oxygen  atom  of  a  neighboring  water
molecule. 
So, you can see that the hydrogen atom of one water molecule is attracted to the oxygen
end of the neighboring water molecule. And all these occurs due to the asymmetric
arrangement of soil water molecule asymmetric arrangement of water molecule and as a
result dipole nature of the water molecule. 
So,  thereby  forming  a  low  energy  bond;  so  this  is  called  hydrogen  bonding  and
remember that this is a low energy bond and a low energy bond between two molecules
and this hydrogen bonding is responsible for polymerization of water. Because, all these
water  molecules  you  know  cluster  among  themselves  clustered  by  using  different
hydrogen bond. So, this is the responsible for polymerization of water molecules. (Refer Slide Time: 13:43)
Another important property of soil is hydration; now you know that the cations such as
you  know  H  plus  sodium,  potassium  and  calcium  becomes  hydrated  through  their
attraction to the oxygen or negative end. So, since these are positively charged; since
these are positively charged cations. 
These cations will attract to these negative side of the water molecule; they will attracted
to  the  negative  side  of  the  negative  end  of  the  water  molecular  rather.  And  then
negatively charged clay surface attract water with and this times to the hydrogen end of
the molecule. So, this hydrogen end of the molecule is positive electropositive and it is
get attracted to the negatively charge clay surfaces. 
And we will discuss how these negative charge develop in the clay surfaces later on. So,
as  a result  of this  attraction  also  these  water  molecule  get  absorbed  over  the  clay
surfaces. And so the third important aspect of hydration is due to this polarity nature of
the water molecule. 
When there is a you know when there is a salt present the salt easily dissociate or
dissolutes within the water due to polarity nature of the water. Because, you know soil
basically  contain  some  cations  and  anions  and  cations  will  be  attracted  to  the
electronegative end that is this end and the anions will be attracted to this electropositive
end there by dissoluting in the water. So, this is responsible for hydration. (Refer Slide Time: 15:27)
So, another important is cohesion and adhesion is you can see in this picture this is
showing the manifestation of cohesion and adhesion. Obviously, the cohesive forces we
can see basically developed due to the hydrogen bond between the individual water
molecules. 
And ultimately these water molecules are absorbed over the surface of the soil particles
because in the last slide I have already told you because these surface of the soil particles
develop  negative  charge.  And  as  a  result  the  positive  end  of  this  water  molecules
attracted to this negatively charge colloids or negatively charge soil particles and they
attach.
And as a result there is an adhesion. So, adhesion is basically when water molecule
attached to the soil or clay; clay particle and when water molecule they attach to another
water  molecule  that  is  cohesion.  And; obviously,  you  can  see the  manifestation  of
cohesion in this picture where you can see water in you know in between thumbs and
index finger; obviously, it is showing boat adhesive nature of the water and also cohesion
you can see which is forming the continuous water in between these two fingers.
Continuous this is basically showing the cohesive nature and as well as when the water is
you know  sticking with the skin that is  the manifestation  of adhesion. So, another
important aspect is surface tension now surface tension; obviously, occurs at the  liquid
and air interfaces. And remember that it results from the greater attraction of watermolecules for each other or in another words it is a cohesive forces than for the air
above.
As you can see this insect is moving over the water surface and it is creating some
depression. Just like there is an elastic membrane over the water surface and you know
otherwise in you know I mean instead of sinking; they are forming this depressed water
surface. And this depressed water surface is basically due to the cohesive nature of the
water molecules. And due to the cohesive nature of the water molecules there is a some
bends and this is an expression of surface tension. So, this is another important property
of water. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:05)
Let us discuss another important mechanism of water that is capillary mechanism. So, if
you have a tube with a fine tube with less than 1 millimeter in diameter; less than 1
millimeter diameter and clean glass tube.
So, if you push that that glass tube into the water just like here; you will see that the
water will rise into the tube and; obviously, the smaller the tube bore the higher the water
rises. So, in other words there is an inverse relationship between the height of the water
inside the tube and the diameter of the tube.
So, there is an inverse relationship and obviously, the water molecules are attracted to
the sides of the tube due to the adhesive nature as you can see size of the glass due to theadhesive nature and I will start to spread out along the glass in response to this attraction
and the cohesive force. 
So, two types of force are basically you know acting here; one is adhesive force between
the glass and the water and the cohesive force of water molecules. And remember that
the  cohesive  forces  hold  out  water  molecule  together  and  create  a  surface  tension.
Because and as a result of the surface tension it causes a curved surface and this is this
curved surface we call it a meniscus. 
And this is called the curved surface is called meniscus. And remember that the lower
pressure under the meniscus in the glass tube allows the higher pressure of the free water
to push the water into the tube here. And the process continues until the water in the tube
as risen high enough that it is weight just balances the pressure differences across the
meniscus. 
This is called the capillary the height of the water inside the tube is basically follows this
relationship and there is a derivation of this relationship; obviously, we are not going to
that  details  hm.  So,  generally  this  relationship  is  present  when  there  is  a  capillary
mechanism. So, capillary mechanism is very important as for as the water is water
property is concerned. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:38)
And capillary mechanism of water also shows us manifestation in the soil water. So,
remember that as I have already told you the height of the rise h; the height of the rise h
it doubles when the tube inside the radius is half. And as you can see when we are
decreasing the radius of the tube; obviously, in this way; the height of the rise is getting
almost doubled in the successive tubes. And the same relationship using glass tube
different bore size and the same principle also relates pore size in a soil and height of
capillary rise.
 But, the rise of water in a soil is rather jerky or irregular because of the tortuous shape
and variability in the size of the soil pores as well as because of the pocket of the trapped
air. So, you can see here there are two different types of soil one is coarse sand another is
file sand. So; obviously, in case of coarse sand there are only macro pores and in case of
fine sand; the pore size is quite small when as a result the capillary rise of water is quite
high in case of fine sand then that of coarse sand.
However, the rise of the water is not as regular as you can see in the left most picture and
this is a somewhat irregular because of water trapped. And you know irregular nature on
you know and tortuous shape and variability in the size of the pores. And remember that
the finer the soil texture the grater the proportion of small size pores and hence the
higher and ultimate rise of water above the free water level. 
So, as you can see in this picture; obviously, we can see as the you know that finer the
soil texture; obviously, here three different types of soil sand, loamy sand and clay loam
and clay loam is; obviously, more finer in soil texture. And they; obviously, contains
lows or small size more small size pores and the height you know higher the ultimate rise
of water above the free water level  obviously, in this  clay loam soil  there will be
capillary rise; higher capillary rise than that of other two you know coarse texture soils. 
However, because of much greater frictional forces in the smaller pores; the capillary
rise is much slower in the finer texture soil than that of the sand. As you can see the both
of this soil like you know clay loam is a fine texture soil and loamy sand is a coarse
texture soil. And the capillary rise in case of clay texture is much slower than that of fine
texture the capillary rise of water in clay loam is much slower than that of coarse texture
loamy sand. So, this slide basically shows a representation or the application of capillary mechanism
in soil. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:08)
So, capillary movement in soil water can be can be occur in both the direction. So, you
can see here there are two different pictures I have given one is surface run off collection
basin you can see here. And in this surface run off collection basin; obviously, you can
see the water is moving or capillary water is moving both in horizontal direction and in
vertical direction and in the stream bank; obviously, water is moving through capillarity
in a vertical direction. So, that is you know that implies that the capillary movement of
soil water can be in both directions. (Refer Slide Time: 24:52)
Now, let us start the soil water energy concept; the retention or movement of water is soil
and it is uptake and translocation in plants and it is loss to the atmosphere are all energy
related phenomena; obviously, just like any other processes like physical processes in the
universe the water movement is also energy related phenomena.
Now; obviously, remember that the kinetic energy is certainly an important factor in the
rapid and turbulent flow of water just like in a river. But the movement of water in soil is
so  slow  that  the  kinetic  energy  component  is  usually  very  much  negligible.  And
generally potential energy is most important in determining the status and movement of
soil water. 
So, remember one thing very important point that whenever we talk about soil you know
soil; you know energy state where generally you know we are generally denoting the
potential energy and remember that the soil water will always move from a higher
energy state to lower energy state. (Refer Slide Time: 26:02)
So, the total energy is state of soil water is defined by it is equivalent potential energy as
determined by various forces acting on the water per unit quantity. And remember that
there are forces acting there are several forces acting on soil in the vadose zone. 
So, what is vadose zone? If you see in this picture; obviously, at the bottom there will be
zone of saturation or groundwater; I just off the groundwater you will see the soil layer
and at the you know interface between or at the juncture of this ground water and this
soil there are some capillary fringe.
Capillary fringe are basically the movement of water through capillary and when it
occurs up to very certain distance. Above the capillary freeze the unsaturated zone is the
total unsaturated zone is called the vadose zone. And in the vadose zone; obviously,
vadose zone already also contains the capillary fringe. 
Now, in this vadose zone there are 4 different you know forces basically operates. One is
capillary force another is adsorptive force remember there is this adsorptive force; it is
basically adhesion of water to the soil surface as you can see these are adsorb water we
have already discussed that. So, capillary and adsorptive force together results in soil
matric potential; we will discuss the matric potential remember. 
So,  capillarity  and  this  adsorptive  force  basically  combine  to  form  the  soil  matric
potential. Another is gravitational forces due to gravitational attraction and finally, thereare some drag or shear forces at soil surface water interface this. So, these are important
forces which act on soil water and we will discuss this later on in our subsequent
lectures. So, hope you have got a basic idea about water and it is important properties.
And we just started the soil water energy concept and we will start we will try to finish
this soil water energy concept in our next lecture. So, till then.
Thank you. 