Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 15
Tutorial
Welcome friends to this lecture of Soil Science and Technology and in this lecture, we
will start from the slide where we left yes in the last lecture.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:25)
And in the last lecture we started about the methods of measuring the soil content and
today, we will try to finish that and today this is the last lecture of week 2. 
So, we will try to show you some numerical  examples  regarding the bulk density,
particle density and soil water content and porosity which already I have covered. So, let
us start with the methods of measuring soil water content. So, we have already covered
this slide in our last lecture. (Refer Slide Time: 01:07)
So, we should move from here and let me show you some measurement of water content.
Measurement of water content, as you know the direct method is called gravimetric
method. So, measuring water content can be done by this gravimetric method and water
may be evaporated from soil by heating at the 105 degree centigrade to a constant
weight. So, what happens we take some moist soil samples from the field and we dry that
moist soil and we take the moist soil weight, let us see that let us assume that it is a mass
of moist soil and then we dry the soil at 105 degree centigrade overnight and as a result
the water evaporated and then we get there mass of dry soil. 
So, gravimetric moisture content which is denoted by w can be expressed in terms of
mass of water evaporated in gram over mass of dry soil. Now we already know the mass
of dry soil that is M d and mass of water evaporated can be already can be calculated by
M m minus M d. So, if we if we subtract the weight of a dry soil from the weight of a
moist soil we will get the mass of water evaporated and this is one of the major methods
of measuring water content.
However, there is another direct method we call it volumetric moisture content and
volumetric moisture content is generally expressed in terms of theta. And volumetric
moisture content is basically volume of water evaporated over the volume of soil. And
the relationship between volumetric moisture content and gravimetric moisture content istheta equal to w which is the gravimetric moisture content multiplied by bulk density of a
soil over density of water which is generally 1. 
Now, bulk density of soil which is Db you know that mass of dry soil over volume of
soil. So, it is basically the bulk volume of the soil. So, by using this formula we can
convert from volumetric moisture content to gravimetric moisture content and vice versa.
So, these 2 methods are direct method for measurement of water content. So, let us see
one example.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:51)
So, if you see that a soil is sampled by a cylinder measuring 7.6 centimeter in diameter
and 7.6 centimeter length, so calculate gravimetric and volumetric water contents and
dry bulk density using the following data. Now you can see already it is will given that
weight of that empty cylinder which we used for collecting the soil from the field is 300
grams and weight of cylinder plus wet soil is 1000 grams and weight of cylinder plus
oven weight which is 100 after drawing 100 you know over dry weight that is after
drying at 105 degree centigrade, we get 860 grams. 
So, let us you know solve this. So, we already know that the volume of this cylinder can
be calculated by pi r square is the formula where we already know the value of r that is
7.6 and so using that we can you know we calculate these 345 cubic centimeter or cc.
Now we know that weight of the weT soil is weight of the weight soil is basically the
weight of the cylinder plus weT soil minus weight of the empty cylinder, so that will be700 grams and we know and the weight of the dry soil is 860 grams we know minus 300
grams which is the weight of the empty cylinder. 
So, we get 560 grams. So, dry bulk density is basically we are getting weight of the dry
soil over the volume of the cylinder. Now volume of the cylinder is 345 and it is you
know ultimately we are getting 1.62 gram per cc. Now gravimetric, so once we collect
the ones we calculated this dry bulk density, now we can calculate this gravimetric
moisture content. Now gravimetric moisture content you know, the weight of a moist soil
minus weight of a dry soil over the weight of a dry soil.
So, we are getting 25 percent and also volumetric moisture content for calculating the
volumetric moisture content you know we have to multiply the gravimetric moisture
content with the dry bulk density. So, we already calculated the dry bulk density as 1.62
and we are multiplying it with 0.25, but 25 percent of gravimetric moisture content we
are getting 0.41 or 41 percent.
So, this is the result. So, you know ultimately we calculated both gravimetric as well as
volumetric moisture content. So, I hope that you have understood this solution. So, let us
move ahead and see what are the other aspects of measurement of soil moisture?
(Refer Slide Time: 07:06)
Now as I have already told you that in the indirect methods this neutron moisture probe
or neutron scattering is very much important. Now there are some radiation methods ifyou if you go back to our previous slides, you can see that the radiation technique, there
are 2 types of radiation techniques we generally use 1 is neutral scattering another is
gamma ray attenuation.
So, let us talk about the neutron probe, we call it neutron moisture probe also. So, this is
the picture of neutral moisture probe and basically in the neutral moisture probe, the
probe is basically lowered. So, this is the soil surface and we generally lower the, we
generally lower the probe. Now before lowering the probe we have to install this access
pipe. Now this access tube is basically made of some metal and basically these neutron
moisture probe is lowered into a soil where previously installed access tube. 
And it contains the source of fast neutrons and a detector of slow neutrons. So, this is
the, this probe contains a source of fast neutron as well as is detector of slow neutron.
Now once we insert this probe into the soil through this access tubes and generate the
neutrons  these  neutrons  we  will  collide  with  the  hydrogen  atom.  Now  how  these
hydrogen atoms generated these hydrogen atoms are can are basically coming from the
nearby water molecules. So, once these neutrons are you know neutrons collide with
these hydrogen atoms of the water molecules the neutrons further slow down and scatter
and we call it thermalized neutrons. 
The slow neutrons are called thermalized neutrons and the number of slow neutrons or
thermalized neutrons counted by a detector which is also present in this probe and this
basically corresponds to the soil water content and by this you can calculate the soil
moisture or soil water content. So, this is the principle or this is the working principle of
this neutron moisture probe. So, let us see what are the, you know this is a very efficient
method, but it has got some drawbacks also. So, let us see what the drawbacks of neutron
moisture probe are.(Refer Slide Time: 09:27)
First of all for operating neutron moisture probe, you need a radiation permit. Secondly,
it is very much expensive instrument and thirdly it cannot be used in a high organic
matter or organic matter with soil and finally, it requires at access tube. So, obviously,
you can see there is a although the probe housing contains all the neutron generators and
detectors, however you have to pre install a access tube and these access tube will be
required for measurement of moisture content through these neutron moisture probe. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:09)
The another method is called TDR or type domain reflectometer. The time domain
reflectometer works of the principle of time domain reflectometry. Now you know that a
dielectric material is poor at conducting electrical current; however, it can support an
electrostatic field something like a magnetic field and instruments basically the time
domain reflectometer which you know which operates the principle of time domain
reflectometery. 
It can measure the dielectric properties of soil which can be used to determine the
proportion of the soil volume comprised of water because, because of the fact that
dielectric  constant  of  water  which  is  basically  18 is  far greater  than  other  mineral
particles or for a generally in case of mineral particles, the dielectric constant varies from
3 to 5 and in case of airthe dielectric constant is 1. 
So, you can see the dielectric constant in case of water is far greater and therefore, the
dielectric constant for the whole soil is nearly proportional to the volume of water in the
soil in the immediate vicinity that is 3 to 4 centimeter of the sensor. So, using this
working principle this TDR basically works and it can basically measures the, you know
moisture through it is dielectric constant. There is a stark difference of dielectric constant
between soil moisture and other particles and air.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:40)
So, you can see these are the pictures of time domain reflectometer. Remember that these
time domain reflectometer measures both soil moisture content and salinity. So, this is
very important to remember. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:56)
And another important instrument for measuring the soil water or I would say matric
potential. So, it is called tensiometer or field tensiometers.
Now, you can see this is the field tensiometer and what happens? It is basically a water
filled tube and water filled tube closed at the bottom with a porous cup, so this is a
porous cup and at the top is a tight seal. So, there is a tight seal you can see and the
tenacity with which the water is attracted to the soil particle is an expression of soil
matric potential you already know that and remember that these tensiometer measures
these attraction or tension. 
So, soil or field or field tensiometer basically measure the soil water tension. What is the
working principle of this tensiometer? Well, as you know it contains this porous cup, so
once we insert this tensiometer into the soil, so based on the matric at potential of soil
particles or based on the matric potential or attraction of water by soil matrix; obviously,
the water will go away through this water we will release through these porous cup. 
And as a result of water movement through this porous cup to the soil, the vacuum there
will be a vacuum created at the top of the tensiometer. And this vacuum or air pressureor the tension in other words will be measured by a gauge which is fitted at the top of
this tensiometer vice versa when there is a water movement, when they when we are
apply the irrigation water, the excess of water we will further move towards the porous
cup and it will it will it will it will go inside the tensiometer through this porous cup and
as a result further, the vacuum will be adjusted or the you know and the vacuum will be
further measured by this gauge. 
So, this is the working principle of this  field tensiometer. Remember  that the field
tensiometer basically works at you know potential range between 0 to minus 85 kilo
Pascal.  So,  beyond  85  kilo  Pascal  of  potential  or  tension  these  you  know  field
tensiometer does not work properly. So, we have finished the field tensiometer let us see
what else.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:59)
So, there is another important instrument we call it gypsum block. A gypsum block
basically of you know of you know operates.
We also the, we will also termed the gypsum block as electrical resistant block because it
is made up gypsum we call it gypsum block also. So, these you know these electrical
resistant blocks are made of a porous gypsum you know the formula of gypsum CaSo 4
2H2O which is embedded with electrode and where we place these gypsum block into
the moist soil the fine pores in the block absorb the water in proportion to the soil waterpotential. As the more tightly the water is absorbed by the soil matrix, the less likely that
water will be absorbed by these probes.
And as a result or another words the more tightly the water is absorbed by the soil
matrics, less likely it will be you know it will be absorbed by the block. So, as a result
the resistant or to electricity flow between the electric below between the embedded
electrodes in the block decreases because of the changes in the water absorption and
these changes in electricity flow is basically measured by this electrical resistant block
and this is how it works. So, we have covered this.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:38)
Another  important  is  thermocouple  psychrometer.  Now  thermocouple  psychrometer
remember  that  these  a  picture  of  thermocouple  psychrometer  and  thermocouple
psychrometer works you know, it basically you know measures both matric and osmotic
forces So, in a thermocouple psychrometer a voltage generated by the evaporation of a
water drop is converted into a readout of soil water potential which is basically the
combination of both matric potential and osmotic potential and it is most useful in
relatively dry soils. (Refer Slide Time: 17:14)
Another important you know apparatus is called pressure membrane apparatus. Now the
pressure membrane apparatus is basically used to measure the water content at matric
potential which is as low as minus 10000 kilo Pascal. So, up to this range you know
tensiometer cannot read tensiometer is useful only up to minus 85 kilo Pascal; however,
if you want to measure the soil water you content at minus 10000 as low as the, you
know a tension a potential as low as minus 10000 kilo Pascal, you have to use these
pressure membrane apparatus.
At this pressure membrane apparatus it basically after application of specific matric
potential to a set of soil samples their soil water content and determined gravimetrically
by this pressure membrane apparatus and this is a very important laboratory tool and it
measure it makes possible accurate measurement of water content over a wide range of
matric potential in a relatively short time. (Refer Slide Time: 18:20)
So, this is in a nutshell you can see the tensiometer, how these porous end is inserted into
the soil and the gauge basically measures the vacuum and electrical resistance block
where the meter is attached to the wires, which measures the electrical flow resistant to
electrical flow based on the about the moisture which is absorbed.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:41)
And this is neutron probe; we have already told that this is aluminium. You can see this
is  the  aluminium  access  pipe  and  the,  you  know  detector  unit  is  inserted  at  theradioactive source is there and similarly time domain reflectometer or TDR, you can see
there are water sensors and there is a PVC access tube.
So, this is a nutshell gives you know a basic idea about the different methods of soil
water content.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:06)
And this slide shows a different pros and cons of you know different methods; obviously,
these gravimetric method is a destructive method of measurement of water content and
you  know  resistant  block  or  gypsum  block  can  be  automated,  but  not  sensitive  to
optimum blend water contains. So, these are some positive or negative attributes, such as
tensiometer in case of tensiometer as you can see it is only accurate from 0.1 to 1 kilo
Pascal as it is a limited range.
However pressure membrane apparatus you know it can be used for 50 to minus 10000
kilo  Pascal  and  it  is  used  in  conjunction  with  diametric  method  to  constant  water
characteristic curve. So, these are some characteristics of these different methods of
water before a methods of measurement of water content and you can see which methods
are used in the field and which methods are used in the lab. 
So, these slide you will give you basic overview of different methods of measurement of
soil  water content.  So, we have finished  this  lecture  of measurement  of soil  water
content.(Refer Slide Time: 20:19)
Let us start a tutorial focusing on different back up a numerical problems and solution for
soil bulk density at particle density, soil porosity at soil water content. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:28)
So, let us start with the bulk density calculation. So, you can see the first question is
calculate the bulk density of a 400 cubic centimeter soil sample that weighs 575 grams
which is it over dry weight. 
So, we have to calculate the bulk density. Now one thing I must clear that universally we
generally we will we denote this bulk density as rho b and particle density as rho d. So,the so far we were denoting this bulk density and the particle density by B d and sorry D
b and D p. So, up to this slide we are denoting this bulk density by this D b and particle
density by D p, but from now onl will be using rho b and rho d for determining for
indicating the bulk density and particle density.
Now, you can see the solution says that the bulk density here is basically the ratio
between mass of solid and the volume; volume of the sorry mass of the soil and the
volume of the soil. So, we already know that oven dry weight is 575 grams and the, you
know the volume is already given. So, obviously it is 1.44 gram per cc. The second
question is calculate the bulk density of a 400 cubic centimeter soil sample that way 600
grams and that is 10 percent moisture. 
So, we know that is 600 grams which is already content 10 percent moisture. So, to know
the oven dry weight we have to divide this 600 grams with 1.1, 1.1 comes with 100 plus
that 10 percent, so 100 percent plus 10 percent, so basically it is 1.1. So, it is ultimately
we get the oven dry weight of 545.5 grams and this bulk density is 545.5 we have
already calculated the oven dry weight over these total you know bulk volume of the
soil.
So, we are getting 1.36 gram per cc. So, this is how we can calculate the bulk density if
the soil weight is given and the moisture content is also given. So, let us see what is the
next problem. So, the third problem says calculate the volume of a soil sample that is 12
percent moisture, weights 650 gram and it has a bulk density of 1.3 gram per cc. So, we
know that oven dry weight we know here the moist weight is given that it 650 grams and
it contains 12 percent moisture.
So, obviously the oven dry weight will be 650 over 1.12, so it is 580.4 grams. So, this is
the oven dry weight and we know that bulk density equal to mass of oven dry weight
over  the volume.  So, from this  we can  calculate  the  volume  which  is  446.4 cubic
centimeter. The fourth question is calculate the bulk density of a rectangular soil sample
with dimension of 12 centimeter by 6 centimeter, by 4 centimeter that is 15 percent
moisture content and weighs 320 grams.
So, the moist weight is given 320 gram, 15 percent moisture content is given. So, let us
first calculate the volume of a soil. So, it is a rectangular soil sample. So, the volume will
be 12 centimeter into 6 centimeter, it is see 4 centimeter. So, it will be 288 cubiccentimeter. Oven dry weight we can calculate from dividing the moist weight by the total
moisture content, so it is the 1.15. So, we are getting 272 grams and ultimately we are
getting the volume of the soil now we are getting the oven dry weight; obviously, we can
calculate now the bulk density which is 0.97 gram per cc.
So, I hope that this calculation you have understood it and so let us go and see what is
the next question. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:17)
The number 5 fifth problem is calculate the oven dry weight of a 350 cubic centimeter
soil sample with a bulk density of 1.42 gram per cc. Now we already know the bulk
density is 1.42 gram per cc, we do not know the mass of soil; however, we know the
volume of the soil that is 350 cubic centimeter.
So, obviously from that we can calculate the oven dry weight it is 497 grams. The
number 6 question is calculate the porosity of soil sample, that has a bulk density of 1.35
gram per cc and assume the particle density at 2.65 gram per cc. Now you already know
the formula porosity or porosity is basically porosity is basically 1 minus BD by PD into
100. So, porosity basically we express in terms of percentage. 
So, we can see 1 minus BD by you know bulk density by particle density multiplied by
100. So, we know that here the bulk density is 1.35, the average particle density ofmineral soils are 2.65 gram per cc, so we can calculate the porosity that is 49 percent. So,
now you know how to calculate the porosity from the bulk density and particle density.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:58)
There is another question we know calculate the porosity of a 250 cubic centimeter clod
that contents 140 cubic centimeter water when saturated. 
Now, we know that porosity basically can be expressed as a combination of volume of
air plus volume of water over volume total volume. Now here we already know that the
total volume is 250 cubic centimeter and the volume of air and volume of water is 140
cubic centimeter because, it is says that thus when the soil is saturated, that means all the
pore space are filled by water, we are getting 140 cubic centimeter. So, by using this
formula, we can easily calculate that is 56 percent. 
Number 8 problem is calculate the bulk density of a soil sample that has a porosity of 45
percent. Now here you know porosity is given, bulk density we have to calculate and you
know particle density we have to assume that the particle density is 2.65 gram per cc and
we will do the all the calculation for 1 cubic centimeter of soil. Now 1 cubic centimeter
soil we know that and we are a assuming that particle density of 2.65 gram per cc. So,
here porosity here 0.45 percent, so if we subtract 0.45 centimeter from 1 centimeter, we
will get 0.55 into 2.65.So, the bulk density will be here 2.65, so we know that bulk density can be calculated
from particle density multiplied by the volume of particles. Now here the volume of
particles is solid is 0.55 and we know the bulk particle density is 2.65 gram per cc, so by
multiplying it we are getting the bulk density of 1.46 gram per cc. 
So, you can now you know now I hope that these are clear to you and you know now you
can calculate different problems related to porosity and bulk density. 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:41)
Now the last 2 questions are here calculate the porosity of a 250 gram of samples that
contains 65 grams of water when 55 percent of the pores are filled with water So, you
can see here the oven dry weight is give you know 250 gram minus 65 grams, so it is 185
grams of soil. Volume of soil solutes is the 185 gram over 2.65 gram per cc, so it is 69.8
cubic centimeter.
Saturated water content 65 cubic centimeter over 0.55, so it is 118.2 cubic centimeter of
water, total volume of soil; obviously, the volume of water content and volume of soil
solids, so the total is 188 cubic centimeter So, porosity will be volume of air plus volume
of water over volume of total. We know the volume of air plus volume of water is 118.2
cubic centimeter or that is the saturated water content over the total volume of soil, so it
is 188 cubic centimeters. So, ultimately we are getting porosity of 63 cent percent. Final question what is the particle density of a soil sample that has a bulk density of 1.55
gram per cc and a porosity of 40 percent. So, we know that formula porosity is equal to
porosity equal to 1 minus P d by B d sorry 1 minus bulk density over particle density into
100. So, we know the porosity is here 40 and by inputting the bulk density we can
calculate the particle density that is 2.58 gram per cc. So, I tried to give you and basic
overview  of  how  to  calculate  different  numerical  problems  regarding  the  porosity
particle density and moisture content.
So, I hope that you have learned something and we will try to cover more numerical
problems as the course goes on.
(Refer Slide Time: 31:46)
And I must acknowledge for this numerical problem you know the department of land
and water resources of UCA Davis of USA and their class notes I have used for this for
setting these a numerical problems. So, thank you and let us meet you know with a new
set of lectures for week 4.
Thank you. 