Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 14
Soil Water (Contd.)
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:17)
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology and we will start
from the Soil Water energy concepts because we left there in the last lecture. So, we
have discussed about the soil water energy concepts and what are the different forces
which  act  on  soil  water  in  the  vadose  zone  we  discussed  about  the  vadose  zone.
Remember the vadose zone is unsaturated zone above the zone of saturation.(Refer Slide Time: 00:45)
So, let us see what are the 3 models of water distribution. So, the first model you can see
here. It is called water film thickness model and it shows basically the thinner water
films around particle I mean when these are the particles. So, you see 3 different particles
and the thickness of the films of water films  continuously going down as your moving
from the first one to second one to third one.
Obviously as the thickness of the water film around the particles are going down, their
energy or potential energy also decreasing. So, at the top when the thickness of the water
is quite high; obviously, that will be in higher energy state and at the bottom when the
water is drying out and obviously, the thickness is going down that will be in lower
energy state.
So, obviously, the water will move from this position higher energy state to lower energy
state. The second model is called cylindrical tube model and it basically shows the
implication of different size of the pores you know, water distribution. So, you can see
that this is the wettest condition and this is the intermediate condition and finally, it is the
dry condition. So obviously, when the soil is getting dried and the water will first move
from this larger pores.
This large cylinder is basically implicate you know basically indicating the larger pores
whereas; as the small cylinder is showing the smaller pore. So, when the water is. So,
when we are drying the soil, the first the water will go away from this larger pores andfinally, when the larger pores are emptied and then the water will finally, go from the
smaller pores.
The final one the final model is called irregular angular pore model and it shows that
irregular isolated pockets of water. So, we can see these are you know these are angular
shaped pores and in the angular shape pores if you are started if you start dying these this
soil the first you know, the first the water will evaporate from this middle portion and
these three corners will hold the water in higher tenacity. And as we further you have
you know dry the water from this triangular pore, the water most of the water we will
evaporate. However, there will be some amount of water that will still left in this corners
because of higher tenacity.
So, these three models of water basically shows the principal through which the water
distributes from one area of soil to another area. So, this basically governs the pathway
though which the soil water will move from one portion of the soil to another portion of
soil. So, let us see what is soil water potential.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:07)
So, to quantify potential energy state of a soil water reference state is needed. Remember
that we need a reference state for quantify the potential energy of soil water because
whatever we will be expressing in terms of potential energy that will eventually shows
the total soil water potential. And this reference state is basically potential energy of purewater  with  no  external  forces  acting  on  it  at  a  reference  pressure  that  is  the  one
atmospheric pressure, reference temperature and reference elevation.
So, if the water is present in a pool that water which is present inside the pool is
considered as a reference state with zero potential energy. Soil water potential is then
determine and its potential energy per unit quantity of water relative to the reference
potential of 0. So, the water which is present in this reference state are considered as a
potential energy of 0. And whenever we are talking about soil water potential, it always
determine the potential energy per unit quantity of water relative to that the reference
state.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:21)
So, if you see this picture, this picture gives a broad overview of different soil water
potentials. Now you can see this line. This line is showing basically potential energy
level of pure water at standard reference state which is taken as a zero. And obviously,
here the potential energy of soil water at a higher elevation than that of the standard
reference state. Suppose here and this we will form the gravitational potential which is
another  important  potential.  And  energy  level  is  obviously,  higher  than  a  standard
reference point positive.
So, whenever we are going in this direction, energy level will be always positive and
below  these  reference  state,  there  will  be  osmotic  potential.  So,  what  is  osmotic
potential? Potential energy level at of water containing salt and other solutes, we willdiscuss this later on. And as a result there will be negative we know there will be we
know the now the energy level is lower than free pure water at a difference point. So, it
is negative in sign and finally, here will be potential energy level of water attracted by
soil solids or soil matrix and we call it matric potential. This is also negative.
So,  you  can  see  the  manifestation  of  different  potential  like  gravitational  potential
osmotic potential, matric potential you know and their relative position as compare to
this you know pure you know or reference state which is taken as  zero. The potential at
remember that the potential at this reference state is always taken as zero.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:33)
So, the formal definition of soil water is total soil water potential is defined as the
amount of work per unit quantity of pure water that must be done by external forces to
transfer reversibly and isothermally an infinitesimally amount of water from the standard
state to the soil at the point under consideration.
So, since water in soil has various forces acting upon it, potential energy usually differs
from point to point; obviously, and hence it is potential energy is variable where the
potential is a variable, this is the this is the acting force through which water is moved
from one portion of the soil to another portion of soil. So, remember that potential is
defined as it is a multiplication of force and distance. So, if the force is you know
basically denotes by mg and the distance is by l.So, this is the final expression where is the rho w is basically the density of water and
volume of you know and this is the volume a, g is the gravitational acceleration and l is
basically the distance. So, it is expressed in newton meter and so, this is then expression
of general expression of potential.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:07)
So, total soil water potential is basically as I have showed you in that last picture, it is
basically combination of 4 different potentials. One is gravitational potential; another is
matric potential, then osmotic potential and hydrostatic potential. And it is basically
expressed in terms of newton per meter square. So, let us see them one by one.(Refer Slide Time: 09:41)
So, let us start with a gravitational potential. So, the force of gravity when the force of
gravity act on soil water, it acts same as it does on any other body. When the attraction
being towards the earth centre and the gravitational potential which is psi g of soil water
may be expressed mathematically as psi g equal to g multiplied by h where g is the
gravitational acceleration and h is the height.
So, you can see this is the water wheel and; obviously, the water will always try to move
from  this  higher  gravity to  you know  higher  position  to the  lower position  due to
gravitational attraction. And obviously, the water at this height will have higher potential
energy than that of water here with lower potential energy. So, while water will always
try to move from this higher elevation to lower elevation and this is called gravitational
potential.(Refer Slide Time: 10:51)
So, the second one is called pressure potential. Remember that the pressure potential is
basically the combination of both hydrostatic and matric potential. Now it basically
includes  the  positive  hydrostatic  pressure  due  to  the  weight  of  overlying  water  is
saturated soil and aquifers. We will discuss that later on and the negative pressure due to
the attractive forces between the water in the soil solids of the soil matrix.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:27)
So, basically as the definition says, this is the height. The first one shows the hydrostatic
potential and the second one shows the matric potential due to the soil matrix.Now, let us start with the hydrostatic potential. The hydrostatic pressure gives rise to
what is often termed as hydrostatic potential and it basically we denote this by phi h, a
component that is operational only for water in saturated zone below the water table.
And generally when  you are swimming into some swimming pool and go in you know
some  time  you  go  down  to  the  swimming  pool,  you  will  see  you  will  field  this
hydrostatic potential in your ear drums.
So, these hydrostatic potential is only operate you know only can be found at a saturated
zone below the water table.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:17)
And matric potential is basically the attraction of water to solid surfaces give raise to
matric potential which is psi m and remember that is always negative because water
attracted by the soil matrix has an energy state lower than that of pure water. As I have
already showed you in this diagram that the matrix potential and this osmotic potential is
always negative because the water attracted by the soil matric has an energy state which
is lower than that of pure water which is considered as 0.(Refer Slide Time: 12:51)
So, this picture gives a better understanding of the pressure potential considering both
hydrostatic potential and matric potential. So, as you can see the top of the saturated
zone. So, this is the water table and the top of the saturated zone is termed as the. So, this
is the top of the saturated zone we call it water table and above the water table the soil is
unsaturated and its subjected to the influence of matric potential; obviously, due to the
attraction of different soil matrix and water below the water table is saturated soil is
subjected to hydrostatic potential.
So, hydrostatic potential is always positive; however, the matric potential is always
negative and matric potential is governed by the capillary rise. However, the rise may not
be always linear and sometime it may be irregular due to irrigation and different types of
water inputs. So, basically you know what I try to convey that the pressure potential is
combining two different potential one is hydrostatic potential, another is matric potential.
Hydrostatic potential always can be found at a lower level at a level below the water
table and it is always positive. However, the matric potential is always negative.(Refer Slide Time: 14:33)
Now osmotic potential; the osmotic potential or psi o is attributable to the presence of
both inorganic and organic substances dissolved in water and remember that has water
molecule cluster around the solute ions or molecules, the freedom of movement of the
water is reduced or in other words the potential energy is also reduced.
So, that is why osmotic potential is also negative just like as matric potential. In case of
matric potential if you remember it is basically due to the attraction of soil matrix to the
water and as a result the freenesss of the water to move to any other place is restricted.
And as a result there potential energy get decreased. So, this is why the potential energy
of the matric potential and the osmotic potential is always negative than that of the
reference state.
At a greater the concentration of the solutes the more osmotic potential is lower than;
obviously, water we will tend to move to where its energy level will be lower in this
case; obviously, to the zone of higher solute concentration. So, water will always move
from a zone which has got lower solute concentration to the zone which has got higher
solute concentration because higher solute concentration means lower osmotic potential
and as a result of that water will move from higher energy state to lower energy state.(Refer Slide Time: 16:01)
So,  how  you  can  express  the  soil  water  potential?  So,  soil  water  potential  can  be
expressed in 3 different ways. One is potential per unit mass, another is potential per unit
weight, another is potential per unit volume. So, potential per unit mass or nu is basically
you know expressed in terms of joules per kg and obviously, it is multiplication of two
terms one is g that is gravitational acceleration and l that is the length. And basically the
because the water height I would say and potential per unit weight that is expressed in
terms of h is basically at you know basically expressed in terms of l that is head unit and
which is also equivalent height of water as we have already covered in case of capillary
movement of water.
And finally,  at  most importantly  potential  per unit  volume  will be  using  most this
potential per unit volume and we generally we use this as psi and it is basically the
multiplication of this rho w Vgl and by V. So, we are getting rho wgl and it is newton per
meter square which is the water pressure units and; obviously, the SI you did the similar
SI you know the equivalent SI unit is called Pascal as you denoted by Pa. 
And generally we denote the soil water potential in terms of either kilo Pascal or bar, we
will discuss this later on. So, basically you can see comparing all these three that is
potential per unit mass or potential per unit weight and potential per unit volume that we
do not need to compute, the soil water potential directly by computing the amount of
what he did.But  measure  the  oil  water  potential  indirectly  from  pressure  or  water  height
measurements. So, we can see all of these contain this l component. So, if we can
measure these components, we can basically compute the soil water potential; we do not
need to compute the amount of work needed.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:31)
So, expression of soil water potential as you can see we can express the soil water
potential either height of unit column of water mean centimeter or in bars or in potential
or in you know kilo Pascal.
So, remember that the SI unit kilo pascal is equivalent to 0.01, but so, it is basically
conversion from one form to another form.(Refer Slide Time: 18:57)
So, this curve is very much important, we call it water characteristic curve. So, in this
water characteristic curve, it shows basically the relationship between the soil water
potential  and  volume  of  soil  water  content  or  volumetric  soil  water  content  or
gravimetric soil water content. So, we can see the x axis we are just plotting the soil
water potential in log scale, remember that in log scale both in bars and kilo Pascal.
So, as we are going from by does 1 kilo pascal to by does 100, 000 kilo Pascal , we are
basically drying the soil as you know that and similarly from 0 minus 0.01 bar to minus
1000 bar, we are drying the soil continuously. And in the y axis, we are putting either
volume of water content or we call it volumetric water content or gravimetric water
content or we call it mass soil water content. So, you can see at a given soil water
potential, the clay contains higher amount of water the, that of you know core structure
soil.
These basically due to the higher tenacity of clay for water, as compare to loam and
sandy because in case of clay the total porosity is quite high. As a result you know the
total you know the attraction of water by the clay is quite higher than that of sand and
loam. However, you will not see this curves you will not see the abrupt bend and it is
very  smooth  as  you  can  see.  These  smoothness  is  basically  shows  the  continuous
distribution of pore spaces in the soil.So, there is no abrupt bend or break. Another important thing we can see that there is a
dotted line which is basically showing the poorly aggregated soil same soil with poorly
aggregation poor aggregation. So, soil structure also effects the shape of the soil water
characteristic curve. This is soil water characteristic curve by the way I have written
water characteristic of, but it is a soil water characteristic curve. So, you can see in case
of a well aggregated soil which is denoted by this solid line.
It contains more amount of total porosity. So, total porosity is quite high in case of well
aggregated soil than that of a poorly aggregated or compacted soil. So, as a result of
more or higher total porosity that amount of water or tenacity of that well aggregated soil
for holding the water is quite high than that of poorly aggregated soil. So, as a result at a
given point the well aggregated soil will contain more water; however, as we compact
the soil, the proportion of the middle and small size for increases in case of poorly
aggregated soil as compared to a well aggregated soil. So, that is why there is a change in
shape. So, water is you know release differently from those poorly aggregated soils.
So, these curve basically shows gives us the relationship of change in soil water , how
change in soil water potential or in other words how the soil water content vary from one
type of texture and one type of structure to other types when you are continuously drying
the soil. So, when you are drying the soil based on the soil texture and structure, the
water content vary. So, that basically expressed through these soil water characteristic
curve.(Refer Slide Time: 13:19)
Another important term is hysteresis. So, hysteresis is basically the relationship between
soil water content and matric potential and of a soil upon being dried and then rewetted.
So, you can see again this hysteresis is basically showing the relationship between matric
potential and soil water content and the here we are you know we are we are we are
denoting soil water content by the by theta. And so, also matric potential is given either
in bar or kilo Pascal. So, you can see the relationship between the soil water content and
matric potential for a given soil when we are drying that soil is not similar for the same
soil when we are rewetting it.
So, there is a difference and this difference occurs because of several factors. One is
either non uniformity of soil pores, entrapped air and swelling and shrinking properties
of the soil. So, let us start drying the soil. So, why there is a higher moisture content in
case of drying, you can see this is you know this is the drying phenomena and large pore
remains full because of capillary attraction in the nano pores above. So, these are large
pores and these are narrow pores the capillary movement of water will push more water
to these narrow pore. So, as a result large pores remains full and this is called the ink
bottle effect.
So, as a result there is higher moisture; however, where we are rewetting the soil water is
drawn up by the narrow pores by the, but the capillary rise ceases when you pore widens
suddenly. So, as a result of that at a given matric potential, the water content in a dryingsoil will be always higher than that of the water content when we are rewetting the soil.
So, these property of soil water is called hysteresis and as a soil are wetted remember
that another factor where the soil are wetted some of the smaller pores are bypass leaving
entrapped here that prevents the water penetration. So, this is another important reason
for lower water content in the rewetting curve. So, this is called the hysteresis property of
soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:57)
So, we have discuss about the energy concepts of soil. So, let us discus about different
methods for measuring soil water content. So, we can broadly differentiate the methods
of measuring  soil water  content  into  direct  method  and indirect  method.  So, direct
method we will be discussing about the gravimetric, also we will be discussing about the
volumetric method of soil water content.
However, indirect methods are needed to be calibrated for special type of soil or specific
type of conditions  and the indirect  methods  can be divided into chemical  methods,
thermal property method, acoustic methods, radiation technique and electrical property
based methods. Radiation techniques are of two types one is neutron scattering another is
gamma ray attenuation technique electrical properties base methods are divided into
electrical conductance and dielectric constant.
So, based on dielectric constant we use TDR or time domain reflectometer, we will
discuss that in details in the next lecture. And based on the electrical conductance, thereare gypsum blocks, nylon blocks and change in conductance. So, all these are different
methods for measuring soil water content. So, this slide gives you a snapshot of different
methods which you use for measuring the soil water content and in the next lecture we
will try to discuss them one by one and the next lecture also will be you know discussing
about different methods what are their drawbacks, what are their advantages. So, let us
rap up here and from next class, we will be starting discussing about different methods of
soil water content measuring in details.
Thank you very much.