Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chackraborty
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 10
Soil Texture and Structure
(Refer Slide Time: 00:15)
Welcome friends, to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology and today, we will
be discussing about soil texture and its classification. And, what is soil texture we will
talk about its definition, what are the different types of you know soil textural classes,
what is USDA soil textural triangle, how to use the texture triangle and then we will be
also discussing about soil structure which is an very important soil property and what are
the different types of soils of structure and what are the factors which affect soil structure
and how we can manage soil structure.
So, in this lecture I will try to give you a basic overview of soil texture and structure.
Now, obviously, if you want to you know if you want to go for a further refined you
know more advanced we know this advanced studies of soil texture and structure you
can obviously, consult any standard reference book or any standard books like The
Nature and Properties of Soils written by Brady and Weil.
So, let us start with the soil texture. Now, you know that the definition of soil texture
says it is a relative proportion of soil separates that is relative proportion of sand silt andclay in the soil. And remember that it is a basic and very hard to alter a property. So, this
property is more or less it is constant and you cannot change this property.
Now, in the first lecture of soil I have already told you about there are three major soil
separates in a soil which are basically sand silt and clay and as you know according to
the USDA particle size range you know sand particles diameter of 0.05 to 2 millimeter,
whereas silt contain 0.002 to 0.05 millimeter diameter whereas, in case of clay the
diameter of the particle is always less than 0.002 millimeter.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:19)
So, based on this classification and you know each of this soil separate has their own
significant properties. Now, let us discuss what are that we know what are the intrinsic
properties. So, in this table if you can see you know first as for the as per as size is
concern we have already discussed it.
The second important point is feel. So, if you feel you know if you rub the soil which is
you know if you rub the soil in between your thumb and finger, you will see that you
know the sand will the sand will fill a very gritty and silt will feel like you know smooth
and silky in nature and clay will be very very sticky in nature.
So, as per as the pore size is concern obviously, the sand particles the sandy soil mainly
contains you know higher amount of you know larger pore space, we call the macro
pores and you know in case of silty soil or in case of silt we will see that the pore size issmaller than that of sand. However, in case of clay the pore size is very very small. So, in
other wards sand mainly contains macro pores where as clay mainly contains micro
pores.
So, another important property based on this pore size is water and nutrient holding
capacity. So, in case of sand the water and nutrient holding capacity is very very low in
case of silt it is more than sand. However, in case of clay it is high, but releasing capacity
is low because of huge amount of water holding capacity high amount of water holding
capacity of clay the water cannot move freely within a clay soil. However, it can move
freely with in a sandy soil, but it is holding capacity is very very less.
Another important property is the specific surface area. So, in case of sand obviously, the
specific surface area is very low because of larger particle diameter and in case of silt it
is large. However, in case of clay it is very very large or tremendous high specific
surface area and we will discuss that you know very soon.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:49)
So, this slide shows basically the changes in specific surface area as we go from gravel to
sand to silt and clay. Now, you can see from this you know in the x axis we are plotting
the particle size or width of each cube if we are considering each soil particle as a cube
and if you are going from gravel to sand to silt and clay your seeing that the particle size
is reducing from 10 to 1 to 0.0001. So, we are starting from gravel when we are going
towards the clay.So, particle size is continuously going down. So, as a particle size continuously going
down you will see that specific surface area which is measured in terms of square
millimeter  per gram  is  continuously  increasing  in  this  direction.  So,  obviously,  for
example, if we consider a volume if a sand particles with 8 millimeter or you know
gravelly particle with 8 millimeter; 8 millimeter particle you know particle size then we
will have a total volume of 512 cubic millimeter; however, if it is mass of 1.3 gram.
Now, once you break down this big cube into individual very small cube, ultimately you
will see the total surface or specific surface area is increased because the internal surface
area here will be also available. So, these will add up to the specific surface area and
obviously, as you see that as you are going from higher particles to the lower particles I
mean lower size particles there is a exponential almost exponential increased in specific
surface  area  and  obviously,  as  the  specific  surface  area  increases  the  adsorption,
swelling, plasticity and heat of wetting all these increases.
So, that basically shows that once when we go from sand to silt to clay, obviously, their
specific surface area increases and as a result of the increase in specific surface area the
adsorption which is a surface phenomena and swelling plasticity and heat of wetting all
this properties generally increases.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:19)
So, importance of specific surface area as you can see from this slide, that when there is
a small particle; obviously, there will be more when there will be small particle there willbe more specific surface area and when there will be more specific surface area there will
be water holding capacity. In case of clay as a we have already discussed that it has got
high water holding capacity and it is because of it has got high surface specific surface
area because of small particle size. 
Also due to the small particle size and due to the higher specific surface area you will see
that more nutrient holding capacity as we can see generally in case of clayey soil. Also
due to the higher specific surface area you will see that more area for weathering and;
obviously, more nutrient released by the weathering.
So, this is another importance of specific surface area. Another importance of specific
surface area that when that is a higher specific surface area, obviously, there will be more
ions in surface and more the soil will stick together as an aggregate. So, this is the
implication of specific surface area and more surface specific surface area will also helps
in more chances of microbial activity. So, these slides basically show in a you know in a
compressive way that importance of specific surface area and obviously, this changes in
specific surface area is very much apparent when you go from you know sand to silt to
clay particles.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:57)
Now, soil textural classes. So, soil textural classes convey an idea of size distribution of
particles and the general nature of their physical properties. So, based on the texturalvariation of the soil we have divided the soil into 12 textural classes and these 12 textural
classes the depicted by using a textural triangle. So, let us see what is a textural triangle.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:25)
So, textural triangle as you can see this is a textural triangle we call it USDA textural
triangle and in this textural triangle you can see there are 12 different textural classes. So,
what are these textural classes as we can see? It is starts from clay it is it is starts from
you know clay and also silty clay, silty clay loam, silt, silty loam, loam, clay loam, sandy
clay, sandy clay loam, sandy loam, loamy sand and sand. And, as you can see in each of
the sides of this textural triangle they you know the percent of silt is distributed in this
side and percent sand is distributed in this side and percent of clay distributed in this
side. So, starting from 0 to 100 percent and remember that all these percentage of sand
silt and clay all adds up to 100 percent. So, if we know only two of them you can
obviously, you know calculate the third one.
So, based on that also I mean there are general terms which we use for describing the soil
texture in relation to the basic soil textural classes, as you can see here you know when
the soil belongs to the sands and loamy sands we call them coarse texture soil, when they
belong to the sandy loam and fine sandy loam we call them moderately coarse soil, when
they belong to very fine sandy loam, loam to silty loam to silt we call them medium
texture soils and when they vary from sandy clay loam sandy silty clay loam and clayloam we will call them moderately fine and fine are basically consist of sandy clay silty
clay and clay.
So, based on the dominance of clay and sand obviously, we can separate the soils into
coarse texture and fine texture soils. So, obviously, sandy soils are generally coarse
texture in nature where as the clay soils are generally fine in nature.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:43)
So, let us see how to use the soil textural triangle. So, let us consider an example where
there is 30 percent clay, 20 percent silt and 50 percent sand. So, how to use the USDA
soil textural triangle to measure or to determine in which textural class our soil belongs.
So, we will start from here. So, let us start with the percent silt. So, here we can get the
percent silt know let us starts with the clay. So, there is 30 percent clay. So, we will start
from here. So, 0 percent clay, 20 percent clay and 30 percent clay; so, at the 30 percent
mark we will draw a parallel line as you can see here these a parallel line which is you
know along with the percent sand side. So, this is the first step and in the second step we
know there is 20 percent silt.
So, we will draw another parallel line to the clay axis to this is a blue you know green
colour line you can see here and you can see both of them intersect at this point and if we
go further and we know there are 50 percent of sand then we can draw another line
which is parallel to the percent clay. So, you will see that all the three lines will intersectat this point and basically this point belongs to sandy clay loam. So, based on these we
can define that our soil the given soil sample belongs to sandy clay loam soil texture. So,
that is how we use generally soil textural triangle.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:33)
Now, how to use the soil texture how to feel or how to determine the soil texture? Well,
there are a couple of ways to feel you know determine the soil texture. One of the you
know one of the most a qualitative way is the feel method. So, basically the soil silty is
generally go to the feel and take the soil in between the thumb and fingers and they just
rub it and they just try to feel it by rubbing in between the fingers. So, and also try to
form a try to mold them into different shapes. So, based on that they can say whether the
soil belongs to a sandy, belongs to a silty soil or loamy soil or ultimately to a clayey soil
or not.
So, there are some well defined criteria for classifying the soils in to different soil texture
classes. As you can see here these shows basically, these basically shows the flowchart
which generally we use for identifying the soil through feel method. So, these basically
gives a very good idea about how to use the feel method for determining the soil texture.
For example, let us start by moistening and kneading the soil into putty like consistency
and try to form a ball. So, this is our first step. So, the second steps is can the soil be
formed into a stable ball that you know does not fall apart. So, if it is no if the answer is
no; obviously, the soil belongs to sand class so, that means, the soil cannot be form into aball. So, obviously, this is sand. If it is yes, they will go to this step. So, the second
question will come can the soil squeezed in to a ribbon? If it is no, obviously, it will be
loamy sand because due to the presence of sand the plasticity nature of the soil is very
very low if it is then it will go to the further decision making question.
So, based on this flow chart you can literally differentiate different types of soil texture.
For example, you can see here they are trying soil sand silt is trying to form a ribbon
using a by kneading a soil and obviously, you can see the type of you know the length of
the ribbon is always less than 2.5 centimeter. So, obviously, that belongs to loamy type
of soil and there is when this ribbon size is 2.5 to 5 centimeter, the types of you know it
belong it shows the types of clayey loam and when the size of the ribbon is greater than 5
centimeter it shows the type of clay.
So, based on this size of the ribbon or you know and these decision making criteria you
can literally you know classify different soils into different soil textural classes.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:33)
For example, in case of sand it will feel gritty and it will basically considered non
cohesive because it does not stick together in a mass unless it is very wet.(Refer Slide Time: 16:45)
In case of silt, it does not feel gritty, but it is feel somewhat floury and smooth like silly
putty in your hand when your rub it.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:51)
And finally, when in case of clay when it is very it is very sticky when it is wet, and also
it is very much plastic or it can be molded into readily into a shape or rod. So, you know
clay shows these type of characteristics and also you can use the clay for easily formed
ribbons which you cannot do with in case of with sand and silt.(Refer Slide Time: 17:21)
So,  how  we  generally  determine  soil  texture?  Well,  there  are  couple  of  ways  we
generally determine soil texture in the lab. All these are quantitative in nature and the
classical sedimentation method is basically used in the lab and generally we have divided
that classical sedimentation method into two major methods: one is called pipette method
and the second is hydrometer method.
So, both the both of  these are based on the sedimentation principle and based on the
Stokes' Law; we will discuss the Stokes' Law in the next slide. Remember that the soil
dispersed using chemical agents and allowed to basically to sediment and you know to
settle down and obviously, in the particle settle down based on the principle that the
bigger they are the faster they fall. And, obviously, you know these two methods are
very much time consuming methods and very much laborious methods also.
So, nowadays soil scientist at you know are measuring the laser diffraction measuring
the soil particle size or soil texture using laser diffraction method and we call is laser
diffraction  particle  size analyzer. It is very much fast and precise but sometimes  it
underestimates clay. So, that is one of the drawback of these laser diffraction particle
size analyzer
Now,  obviously,  in  this  picture  as  you  can  see  that  based  on  this  principle  of
sedimentation  obviously,  if  we  disperse  the  total  soil  using  some  dispersing  agent
obviously, at first the coarse sand will settle down followed by fine silt and obviously,clay will remain in the solution. So, based on their diameter or based on their size they
will settle down and this is the principle which is used for pipette and hydrometer
methods.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:31)
And, this is a picture of LDPSA which is more precise and this is the laser diffraction
particle size analyzer and it is a very much costly instrument also.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:41)
So, let us discuss  about the stokes  law  now  Stokes' law  basically  says  the settling
velocity of an particle in a liquid and if we denote the settling velocity by V it isbasically  proportionate to the diameter  of the effective diameter  of the particle and
gravitational force which is denoted by g and the difference between the density of the
solid particles and density of the fluid and it is inversely proportional to the viscosity or
thickness of the fluid.
So, here D is basically the effective diameter of this particle of the of the particle and g
basically shows the gravitational force which is 9.81 Newton per kilogram and eta is
basically viscosity of water which is you know measured in terms of 1000 Newton
seconds per square meter and D s is the basically density of solid particles for most of the
soil which is 2.65 mega gram per per cubic meter and density of fluid is 1 mega gram per
cubic meter. And, substituting these values into equation we can write this is V equal to
h by t, where h is the distance and t is the time and obviously, when you simplify will get
it we will get to this kd square, where k is a constant.
So, in other words this settling velocity of any particle through a liquid is proportional to
its  diameter,  when  there  will  be  hydrometer  obviously,  in case  of  sandy soil  sand
particles obviously, they will settle more faster than that of clay particle. So, based on
this Stokes law this hydrometer and pipette method were developed and both were used
for quantitative estimation of soil texture, we also call it particle size analysis.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:55)
So,  what  is  the  importance  of  soil  texture  by  the  way?  The  soil  texture  basically
determines  the  water  holding  capacity  of  the  soil  and  it  impacts  the  soil  erosion.Remember that, well drained soil allows good aeration and sandy soil will allow good
aeration whereas clay soil will not allow good aeration. I mean sometime because the
macro pores because the macro pores which are present in the case of sandy soils, they
allow good aeration.
And, it also affects the degree to which the soil is susceptible to erosion obviously, sandy
soil will be much more susceptible to erosion than clayey soil and it also affects the
organic matter levels in the soil. Generally we have seen that there is a you know
coexistence between high amount of clay and organic matter in most of the soils. So, that
means, the soil texture also determines the organic matter levels in the soil sometimes.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:49)
Now, let us start with the soil type structure. So, what is soil structure? Soil structure is
another  important  property  which  basically  is  the  arrangement  of  the  primary  soil
particles or sand silt and clay and other soil materials into discrete aggregates.(Refer Slide Time: 23:07)
And, soil structure you know can be differentiated you know described in terms of either
type either relative size or peds or grades. So, type or shape of the peds type basically
shows the shape of the peds; what is ped we will discuss later on and also relative size of
the peds we call it class and grades and relative class or relative size or class of peds is
basically divided into fine, medium or coarse and grades or degree of development of
peds which are basically strong, moderate and weak.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:45)
So, let us discuss what are peds? So, peds are the structural units and which have distinct
boundaries and well defined planes of weakness between the aggregates and as you can
see that peds consists of primary particles remember and they are bound together by
different cementing agents like organic matter like clay and hydrous oxides of iron
aluminium and also peds can take several shapes.
So, if you see here in this first picture you can see if the individual particles there is sand,
silt and clay they stick together and aggregate together to form a ped which is an
aggregated which is an aggregate and also peds you know stacked around each other to
form a total soil structure. And, this is an actual picture of soil ped.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:41)
Now, what are the different shapes of the peds? So, types of soil structure is basically
depends on the shapes of different peds. So, ped shapes are differentiated into granular
and crumb and we collectively called them spheroidal structure, and blocky structure,
prismatic structure, columnar, platy, single-grained and massive. So, let us see one them
one by one.(Refer Slide Time: 25:04)
Let us start with the granular structure. Remember that the granular structure resembles
with the cookie crumbs and it is usually less than 0.5 centimeter in diameter as you can
see in this pictures and these granular structure are commonly found in surface horizons
where roots have been growing. So, this type of structure is very much we know they are
very much favorable for growth of the plant because they can we know they allow the
easy water movement and air and water movement.
There  is  another structure called  crumb structure and crumb structure  is  a granular
structure with more porosity. So, obviously, granular structure has their you know high
porosity, but crumb structure is another type of granular structure which as more porous.
So, you know both of them or you know both of them are termed as spheroidal structure
and both these structures are very much you know helpful for plant growth.(Refer Slide Time: 26:05)
 The another structure is called blocky structure and blocky structured basically consist
of  irregular  blocks  that  are  usually  1.5  to  5  centimeter  in  diameter  and  it  can  be
differentiated into angular blocky or subangular blocky based on the angle of different
sides or different planes.
So, as you can see here in this shows the blocky structure you can easily see here this is a
blocky structure and obviously, this blocky structure are differentiated you know you
know as I have told you that blocky structure can be also differentiated into angular
blocky and subangular blocky.(Refer Slide Time: 26:55)
As you can see here the angular blocky are more you know plain. However, in case of
subangular blocky the plains are generally curved or not plain I would say.
So, blocky structure are generally of two types.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:15)
So, let us see what are the other structure. Another unstructured is called prismatic
structure as you can see, it is a prismatic like and prism shape and it is these are basically
vertical columns of soils that might you know might be a number of centimeter in length.And, they are generally used you know found in lower horizons of soil as you can see a
these are prismatic structures.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:37)
Another structure name is columnar structure and columnar structure are you know the
vertical columns of soil that have a salt cap at the top and this columnar structure you can
found you know you can see in arid climates.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:55)
Platy structure: platy structure is basically composed of thin and flat plates of soil that
lies basically horizontally as you can see and usually found in compacted soil. Generallydue  to  the  heavy  machinery  operation  over  the  soil  surface  this  type  of  structure
generally occurs and this type of structures are not very much favorable for the growth of
the plant because it restricts the water and air movement.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:21)
Another type of structure is called single grained structure where the soil is broken into
individual particles that do not stick together and obviously, you remember that always
accompanies a loose consistency. As you can see in this picture and you can see this type
of structure in sandy soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:41)
 Another structure is called  massive structure now massive structure has no visible
structure and it is hard to break apart and appears in a very large clods. As you can see
the clods are formed and this type of structure you can basically see in a rice field due to
the paddling and subsequent drying of the soils. So, this massive structure also does not
have any clear plains and we know they are not well defined actually.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:15)
So, we have completed the types of soil structure; now let us see class of soil structure.
Obviously, the class of soil structure depends on the size of the peds and they are
differentiated into fine, medium and coarse.(Refer Slide Time: 29:31)
Now, obviously, the question comes that how does structure affects water movement into
the soil. Well, in soils with good structure the pore space that occurs between peds are
relatively  large  and  facilitates  water  and  air  movement.  However,  well  developed
structure  is  very important  in clayey  soils  because  clayey  soils  with poor structure
restricts water and air movements.
So, it is always required to improve the structure of clayey soils and we can do that by
different methods different management practices; one of them is addition of organic
matter.(Refer Slide Time: 30:07)
 Another important aspect of soil structure is degree of water movement. As you can see
here  I have  shown here  six  different  types  of structures  starting  from  single-grain,
blocky, platy, granular, prismatic and massive. And, as you can see you know this single
you know the water movements how it varies from one structure to another structure.
Obviously in case of platy structure; obviously, in case of platy structure due to the platy
and compact nature water movement will be very much slow. And, in case of blocky
structure it will be moderate and in case of single grain it will be rapid in nature and also
in case of massive soil structure, it will be very much slow generally we found it in rice
soils prismatic structure I mean it will be moderate flow you will see moderate flow and
granular  structure  which  is  very  much  helpful  for  plan  growth  you  will  see  rapid
movement of  water.
So, as you can see based on the soil structural classes also you can you know the water
movement varies significantly.(Refer Slide Time: 31:37)
So, can we alter the soil structure? Is it possible? Well, unlike the soil texture structure
can be altered by tillage. As I have already told you texture cannot be altered, however,
structure can be altered by tillage. And, tilling soils that are too wet or compacting soils
with heavy equipment can break down the natural structural units and we will discuss
that effects when we will be discussing about tillages. And, remember that soil texture
can be obviously, soil texture can be obviously, change by implementing different types
of management practices  and one of them is incorporating huge amount of organic
matter. So, altering of soil structure is possible.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:27)
Now, let us see some description of field soil field soil structure as you can see here
these are individual blocky ped and this is an example of weak medium angular blocky.
So, it shows a combination of both type class and grades of soil structure while defining
a soil structure.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:45)
Then it is a strong very coarse and prismatic structure.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:49)
Remember that hierarchical organization of soil aggregates is very important and it is the
characteristics of most of the soils because even the smallest particle turns out to be
aggregate made up of numerous primary soil particles.
(Refer Slide Time: 33:11)
As you can see from here the smallest particle turns out to be the aggregate made up of
numerous particle primary soil particles and these slide shows how primary soil particles
aggregate together to form a soil structure.
So, we start generally with primary particles like sand silt and clay humus. So, these
primary particles formed the sub micro aggregate by plane by adding by the cementing
action of plant debris coated with clay and also different microbial aggregates. Sothe soil
is encrusted with microbial debris and plant and microbial debris. In the third step it will
for micro aggregate and in the micro aggregate you will see both root hairs, hyphae and
polysaccharides which are acting as cementing agents and finally, you will see macro
aggregates. The micro aggregates will form the macro aggregates by interconnection of
roots and hyphae.
So, you can see from primary particles to macro aggregate different types of binding
agents are responsible and you know that shows how these primary soil particles show
hierarchical organization to form a macro aggregate.(Refer Slide Time: 34:17)
 Grades of soil structure; obviously, the terms weak, moderate and strong are used to
describe the grades or how stable the peds are and how hard they are able to be break
apart. So, based on this we can differentiate the, we can term what is the grade of soil
structure.
(Refer Slide Time: 34:35)
So, it is my final slide. So, summarily we can say that texture is basically the size of
brick used if you are making a house. The texture is basically the size of brick used and
structure is basically the arrangement of bricks or the house represents a soil structure,then  hallways,  doorways  and  windows  in the  house  represent  associated  pores  and
channels. So, soil texture and structure thus very very important soil physical properties.
Thank you.