Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 22
Silicate Clays (Contd.)
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology and in the previous
lecture we talk about what is soil colloid and what are the different classes of soil
colloids.  And, then  we  distinguish  about  we distinguish  between  the  inorganic  soil
colloids and organic colloids. We talked about what are the different types of inorganic
soil colloids.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:01)
And then we started about silicate clays and we distinguish silicate clays into several
categories starting from nesosilicates, then sorosilicates, then cyclosilicates, inosilicates,
then  phyllosilicates  and  tectosilicates.  And,  we  specifically  started  talking  about
phyllosilicate, because that represents soil clay minerals and.
We started talking about the  basic building blocks of phyllosilicates  that is silicate
tetrahedral. We talked about their structure and we talked about how they linked each
other  linked with each other to form a silicate tetrahedral sheet. And, then we also talked
about aluminium octahedral and how aluminium octahedral sheets are formed. And, then
how they are sandwiched between you know one octahedral you know one octahedralsheets sandwiched between two tetrahedral sheet to form a 2 is to 1 structure and what is
1 is to 1 structure.
What is unit cell and what is inter layer, what is layer and what is you know what is
crystal and then what are the different types of plates. So, we stop there and let us start
and let us go from the here. And, in today’s lecture we will be discussing in details about
mineral structure of different clay minerals.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:58)
So, before going to the structure of the clay minerals let us discuss what are the major
sources of charge. Now, we will be discussing the sources of charges in details in our
forthcoming lecture. But let me tell you that there are two major source of charge sources
of charges which developed within the clay minerals.
So, one of them is isomorphous substitution and in case of isomorphous substitution
what happens: one element face the position of another element having similar size. So,
you can see here one in a here there is a tetrahedra silicate tetrahedral which is basically
neutral. And, then one silica in the tetrahedral you know is basically you know replaced
by in the tetrahedral sheet basically.
This is the tetrahedral sheet and one silica in the tetrahedral sheet is getting replaced by
aluminium which are which is having the similar sizes as that of silica. And, as a result
of that there is an excess of negative charge. So, because silica you know that plus 4aluminium is plus 3 and O 4 minus 8. So, here plus 7 minus 8; that means, minus 1. So,
there is a negative charge generation. So, as a result of this type of substitution we call it
isomorphous iso stands for similar morphous stands for size.
So, since silica and aluminium has almost similar size they this aluminium can substitute
this silicon not only that they you know, another major prerequisite for this type of
substitution is that there should be there should be difference in valency of 1 not more
than 1. So, you can see plus 4 valency of silica is getting replaced by plus 3 valency you
know of aluminium. So, this is call silica this is example of a isomorphous substitution in
case of tetrahedral layer. However, in case of octahedral layer you can see aluminium is
getting replaced by magnesium because both of them are having the similar size.
So, remember that in case of silica tetrahedral layer a silica tetrahedral sheets silica get
replaced by aluminium whereas, in case of octahedral layer aluminium generally got
replaced by either magnesium or iron. So, these  isomorphous substitution is one of the
major source of charges which develop in the clay minerals; that is why clay is very
active. There are other charges you know there are other sources of charges also we will
discuss them later on.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:42)
So, let us move ahead and see in details you know this isomorphous substitution, you can
see here in this tetrahedra three cations obviously, minus 3 stands for 3 you know oxygen
group. And so, we are getting minus 3 because, one of their minus charge is gettingshared with the adjacent  silica.  And, here in the trioctahedral  layer obviously, you
remember the tetrahedral layer where all the 3 octahedral positions are filled by cations.
Now, in case of trioctahedral layer if you remember the octahedral positions are basically
dominated by magnesium because, it has 2 valency plus 2. So, you can see this is plus 2
plus 2 plus 2 so, it is plus 6. So, we are we are getting a net charge of 0. However, when
we are replacing also I am in here also this is the dioctahedral layer where we are getting
the total net charge of 0. However, if in these you know dioctahedral sheet if we replace
1 aluminium with 1 magnesium then you can see there is a generation of net 1 negative
charge.
So, this is an example of dioctahedral with isomorphic substitution. You can see what are
the different ions which can replace you know among themselves. So, silica get already
replaced  by aluminium  and this  type of silica replacement  by aluminium  occurs  in
tetrahedral sheet. Whereas, in case of octahedral sheet you can see generally aluminium
get replaced by either iron or magnesium or sometimes zinc. So, these are some results
these are some examples of isomorphic substitution or isomorphous substitution.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:48)
So, in summary what are the basis for distinguishing crystalline silicate clays; obviously,
based on the numbers and combine combination of structural units we already know that
you know how these crystals are formed. And each crystals are formed with in the form
of layers and obviously, there are two general categories: 1 is to 1 and 2 is to 1. We havealready discussed this and obviously, by the number of cations in the octahedral sheet
trioctahedral structure and dioctahedral structure we have already covered this.
Then size and location of layer charge and then type of bonding of layers; obviously,
remember that there are different types of you know bonding occurs between the layers.
Obviously, ionic is ionic bonding is the most you know ionic bonding has a more
strength followed by hydrogen bonding and then van der Waals force which is very weak
in nature. And obviously, you know we can distinguish clay in a crystalline silicate clays
based on the present or you know presence of a cationic interlayer. Like in case of fine
grained mica or like, we will discuss that in later.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:53)
So, mineralogical organization of silicate clays we already it covered that in last lecture
that is 1 is to 1 type of silicate clays and 2 is to 1 type of silicate clays. I am not going to
discuss that in details. Obviously, in case of 2 is to 1 type of layer 1 octahedral layer is
sandwiched  between  2  tetrahedral  sheet.  And  so,  this  is  the  basic  you  know
organizational difference between this 1 is 1 and 2 is to 1 type of layer.(Refer Slide Time: 08:22)
Now, let us start with 1 is to 1 silicate clays. So, you can see here the basically if this
type of silicate clays it layer consists of 1 tetrahedral and 1 octahedral sheet held together
by  apical  oxygen atom.  Obviously, you can  see  there  are  certain  planes  of atoms;
obviously, here you can see hydroxyl and aluminium which are snugly fitted in the holes
and also oxygen and silica in between. So, there are several layers of atoms and if we see
a two-dimension display we can see. Obviously, there will be hydroxyl plane followed
by aluminium plane and then again oxygen and hydroxyl plane followed by silica plane
and then oxygen plane.
So, this example of 1 is to 1 I will layer of 1 is to 1 type of clay because there is only 1
silica tetrahedral sheet and 1 aluminium octahedral sheet. What is the major you know
clay mineral? Kaolinite is the most common 1 is to 1 type of clay. This is most one of the
most  prevalent  1  is  to  1  type  of clay.  I remember  that  this  kaolinite  is  the  major
ingredient of the porcelain and these kaolinite  got its name because, it was first invented
in the kaolin province of China. And, it is synthesized under equal concentration of
aluminium and silicon.
And this is the actual silica structure you can see these are basically hexagonal flex layer.
These are basically hexagonal, this individual layers are hexagonal in shape and this is
how this kaolinite will look under the electron microscope.(Refer Slide Time: 10:15)
So, let us go ahead and see the some properties of kaolinite. Obviously, in case of
kaolinite there is no isomorphous substitution remember that this is very important in
case of kaolinite we cannot see any isomorphous substitution. So, due to the due to the
absence  of  isomorphous  substitution;  obviously,  there  is  very  little  chance  of
development of negative charge. There is very little chance of development of negative
charge at their surface and as a result of that they are very nutrient poor.
Because no cationic nutrient can absorb at the surface because, of these low you know
lower  low  negative  charge  development.  And  obviously,  it  has  got  no  shrink  well
potential because of hydrogen bonding between the adjacent layer. So, let me show you
if what is that mean. So, if we consider 1 you know tetrahedral you know 1 1 is to 1
kaolinite;  obviously.  So,  this  will  be  silica  tetrahedra  and  this  will  be  aluminium
octahedra.
So, similarly another adjacent layer will consists the similar repeating units. So, it will be
silica tetrahedra followed by aluminium octahedra. So, in the aluminium octahedra as
you can see at the base of aluminium octahedral; obviously, there will be hydroxyl ions
and just below these alluminium hydroxyl ions you will see the oxygen plane. So, if you
consider this is as a layer single layer and you consider another repeating layer here;
obviously, there will be hydroxyl atoms here. So, here we are getting oxygen and here
their adjacent hydroxyl.So obviously, there will be a bond formation between this oxygen and hydroxyl, this is
the hydrogen bonding or hydrogen bond. And, due to the presence of this hydrogen bond
between these two adjacent layer; this 1 is to 1 type of layer clay or kaolinite cannot
show any swelling  shrinkage property. Because, of this hydrogen bonding between that
two repeating layers. So, that the reason that these I mean kaolinite cannot show any
swelling shrinkage properties and obviously, it is a product of acid weathering. And, this
is how we kaolinite will look like, it is white in colour. Pure kaolinite is basically white
in colour.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:08)
And this is the interlayer structure; obviously, this is the layer structure of kaolinite.
Obviously, you can see the d axis spacing; that means  the spacing between. If we
consider this is a if we consider this is a plane of layer of atom and; obviously, the
adjacent or that very next similar plane layer of atoms the distance is called d axis
spacing or d spacing.
And, this d spacing in case of kaolinite is 0.74 nanometer. So, again the d axis spacing in
case of kaolinite is 0.74 nanometer or 7.2 Armstrong. So, less cation exchange capacity
owing to hydrogen bonding and relatively it is less and this kaolinite shows relatively
less plasticity stickiness and cohesion.(Refer Slide Time: 14:18)
So, we have finished the kaolinite; I hope then let us go ahead and see what are 2 is to 1
type of clays. Well, as the name suggest 2 is to 1 is basically 2 will silica tetrahedral
sheets linked with 1 octahedral sheet. And, you can see four major groups of 2 is to 1
type of clays: one is expanding clay and the you know non-expanding clay.
Among the expanding clay you can see smectite and then vermiculite. And however, in
case of non-expanding clay there are fine grained mica or illite and then clorite.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:51)
So, these are four I would say these are four major types of I would say these are four
major types of 2 is to 1 type of clays and we will discuss them in details not groups, but
in the types. So, let us start with the smectite. So, in case of smectite; obviously, in there
will be in case of smectite there is a high amount of isomorphous substitution and they
are mostly negatively charged because of this high amount of isomorphous substitution.
And  as  a  result  of  interlayer  molecules  and  interlayer  water  and  cations  they  are
subjected to shrinking and swelling.
When owing to loosely bound oxygen to oxygen or oxygen cation bonding we will we
will see it in a bit. And, remember that it also shows high plasticity stickiness and
cohesion owing to high expansion. So, the one of the major you know example of this
smectite is a montmorillonite. And, this smectite type of clay can be found in the black
cotton soil of India special in Maharashtra region, where you will see the development of
cracks. And swell during the wet, during the monsoon as well as in rises in ellipse; I will
show you.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:13)
So,  let  us  see  the  montmorillonite.  Montmorillonite  is  2  is  to  1  type  of  smectite;
obviously, a layer charge originates from the substitution of magnesium from alumina in
the octahedral sheet. Remember these are nutrient rich and they show very high shrink
swell capacity and they are very unstable on the low pH. And, high moisture and this is
how the pure montmorillonite you know will look like.(Refer Slide Time: 16:37)
So,  let  us  see  the  structure  of  montmorillonite.  So,  this  is  structure  of  the
montmorillonite; obviously, the d axis spacing that is if we consider this is a oxygen
plane and this is another repeating oxygen plane. So, the distance is d axis spacing. So,
similarly if we consider this is a silica plane, and here is a also silica plane. So, the
distance between these two similarity repetitive layer is basically the d axis spacing. So,
do not get confused about d axis spacing.
So, montmorillonite the d axis spacing varies from 1 to 2 nanometer and because, in the
interlayer space there is a high amount of water molecules and miscellaneous cations.
Why there are high molecules in interlayer cation, because you can see this is a structure
of montmorillonite. Obviously, there will be hydroxyl, there will be oxygen atoms and
there will be silica atoms followed by then hydroxyl then aluminium and magnesium
because aluminium and magnesium.
Because of isomorphous substitution and the similar repeatating layer you can see here.
So obviously, due to the variable spacing between these two repeatating layer, there will
be chance for exchangeable cations to enter. And; obviously, there will be hydrated
exchangeable cation inside this interlayer space and as a result of this there will be
variable you know distance or there will be variable d axis spacing. As you can see it is
varying from 1 to 2 nanometer and remember that isomorphous substitution is occurring
in the octahedral layer. So, again in case of montmorillonite the isomorphous substitutionoccurring the octahedral layer and as a result of this substitution, you know there will be
generation of the negative charge.
Negative  charge  repulse  themselves  as  a result there  will  be;  obviously, you know
different hydrated exchangeable cations enter into the interlayer space and as a result
there will be variable spacing. And, as a result of this variable spacing they will show
shrink and swell property. Because in the dry season; obviously, the interlayer water will
evaporate and these two layer will collapse to each other and then it will shrink. And,
during the wet season or monsoon season the water will go inside, and then it will create
the swelling. So, this is how montmorillonite shows the swelling and shrinkage property.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:15)
And this is how montmorillonite looks like under electro microscope and you can see
this is very common black cotton soil in India. And, you can see you know this is an
example vertisals; obviously, you know about the vertisal also. Vertisals are like that I
mean they are dominated by the smectite and montmorillonite and they shows this deep
cracks during the dry season, because of this swelling and shrinkage property.(Refer Slide Time: 19:54)
So, let us go to another one vermiculite. Remember that it is weathered mica product
where potassium ions between the molecular sheets are replaced by magnesium ions.
And,  they  have  highest  cation  exchange  capacity  we  will  discuss:  what  is  cation
exchange capacity later on among all the clay. And, less swelling capacity than smectite,
but more than kaolinite; remember they are very very nutrient rich and stable under low
pH. Now, this is important less swelling capacity than smectite, but more than kaolinite
we will discuss why.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:26)
So, again this is a structure of vermiculate you can see. This is the right most structure is
basically the electro micrograph of vermiculite. And the left one you can see you know
the actual structure of vermiculite. The interlayer d axis spacing varies from 1 to 1.5
nanometer. And obviously, in the interlayer space there will be dominance of water
molecules magnesium and other ions. So, this is about vermiculite.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:59)
So, let us see what we have; the next group is mica group. Mica group is you know a
basically you know represented by this mineral call illite and illite will look like fibrous.
Illite will show fibrous nature under electro microscope and in case of illite; obviously,
there will be only isomorphous substitution in the tetrahedral layer. In the tetrahedral
layer silica 4 or silica atom get replaced by aluminium atom or aluminium ions.
Silica get replaced by aluminium and as a result of that there will be a high net negative
charge. Although the interlayer space will be dominated by potassium and which get
adsorbed in the interlayer. And, as a result of that they will lock the structure these
potassium ions are very small in size as a result of that there will be very less space in the
interlayer. And, a as a result will be there will be non-expanding there are non-expensive
and they are fairly nutrient poor in nature.(Refer Slide Time: 22:12)
So, this is a structure of illite; obviously, you can see the isomorphous substitution only
occurring in the tetrahedral layer. And obviously, whatever negative charge develop is
getting satisfied by this interlayer K plus and K plus is very small as a result of that they
are almost collapse. And, as a result of that they are very much tightly bound and as a
result their collapse only the d axis spacing is 1 nanometer. And, that is why these are
non-expanding in nature; another name of illite is fine grained mica alright.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:52)
So, the final one chlorite; chlorite is basically also having the similar structure as the
other 2 is to 1 type of mineral. However, in the interlayer space there are iron and
magnesium occupy, in the there will be you know interlayer octahedral sheet which will
be either occupied by iron or either occupied by magnesium. We talked about that in our
last class; obviously, when there will be magnesium hydroxide interlayer that will be
considered as brucite layer.
When there will be alluminium hydroxide interlayer that will be considered as gibbsite
layer. So, hydroxy octahedral sheet in the interlayer space and they; obviously, due to the
presence of this hydroxy octahedral interlayer space they shows restricted swelling. Due
to the locked interlayer structure they are nutrient poor and there very much common in
sedimentary rocks and the soils derived from them.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:47)
So, this is a structure of the chlorite you can see; obviously, they are almost similar than
that you know that with the 2 is to 1 type of mineral. However, in the interlayer space
there  is  a  hydroxide  sheets  based  on  the  dominance  of  hydroxide,  based  on  the
dominance of the cations of the hydroxide they are named differently.
Obviously, you know either it is magnesium hydroxide or ammonium hydroxide. The
interlayer or d axis spacing is 1.4 nanometer and as a result of the presence of this
hydroxide sheet their locked structure and they have low nutrient capacity.(Refer Slide Time: 24:31)
So, let us see visual comparison between all  the different  types of you know  clay
minerals some major clay minerals. Remember that there are 100’s of different clay
minerals; however, we are only focusing on 4 to 5 major ones. So, let us see what are
their visually how can separate them. So, you can say let us start with the simplest one.
So, the kaolinite, kaolinite is the simplest one, it is non-expanding and non-swelling, it is
0.5 you know 1 is to 1 type of layer; with the d axis spacing of 0.7 nanometer followed
by montmorillonite.
Montmorillonite is you know one is you know 1 to 2 nanometer interlayer or d axis
spacing and water molecules. So, you know the interlayer space is dominated by either
water molecules or miscellaneous cations. And, in case of vermiculite the interlayer
space is dominated by water molecules and magnesium and other ions. And, the d axis
spacing is little bit lower than that of montmorillonite; it is one point 1 to 1.5 nanometer.
And  then  find  in  mica  or  non  expanding  illite;  obviously,  due  to  the  presence  of
interlayer potassium they are locked in nature. And, the d axis spacing is also very less
followed by these chlorite which is 2 is to 1 1 is to 1. We by the way we call to a chlorite
as 2 is to 1 is to 1 because 2 is to 1 we already know and 1 stands for another magnesium
or aluminium hydroxide sheet, and these are also non-expanding on minimum swelling.
So, this is the visual you know visual comparison between these major clay minerals.(Refer Slide Time: 26:11)
So, let us see what how clay mineralogy and weathering patterns are linked. So, this is
very  interesting  diagram.  So,  that  you  know  secondary  minerals  or  clay  minerals
basically forms from weathering of the primary minerals. So, let us see what are the
sequence of different secondary minerals when they are formulating, when they are
generating from the primary minerals. So, let if you see the primary minerals these are
the first or precursor of secondary minerals or clay minerals.
So, at first from the primary minerals; obviously, there will be the formation of illite or
chlorite.  And  in  the  next  step;  obviously,  the  interlayer  potassium  of  the  chlorite
interlayer potassium of illite will be replaced. Because, as the weathering is going on all
the interlayer you know interlayer ions will be getting replaced by other ions which are
present in the soil environment. Obviously, you will see that illite will be converted to
vermiculite because the only difference between illite and vermiculite is the interlayer
potassium.  So,  when  the  interlayer  potassium  get  replaced  they  will  be  ultimately
converted to the vermiculite.
Similarly, in case of chlorite when the magnesium will be replaced magnesium will be
you know magnesium will be weathered or magnesium will be removed; ultimately it
will  be  producing  the  vermiculite.  And,  from  the  vermiculite  when  the  interlayer
magnesium will be further reduced or removed ultimately it will produce a smectite,
from the smectite remember that this is the 2 is to 1 type of mineral. So, we are havingmore dominance of silica tetrahedral than alluminium octahedral 2 is to 1 you know. So,
there  will  be  further  weathering,  further  weathering  will  remove  the  silica  further
ultimately we will be producing 1 is to 1 type of kaolinite. And, further and extreme
weathering condition there will be further removal silica ultimately producing the iron
aluminium oxide.
So, you can see in case of young and weakly weathering soil you will see the dominance
of illite and chlorite. And, in case of intermediate weathering you will see the dominance
of  smectite  in  sometime  vermiculite.  And  obviously,  in  case  of  strong  weathering
condition you will see the dominance of kaolinite and iron and alluminium oxides. So,
this is how weathering and intensity of weathering and help in changing one clay mineral
to another clay mineral.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:46)
This is the so, we have covered the basic structure of clay minerals and we have discuss
about their d axis spacing and all these important parameters which are you know. And,
then we made the visual comparison between different clay minerals and we distinguish
them based on their d axis spacing and also based on the interlayer cations and interlayer
other molecules.
So, let us rap up here and in the next lecture we will be finishing these silicate clays.
And, then we will go ahead and see: what are the different sources of charge which are
of different sources of charges which basically develop within the clay mineral.So, till then thank you.