Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 20
Tutorial
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology. And in this lecture,
we will try to finish the soil temperature, which we started in our last lecture and we will
also try to solve several, you know, couple of problems related to soil aeration and soil
temperature. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37)
So,  in  the  soil  temperature,  we  discussed  about  how  soil  temperature  is  affecting
different soil as well as microbial and other process. So, let us see some other examples.
So, let us see: what is the implication of soil temperature in soil heating by fire. Well
remember  that,  when  heating  up  the  surface  soil  to  remove  the  volatile  organic
component in sandy soil and as a result of heating up of the surface soil. So, as a result of
the heating of a surface soil, the volatile organic compounds, you know, diffuses the
volatile organic compound diffuses to the subsoil and get there solidified. 
So, you can see that, you know, this is a burning of plant liter at the surface. So, this is
the reason and as a result of that, soil temperature increases with the soil temperature,
you  know,  the  soil  temperature  increases.  As  a  result  of  that,  whatever  volatilecompounds were there at the top of the surface, they will diffuse to the subsoil and again
solidified. So obviously, because of that, there is a temperature gradient from surface soil
to the subsurface soil as you can see here. So, this volatile substance will diffuse into the
subsoil and again solidified and it will drastically reduce the infiltration of the soil
because, there are water repellent in nature. So, that is how soil temperature by forest fire
affects the soil, you know, water moment as well as different other soil physical and
chemical properties.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:20)
So, let us move to the next slide, you see: what are the important thermal properties of
the soil. So, we all know heat capacity. So, what is the specific heat of soil? Now specific
heat of the soil is the heat capacity per gram of soil, which is measured in terms of
calorie per gram and it controls the degree to which, you know, the soil warms up. Sorry,
it should be soil warms up. 
So, the specific heat largely controls the degree to which the soil warms up in the spring,
it is the very very important soil property. And the specific heat, you remember that this
specific heat of pure water is defined as 1 calorie per gram or 4.18 joules per gram and
that of a dry soil. So, the specific heat of dry soil is about 0.2 calories per gram.
So, you can see the specific heat of, you know, pure water is 5 times more than that of
specific heat of a soil. So, as a result of that, wetter soils, you know, wetter soil warms
more slowly than that of drier soils. Because, when there will be water in the soil, as aresult of high heat specific heat more amount of heat will be required to raise the
temperature. And as a result of that, the dry soil will, you know, will warm more faster
than that of wet soil. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:58)
So, this is a specific heat. And what is heat of vaporization? Well it requires a large
amount of energy that is around 540 kilo you know kilo calorie for every kilogram of
water to be vaporized and their and this use of energy for evaporation has major effect
because, it cools the soil. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:18)
So, what is thermal conductivity? It is very very important aspect remember that, the
movement of heat in soil is also analogous to the movement of water. So, we have
discussed about the movement of water in case of saturated soil, in case of unsaturated
soil. In case of saturated soil, we discuss about Darcy’s law and remember that. So, the
movement of heat in the soil is analogous to the movement of water and also the rate of
flow being determined by a driving force and by the ease with which heat flows through
the soil and this can be expressed by Fourier’s law. 
So, this is important remember that this is called Fourier’s law. Now, what Fourier’s law
states? The formula of Fourier’s law is qh is equal to minus k into dT over dx, where qh
is the thermal flux, k is the thermal conductivity of the soil and dT over dx is the
temperature gradient over distance x that serve as the driving force for the conduction of
heat. So, this k is basically called the thermal conductivity. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:37)
So, let us see some factors which affects the thermal conductivity of the soil. The first
important factor is compaction because, you can see the soil when the soil is more
compacted; obviously, the heat flow will be more. So obviously, the arrow shows the
heat transfer as we can see this is the loose soil loosely aggregated soil and this is the,
you know, compacted soil. And the compact soil will transfer more heat and compacted
soil  increases  the  particle  because,  this  compact  soil  increase  the  particle-particle
contacts which helps in heat transfer. So, you can see here; obviously, in between theparticles there are air molecules. So, as a result there is no, you know, particle-particle
contact, but as you are going from loose to compact soil; obviously, there will be more
particle to particle contacts and as a result of this particle-particle contacts there will be
more heat transfer. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:45)
So, compaction, we know, increases the heat flow in the soil. Another important aspect
is, you know, the volumetric water content. So, you can see this as the interplay between
volumetric water content or in the words water content with the thermal conductivity. So,
as we are increasing the water content in the soil, thermal conductivity is also increases.
So, if the water content of the soil is increased, it will also increase the heat transfer and
the water because, the water has more thermal conductivity than that of air. So, if the
pore spaces are filled by water they will; obviously, replace the air. So, the water the
presence of water into the pore space will increase the thermal conductivity because, the
water has more thermal conductivity than that of air. So, you can see there are 2 types of
soil, one is aggregated loam and another is non aggregated loam soil. 
So, in case of non aggregated loam soil or another words, it is a compacted soil we can
say. So, the in case compacted soil; obviously, the thermal conductivity rises more as
compared to well aggregated loam, where there will be more amount of macro pores. So,
this is the implication of volumetric, you know, water content in thermal conductivityinto, you know, in 2 types of, you know, aggregated soil. One is compacted another is
aggregated. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:09)
And also, temperature also has shows variation  with time and date; obviously, soil
surface temperature changes with the season, as we can see in this in this picture and
subsoil temperature changes very little with the season, that is 4 to 5 meter depth and
subsoil temperature is less variable than that of air and surface soil temperature. So, the
surface soil temperature changes more rapidly than that of subsoil temperature, because
at the subsoil temperature is more or less, you know, almost constant. (Refer Slide Time: 08:43)
So, how you can control the soil temperature? Well there are couple of ways to control
the  soil  temperature,  some  examples  of,  you  know,  management  strategies  for
controlling the soil temperature are organic mulches and plastic residue management. So,
it is generally used to the buffer temperature. So, as you can see in this in these 2 graphs;
obviously, this green this line shows the mulch condition, this is no mulch condition and
this is years, you know. So here, also, you know. So, days in January, the temperature in
year is quite low. So, if you go for mulching, it will raise the temperature. So, it will
protect  the  soil  temperature  from  going  below  a  certain  temperature  so  that,  the
germination  and  biological  activities  and  all  other  nutrient  transformation  can  be
maintained. 
So similar, you know, the opposite can be found in case of, you know, August because,
in case of August or in other words in case of drier months; obviously, their temperature
will be higher followed by the no mulch condition. And finally, you will see lower
temperature will be get, you will get in the mulch conditions. So it will conserve the
temperature of the soil. And it will, you know, it will prevent the soil temperature to go
beyond a certain limit, thereby, you know, preserving all the soil biological as well as
physical, all the soil biological as well as chemical activities. 
So, this is, you know, importance of mulch for soil temperature control. Remember that,
mulch from conserve, you know mulch from conservation tillage let the, you know, so;mulch  for  conservation  tillage  is  also  important.  Because,  in  the  definition  of  the
conservation tillage it says, the conservation tillage must let the crop residue on the soil
surface. So, when we leave the crop residues in the soil surface, it acts as a natural mulch
or organic mulch and reduces the temperature, it reduce the transportation cost. And in
another word, it helps in maintaining soil temperature and; obviously, it is helpful in case
of warm temperatures. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:06)
Plastic mulches, plastic mulches are used to increase the soil temperature. So, organic
mulches in case of conservation tillage are helpful in warm climate, whereas plastic
mulch are helpful in the cooler climate. Because, plastic mulches are used to increase the
soil temperature in the cold region and there are 2 types of plastic mulches, one is called
clear plastic mulches, another is black plastic.
So, clear plastic has greater heating effect than that of black plastic and generally it is
used in cool climate for growing crops or for pest management. The major disadvantage
is that it is non renewable, but some nowadays biodegradable plastic films can be used as
a mulch. (Refer Slide Time: 11:50)
So, as you can see, these are the some biodegradable plastic mulches farmers are using
nowadays for mulching purpose in the cooler climate region.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:00)
So, another important aspect is the soil with more water having 3 to 6 degree lower
temperature than that of dry soil and to get warmer soil; obviously, you need to improve
the drainage condition. So, you we know so; obviously, we have already discussed, why
the temperature in dry soil is higher than that of wetter soil. So, moisture control is also
and other factor to, you know, to control the soil temperature.So, guys we have finished this soil temperature chapter. So, I hope that you have learnt
something new and let us go and solve some problem in the next lecture next tutorial.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:49)
So, will be solving 3 problems; obviously, let us, you know, relating to soil aeration and
soil temperature. So, let us start with problem 1. So let the problem says consider a crop
field with an effective root zone depth of 80 centimeter, a daily. So, the effective root
zone here is 80 centimeter, a daily transpiration rate of 6 millimeter and a daily soil
respiration rate of 10 gram oxygen per square meter. So calculate, what fraction of the
oxygen requirement is supplied by convection if air is drawn from the atmosphere in
immediate response to the pressure deficit created in the soil by the extraction of soil
moisture. 
So, let us first calculate the volume of water that is being extracted per square meter. So,
the volume of soil water that is being extracted per square meter by the crops through
transpiration process is 1 square meter multiplied by 0.006 meter. So because, we are
converting 6 millimeter to meter; so, we are getting around 6 liter per day. Second, you
can see volume of air drawn from the atmosphere will be similar to the volume of water
withdrawn from the soil that is 6 litre. Because, whatever water are we have in the plants
drawing from the air, drawing from the soil, I am sorry, this water will get replenished by
air from the atmosphere. The similar volume will be maintained.So here, so a volume of air drawn from the atmosphere will be similar volume to the
volume of water that is been withdrawn from the soil. So, volume of oxygen drawn from
the atmosphere will be 6 multiplied by 21 percent that is 1.26 liter because, we know in
the atmosphere, there are 21 percent of oxygen and also mass. So, the mass of oxygen
drawn from the atmosphere, if you convert it to the gram from liter will get around 1.8
gram and that comes from 1.26 over 2 into 2.4 multiplied by 32. So, how it comes
because, you know that 32 gram is the molecular weight of oxygen, 32 is the molecular
weight of oxygen and 22.4 liter is the volume of 1 mole of gas at standard temperature
and pressure.
So basically, we are converting this liter of oxygen to the gram. So once, we calculate
this is 1.8 gram, the final question is we have to calculate, what fraction of the oxygen
requirement  is  supplied  by  convective  air  by  convection,  if  air  is  drawn  from  the
atmosphere in immediate response? So, the percentage of daily oxygen requirement
supplied by convection is 1.8, which you have already got and 10 is the total is a daily
soil respiration rate got from here percent. So, that will come around 18 percent. So, I
will hope that you have understood  this problem this solution. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:35)
So, let us go ahead and see what is our next problem. Now, this also, you know, deals
with soil aeration. So, this problem says that consider a soil profile in which the air phase
oxygen concentration diminishes linearly from 21 percent at the soil surface to half ofthat at 100 centimeter depth. So, if the total porosity is a uniform  45 percent  and the
volume wetness is 35 percent, calculate the diffusion rate using Penman’s coefficient for
the effective diffusion coefficient of oxygen in the soil Ds. 
Assume steady state diffusion and use value of 1.89 into 10 to the power minus 1 square
meter  per  second,  sorry,  square  centimeter  per  second  for  the  bulk  air  diffusion
coefficient. Again, you have to consider that there is a soil profile and there is a steady
state flow and it linearly this oxygen concentration, you know, depletes from 21 percent
at the soil surface to it is half at 100 centimeter depth. If you know they have given the
total porosity of 45 percent and also they have given volume wetness 38 percent. So, we
have to calculate the diffusion rate using Penman’s coefficient.
Now in the last lecture, we have already discussed about the fick’s law of diffusion as
well as their Penman’s modification. So, we will be using that Penman’s modification
and fick’s law for solving this problem. So, our first step is to estimate the effective
diffusion coefficient Ds using Penman’s linear relation between Ds and the air filled
porosity fa. So, if you remember the Penman’s Penman equation shows Ds over D 0
equal to 0.66 fa, where 0.66 is the tortuosity factor. Now we know that this fa or air filled
porosity can be calculated by subtracting the volume wetness from the total porosity.
Now, we know the total porosity is 0.05 and the volume wetness is 0.035 and basically
the bulk diffusion air diffusion coefficient value is 0.189 square centimeter per second,
which we got from here. So, ultimately we are getting 0.0126 square centimeter per
second, this is Ds. So, once we calculate, Ds let us see what is our next step. (Refer Slide Time: 19:45)
So, we now use the fick’s law to calculate the steady state one dimensional diffusive flux
qd of oxygen through the soil profile from the atmosphere to the plane at which the
oxygen concentration is 50 percent and the depth is 100 centimeter. So, let us use the
Fick’s first law. So, the Fick’s first law is qd equal to Ds multiplied by dc by dx. Now
recall  that  the  concentration  of  oxygen  in  the  external  atmosphere  is  about  0.32
multiplied by 32 gram per 22.4 liter. So, that comes around 3 into 10 to the power minus
4 gram per cubic centimeter. So, therefore, by substituting this number into this equation,
we get value of qd that is 1.26.
So, we have already calculated this in the, you know, this Ds value we have already
calculated this. So, the initial you know initial concentration of the external air is this and
the final concentration will be 50 percent as we can see the oxygen concentration is
about 50 percent of the atmosphere. So, the final concentration is 1.5 multiplied by 10 to
the power minus 4, because you know the dc is the changes in your concentration.
So, we are getting in the changes of concentration from the atmosphere to the soil at 100
centimeter depth. So, here dx is 100. So, ultimately we are getting 1.89 multiplied by 10
to the power minus 8 gram per square centimeter into second. So, this quantity can be
multiplied by 10 to the 4 square centimeter by meter square and by 8.64 10 to the power
4 second per day, to obtain the flux in gram per square meter of soil surface per daybecause,  you  know  that  in  one  day,  there  will  be  this  amount  of  taken.  So,  8.64
multiplied by 10 to the power minus 4 seconds.
So, you just need to convert this 1.89 into 10 to the power minus 8 gram per square
centimeter second to, you know, flux in gram per square meter of soil surface per day.
So, for getting that we have to multiply this 1.89 into 10 to the power minus 8 with 10 to
the power 4 into 8.64 multiplied by 10 to the power 4. So, we are getting it a total of final
value of 15.83 gram per square meter per day. So, this is our final solution.
So, basically in this solution, we are using first the Penman’s equation to calculate the Ds
and using the Ds we will calculate the diffusion flux qd using the Fick’s law. And
remember that, here we have to calculate the, you know, diffusion gradient also and this
concentration gradient. And this concentration gradient can be calculated by subtracting
the initial concentration of oxygen and the final concentration of oxygen. And, we know
that final concentration is just half of the initial concentration and the distance is given it
is 100 centimeter.
So once you get that, we have to just convert into gram per meter square using suitable
multiplication factor. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:40)
So, I hope that you have understood this solution. So, let us go ahead and see our third
problem. So, in this problem it says that assuming steady state condition, calculate one-dimensional thermal flux and total heat transfer through a 20 centimeter thick layer. If
the thermal conductivity is 3.6 into 10 to the power minus 3 calorie per centimeter
second degree and a temperature differential of 10 degree centigrade maintained across
the sample for 1 hour. 
So here, first and you know we will be using Fourier’s law for solving this problem and
as you can see we are we are basically calculating qh here and this qh can be calculated
by  using  this  formula,  where  k is  the  thermal  conductivity  and dT  over  dx  is  the
temperature gradient. And you can see that, you know, the thermal conductivity value is
already given that is 3.6 multiplied by 10 to the power minus 3 calorie per centimeter
second degree. And so, we have to and here the temperature differential is already given
that is 10 degree centigrade. So, it is basically Dt, this is k and this is dx.
So, dx you already know that is 20 centimeter thick layer. So, ultimately we are getting
1.8 multiplied by 10 to the power minus 3 calorie per square centimeter second. So, we
have to calculate it for 1 hour or 3600 second because, you know 1 hour equal to 3600
second. So, what we are what we got it is qh, we know that total heat transfer is basically
the multiplication of qh with the total number of seconds in 1 hour. So, ultimately, we
are getting 6.48 calorie per square centimeter. So, guys these are couple of, you know,
problems and their solutions, I thought that I should discuss with you to give, you know,
to help you understand different soil physical process specially, soil temperature and soil
aeration. 
And these will  be helpful  for you to in the  near future for solving several related
questions; obviously, I cannot cover all the, you know, different types of problems,
because of time constraint. However, I would, you know, I would expect that you will go
ahead and consult different text and reference books for solving. And for consulting
different types of problem related to the soil physics, soil physical parameters like soil
layers, soil temperature, and soil water and soil porosity and so on and so forth.
So, by, you know, by this we are wrapping of the soil physical processes and from the
lecture which will start, which will start next week we will be starting the soil chemical
process. So, if you have any questions, please feel free to email and feel free to ask me
any questions. And I will be more than happy to explain any queries you may have. 
Thank you very much.