Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 23
Sources of Charges in Soil
(Refer Slide Time: 00:25)
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology. And in this lecture
we will be finishing we will be finishing this silicate clays because, we have started the
silicate clays. And we will be talking about X ray diffraction analysis and after we cover
the X ray diffraction analysis, I will be going to the next topic that is different sources of
charge development in the clay minerals. And so, let us talk about X ray diffraction
analysis.
Now, as I have already told you that d axis spacing is very much important for the
identification of the clay minerals because; one clay mineral differ from another clay
mineral based on their d axis spacing. As you can remember the d axis spacing of
kaolinite is the smallest that is 0.72 nanometre followed by you know illite which is also
non expanding. Then we see 1.4 which is for nanometre for you know 0.14 nanometre
for kaolin for chlorite.(Refer Slide Time: 01:29)
If we go back and see there is 1.4 nanometre then 1 nanometre for illite 1 to 1.5
nanometre for the vermiculite  1 to 2 nanometre for smectite or montmorillonite. So, you
can see there are differences in the d axis spacing and basically we use this structural
difference for their identification using the X ray diffraction analysis. So, what is X ray
diffraction? So, if you can see these are some parallel atomic planes; obviously, you
know what are the parallel atomic planes and what is the d axis  spacing I have already
discussed this. So, the distance between these parallel you know distance within this
parallel  two lines  of atoms  is  d axis   spacing  and suppose there  are two different
incidence X rays which are diffracting from the different planes.
So, let us considered this is the ray I and this is ray II. So, you can see the ray I is coming
and ultimately it is getting diffracted from the first layer. So, this is the diffracted ray and
in the and also in the IInd the ray also getting diffracted from the next parallel atomic
planes from this plane. So, the distance of atomic planes D that is the distance of these
atomic planes are D can be determined based on Bragg’s equation which is given by
scientist Bragg. The Bragg says that BC plus CD is or in other words Bragg’s law says
that the two rays will constructively interfere, if the extra distance ray II travels is a
whole number of wavelength further then what ray I travels.
So, what is constructive interference first of all and what is destructive interference? So,
let us consider this picture; obviously, we can see these two waves are in phase. And,when those two those two in phase waves combined they will form this constructive
interference which will have higher amplitude than individual these individual you know
waves. And here you can see these are these two waves are out of phase so, they are
basically nullifying themselves. So, this is an example of constructive interference and
this is an example of distractive interference.
So, the two rays here you can see this is the ray I and this is ray II. So, these two ray only
can constructively interfere if the extra distance travel by this ray II will be an integer
multiplier of the wavelength of this incident rays and the wavelength is lambda. So, you
can see what is the distance this ray I travelling? The ray I is travelling A and from A to
here. And, the ray II is travelling the extra distance ray II is travelling this BC plus CD,
this is the extra distance that ray II is travelling. So, BC plus CD has to be an integer
multiplier  of  the  wavelength  of  incident  ray. So,  if  the  incident  ray wavelength  is
lambda; obviously, n is the integer.
And or in another words n lambda is basically 2 d sin theta because BC equal to d sin
theta, theta is the angle that it makes you know this is the angle theta and BC and also
CD is another d sin theta. So, BC plus CD equal to 2 d sin theta or in other words n
lambda will be 2 d sin theta which are or in other words d will be n lambda by 2 sin
theta. So, this is the basic you know form of this Bragg’s law and different clay minerals
now these d will vary from one clay mineral to another clay mineral.
And different clay minerals have various basal spacing or atomic planes or in other
words d axis  spacing. For example, the basal spacing of kaolinite is 7.2 angstrom or 0.72
nanometre. So, based on this principle you can separate one clay mineral to another clay
mineral. So, based on this d axis  spacing you can separate one clay mineral to another
clay mineral.(Refer Slide Time: 07:13)
So, basically the technique we used for separating the clay minerals or identifying the
clay minerals is called XRD technique or X ray diffraction technique. And basically you
will in the X ray diffractions technique you will see some peaks like that and as you can
see we are having the you know kaolinite peaks arising at 7.2 angstrom around 7.2
angstrom. And by changing the two theta value we can get the second order peak also at
3.56 angstrom which is basically 7.13 divided by 2.
So, you can see these d axis  spacing can be exactly identified by using the X ray
diffraction analysis and this using this effect X ray diffract by the way we call it X ray
diffractograms using this effect X ray diffractograms you can identify the individual clay
mineral. So, this is about the X ray diffraction analysis and there are also you know there
are several details about X ray diffraction analysis now we are not going in details.
However, if you are interested you can consult any book which deals with the X ray
diffraction analysis to gain better understanding of the processes.
So, guys we have completed the silicate clays, you know I hope that you have learned
something new in this silicate clays. This is very important and then in the next topic we
will be sources of charges in the soil colloids.(Refer Slide Time: 08:45)
So, let us start and in this lecture we will be covering in this topic we will basically
covering these following concepts we will be covering the constant charges in colloids.
Then we will be covering variable charges in colloids and then we will be talking about
adsorption of cations and anions to colloidal surface.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:01)
So, let us talk about types of charges. Two types of charges arise in soil colloids; one is
called constant or permanent charge and these you know this another charge is called
dependent or variables dependent and variable charges. Now, constant or permanentchargers  occurs,  because  of  isomorphous  substitution  I  have  already  talked  about
isomorphous substitution in our previous lecture and we will be talking about this pH
dependent charge variable dependent charge.
 Now, remember that this variable charge depends on the solution ph that is why it is also
called pH dependent charge. So, these are two major sources of charge that develop
within the soil colloid. So, we will discuss them one by one.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:52)
Let us start with the constant charge; the constant charge arise due to the isomorphous
substitution and it is called constant or permanent because it does not depends on the
variable pH, it is constant it depends on the internal structure of the clay mineral. So, it is
not dependent on pH it only depends on isomorphous substitution which is basically
replacement of cation by another cation of similar size and depends only the type and
abundance of the cations.
And; obviously, this type of isomorphous substitution basically you can see you know in
2 is to 1 type of clays like montmorillonite like vermiculite and you know like illite I
have already discussed them in our last lecture.(Refer Slide Time: 10:37)
So, this negative charge arise basically when a lower charge of cation replace higher
charge cation you know we have discuss about that replacement of alumina with Al3 plus
with  Mg2 plus  octahedral  sheet.  And  also  replacement  of  Si4 plus  with  Al3 plus
tetrahedral sheet in case of fine grained mica if you remember. So, these are some
examples of isomorphous substitution and as a result of this isomorphous substitution
there is a development of constant or negative permanent charge.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:10)
I have discuss already this picture in our last this diagram in our last lecture. So, I am not
going to in details, but just to give you know just to  you know brief idea you can see
aluminium 3 here is replaced by magnesium and; obviously, occurs in an this type of
thing occurs in aluminium dominated dioctahedral sheets of smectite vermiculite and
chlorite.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:35)
So, we talked about constant charge they are basically negative, but sometime positive
constant charge also develop. So, how they develop? Remember that positive charge
arises when a high charge cation replace lower charge ion it is for example, when Al3
plus replace as Mg2 plus in trioctahedral sheets and it is a common in trioctahedral
hydroxide  sheets  in  chlorites.  So,  this  is  an  example  where  positive  constant  or
permanent charge also can develop within clay.(Refer Slide Time: 12:09)
Now, what is variable charge or pH dependent charge? The pH dependent charge or
variable charge is mainly found within 1 is to 1 type of clay like kaolinite and humus.
Remember that humus is the one of the humus is the organic colloid and it is one of the
major component of soil. And remember that this 1 is to 1 type of clay and kaolinite you
know  and  humus  basically  shows  variable  charge  because,  exchange  occurs  in  the
external surfaces only.
 I remember that they may give rise to both positive and negative charge that is why we
are calling it variable charge because they can generate either positive charge or negative
charge. However, in case of constant charge it is mostly negative charge. So, in case of
variable charge or pH dependent charge is depends on pH of the soil solution.(Refer Slide Time: 13:01)
Now so, what is variable charge variable charge I mean you can see here this is the
neutral pH. Now you know that clay mineral contains different layers of atoms like
hydroxyl followed by aluminium, then followed by oxygen hydroxyl, then followed by
silica, then followed by you know oxygen in case of 1 is to 1 type of layer; obviously, 1
is to 1 type of layer.
So, these are some edges so, when this type of edges are present; obviously, you will see
that  there  will  be  hydroxyl  group which  are  present  at  the  edges  broken  edges  of
aluminium. And in case of lower pH; that means, when there will be lower pH when
there will be high dominance of protons you know that. So, this proton will go and attach
to these hydroxyl to form this positive charge. And so, you can see at the at acidic
condition.
 In acidic condition this 1 is to 1 type of clay or edges of the 1 is to 1 type of clay they
can produce the positive charge. However, in case of high pH condition; that means, in
alkaline conditions there will be dominance of OH minus and this H will react with OH
minus to produce H 2O and ultimately living these O minus. So, they are ultimately
creating negative charge.
So, you can see based on different pH the charge distribution is also changing in case of
lower pH here getting positive you know there will be development of positive chargeand in case of higher pH there will be development of negative charge. So, that is why
we call it variable charge all right.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:09)
 
So,  development  of  a  pH  dependent  charge  in  kaolinite  in  this  specific  example;
obviously, let me show you. So, this is a 1 is to 1 type of layer and is to in this one 1 is to
1 type of layer one charge from octahedral oxygen that has lost this hydroxyl. So, you
can see one hydroxyl is getting lost from this from here and we are getting a net surface
charge of minus 3 and the crystal edges of 1 hydroxyl will attached to this 1 sorry 1
proton will attached to this minus half to create positive half. So, here we are getting net
negative charge edge I mean minus 1 and ultimately we are also getting net surface
charge of plus 1.
So, you can see as pH decreases from left to right. So, here pH is decreasing from left to
right so; that means, in lower pH condition there will be higher dominance of H plus,
higher dominance of H plus will produce more positive charges at the edges. So, you can
see with the increase of the pH the net surface charge is getting positive from minus 3 to
plus 1. And; obviously, you can see here how these protons are getting attached to this
edge I mean this hydroxyl groups which are present at the edges or broken edges.(Refer Slide Time: 17:05)
So, I hope it is now clear to you. So, let us go and see you know variable charge ok, we
have discussed about the negative charge; obviously, this positive charge occurs under
moderate to you know extreme acidic condition and; obviously, under low pH edge
oxygen associate with H plus hence a net positive charge I have already told you that.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:23)
So, let us see there these are charge characteristics of representative colloids showing
comparative levels of permanent and pH dependent negative charge. You can see one
thing that in case of organic the constant charge is percentage of negative in the totalnegative  charge;  obviously,  the  percentage  of  constant  charge  is  only  10  percent;
however, the pH dependent charge is 90 percent.
So, in case of smectite also the constant charge is 95 percent because of isomorphous
substitution; however, there is only 5 percent you know you know pH dependent charge
because, you know they do not show this type of broken you know there is no such you
know positive charge development at the or negative charge development at the edges.
As you can go from organic then to you know smectite, vermiculite to kaolinite now you
can see 95 percent of the negative charge is based on pH independent charge. Because,
the constant charges is only 5 percent why it is that because, if you remember they have
almost lock structure due to the presence of hydrogen bonding in the adjacent in between
the adjacent layers.
 As  a  result  no  cations  or   another  you  know  moreover  there  is  no  isomorphous
substitution  in  case  of  kaolinite  as  a  result  of less  isomorphous  substitution  in the
kaolinite; obviously, there will be no constant charge or negative charge development
only they rely upon the pH dependent charge. However, in case of gibbsite and you
know  goethite  their  extreme  condition;  obviously,  there  will  be  100  percent  pH
dependent charge. There will be no constant or permanent negative charge.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:32)
So,  what  is  the  relationship  between  pH  and  charges?  Obviously,  cation  exchange
capacity increases with increasing soil pH it is quite obvious because you can see here
the relationship between soil pH and surface charge. So, as we can see if the soil pH is
increasing the you know negative charge increasing or in other words cation exchange
capacity is increasing or another word as the soil pH is increasing the negative charge
increases because, of pH dependent charge. And, as a result of that there will be more
cation exchange capacity or in other words there will be more ability for the soil to
absorb more positive cations.
So, that is why cation exchange capacity increases with increasing soil pH; however,
anion exchange capacity decreases with increasing soil pH as we can see the soil pH is
increasing from 3 to 4 to 5 to 6 and 7. And positive you know anion exchange capacity is
getting decreased here from 0.3 almost 0.2  point plus 2.5 to around 0, at around 7, at
around 7, soil pH because of that I mean anion you know why is that because as we are
increasing the soil pH you know negative charge further develops. And as a result of the
negative charge develops that will that will create the repulsion of the negatively charged
anions and as a result of that anion exchange capacity will decrease.
Now,  what  is  cation  exchange  capacity?  So,  before  discussing  this:  what  is  cation
exchange capacity and anion exchange capacity? Cation exchange capacity is the soil to
absorb the cations adsorb the cations from the nearby environment. Whereas, anion
exchange  capacity  is basically  the ability  of soil to adsorb anions  from the nearby
environment;  remember  that  since  cations  are  positive  negative  charge  has  to  be
developed over the soil surface for their attraction and electrostatic attraction forms
between these cations as and this negatively charged surface of the clay minerals.
 So, and in case of anions; obviously, this is because of pH dependent charge and pH
dependent charge in the low in the low pH condition in the low pH condition or acidic
condition; obviously, there will be positive charge development. And this positive charge
will attract the negative charge anions like nitrate and sulphates and they will attached to
the soil surface. So, this is anion exchange capacity and cation exchange capacity.
 So, I hope that now it is clear why cation exchange capacity increases with increasing
soil pH and anion exchange capacity decreases with increasing soil pH. Now in acid rich
1 is to 1 type of in acid rich 1 is 1 is 1 type of clay soils tropic tropical regions positivecharges are more abundant whereas, negative charges predominant in two is one type of
clays in temperate region it is quite obvious. Because, 1 is to 1 type of clays kaolinite and
kaolinite can only generate the pH dependent charge not the permanent charge due to
isomorphous substitution.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:48)
So; obviously, clays  are negatively  charged because this  is  a very good you know
experiment and where they have you know scientists have plays to electrodes. And;
obviously, you can see the clay attracted to the positive terminal and demonstrate it is
negative charge. So, clay particles are negatively charged and this negatively charged
develops this negative charge develops predominantly from the isomorphous substitution
or constant charge.(Refer Slide Time: 23:16)
 Now adsorption of cations and anions adsorption remember that it is basically some
examples are adhesion of gases ions or atoms to the surface. And it may be either
physical or maybe chemical and charged colloid surface adsorbed cations and anions two
types of formation aid in adsorption; one is outer sphere and inner sphere complex.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:37)
So, let us discuss what is outer sphere complex? Outer sphere complex is when ions are
usually surrounded by water in soil solution and water molecules thus, acts as a bridgebetween the ions and colloid surfaces. And, these weak electrostatic force bind the two
bind the ions and to the colloids and ions are easily replaceable.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:59)
So, this outer sphere complex; what is inner sphere complex? Inner sphere complex is
when no water molecule between the ions and colloids hence ions directly bound you
know they are bond with colloidal surface as a very difficult to replace ion. So, here you
can see tightly bonded K plus ions. 
 So, these are example of inner sphere complex this you know this is an example of fine
grained  mica  or  illite  if  you  remember  in  case  of  illite  there  is  only  isomorphous
substitution in the tetrahedral sheet. So, as a result of that the inner layer is occupied by
the  small  potassium  cations  and  these  potassium  cations  forming  this  inner  sphere
complex they are not surrounded by you know water hulls. So, these are example of
inner sphere complex.(Refer Slide Time: 24:50)
So, this picture shows in a nutshell what is inner sphere and outer sphere complex. So,
you can see there are two types of surfaces; obviously, these negatively charged sites
where we can see negative charge developed due to isomorphous substitution. And these
are positively charged site which occurs due to variable pH and these negatively charged
site are basically you know attracting different cations.
And; obviously, this an outer sphere complex you know calcium ion surrounded by you
know water molecules they are getting attached here and also this is an example of inner
sphere complex where this H 2PO4 is getting attached directly to the you know to the clay.
So, it is hydroxylated surface of kaolinite and gibbsite this is an hydroxylated surface of
kaolinite and gibbsite examples.
And so, basically both outer sphere complex and inner space complex are defused in the
nearby soil solution. So, this is why this is called outer and inner sphere complexes and
now I hope it is clear to you: what is the difference between outer sphere complex and
inner sphere complex.(Refer Slide Time: 26:16)
So, roles and adsorption; obviously, you know the amount and type of cation adsorbed
affect the fertility of the soil here you can see a list of different cations and anions which
are having different you know different roles for the growth of the plants. Obviously,
ammonium is a plant nutrients there is a plant nutrient aluminium is toxic to the plants,
calcium is a plant nutrient, cadmium is toxic pollutant so ones and so forth.
So, these roles of adsorption they are having high roles in adsorption because based on
their dominance they can you know influence both you know soil fertility as well as
plant growth.(Refer Slide Time: 26:59)
So, we have finish the different sources of different charges in the clay in the soil colloid.
And I hope that this lecture was you know informative to you and you have learned
something new and if you have any queries feel free to send me an emails and send the
emails to my TAs. So, they will be more than happy to help you and let us wrap up here
and in the next lecture we will be starting a new topic.
Thank you very much.