Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 25
Sorption of Pesticides
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:22)
And in this lecture, we will be trying to finish the cation exchange capacity and anion
exchange capacity, where we left in the last lecture and then will be trying will be
discussing  about  a  new  topic  that  the  adsorption  of  pesticides.  So,  what  is  the
relationship between pH and CEC? Obviously, generally CEC increases with the pH and
the permanent charge of 2 is to 1 type of clay that is pH depended charge of humus and
allophane and some 1 is to 1 type of clay hold exchangeable ions, you already know that.
So, as the pH is raised obviously, the negative charge on some 1 is to 1 type of silicate
clays, allophone, humus or even iron aluminium oxide increases and CEC also increases.
Because, if you remember the pH dependent charge, when we are increasing the pH that
will basically create the negative charge. So, creation of the negative charge is basically,
they increasing the CEC because, it is attracting the cations in the soil surface or clay
surface. So, as the pH is raised obviously for 1 is to 1 type of clay allophane and even in
iron aluminium oxide, there will be increase in CEC. And in alkaline condition CECreflects the pH dependent charge as well as the permanent charge because, you know that
permanent charge is permanent. However in case alkaline condition just I told you, it
will develop their negative charge that is pH dependent negative charge. So, ultimately it
will be a total  of both permanent  charge as  well as pH dependant  charge. So, the
determination of CEC is generally done at pH 7 and or 8.2. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:00)
So, exchangeable cations in field soils, you know the exchangeable ions in the field soil
depend upon the climatic condition. Obviously, the iron and aluminium and complex
aluminium hydroxy ions and H plus are most prominent in humid region and calcium,
magnesium, sodium dominate you know soil in low rainfall areas because, you know in
case of highly leached areas. Obviously, in case of highly leached, warm and humid
condition obviously, there will be formation of oxisols. Now why there will be formation
of oxisol? Because there will be iron aluminium oxides dominance. So, you will see that
in humid region specifically in the warm and humid region, there will be a predominance
of iron aluminium ions.
However, in the low rainfall areas; obviously, in arid region, there will be predominance
of different types of soils, because of high evaporative demand. And as a result of high
evaporative demand, these soils will be much more, I would say dominated by calcium,
magnesium and sodium ions. So, in a given soil the proportion of the cation exchange
capacity satisfy by a particular cation is termed as a saturation percentage of the cation.So, for example, if 50 percent of the CEC satisfy by calcium ions the exchange complex
is said to have a calcium saturation percentage of 50. So, this terminology is especially
useful in identifying the relative proportion of sources of acidity and alkalinity in the soil
solution. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:33)
So,  cation  exchage  properties  are  typical  for  unamended  clay  loam  surface  soil  in
different climatic region. So, if we can see one interesting trend you can see, we are
giving 4 different condition, one is warm and humid region that is represented by Ultisol,
which is highly weathered one of the highly weathered soils, and then you know cool
and humid region and then represented by Alfisols then semiarid region, you  know
which is denoted by Ustolls, and then arid region that is Natrargids. So, you know if you
see a trend the exchangeable H plus and Al3 plus will be continuously reducing from this
warm humid region to cool humid to semiarid and arid region.
So, 7.5 percent 75 percent to 28 percent to 0 percent almost; and exchangeable calcium
will show the reverse trend, I mean you can get 2 percent in the warm and humid region.
However, we are getting 9 percent in cool even humid region, it is increasing to 17
percent in semiarid region and 13 percent in the arid region. And also exchangeable
sodium, which is basically present in alkaline soil, which is another type of you know
which has the high pH. So, in these basically this alkaline soil and exchangeable sodium is present in a trace
amount in case of warm and humid regions, it is very 0, it is very less 0.1 percent in
Alfisol again, 4 percent in Ustolls and arid soil, which is dominated by different sodium
salts, you will get almost 90 percent. So, you can see how these, dominance of different
cations are changing for a particular type of soil, when it is you know for different
climatic conditions. So, that shows the importance of climate for soil development as we
have discussed in our earlier lectures of soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:41)
So, cation saturation and nutrient availability obviously if the percent saturation of some
ions are high then those ions will be easily and rapidly displaceable; obviously. Now
influences of complementary ions. Obviously, the strength of adsorption of common
cations on most colloids  is generally follow this order, what is the order? That is you
know  aluminium  is  strongly  adsorbed  followed  by  calcium  then  magnesium  then
potassium, which is showing the similar adsorption capacity and which is further you
know further more than sodium.
So, potassium can be easily replaced by Al3 ions in the acid soil and it will be available
for the plants ok. So, in the acid soil aluminium will replace this potassium and this
potassium will be available to the plants. So, there are some nutrient antagonism. So, this
is another important aspect, there are some nutrient antagonism that in certain soil causeinhibition of uptake of some cations by plants. For example, sometime high potassium
levels are known to limit the uptake of magnesium.
So, that is means potassium and magnesium has a some nutrient antagonism even when
significant quantities of magnesium are present into the soil. So, that shows the different
interaction or influence of different complementary cations in the soil system.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:10)
So, here you can have a better idea in this diagram. So, basically it is a soil colloid;
basically in our case, that is clay and this is a root extending H plus and to exchange
cations on the colloid and in the cations in the colloid surface, you can see there are
several types of cations like sodium and then potassium. And they are basically loosely
held complimentary ions with large oscillations zones.
So, if we compare potassium and sodium, sodium has more large oscillation zones. So,
this is called the oscillation zone and in this oscillation zone, you know they are loosely
held this sodium. So, sodium is easily replaceable than that of potassium. So, root you
know and in another condition. Obviously, this aluminium and potassium are present.
However,  this  aluminium  are  more  tightly  held  complimentary  ions  with  small
oscillation zone than that of potassium. So, in these 2 condition, you are seeing basically
the difference in oscillation zones and ultimately, difference in their affinity to the clay
colloid. So, the half circles are loosely held with the soil.So, these are the half circles, which are basically loosely held with the soil and the root
will take the cations from the soil in exchange with H plus ions. So, in the left figure the
loosely held sodium plus will be easily taken up by the plant and in the right figure, the k
plus will be easily taken up by the plant. And you know the  k plus will be comparatively
more vulnerable to be replaced and sent to the soil solution and k plus will be more
available to the plant uptake and leaching. So, this is how the interaction or between
complementary cations influence their uptake by different plants ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:08)
So, this is now let us consider another important very very important topic, that is
percent base saturation or BS. Now percent base saturation on the CEC occupied by it is
basically, the percentage of CEC, which is occupied by the basic cations. So, we have
calculated already the CEC. Now if you can calculate what is the percentage of the total
CEC,  which  has  been  occupy,  which  is  contributing,  which  we  which  is  being
contributed by the basic cations, that is calcium magnesium and potassium then we can
calculate the percent base saturation. 
So, basic cations are distinguished from the acid cations H plus and Al3 plus. So, if we
can distinguish basic cations will be calcium, magnesium and potassium whereas, acid
cations will be aluminium and and H plus. So, at an approximately soil pH of 5.4 or less
Al3 plus is present in a significantly high concentration then that hinders the growth ofmost of the plant species and the lower the soil pH, the greater the amount of toxic Al3
plus.
So therefore, soil with high percent base saturation are generally more fertile, because
when there will be high dominance will of Al3 plus; obviously, that will create the
nutrient toxicity or Al3 or aluminium toxicity. So, we do not need that condition, we need
a fertile soil. That means, that can support the plant growth that can give that can support
the plant growth that can supply the required nutrient to the plant. So obviously, the soil
with high percent base saturation will have more fertility and they have little or no acid
cations Al3 plus that in the toxic to the plant. So, you know this high you know percent
base saturation soil, they have little or no acid cations like Al3 plus that is toxic to the
plant growth. 
So, soil with high percent base saturation have a higher pH obviously. Therefore, they
are more buffered against the acid cations from plant roots and soil processes that acidify
the soil like nitrification, acid rain, etcetera we will discuss nitrification in our coming
lectures. And also they can contain greater amounts of essential plant nutrients cation
like potassium, calcium, magnesium for they use by the plants. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:31)
So, these are very important what is the formula percent base saturation? The percent
base saturation is basically, calcium plus magnesium plus potassium over total CECmultiplied by 100. So, depending on soil pH the soil base saturation maybe a fraction this
is very important.
So, depending on the soil pH the soil base saturation or percent base saturation maybe a
fraction of CEC or approximately equal to the CEC. So, in general if the soil pH is below
7 the base saturation is less than CEC, because there must be some acidic cations;
however, at pH 7 or higher soil clay mineral and organic matter surface are occupied by
basic cations and thus base saturation will be equal to the CEC in that condition.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:19)
So, what are the effect of different colloid types? Difference exists in the tenacity with
which several types of colloids will specific cations.
So, at a given percentage base saturation smectites, you know at given percent base
saturation smectite, which have a high charge density per unit of colloid surface hold
calcium more tightly or more strongly than that of kaolinite. So, calcium percentage will
have to be increase up to a certain percentage to satisfy the need of plant in case of
smectites  and  kaolinite  can  supply  calcium  at  relatively  lower  percentage  of  base
saturation, and obviously the need to add limestone to the 2 soils will be somewhat
differently partly. Because of this factor we will discuss why we add limestone, in why
when we will discuss the soil acidity.(Refer Slide Time: 13:07)
Now, let us discuss anion exchange, anion exchange is also same anion it is basically, the
ability of the soil to exchange anions from it is surrounding medium and anion held in 2
major  ways.  Firstly,  they  are  held  by  anion  adsorption  mechanism  similar  to  the
responsible for similar, which are those responsible for cation exchange. Secondly, they
may actually reactive surface oxides or hydroxides forming more definitive inner sphere
complexes. Now in the last lectures, we have discussed, what are inner sphere, inner
sphere complex and outer sphere complex. So, I am not going to discuss them in details.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:41)
So, anion adsorption mechanism the basic principles of anion exchange are similar to
those of cation exchange and the charge on the colloids are positive. And the exchange is
among negatively charged anions, the positive charge develop due to the pH dependent
charge you know that, and a positive charge is associated with the surface of kaolinite
iron aluminium oxides and allophone, and attract anions such as sulphate and nitrate.
You can see here you know the nitrate is first adsorbed to the soil colloid and which is at
that getting replaced by another cation that is chlorite. 
So, just in case of cation exchange equivalent quantities of ammonia, nitrate and chloride
are exchange here. So, the reaction can be reversed and nutrient anions release can be
absorbed by the plant. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:28)
So,  AEC  generally  decreases  with  the  increase  pH. Obviously,  when  there  will  be
increase pH, there will be negative charge development. So, when there will be negative
charge development due to the pH dependant charge; obviously, the AEC or anion
exchange capacity will increase. So, this is quiet you know with the increase of the , I am
sorry with the increase of soil pH, there will be development of negative charge. 
So, when there will be development of negative charge obviously, the anion exchange
capacity will decrease and cation exchange capacity will increase because, it will attract
more cation and it will repel more, you know anions and attract more cations. So, this
graph basically shows that relationship.(Refer Slide Time: 15:17)
So, what is the relationship between weathering and CEC and AEC level? Obviously,
you can see there are three different conditions mostly 2 is to 1 type of clays you know
you can see here three different conditions. In the first condition is the mild weathering
condition, there is a intermediate weathering condition and strong weathering condition,
mild weathering condition obviously, 2 is to 1 type of clays intermediate weathering
condition, 1 is to 1 type of clays and strong weathering condition mostly iron aluminium
oxide clays, we have already discussed that.
 So,  increasing  weathering  is  basically  in  this  direction  so  and  which  we  are  an
increasing  the  weathering  obviously  the  cation  exchange   capacity  will  decrease.
Obviously, you will see most cation exchange  capacity in case of 2 is to 1 type of soil,
which will further reduced to 1 is to 1 type of soil and it will reduce to almost 0. In case
of iron aluminium oxides and in and for anion exchange  capacity, we will see the
reserve strength. So, as we are increasing from mild to intermediate to strong weathering
condition, the anion exchange  capacity will further increase ok.
So, we have completed this cation exchange  capacity topic, let us start another important
topic that is sorption of pesticides in the soil.(Refer Slide Time: 16:33)
So,  we  will  be  covering  the  importance  of  pesticides  sorption  then  distribution
coefficient then binding of biomolecules and to clay and humus.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:42)
So, importance of sorption of pesticides in soil, you know that soil can adsorb charge
organic ions by either AEC or CEC because, either it is positive or negative depending
on the positive and negative nature of the charge organic ions, it will be adsorbed and
sorption can reduce the movement of the groundwater because, when it will be sorbed.Obviously, it will not leach down to the ground water and it can allow time for soil
microorganism to break the chemical down to less toxic byproducts.
 So, when it will be adsorb by the clay colloids, it will be you know the chance of further
leaching down to the ground water will be reduced. And there will therefore, it will get
more time for the microorganism to degrade this, and also it can also produced inner
sphere complexes. So, it is common for organic compounds to be aborbed within the soil
organic colloids by a process called partitioning and the hydrophilic part will not be
adsorbed by the moist clays.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:43)
Now, what is partitioning? Now this is a very good picture of partitioning process. Now
this method is also known as the extraction methods an extraction means drawing a
compound out of a mixture using a solvent. So, solvent partitioning is you know we can
we can call it solvent partitioning is more specific. So, it means compound of a choice of
2 solvents that they can dissolve in some compound, dissolve in one solvent, and some
compound dissolve in the other solvent that way the compound in the mixture become
separated in 2 groups. 
So basically, you can see here in this first condition two compounds the dissolved in a
some in a solvent and now we are adding a second solvent, which is denoted by this
circles hollow circles. So, we are basically mixing the 2 different solvents as well as 2
compounds  together  in  here.  And  finally,  when  the  solvent  separates  again  thecompounds go into 1 solvent on the other based on their polarity. So, based on their
polarity, they will separate into 2 different solvent. So, this is called partitioning process
ok. So, this is very important for pesticides option,  how? We will see. 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:01)
So, this partitioning can be quantified using a partitioning coefficient or Kp, which is
basically concentration on solid over concentration in the solution. So obviously, you can
see  there  are  this  shows  this  graph  shows  the  relationship  between  Ceq,  which  is
equivalent  concentration  or  per  and  concentration  on  solid.  So,  Ceq  is  basically
concentration in solution and here it is q is basically, concentration on solid. 
So basically, this line shows the higher Kp and this line shows the lower Kp. So, high Kp
means higher sorption; obviously, and low Kp means weaks options. So, high Kp means
hydrophobic  compounds  on  organic  matter  when  hydrophobic  compounds  like  the
organic pollutants like organic pesticides, they are hydrophobic in nature. So, they will
not you know they will not mix well with water. So, they will mix more with the you
know organic matter into the soil and you know water soluble compounds, which are
hydrophilic that prefers to stay in the solution will responsible for this low Kp. 
So, let us move ahead and see what are the organoclays?(Refer Slide Time: 20:17)
Now, organoclays is very important aspect, the hydrated metal cations like calcium that
are adsorbed on the surface of the smectites can be replaced with large organic cations
and giving rise to what  we are termed  as organoclays  that  is smectite  organoclays
specifically.  Now, such  clay  surface  are  more  friendly  towards  the  applied  organic
compounds, making it possible for the clay to participate in partitioning. Obviously,
when these  clays  are  more friendly  towards  the  applied  organic  cordon, you know
compounds it will take part more into the portioning processes.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:59)
 So, let us see an example of sorption. So, this is a very good example of sorption
procession  experiment.  Now  this  experiment  was  done  by  a  gentian  violet  colour
solution and in a sandy loam soil with moderate CEC and it is sandy soil with negligible
CEC. So, these are 2 you know different soil, which is sandy loam soil with moderate
CEC and this is sandy soil with negligible CEC. So, after we leach these 2 soil with these
gentian violet solution, a clear solution and we collect the leach it at below  in a beaker. 
So, after leaching we will see a clear solution was found in case of sandy loam soil and
in contrast water drained from the sandy soil was still purple in colour in case of you
know, in case of sandy soil with the lower CEC so that means, higher CEC or moderate
CEC because, in the sandy loam soil there was some amount of silt or organic matter.
However, in case of you know sandy soil; there is low amount of organic matter and due
to the presence of organic matter. In case of sandy loam soil you know these organic
matter will adsorb, all the gentian blue solution. So ultimately, it will you know the clear
solution will leach. However, in the second case the total. So, there is no change. So,
further the purple colour solution was leach down. So, that shows the import of sorption
by different by organic matter which is present into the soil. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:43)
Now, this is a picture of an African field and you can see after applying. So, in this field
scientist are applied you know the farmers are applied herbicides and the field is still full
of weeds, what is the reason behind this? There is a bizarre condition, where applying theherbicides to kill the weeds, but we still finding that this is full of weeds. So, what
happens the soil has a upper A horizon, you know what is A horizon with a low CEC and
a clay subsoil with high CEC, argillic.
 Now you know, what is argillic? Argillic is dominated by clay clay mineral. So, this soil
have upper A horizon with low CEC and lower argillic horizon with high CEC. So, when
they applied all the pesticide, all the pesticides was adsorbed by subsoil clay. So, that
there is no longer available to be taken out by the roots of the weeds. So, as a result of
that, weeds further grow. So, that also shows the importance of sorption of different
organic pesticides by clay and different other component, which are present into the soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:59)
Now, what is distribution coefficient? The tendency of a pesticide or other organic
compound  to  leach  into  the  groundwater  is  determined  by  the  solubility  of  the
compound. And by the ratio of amount of chemical solved by the soil to remain into the
solution and this ratio is basically known as the distribution coefficient or Kd. So, Kd is
basically, you know milligram of chemical sorbed per kg of soil over milligram of
chemical per litre of soil solution.(Refer Slide Time: 24:31)
So, the unit of Kd obviously it is litre per kg and it depends upon the nature of the soil;
obviously, the variation is related mainly to the amount of organic matter or organic
carbon into the soil. So, it can also be represented by using a similar ratio, we call it Koc
or other name is organic carbon distribution coefficient. So, Koc is basically, mg of
chemical sorbed per kg of organic carbon and mg of chemical per litre of solution. 
So basically, we are you know this is the formula of Koc that is Kd over gram of organic
carbon per kg of soil. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:14)
So, let us see Kd and Koc are used for herbicides and metabolites, you know one soil
which has higher Kd and Koc values will absorb more pesticides obviously. And these
high values indicates that chemicals are strongly adsorbed by the soil and less susceptible
to leaching. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:32)
So, these are some Kd and Koc values for several widely used herbicides like atrazine,
diethyl atrazine, metachlor, metolachlor. And all this thing, you can see what are the
variation of their Kd and Kc values and these are the very important or the adsorption in
the soil. (Refer Slide Time: 25:50)
Now, binding of biomolecules and to clay and humus is very important. Now the bond
between the biomolecules and the colloid is often quite strong. So, that the biomolecules
cannot be easily removed by washing or exchange  reactions and the initial attraction
maybe between charge colloidal surface and positively or negatively charged functional
groups  on  biomolecules  and  these  type  of  reaction  has  2  environmental  impact,
obviously the first the bound.
Firstly, the bound chemical remains for a long period of the long period longer period in
the soil as the microorganism cannot recognize and react with their target sites. And
secondly, some chemicals remain active after adsorption to so toxins remains toxic to the
susceptible organism, enzyme continuous to catalyze the reactions. So, these are 2 types
of impacts environmental impacts, you can get from this sorption of biomolecules, you
know to the clay and humus.(Refer Slide Time: 26:52)
Let us see some example Bt toxin, you already know that. 
Now, Bt toxin is basically a toxin produced by a soil micro organism called  Bacillus
thuringiensis, and basically it is used for organic farming for protecting crops from insect
damage. So, it is adsorbed by soil. So, the 2 is to type of clay montmorillonite soil, you
can see in this graph. Obviously, the 2 is to 1 type of soil like montmorillonite can adsorb
the toxin up to 30 to 80 percent of it is mass. So, 1 is to 1 type of obviously it is not that
efficient, because of low charge development. And obviously, the adsorption reaction
completed within a minute, in case of montmorillonite.(Refer Slide Time: 27:32)
Second let us see DNA, now it this is a scanning electron micrographs or SEM image,
SEM image of DNA from Bacillus subtilis bound on kaolinite clay, which is represented
in the left picture or montmorillonite clay, which is shown in the right picture. So, the
arrow point stands for basically, the stands bound to DNA stands of bound DNA. Now,
DNA bound to clay or humus is protected from decomposition, but retains the capability
of transferring genetic information to living soil.
So, this is implication of DNA sorption in the soil antibiotics.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:13)
So, antibiotics also adsorb by soil colloids by the process of CEC, it also has a very high
Kd values, after sorption it develops positively charged sites in the soil. And increasingly
research shows that even though sorption to soil colloids, may reduce their efficacy
somewhat the soil bound antibiotics still works against bacteria and there is evidence that
at least some antibiotics can be taken up from soil by food crops. 
So, enter into the human food supply. So, it will increase the resistance against the life
saving drugs into the body. So, this is the implication. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:50)
And let us see one example of antibiotic, that is chlorotetracycline, it is the first antibiotic
which has been you know developed. Now adsorption isotherms illustrates, the retention
of chlorotetracycline or CTC by montmorillonite and kaolinite as a function of ionic
background  cation.  So,  you  can  see  the  montmorillonite  or  smectite.  Obviously,
montmorillonite is showing more you know adsorption you know more adsorption than
that of kaolinite and calcium CTC retention decrease in the presence of calcium nitrate
than that of sodium nitrate; obviously, because calcium is more competitive with CTC
than sodium. So, CTC is adsorbed by the soil via CEC.
So, you can see in case of presence of sodium nitrate, the adsorption is higher. However,
in case of presence of calcium nitrate the adsorption is somewhat lower because, calcium
is more competitive with the CTC than sodium. So, these are some complex interaction
between the different molecules, which is present into the soil, which we apply into thesoil and the components, which are already present into the soil and you know you can
search some literature. Obviously, consult some literature to gain a in depth knowledge
of these sorption characteristics. These are very interesting and I would suggest you to go
and discuss and to consult some literature to gain more in depth knowledge of this
sorption process, which will be giving you more practical perspective of learning soil
science and technology.
Thank you guys we are completing this week 5 of lectures. So, we will be starting the
week  6  of  lectures  from  our  next  lecture.  Hope  you  have  understood  and  learnt
something new in this week, we have discussed you know several important topics of
soil  chemistry,  and we will  be also discussing  some other important  topics  of soil
chemistry related to the soil silicate clays in the week 6.
Thank you, and let us meet and in our next weeks lecture. Bye.