Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 21
Silicate Clays
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology and we are going to
start a new week of lectures and we will be starting week 5. And from this week we will
be starting soil chemistry and other chemical processes related to soil and last week we
have covered different soil physical processes.
So, from this week onwards we will be covering different soil chemical process. So, in
this lecture we will be we are talking about a most important soil fraction that is clays
and their internal structure. So, basically they are made of silicate you know that is why
we will be calling them Silicate Clays.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:19)
So,  let  us  start  today’s  lecture  and  in  this  lecture  you  know  it  will  take  probably
consecutive two lectures to complete the silicate clays. But, we will try to cover this
following concept we will follow below, we will try to cover you know the soil colloids
and their types and then what are the silicate clays.And then we will cover what are the basic structures of silicate clays, then we will
discuss about types of crystalline silicate clays and then X-ray diffraction analysis. So,
let us start with the colloid.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:43)
So, you know I hope that you know that a colloid is a two phase system where, not only
nowhere only you know one finely divided phase is dispersed in another phase. And the
phase which is you know finely divided phase is called dispersed phase and this you
know the other medium is called dispersion medium. So, colloid it is basically two phase
system where you know dispersed phase is dispersed in dispersion medium. So, example
let us see some example some common examples are you know clay in water which is
basically  solid  which  is  dispersed  in  liquid  dispersion  medium.  And  also  cloud  in
atmosphere where basically liquid is dispersed in the gas.
And remember that in case of soil so, if we narrow down to the soil we will see that you
know  all  the  particles  which  are  having  you  know  size  less  than  2  micron  or  2
micrometre are called the soil you know soil colloids. Now, these particles which are less
than 2 micron in size basically combine both clays and humus fraction; we will see in a
couple of slides what are their distributions. And then you know; obviously, there are
majorly two types; one is soil inorganic colloids and soil organic colloids. And, in soil
inorganic colloids basically clay and different iron and aluminium oxides basically are
there whereas, in case of soil organic colloid it basically composed of humus fraction.So, you know these soil colloids are very much chemically active and they greatly
impact you know eco system functions. So, we will in coming you know in coming days
we will learn that how they impact different soil chemical as well as cement soil physical
process.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:04)
So, let us go to the properties of soil colloid. Well you know there are certain properties
of soil colloid; obviously, it they are very extremely small in size and also they have very
high surface area, you know they have very surface area and they you know have
charges which are predominantly negative charge. And obviously, you know there will
be adsorption of cations and anions and you know in these soil colloids the surface of the
soil colloids.
Now adsorption is a surface phenomena in against you know as compared to absorption.
So, adsorption is a surface phenomena where all the cations and anions are attached to
the surface of this organic colloids. So, colloid from an ionic double layer we learn what
are the ionic double layer and you know basically you know the ionic double layer
consist of a inner anionic or cationic layer with adsorbed outer cationic and anionic layer
we will discuss that later on.
And; obviously, another major property of these soil colloids are you know they can
adsorb water and  due to adoption of water they can produce different shrinking and
swelling of clay. And you have learned from soil classification that this vertisols whichare having you know high amount of clay. They can they can exhibit this shrinking and
swelling properties. And we will discuss what are the reason behind these shrinking and
swelling properties of the clay.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:44)
So, let us go to the next slide and see: what is unit cell this is very important concept.
Now, if you consider let me show you. So, if this is a crystal lattice, this whole is a
crystal lattice, now you know about lattice and crystal. And each crystal lattice is made
of some simplest repeating unit we call it the unit cell.
Now, this is a unit cell. Now, these unit cell will repeat itself to create this whole crystal
lattice and it repeats itself in three dimension to form the total crystal lattice you know
both in x you know in x direction y direction as well as in z direction. And remember
that the basal spacing plays a fundamental role in the identification of clay minerals
specimen by X-ray diffraction; what is a basal spacing? The basal spacing is the spacing
between two successive similar planes of atoms and we will discuss that later on.
So, this basal spacing is very much characteristic feature for individual clay mineral and
based on this basal spacing we can differentiate one clay mineral to other clay mineral,
we will discuss that later on. So, you have basic idea: what is unit cell and what is crystal
lattice? So, similar you know construction of similar construction can be found in clay
also we will see that in a while.(Refer Slide Time: 07:19)
So, let us go to the next slide and see: what are the different types of soil colloids. Well
soil colloids can be differentiated into four different you know four major groups. One is
crystalline silicate clays, another is non crystalline silicate clays, then you know iron
aluminium oxides and finally, organic colloids or humus. So, this crystalline silicate is
basically composed of some clay minerals like kaolinite and smectite will discuss their
structure and properties later on. Non crystalline clay mineral means they do not have
any  crystalline  structure  so,  some  examples  are  allophane  and  imogolite  allophane
mainly occurs in the volcanic soils.
Iron and aluminium oxides are you know some examples are gibbsite and goethite and
these three basically you know collectively called as a soil inorganic colloids. Whereas,
soil organic colloid composed of humus and we will discuss humus in the later you know
in while will discuss, while we discussing soil organic matter in later part of this course.(Refer Slide Time: 08:34)
So, we have learned about the different types of soil colloids. So, let us go and see what
are the, what we mean by crystalline silicate clays. Now, crystalline silicate clays also
has a layered structure with two to four sheet per layer. And you know if we see these a
crystalline layer you know clay mineral this is kaolinite one of the most prevalent clay
mineral.  So,  this  is  the  kaolinite  structure  under  the  electron  under  the  electron
microscope and you know you will see these you know they are made of these sheets
like in structure.
Say hexagonal sheet like structure. So, these hexagonal sheet like structures stacked
upon each other at to form this total silicate crystal. And remember that this crystalline
silicate has layered structure as we can see here these are individual layers so, with two
to four sheets per layer. So, we will see in details about you know we will see in details
about their structure.
So, let us you know also they are predominantly negatively charged remember that these
crystalline silicate clays develop this huge amount of negative charge. And, how they
develop this negative charge we will discuss later on due to different types of chemical
process. And, also they have diverse soil property so, they have diverse properties we
will we will also discuss that later on.(Refer Slide Time: 10:06)
Now, another important you know class of solid colloid is non crystalline silicate clays.
The non crystalline silicate clays because they do not have any ordered and crystalline
structure and they have high amounts of positive and negative charge they develop both
positive and negative charge. And they have high water holding capacities and low
stickiness you know you have already learned about the stickiness and different classes
of stickiness in soil consistency lecture.
So, these non crystalline silicates are clays are having you know low stickiness and one
predominant  example  of  these  non-crystalline  silicate  clays  is  allophane  and  these
allophane basically occurs in volcanic soils.(Refer Slide Time: 10:53)
So, the third major class of soil colloid is iron aluminium oxides and they are basically
found in highly weathered soils and they may be crystalline or sometime amorphous and
they have low plasticity and stickiness. So, you can see some iron aluminium oxide;
obviously, gibbsite is goethite is one of the major iron oxides which is present into the
soil as well as gibbsite which is one of the major aluminium oxide which is present in the
soil.
So,  these  are  also  considered  as  soil  colloid  because  they  show  different  types  of
properties you know which you know different types of properties generally shown by
colloids.(Refer Slide Time: 11:39)
So, the final one the organic one is humus. So, this is the smallest of all soil colloids and
these  are  basically  made  of  partially  decomposed  cell  walls  and  biomolecules  will
discuss their structure later in this course. And they have very high water adsorbing
capacity and also net charge of humus remember that it is always negative. So, we have
you know we have covered the basic overview of different soil colloid classes.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:11)
So, let us go ahead and see what are silicate clays. Now, you know all the minerals if you
see which are present in nature you can classify them into six major categories; startingfrom  nesosilicate  then  sorosilicates,  then  inosilicates,  then  cyclosilicates,  then
phyllosilicates and then tectosilicates. So, what is you know what is the building block of
this type of structure? Well in any silicate mineral the basic building block is called silica
tetrahedra.
 Now let me show you just. So, if we let me increase the size of the marker a bit so, that
it can be visible alright. So, this is the example of silica tetrahedra. Now, the silica
tetrahedra is basically composed of one silicon atom at the centre followed by four
oxygen atoms at four corners making a tetrahedral structure. So, basically it is SiO 4 or
silica tetrahedra structure.
 Now, when a silica tetrahedral structure you know appears into in the nature as a
separate I mean they are separate entity. So, in that case we will call them nesosilicate.
So, nesosilicate that basically composed of only one silica tetrahedra. The 2nd category
is called sorosilicates. Now, sorosilicates are basically two or more linked tetrahedra and
these tetrahedra are basically joined by sharing their apical oxygen as we can see here.
So, these an example  of the sorosilicate  and obviously, the basic structural  unit of
sorosilicate is either Si 2O7 or Si5O16.
The 3rd is inosilicates  or inosilicates; now inosilicates  is basically single or double
chains of tetrahedra and the basic building you know basic structural unit is either SiO 3
or Si4O11. Now you can see this is an example of inosilicates where you know it is
basically composed of single or it is basically single chain of tetrahedra which formed by
sharing their apical oxygen. And the fourth one is cyclosilicates and this is an example of
cyclosilicates. Cyclosilicates are basically single I mean closed rings or double rings of
tetrahedra as you can see this a closed ring of tetrahedra and this is an example of
cyclosilicates.
And  the  fifth  one  is  the  most  important  and  this  is  called  phyllosilicates.  Now
pyllosilicates are basically you know they are they looks like sheets of tetrahedra and
you can see these are you know all these tetrahedra are sharing their oxygen to form a
sheet like structure or tetrahedral sheet. And these type of sheet like structure you can see
in the phyllosilicates and this phyllosilicate name comes from phyla or leaf like structure
and the basic unit of this phyllosilicate is Si 2O5. And why we are highlighting thisphyllosilicates? Because, all the clay minerals which we will be discussing all the clay
minerals belongs to these phyllosilicate structure.
And the final one is tectosilicates; tectosilicates is most stable because it is composed of
a  framework  of  tetrahedral  structures  and  the  basic  you  know  unit  is  SiO 2.  Some
examples are primary minerals like you know quartz is very important example and these
are widely spread in the nature. So, these are the basic classification of silicates and you
know this is we call silicate clays and because another name is phyllosilicates.
And these are other silicate minerals and these minerals are mainly present in primary
minerals  and  also  this  tectosilicates  also  present  in  primary  minerals.  So,  we  have
covered what are the different types of silicates.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:16)
So, let us go ahead and see how a crystal lattice of soil you know a crystal clay lattice
looks like. Now, a crystal clay lattice basically looks like you know these this picture and
as we can see basically a clay particle or clay crystal is basically made of these unit cell,
these are unit cell.
So, these unit cell basically produce ionic double layers and in between the you know let
you  know  ionic  double  layers  by  how?  Because  these  individual  you  know  these
individual unit cell is you know develop high amount of negative charge at their surface
we will discuss how later on. And as a result of the development of negative charge attheir surface all the different types of cations are adsorbed at their surface and as a result
they form ionic double layer.
So, basically  negative  negatively charged colloid when it when it is surrounded by
different adsorbed cations then it forms the ionic double layer. Not only that and you
know there are two types of surfaces; external surfaces and internal surfaces; obviously,
in between two layer you will see the internal surfaces. So, it is an internal surface and
external surface is this and these are some examples of external surfaces.
Obviously, these are present in direct contact with soil solution and these soil solution
basically composed of you know they basically contains different types of cations as well
as different types of anions like chlorine and you know different you know like chloride
nitrate and so on so forth. So, this is basically a structure of silicate clay crystal which is
made of you know which is made of this layered structure. And in between the layer
there is called the inter layer space and external surface also available and all these
spaces are accessible for different cations and anions which have present in the soil
solution for adsorption.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:48)
So, let us focus on silica tetrahedra and their related structures. So, as we can see as I
have discussed that this is the silica tetrahedra which is composed of four equidistantly
placed oxygen atom and in the inside there is a silica atom.So, and the building block is; obviously, SiO 4 minus and the angle is 109 degree and this
an individual silica tetrahedra.
So, when all the silica tetrahedra share their one oxygen with the adjacent tetrahedra they
form a sheet like structure just like this. So, this called a tetrahedral and this is one of the
major important sheet which is you know which composed the you know you know
which  actually  builds  the  soil  you know  soil  clay  structure.  So, so, this  is  silicate
tetrahedra.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:57)
So, if you go to the next slide let us see what is another building block. So, another
building block in soil is the aluminium octahedra and this aluminium octahedron the
individual aluminium octahedron is basically made of the central aluminium and which
is surrounded by 6 hydroxyl you know hydroxyl anions or hydroxyl groups making a
octahedral structure.
 So, the central cation is either aluminium sometime it is magnesium will discuss in
which condition it magnesium occupies the central position. And remember that all the
other  surrounding  you  know  hydroxyl  group  they  create  a  you  know  a  octahedral
structure.  So,  that  is  why  we  call  it  either  aluminium  octahedral  or  magnesium
octahedral. So, all these aluminium know when couple of aluminium octahedron share
their phases and sides with the adjacent octahedra they form also a sheet like structure
we call it octahedral sheet like structure.So,  we have  the  tetrahedral  sheet  and we have  octahedral  sheet.  So,  based  on  the
arrangement of this tetrahedral sheet and octahedral sheet in unit cell there are different
types of classes of silicate clays that we will discuss later on.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:42)
So, let us go ahead and see how this tetrahedral octahedral linkage. So, if we consider a
unit cell if we consider this an unit cell these unit cell is basically we call it 2 is to 1
trioctahedral mineral. Now, why we are calling 2  is to 1? Because, you can see in the
middle there is an octahedral sheet which is sandwiched between two tetrahedral sheet.
So, that is why we call it 2 is to 1. So, 2 stands for 2 tetrahedral sheet and 1 stands for 1
octahedral sheet. So, how they linked together, you can see these red solid you know
structures  are  basically  denoting  oxygen  whereas,  these  are  silicon  and  these  are
basically magnesium. So, magnesium this basically magnesium octahedra and in the
magnesium  octahedra  these  yellow  balls  are  basically  hydroxyl  and  these  reds  are
basically oxygen.
So, basically these tetrahedral sheet and octahedral sheet joined together by sharing their
apical  oxygen  together.  By  sharing  their  apical  oxygen  these  octahedral  sheet  and
tetrahedral sheet joined and as a result they form this 2 is to 1 structure. Sometime you
will see the structure is 1 is to 1 structure; that means, there will be only 1 octahedral
sheet and only 1 tetrahedral sheet. So, based on the number of tetrahedral sheet and
octahedral sheet in an unit cell we can differentiate clay into 1 is to 1 type of clay and 2is to 2 type of clay. Now, what is a shorthand notation of this clay structure? Obviously,
you will see since it is a 2 is to 1 structure this is tetrahedra this is tet stands for again
another tetrahedra and in between these an octahedra sandwich. So, now probably you
have understood what is 2 is to 1 and minerals.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:59)
Now, another you know question comes why we are calling it trioctahedral and what is
dioctahedral? Now, you see as a result of these tetrahedral and octahedral arrangement
there are; obviously, you know in this case we are calling it dioctahedral and in this case
you know we are calling it in this case it is trioctahedra and this is called dioctahedra.
 Now, trioctahedra and dioctahedra why we are calling it dioctahedra because you see
there  are  three  octahedral  positions.  Octahedral  positions  are  this  one  is  the  first
octahedral position, this one is the second octahedral position, this one is third octahedral
position. So, when all the octahedral position all the three octahedral positions are filled
with cations then we will call it trioctahedral.
And when two third of this octahedral position are fill as can see here then we will call it
dioctahedral structure. Now in case of trioctahedral; obviously, to satisfy there will be
the magnesium because Mg2 plus multiplied by 3. So, there will be 6 plus whereas, the
similar charge can be produce in dioctahedral when there will be aluminium three plus
multiplied by 2.So, 6 plus so; obviously, the net charge is same; however, the numbers of cations are
different. Here the aluminium is prevalent in case of dioctahedral structure whereas, in
case of trioctahedral structure you will see magnesium is prevalent. So, I hope that you
can  understand  now:  what  is  the  difference  between  trioctahedral  structure  and
dioctahedral structure.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:51)
So, so, based on these 1 is to 1 layer or 2 is to 2 layer and whether it is trioctahedral or
whether it is dioctahedral you can differentiate the so, you know you can differentiate the
soil  clays  into  the  following  categories.  So,  obviously,  the  broad  categories  are
trioctahedral and dioctahedral and among the broad categories of trioctahedral if  it a soil
is only consist of a octahedral sheet there is no tetrahedral sheet. And in case of a
trioctahedra it will be only composed of magnesium and in case of dioctahedral stracture
it will be composed of aluminium 3 plus as I have already told you.
So, example is gibbsite Al(OH) 3 and brucite is magnesium hydroxide and you know
trioctahedral 1 is to 1 type of mineral is example serpentine you can see only one
tetrahedra and only one octahedra. Here there is only 1 tetrahedra another you know 1
octahedra;  however,  the  difference  is  in  this  case  this  is  dioctahedral  example  is
kaolinite. Kaolinite is one of the major clay mineral and if we consider 2 is to 1 type of
mineral; obviously, the 2 is to 1 type of trioctahedral mineral example is pyrophyllitewhereas,  2  is  to  1  type  of  dioctahedral  mineral  is  talc.  So,  these  are  some  broad
classification and with some examples.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:25)
So, let us you know go and final these have final slide for this lecture if you see these are
relationship between plane sheets and layers. So, if we consider this is basically silica
tetrahedral sheet and you can see some basal 3 oxygen and 1 apical oxygen and in you
know this is a silicon atom. And; obviously, in case of you know in case of octahedra the
central atom is either aluminium or magnesium followed by you know surrounded by 6
hydroxyl anions.
Now, this is a unit cell structure or layer structure in the layer you can see it is a 2 is to 1
type mineral so; obviously, 1 tetrahedral sheet 1 tetrahedral sheet 1 octahedral sheet
octahedral  sheet  is  sandwiched  between  tetrahedral  sheet.  Followed  by  a  another
repeating unit you know that inside clay structure these unit cell will repeat itself to form
a total clay crystal. So, there is another repeating layer and so, this is a layer and this is a
layer and in between these two layer is called inter layer space and this inter layer space
is where different types of cations and water adsorb.
And the total summation of these inter layer space as well as these layer structures are
called the crystal. So, soil crystal is made of both these layers as well as these inter layer
space. And; obviously, you will see different planes different planes of a 2 is to 1 type of
mineral 2 is to 1 type mineral you can see you know at the basal at the base. You seeboth silica and oxygen plane where you know from silica tetrahedra followed by oxygen
and  hydroxyl plane  and there  therefore,  aluminium  and  magnesium  plane  and then
oxygen or hydroxyl plane and then again the repeating unit.
So, this is you know a overview of a soil structure or soil clay structure and will stop
here and these are very much interesting thing and will learn new things in the next
lecture. So, let us rap up here and then will discuss these more in our coming lecture.
Thank you very much.