 Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhara Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 28
Soil Acidity
Welcome, friends to this new lecture of week 6 that is we will start from Soil Acidity.
So, basically will be starting for you know discuss discussion about the different types of
problematic soil. So, we are starting with the soil acidity now. So, soil acidity is very
very  important  as  per  as  the  soil  physical  chemical  and  biological  properties  are
concerned.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:45)
And, we will be covering this following concepts will be recovering what is first soil
acidity and then what are the natural and manmade causes of soil acidity, what are the
different pools of soil acidity and finally, how to ameliorate soil acidity. Obviously, you
know we cannot cover in details all of this, we will be having a you know will be trying
to give you a snapshot of different ideas and overview of different you know of this
topics  and will hope that you will learn in details  in future by consulting different
textbooks and reference books.(Refer Slide Time: 01:21)
So, we just start with the soil acidity. Obviously, you know soil acidity is measured in
pH units and you know that pH is basically the negative logarithm of hydrogen ion
concentration and it also considered as a master variable ah. So, let me increase the
mouse pointer so, that minute please so ok, alright. So, you know that pH is basically the
negative logarithm of hydrogen ion concentration and it varies from you know the pH
varies from 0 to 14 and obviously when the pH is, when the pH is 7 that is called neutral
and when it is greater than 7 that is call you know alkaline conditions and when there is a
less than 7 pH that is a acidic condition.
So, pH is also known as the master variable as per as the soil analysis is concerned
because it governs different types of soil chemical, physical and biological activities.
Different  microorganisms  are  present  in  the  soil  based  on  the  soil  pH  and  their
abundance varies  from one pH condition to another pH condition. Different chemical
processes  and  biological  processes  and  nutrients  recycling  processes  and  nutrient
mobility and nutrient I would say nutrient transformation processes specifically depends
on the soil pH. So, that is why it is called master variable and obviously, you know here
the  pH  is  the  negative  log  of  hydrogen  ion  concentration  where  this  H  is  the
concentration of you know protons or H plus ions and remember that every unit change
in pH indicates 10 fold changes in acidity, obviously.(Refer Slide Time: 03:28)
So, let us move forward and see the different grades of soil acidity. So, you can see the
soil acidity varies from 0 to generally 14 and obviously, beyond the beyond the pH 7 it is
called alkaline soil and in case of less than 7, it is called acidic soil also we call it soil
acidity. Extreme level of soil acidity can be found when the soil pH goes below 4 an
extreme level of very strong level of soil alkalinity found when the soil pH goes you
know greater than 8 greater than 8 or something like that.
So, depending on the soil acidity also we divided the you know ranges you know we
define a different types of soils. You know this extreme level of the soil acidity can be
found in case of acid sulphate active acid sulphate soil and this type of acid sulphate soil
you know having you know very low pH sometime 3 and less than 3 at this type of acid
sulphate soil is also available is basically in India we can see this type of acid sulphate
soil in Kerala.
And, also the acid peats are having very low pH and the forest soils; the forest soils
having the also very low pH that is almost from 3 to 6. And, humid region arable soil
generally have the pH varies from 5 to near neutral condition and in case of calcareous
soil they have the pH starting from generally slightly alkaline to strongly alkaline soils
and sodic soils are having strong alkalinity. Sodic soils are generally dominated by
sodium ions whereas, calcareous soils are generally dominated by calcium ions.So, you can see depends on the you know soil pH classes also divided into the very
strong that is less than 5 and then strong that is around 5 to 6 medium, then slight, neutral
condition generally around 7 and then 7.5 is mild moderate is generally 8 and beyond 8
or 9 it is strong and very strong. So, these are also very important.
So, what are the reason you know what are the similarity between this pH levels with
different types of common materials? Obviously, pH 0 you will see the in case of battery
acid, in case of lemon juice you will find pH of 1 to 2 around, for vinegar it is pH 3, for
beer or coffee will get pH 4, in case of natural rain will have pH of 5, in case of pure
water milk these are neutral in reaction. So, we will have around 7; sea water, baking
soda will have around 8, antacid tablets  will have 9 and then milk of magnesia is
basically having the pH of 10 and bleach will have the pH of 12 where as the drain
cleaner will have the pH of 13.
So,  you  can  see  different  chemicals  which  shows  different  ranges  or  different  pH
condition and you know will get the extreme conditions in case of battery acid as well as
in case of drain cleaner, so a common materials and their respective pH. So, this graph
basically gives a basic overview of how pH varies and what are the different classes of
pH and what type of soil pH ranges you can expect in different types of soil like sodic
soil, then calcareous soil, then humid region arable soils and forest soils, acid peats soils
and active you know acid sulphate soils.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:24)
So, let us move ahead and see: what are the different sources of soil acidity. Obviously,
the  first and foremost  source of soil  acidity  is  a carbonic  and  other organic  acids.
Remember  that  in  case  of  soil  here  the  soil  air  contains  high  carbon  dioxide
concentration due to and you know from respiration or organic matter decomposition and
this carbonic acid basically you know it reacts with water to form this carbonic acid and
this carbonic acid further dissociates to form this bicarbonate anion and protons and this
protons basically causes the acidity.
And, further accumulation of organic matter, obviously, this organic matter when there
will be high amount of organic matter accumulation this will be decompose you know
eventually those will decompose and due to the decomposition process of organic matter
they will increase the soil acidity. For third is the nitrification process will discuss the
nitrification process in details when will be you know will be discussing soil nitrogen in
week 7.
And, so, nitrification is you know is basically the conversion of ammonium forms of
nitrogen to nitric form. So, due to this and it is an oxidation process and you can see here
ammonium getting oxidised to form water, proton and disassociated nitric acid that is H
plus  and NO3 minus  and these H plus or protons will basically  causes the acidity.
Remember there is this nitrification is basically a microbial mediated you know reaction.
So, this nitrification ultimately forms these protons and these protons will ultimately add
to the acidity of the soil. So, this nitrification is a acid generating reaction or process. So,
what are the other process of soil acidity?(Refer Slide Time: 09:25)
Soil acidity: so, sulphur oxidation, sometime pyrite parent material are there as we can
see here you know pyrite is iron pyrite here is FeS 2 and this FeS2 when it gets oxidized
ultimately it will produce the ferrous sulphate and also dissociated sulphuric acid and this
sulphuric acid will produce these H plus ions which will ultimately add to acidity of the
soil. So, this is another important reaction for ah. So, sulphur oxidation is one of the
major contributor of soil acidity.
And, finally, acid rain acid rain you know different due to different types of combustion
of the fossil fuels, different types of forest fire and other processes when huge amount of
you know sulphur dioxide and nitric oxide or nitrogen dioxide goes into the atmosphere
and  then  they  react  with  the  atmospheric  moisture  atmospheric  water  vapour  and
ultimately reproduce different types of acidic you know different types of acids and these
acids generally come down to the earth surface during the different types of rain raining
event and we call it acid rain.
So, when the sulphur dioxide goes into the atmosphere, reacts with water vapour, forms
the sulphuric acid and ultimately finally, reaches to the soil surface as a result of acid
rain. This is also important source of soil acidity. Similarly happens in case of nitric acid.
Now, you know in case of nitrogen dioxide and also different types of you know apart
from  this  burning of the  fossil fuels. And, you know  different  types  of you know
combustion  of  the  fossil  fuels  and  forest  fire  also  you  know  lightning  events  alsogenerate this type of gases and ultimately produces this acid rain as you can see here H 2
SO4 when it reaches it disassociates to form the sulphate as well as protons. And, also the
nitric  acid disassociates  to form nitrate  and H plus and this  H plus you know this
ultimately forms the soil acidity; sources of the important sources of soil acidity.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:49)
So, plant uptake of the cations is another important aspect when plant root takes up the
more cations you know they tend to balance it by releasing the H plus ion and lowering
the soil pH. So, as you can see here this is a root interior and soil solution and in case of
this first example; obviously, the plant is trying to uptake the ammonium and as a result
of the uptake of the ammonium which is a positive cation, it want to counter balance, it
want to balance this uptake by release of these H plus ions from the root and it is called
the acidifying agent.
So, this another reason this another cause of soil acidity.(Refer Slide Time: 12:35)
So, another important cause of soil acidity is human induced acidity and obviously,
excess of nitrogen fertilizer, then acid rain, exposing potential acid sulphate soil are all
these  are  basically  anthropogenic  in  nature.  For  example,  when  we  use  you  know
excessive amount of nitrogen fertilizer that also ultimately forms the nitrification process
and this nitrification process generates this you know acids and also acid rain the burning
of the fossil fuel it is an human driven process and exposing potential acid sulphate soil
which get completely oxidised to form the more acidity. So, these are the sources of the
acidity.
As we can see here obviously, pyrite is getting oxidised to form this ferrous sulphate and
sulphuric  acid,  and  this  ferrous  sulphate  is  further  oxidised  to  form  the  iron
oxyhydroxide  and  further  sulphuric  acid,  an  elemental  sulphur  also  get  oxidised
sometime to get the sulphuric acid. So, all of these are human induced processes and
these human induced processes ultimately leads towards building of soil acidity and
sometime it is very very harmful for soil biological you know different types of soil
microorganism and macro organisms as well as different types of soil chemical process.
And, also you can see here the ammonium sulphate it is a important nitrogens you know
fertilizer when it get oxidised and ultimately form the nitric acid and sulphuric acid these
also you know adds up to the acidity of the soil.(Refer Slide Time: 14:17)
So, let us move ahead and see what are the how the balance between production and
consumption of H plus ions are maintained. So, here you can see the main process that
produces or consume hydrogen ions in soil systems are given. So, acidifying or H plus
ion producing process are given here. Obviously, the formation of carbonic acid from
carbon dioxide you know that, due to the you know due to the at these carbon dioxide
basically generates due to the respiration action of microorganisms. Acid dissolution
such as you know you know RC double O H and you can see the dissolution of the acid
will further disassociates disassociates. Dissociation of the acids which further produces
the H plus ion.
Then, oxidation  of N, S and Fe compound we already showed you and you know
atmospheric H2SO4, HNO3 deposition in the form of acid rain. Cation uptake by the
plants I showed you. Accumulation of acidic organic matter and then cation precipitation
such as you know you can see aluminium when reacts with water to form this aluminium
hydroxide and also generates 3 hydrogen or you know three 3 protons which you know.
So, these basically hydrolysis process and this adds up to the acidity. So, that is why
aluminium is also considered as a acidic cation of the soil. So, this you know there is a
common you know everybody ask why we consider aluminium for for as an acidic you
know acidic cation because due to the hydrolysis process it generates the H plus ion. So,
that is why we call it as an acidic cation.And, also you can see here silica is reacting with aluminium hydroxide and calcium and
you can see ultimately it is also producing the H plus ion which is acidic production. So,
deprotonation of the pH dependent charges; obviously, you can see if you remember you
know the pH dependent charge and pH dependent charge occurs you know you know
acidified  process  you  know  if  you  if  you  remember  the  pH  dependent  charge  pH
dependent charge occur at the ages of the mineral like kaolinite and  aluminium oxides
and it is you know depending on the pH.
So, in the alkaline condition when there will be sufficient amount of hydroxyl anion
these H plus will deprotonate and comes into the solution to form H 2O to form H2O. So,
it is a deprotonation process and ultimately it will add to the pH of the soil. And,
alkalinizing you know alkalinizing or H plus ion consuming process are also given here
inputs are bicarbonates and carbonates in the form of lime.
And, anion protonation; you can see here anion protonation. Reduction of N, S and Fe
compounds it is quite obvious; atmospheric calcium, magnesium deposition, because
these are basic cations. Anion uptake by the plant; obviously, when there will be anion
uptake by the plant more cations will be you know released. And, the specific adsorption
of anions and cation weathering from mineral such as you know 3H plus when you know
aluminium hydroxide reacts with this proton to form this aluminium ion and in water
molecules this is an another H plus ion consuming processes and also protonation of the
pH dependent charge. So, this is opposite of this reaction.
So, in case of acidic condition; remember, in case of acidic condition protonation of the
pH dependent charge occurs and in case alkaline condition deprotonation occurs. So,
these are the processes for making the balance of for the production and consumption of
H plus ions.(Refer Slide Time: 18:19)
So, how aluminium causes the soil acidity? Obviously, the H plus releases aluminium
from crystal structure and aluminium occur. So, here you can see this important process.
So, you know that aluminium is present in the crystal structure of the clay minerals and it
is bound to this hydroxyl groups at the age of the mineral and when there we add you
know when the you know you now added H plus ions and these H plus ions get adsorbed
in to the clay surfaces it basically makes this crystal structure less stable and ultimately
these three molecules of what you know three molecules of water get released ultimately
you know ultimately you know releases the aluminium from this crystal structure.
And, these aluminium is you know is present ultimately at the age of the mineral as
exchangeable Al3 plus ion and these exchangeable Al 3 plus ion basically are is in you
know  equilibrium  with  the  Al 3 plus  ion  in  the  solution.  And,  these  Al 3 plus  ion
exchangeable Al3 plus ion ultimately helps in hydrolysis of the water to produce the to
produce the H plus ion as you can see hear this is the you know hydrolysis of the water
ah. So, if you consider this process this reaction this Al 3 plus reacts with the water and
ultimately produces the H plus ion producing these aluminium hydro the this compound.
And, the second step it is also again you know releasing another H plus producing
Al(OH)2 and farther it is producing Al (OH) 3. So, each aluminium releases 3 H plus ion.So, that is why the aluminium is considered as an acidic cation. So, apart from H plus
aluminium is also considered as a acid cation because it produces H plus ion or acidic
you know is basically producing the H plus ion due to the hydrolysis of water.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:43)
So, there are different pools of soil acidity. Basically the pools of total soil acidity
generally it is a combination of active acidity plus exchangeable acidity and residual
acidity and there is another term called potential acidity we will we will cover at know
this later.
So, active acidity exchangeable acidity and residual acidity are very important and as per
the quantity wise is concerned this residual acidity is always higher than exchangeable
acidity which is further higher than active acidity. So, let us see what are the active
acidity, exchangeable acidity and residual acidity.(Refer Slide Time: 21:24)
So, active acidity is the acidity usually measured by using the pH of the soil solution and
active acidity basically represent the H plus and concentration in the soil solution and it
can be easily balanced and when we measure the pH of the soil solution by a by a pH
metre  basically  measures  the  active  acidity.  What  is  exchangeable  acidity?  Now,
exchangeable acidity primarily caused by the Al 3 and H plus ion. As you know that Al 3
also acts as acidic cation, so, when we combine the Al 3 plus plus H plus ions in the
exchangeable sites in the soil mineral they are the exchangeable cation then we call it the
exchangeable acidity and it can be measured by using unbuffered salt like KCl. 
As you can see here in this reaction now this Al 3 plus and H plus are present in the
exchangeable sites and we are you know adding some unbuffered salt like KCl which is
basically replacing all the Al 3 plus and H plus ions and replaced with the K plus. So, it
comes in to the soil solution. So, it can be measured then this you know aluminium and
H can be measured. So, this is an example of exchangeable acidity. So, we have covered
the active acidity exchangeable acidity.(Refer Slide Time: 22:41)
So, what is the residual acidity? Residual acidity is basically primarily caused by the Al 3
plus and H plus in non-exchangeable sites in soil colloids, basically in the clay and
organic carbon organic matter. And, they are basically bound cations and released using
the liming material. So, you can see these are basically non exchange present in the non -
exchangeable soil and when we are adding the calcium hydroxide it is basically releasing
these and producing aluminium hydroxide and replacing with the calcium. So, this is an
example of residual acidity.
So, basically total acidity is the combination of residual acidity and active acidity and
exchangeable acidity, there is another acidity pool called potential acidity and it is the
maximum amount of acidity which a partly or totally reduced soil may contain after it
has been completely oxidized. Generally you can see this potential acid in case of acid
sulphate soils. And, so, have covered the four pools of acidity. Remember that, whenever
we go for ameliorating the soil acidity by adding the liming material we neutralize only
the active acidity. So, this is very important. Primarily we are we are utilising the active
acidity.(Refer Slide Time: 23:38)
Now,  cation  saturation  percentage  you  know  the  proportion  of  the  CEC  which  is
occupied  by  given  ion  and  we  already  covered  what  is  percent  base  saturation  or
proportion  of  the  CEC  occupied  by  non-acidic  cations  like  calcium,  magnesium,
potassium and sodium.
And, acid saturation is basically proportion with this CEC which is occupied by acid
cations like H plus and Al 3 plus. So, you can see here if the CEC is 20 centimol per kg
with ten calcium you know with this 10 unit of calcium 3 magnesium, 1 potassium, 1
sodium, 1 H plus and 4 Al 3 plus, what is the magnesium saturation? Obviously, will get 3
by 20 that is 15 percent; what is the base saturation? That is 75 percent. So, obviously,
you know this these are important aspects for calculating the acid saturation, as well as
base saturation of a soil ah.(Refer Slide Time: 25:03)
So, what is the relation between CEC and types of cations? You can see that although
there are four different types of soil here hypothetical soil. So, here in case of soil you
can see although the acid saturation is changing from soil a that is 78 percent to 62
percent the 33 percent to 14 percent. They have implication only on the pH. So, acid
saturation is it you know inter linked with the pH. So, as the acid saturation is increasing
from 14 percent to 78 percent the pH is getting decreased.
However, that may not be reflected in the total CEC because you can see here soil b and
soil d are having the same CEC, that is CEC to 21. However, soil b is less acidic than the
soil d. So, basically here you can we can see that acid saturation has an implication on
the soil respective soil pH.(Refer Slide Time: 26:16)
So, so, why should we consider soil buffering capacity? Now, better buffer the soil better
it resist the acidity from external factors. Remember that you know a better buffer for
soil is always good for you know for resisting any abrupt change of you know soil pH
when we add different types of external factors. And, buffering capacity helps to us to
determine the amount of lime to be applied to raise the pH and higher the CEC more the
buffering capacity of the soil. Obviously, they have more reason then and compensating
only active acidity will have little consequence while liming. Therefore, we should also
consider the other pools also.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:04)
So, effects of let us see the what are the effects of the acidity. Obviously, as I have told
you at the beginning of this lecture different types of microorganisms are present at
different levels of soil acidity. Obviously, fungi are more or less than you know present
as you can see in the acidic soil. However, bacteria is present only at near neutral
condition that is from 6 to 7. However, when there is a very low pH the bacteria cannot
thrive and most of the nutrients are the thickness of these bars are basically representing
the availability.
So, you can see N, K, S all these are more available around the along the pH of new near
neutral pH that is from 6.5 to 7.5 and at the pH acid pH condition which is less than 5.5,
all these are not available on the availability decreases. So, most of the. So, in most of
the  cases  you will  see that,  you know  the  availability  of the  mineral  nutrients  are
decreased.
However, you can see here and opposite train for aluminium, so, aluminium toxity
increases in case of acid soil. Aluminium toxity is very very harmful for the growth and
germination of the crop and manganese iron and hydrogen toxity also you know also
occurs and nutrient availability to plants affected due to the acidity it can also affects the
microbial growth and you know optimal pH for plants are basically also affected. So,
maintaining an optimum pH is very very important for you know for an optimum soil
acidity.
So, guys let us wrap up here and in the next lecture, we will try to finish this soil acidity
and then will then will start the soil alkalinity, sodisity and other topics. So, I hope that
you have you know gained some knowledge about this soil acidity and how soil acidity
occurs due from the different factors and what are the different pools of soil acidity. So,
will we will stop here and from the next lecture will see how we can ameliorate soil
acidity and using different types of liming materials and what are the other important
factors for considering the amelioration of the soil acidity. And so, till then you know
you have a good day and well meet in the next lecture to discuss these things in details.
Thank you.