Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 24
Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC)
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology, and this will be our
lecture 4 for week 5. And we will cover in the next two lectures, we will cover 2
important topics that is cation exchange  capacity and then we will be covering the
absorption of different pesticides. 
In the last three lectures, we have covered you know important aspects of soil chemistry,
we have covered detail in details about the silicate clays, and we have also covered the
sources of charge on clay colloids specially, the inorganic clay colloids. And today we
will be starting a new topic, that is cation exchange capacity and also we will be talking
about anion exchange capacity simultaneously. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:13)
So, what is cation exchange  capacity? The first question comes to our mind, what is
cation exchange  capacity? So, this is the first concept which, we will cover today and
then the rest of the topics are methods for determining the cation exchange  capacity then
cation exchange  capacity of different soils.We will discuss: what is the relationship  between the  pH  and the  cation exchange
capacity and then we will discuss about the CEC in field soils. And also we will try to
see; what is the relationship between different weathering intensity and cation exchange
capacity as well as anion exchange  capacity. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:45)
So, let us start our discussion. So, basically you know that in clay as well as in organic
matter, which is present in the soil they are highly reactive, because of their charge
distribution. And as I have told you that this clay minerals or silicate clays or crystalline
silicate clays, you know create a huge amount of both positive and negative charges
specially, the negative charges due to isomorphic are isomorphous substitution. And
these  negative  charges  are  responsible  for  attracting  different  positive  cations.  So,
basically the cation exchange  capacity is the ability of the soil to exchange the cations
from it is surrounding medium and attach and you know and adsorbing and help in
adsorbing those cations over the soil surface or clay surface. 
So, cation exchange  capacity basically also indicates the, it also sometime indicate the
fertility status or you know nutrient enrichment status of the soil. So, the cation exchange
capacity basically, you know is expressed as the number of moles of positive charge
adsorbed per unit mass of soil. So, unit of CEC or cation exchange ; obviously, the short
form of cation exchange  capacity will be CEC and units of CEC we know earlier, we
use  a  unit  called  milliequivalents  per  100  grams  of  soil  for  estimating  the  cationexchange  capacity. However the recent unit for cation exchange  capacity is centimoles
of charge per kilogram or cmolec per kg of soil. So, basically these 2 units are same. So,
1 milliequivalent per 100 gram is you know is equal to one centimole of charge per kg of
soil. So, in other words, see a soil with a CEC of 15 centimole per kg means 1 kg soil can
hold, you know 15 centimole of positive ions. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:08)
So, let us go ahead and see; what are the different methods of determining the cation
exchange  capacity. 
Now, one of the method is called the buffer CEC method, now what is buffer? Buffer is
any chemical that resist the change. So, some sometime, you will see that we use pH
buffer for measuring pH. So, basically some standardized chemicals which generally
resists the change of chemical status. So, here in the buffer CEC method, basically, we
apply the buffer solution to the soil and if the pH of the buffer is more than the pH of the
native soil, then this methods measures not only the cation exchange  sites activate at the
pH of the particular soil. But also any pH dependent exchange site that would become
negatively charged, if the soil pH which were raised to pH 7 or 8.2.
So, anyway in summary these methods exaggerate, the true CEC of acid soils and the
buffer method that is you know ammonium ions at pH 7 or barium ions at pH 8.2
measure the potential or maximum cation exchange  capacity of soil. (Refer Slide Time: 05:33)
So, another term is called the effective CEC or ECEC this is basically unbuffered. 
So, the unbuffered method can measure only the effective CEC or ECEC of the soil and
these methods gives results, when p the pH of the native soil is lower than that of buffer
pH. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:57)
So, these are 2 general methods and what are the different steps for determining the soil
CEC? Now you can see we are showing here 4 different beakers. Now, these 4 differentbeakers and we are describing the process of measuring the CECs in some sequential
steps. 
So, in the first step, if you can see we are basically pouring the soil in you know in some
funnels and we are leaching the soils with ammonium salt solution sometime ammonium
acetate. Now, this ammonium ions of this ammonium salt solution replaces the other
cations. So, you know that the cations are calcium, magnesium, potassium and then you
know other H plus, aluminium. 
So, these cations are getting replaced by ammonium cation and as a result of that in the
second step, you see in b means the second step all the cations are coming into this leach
solution  and  ultimately  all  the  exchange  sites  of  the  soil  will  be  occupied  by  this
ammonium cation. Now so, after removing, so the now in the second step, you can see
all the soil has been saturated with ammonium. Now our duty is to remove this excess of
ammonium salt solution, then soil is again leached with k plus salt solution.
So, to remove these ammonium attached or adsorbed ammonium cations, we further
leach the soil with potassium salt solution. So, what happens this potassium basically
replaces these ammonium ions and thus all the exchange sites is further occupied by this
potassium. So, ammonium washed into the lower container and the concentration of the
ammonium will be determined, which the CEC of the soil. So, that will basically gives
you the CEC of the soil so again at the first step.
We will take the soil into a funnel and then we leach the soil with some ammonium salt
solution basically, some you know ammonium acetate. And as a result of that you will
see  that  all  the  ammoniums  will  replace  all  the  cations  in  the  leach  solution,  and
ultimately, the ammonium ions will occupy all the exchange sites. In the third step, we
will remove all the ammonium with the help of potassium salt solution by leaching with
the potassium salt solution and finally, we will measure the ammonium in the container
and that will give you the idea of the total CEC.
So basically, it is acting as a proxy for measuring the cation exchange  capacity because
these  ammonium  will  replace  all  these  cations  calcium,  magnesium,  potassium  and
ultimately, it will show the total cation exchange  capacity. (Refer Slide Time: 09:17)
So, let us go ahead and see how we can calculate the soil CEC from lab data. So, after
leaching the soil with 0.4 you know; let us assume that after leaching the soil with 0.4
litre of ammonium solution, all the exchangeable cation shown in the soil samples were
displaced off the colloids and washed into the beaker along with the excess ammonium
ions. So, the solution in this beaker b that is in the second step, was analysed for calcium,
magnesium, potassium, aluminium and hydrogen or you know H plus ions with the
following results and we are getting the following results that is 200 milligram per litre
of calcium ions, 60 milligrams per litre of magnesium then 97.5 milligram per litre of
potassium and then 5 milligram per litre of H plus. And 67.5 milligram per litre of AL3
plus.
So because, only 0.4 litre of the solution was collected from the soil samples and the soil
sample weighted only 0.1 kilo. So, we you can convert these results to by multiplying
with 0.4 and 10 to give the amount of each ion collected in milligram per kg of the soil.
So as an example, we can show we can see the example for calcium, we are getting 200
milligram of calcium per litre and then we are multiplying it with these 2 multiplication
factor to convert it to make milligram per kg of soil. So, basically we are getting 800
milligram of calcium ion per kg of soil.
So, this is simple. So, let us see what is the next step. (Refer Slide Time: 11:06)
So, in the next step for calcium, you know the atomic weight is approximately 40 gram
per mole. So, we can calculate the centimole of exchangeable calcium in 1 kg of soil. So,
basically we have to convert this 800 milligram of calcium into a centimole of calcium.
So, basically you know that 40 grams mean 1 mole. So, from there we can, we know we
can calculate mill mole and centimole. 
So basically, when we convert this 800 when we convert this 800 milligram of calcium,
we will get ultimately 2 centimole of calcium ions per kg of soil. So, our next step for
this calculation so once, we calculate these centimole.(Refer Slide Time: 11:59)
Now, next step is to repeating this calculation for each elements and ultimately providing
for ultimately, which will ultimately provide the following results. So, we are getting
ultimately 2 centimole for calcium per kg, 1 centimole magnesium per kg, 1 centimole
potassium per kg, 2 centimole H plus per kg and 1 centimole of Al3 plus kg. 
So,  we  are  getting  the  concentration  of  each  of  the  cations,  which  were  adsorbed
previously and ultimately contributing to the CEC of the soil. So, we have measured
individual concentration in centimole per kg of soil, we have covered up to this point.
Now, we have to multiply the centimole per kg for each element by the valency of the
respective ion to convert it to the centimole of charge. So, from centimole to centimole
of charge, you have to multiply with their respective valency of the cation. So, you will
get the c mole c per kg of soil. 
So, for example, if we use the calcium again as an example, you can see we are here
using 2 centimole of calcium per kg of the soil, and then we are multiplying it with 2
because, you know the calcium valency is plus 2. So, we are getting 4 centimole charge
from calcium plus ion calcium 2 plus ion per kg of soil. So, for individual element we
have to calculate this centimole of charge. (Refer Slide Time: 13:43)
So, repeating we have to repeat this calculation and we will provide the following results
like 4 centimole of calcium per kg, then 2 centimole of centimole charge of magnesium
per kg, then 1 centimole charge of potassium per kg of soil, then 2 centimole charge per
you know H plus per kg of soil and 3 centimole charge of Al3 plus plus per kg of soil.
Now assuming the 5 elements measured all the five elements measure account for nearly
all the exchangeable cations, if we assume that there are no other exchangeable cation
then the sum of their charges that is 4 plus 2 plus 1 plus 2 plus 3 that is 12 basically,
equals to the CEC of the soil. 
So, that is 12 centimole kg per centimole charge per kg. So, what are the steps? If you jot
down, if you summarise first of all, we have to leach the soil with the ammonium salt,
which will replace all the adsorbed cations into the soil solution into to the leachate
solution ultimately, we will be leaching this ammonium with the help of potassium and
then these further leached down all the ammonium can be calculated and it will basically
you know, it will basically indicate the cation exchange  capacity.
Now, once we calculate the so, for estimating the cation exchange  capacity we have to
measure the concentration of individual cation, which were replaced by ammonium after
we calculate them then we have to multiply with some multiplication factor to convert it
to milligram per kg. And after we convert it to milligram per kg of soil then you we have
to convert it to centimole because, we know the amount or gram of individual elementper mole and from the centimole, we have to convert it to centimole of charge per kg of
soil. So, repeating all this thing for all the elements then we have to submit to get the
total cation exchange  capacity. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:02)
So, another method: if you remember you know in the previous method, what we did we
basically measured the concentration of all the cations, which were leached in the first
beaker with the help of ammonium salt solution. However, if you remember the total
process at the end, we are further leaching all the adsorbed ammonium with the help of
potassium solution. 
So, by measuring the total ammonium concentration also we can also measure the CEC
there  are  2  methods  one  method  says  that  you  measure  all  the  cations,  which  are
previously replaced or in the first stage the cations, which were replaced in the first stage
with the help of ammonium. So, you measure them individually their concentration
covert them into their centimole, and further centimole of charge and then add them, it
will finally, give you the total centimole total CEC. 
Another method, the second method says that you measure all the ammonium, which
were leached by the by the potassium in the last stage. So, you assume that ammonium
concentration is beaker d that means the last stage to be 540 milligram per litre. So, as in
the method one because of 0.4 litres of solution was collected from the soil sample and
the soil sample weighted only 0.1 kilo these result can be further just like the previous.These  results  can  be  calculated  as  follows  to  give  the  amount  of  ammonium  ions
collected  for  mg  per  kg  of  soil.  You  can  see  we  are  multiplying  with  the  same
multiplication factor that is 0.4 and 10 to get a milligram of ammonium ions per kg of
soil. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:45)
And ultimately we are getting, And now in the second stage we are converting it to
centimole, we are ultimately getting 12 centimole of ammonium ions per kg of soil and
then these centimole will be since ammonium has a single valency. So, further we will be
getting that answer is 12 centimole per kg.(Refer Slide Time: 18:04)
So, final our results is CEC 12 centimole c or 12 centimole, you know 12 centimole
charge per kg of soil. Now what are the CEC of different soils? Now the CEC of the
different  soils  also  varies  widely  from one soil  to another  soil, depending  on their
chemical composition. So, sandy soils are low in CEC, but clay soils having high cation
exchange  capacity varies why because, you know the sandy soil are basically composed
of  sands  and  sands  are  chemically  inert  whereas,  the  clay  soils  are  made  of  these
crystalline clay minerals, which are chemically reactive, because of their negative charge
development. So obviously, a clay soil will have higher CEC then that of a negative that
of a sandy soil.
Now iron aluminium oxides, kaolinite are having low CEC that is low less than 10
centimole per kg and whereas mica and chlorites has 10 to 40 centimole per kg, and
smectite, and vermiculites ranges from 80 to 180 centimole per kg, and the humus.
Remember that humus is having the highest CEC that is more than 250 some you know
most of the time it is more than 250 centimole per kg. So, remember that among the clay
minerals, if you compare clay minerals as well as the humus, humus is showing more
cation exchange  capacity than rest of all the clay minerals. So, humus is much more
reactive than the clay. 
So,  you can  see  based on  the  clay  mineral  nature  or clay  mineral  type  the  cation
exchange  capacity is wearing and you know the reasons behind this because, you knowthat in case of kaolinite there is no isomorphic substitution. So, as a result of that there is
you know very less amount of negative charge development, when there is a very less
amount of negative charge development; obviously, their cation exchange  capacity will
be low all similarly. So, in case of smectite and vermiculites obviously, you will be
having high amount of isomorphous substitution. 
In that octahedral layer if you remember from our last lecture then obviously, there will
be high amount of negative charge. And these negative charge high amount of negative
charge  will  ultimately,  contribute  to  the  high  cation  exchange  capacity  mica  you
remember that both the layers, the inter layer space has collapsed by the small potassium
cation. So, there is no space for adsorption of the potassium ion. So, as a result it is also
have intermediate ranges of cation exchange  capacity. So, we have an basic idea about
the cation exchange  capacity of different soils.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:44)
So, remember that at higher pH soil humus contributes more cation exchange  capacity to
the soil with a constant amount of clay. So, if you see this is the relationship between
organic carbon in gram per kg and cation exchange  capacity, which is being expressed
in terms of centimole of charge per kg. So, if you go back to the previous, you know
previous couple of slides, you will see that here, you should replace the cmol  that cmolc
obviously it should be centimole of charge.So, please you know replace this c mole with centimole c, I will try to change this while
I will be distributing the ppt with you ok. So, it will be centimole of charge per kg of
soil. So, let us move ahead and see so, what I was talking about the relationship between
organic carbon and cation exchange  capacity in centimole of charge per kg of soil. So,
you can see that at pH 4 to 4.5 in this line; obviously, at pH.
You know 4 to 4.5 1 gram of soil humus increases the CEC of 0.13 mole per kg. So, if
you increase 1 gram of soil humus because, we are getting a slope of 0.13. So that
means, so, in this case for this line, we are getting a slope of 0.13. That means, if you
change the you know the organic carbon by 1 unit that is 1 gram per kg you will get an
increase CEC of 4 to I mean of increase CEC by 0.13 centimole charge; however, at pH
5 to 5.5. 
We are getting you know a slope of 0.26. So, slope is higher. So, one the slope is higher;
obviously, that interpretation will also change. So, we are getting at pH 5.5, when we are
increasing the organic carbon 5.5 concentration with by 1 gram per kg the pH will
increase  0.26  centimole  charge  per  kg.  So,  you  can  see  at  higher  pH  soil  humus
contributes more CEC. So, higher pH we are getting here 5 to 5.5 and here 4 to 4.5, we
are getting a CEC increase of 0.13 centimole c per kg here for 4 to 4.5.
However, in case of 5 to 5.5, we are getting an increase of 0.26 centimole charge per kg,
which is double than the earlier. That means, again it is re establishing the fact that at
higher pH soil humus contributes more CEC in the soil with a constant amount of clay
that is a you know prerequisite that your clay has to be constant in both the condition. (Refer Slide Time: 24:19)
So, let us see some common ranges of potential common ranges of potential cation
exchange  capacity, if we, I am trying to show you the important soil orders and their
corresponding CEC. So, if you consider histosols; obviously, we are getting the highest
CEC because, it is dominated by organic matter. So, we are getting you know c mole
100- 110 to 170; 170 c mole c per kg of soil and in case of vertisols, we are getting 33 to
67. And obviously, in case of aridisol, which is dominated by sand we are getting lower
somewhat lower spodosols, we are getting lower in case of oxisols, which is basically
dominated by iron and aluminium oxides. 
We are getting very low which is 2 to 13. So, you know that in case of iron aluminium
oxides kaolinite, there is low amount of CEC. So, that is the reason that you know we are
getting low amount of cation exchange  capacity in case of this oxisols. However, in case
of histosols, we are getting high amount of you know cation exchange  capacity. (Refer Slide Time: 25:37)
So, let us do some you know let us solve some problems. So, you know we want to
estimate the cation exchange  capacity and clay mineralogy. 
So, we want to estimate the first step, we want to estimate the cation exchange  capacity
from soil mineralogy or clay mineralogy. So, the dominant clays in mollisols are likely 2
is to one type such as vermiculite and smectite thus the average CEC of the clays of these
types to be about you know 100 centimole per kg of clay 100 centimole charge per kg of
clay. So, at pH 7 the CEC of organic matter is about 200 you know that I showed you in
the last couple of slides the ranges of you know CEC for organic matter.
So, it will be we can assume it by you can assume it as 200 centimole per kg, since 1 kg
of this soil has 0.20 kg that is 20 percent of clay and 0.04 that is 4 percent of organic
matter we can calculate the CEC associated with each of these sources. So, let us see
what is the CEC from each of these sources. So, from the clays in the mollisols we are
getting 0.2 multiplied by hundred centimole charge per kg.
So, that is 20 centimole charge per kg. So, basically we have to multiply the respective
cation exchange  capacity with the fraction of that mineral, which is present into the soil.
So, you know that here it is 0.2 kg per clay mineral we are getting in 1 kg of soil. And
from organic matter of the mollisol, we are getting 200 multiplied by 0.04, which is 4
percent. So, we are getting 8 centimole per charge. So, ultimately the total CEC from the
mollisol will be 20 plus 8 that is 28 centimole charge per kg of soil. (Refer Slide Time: 27:46)
So, it is a one type of solution and if you try to estimate the clay mineralogy from CEC,
you know we assume that is soil contains 60 percent of the clay and 4 percent of organic
matter and you know at the pH 4.2. So, you also know the CEC is 5.8 centimole charge
per kg. So, you want to estimate the types of clays present. So, at pH 4.2 the CEC of
organic matter would be comparatively lower about 100 centimole charge per kg. So
therefore, let us estimate. 
So, we estimate that is CEC from organic matter in 1 kg of soil; obviously, it will be we
know 0.04 kg organic matter that is 4 percent multiplied by 100 centimole, we have
assumed that 100 centimole charge. So, it will be 4 centimole charge, the remaining
portion of the CEC contributed by the clay can be estimated as so, the total CEC is
basically contributed by both clay mineral as well as organic matter; however, we have
already calculated the CEC, which is being contributed by the organic matter.
So, the rest of the CEC will be automatically contributed by a clay in 1 kg of soil. So, the
rest of the CEC will be 5.8, we know the total CEC and we are subtracting the centimole
charge, which is coming from organic matter; so 1.8 centimole charge. So, this 1.8
centimole charge has to be you know has to be contributed by the clay. So, since 1.8
centimole per kg of soil is provided by 0.60 kg of clay that is 60 percent of 1 kg of soil. 
We can estimate the CEC of the pure clay is basically 3 centimole per kg of clay. Now
from the previous day which I showed you different order, if you can compare thatprevious table, we can identify the soil and the soil order by the respective CEC. Now we
are getting 3 centimole charge per kg of clay. So, if we go back to the previous table. So,
basically  we will be  ultimately  getting  a  CEC, which can  be contributed  by either
oxisols, either ultisols or spodosols because, they have the range which covers that 3
centimole charge per kg of soil. So, from that you can calculate, you can as identify the
soil order not only the soil order, but also you can get a hint about the clay mineralogy.
So, guys I hope that you have got some, you know basic ideas about the cation exchange
capacity and how we calculate, how we estimate the cation exchange  capacity in this
lecture. And we will try to finish this lecture, we will try to finish this topic rather in this
coming lecture and then we will be covering also the anion exchange  capacity and then
we will go to around next topic. 
Since then, thank you very much.