Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 26
Diffuse Double Layer
Welcome, friends to this new week of lectures for Soil Science and Technology and we
will start with this, we will start this week with the topic that is Diffuse Double Layer
theories. And so, this is very important for different soil physical and chemical properties
and we will discuss why. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:44)
And, we will probably will cover these concepts. For example, what is diffuse double
layer, what are the different types of diffuse double layers and what is quantitative
description of double layers and then we will talk about zeta potential iso electric points
on all these things. (Refer Slide Time: 01:01)
So, let us start with the diffuse double layer. Now, diffuse double layer is basically you
know that all the clay particles and negative charge because of either you know iso most
of the time this because of isomorphous substitution. So, they can adsorb cations. So, as
a result of the adsorption of the cation under dry conditions this cations are tightly bound
to clay surface by electrostatic force and this electrostatic force depends on charge,
position of charge and valence of exchangeable cations. So, these three are important
factors for electrostatic force. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:45)
Now, diffuse double layer comes into question when the soil is wet. So, when wet
cations are adsorbed or cations adsorbed try to defuse away from the surface due to their
higher concentration high concentration near surface, that is caused due to the Brownian
movement. Now, you can see here this is a negative colloid and this is a this is in case of
dry condition and this is fully hydrated condition. 
So, in the dry condition you can see this negative colloid is surrounded by these you
know positive charge cations which are tightly bound. However, when there is a fully
hydrated condition obviously, these tightly bound cations will try to diffuse away due to
their Brownian movement and that is the you know condition when diffuse double layer
comes into action. So why, let us see. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:55)
So, this diffusive force along  with electrostatic  forces  exerted  by the negative  clay
surface causes the cations to be distributed around the clay surface as a cloud. As you
can see in the last slide also their surrounding the clay you know negatively charged clay
colloid is a cloud like formation.
So,  this  distribution  of  cations  is  similar  to  air  in  atmosphere  where  the  escaping
tendency of air is overcome by earth’s gravitational pull. So, there is a counter balance, I
mean there is a balance between these two factors. So, this charge clay surface and the distributed charge in adjacent phase together is called
the diffuse double layer. You can see the charge clay surface and adjust and distributed
charged in adjacent phase together is called diffuse double layer. The first layer is made
by these negatively charged clay surface, the second layer is made by this distributed
charges or ions. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:02)
So, this is a diffuse double layer. You can see here if this is a clay surface; obviously, it
will develop negative charge as you can see and this negative charge will be satisfied by
this  positively  charged  cations.  However,  if  you see  the  distribution  of the  cations
obviously, they will be highly concentrated along the surface of the clay. However, their
concentration will decrease as they move away or you know go to the further distance
from the clay surface. 
So, basically they are diffusing. So, this graph also shows the relationship between the
distance and concentration. So, as the distance increased both the cation concentration
getting decreased and also and anion concentration is increasing, because obviously,
when there will be negative charge at the clay surface there will not be high amount of
anions because of repulsion. So, there will be minimum amount of anion present at the
near vicinity of the clay surface. However, as he go further away from the clay surface
there increase their concentration will be increasing as you can see in this picture their
concentration is increasing in this zone. So, obliviously the anion concentration willincrease and the bulk solutions zone after a certain distance they will be present in
equilibrium condition. 
So, this is how the diffuse double layer looks like this will be. Firstly, clay surface you
know  this  is  the  first  layer  followed  by  second  layer  of  diffusing  ions.  So,  the
concentration of the cations decreases with distance from the surface where that is of
anion increases with distance from the surface and after some distance there will be a
bulk solution where the concentration of the cations and anions are equal and unaffected
by the surface. So, after the certain distance you see there is there are almost similar. So,
there is unaffected further from the clay surface. So, this is the diffuse double layer. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:08)
So, the diffuse double layer thus, consist of the permanent negative charge of the clay
and the cations diffused in the soil solution that balances the negative charge of the clay.
So, that is how a diffuse double layer is basically made of. So, innermost layer strongly
held by the clay that is known as the Stern layer will discuss what is Stern you know in
couple of minutes and the water in this Stern layer is known as the absorbed water and is
more viscous than the free water. And, a layer extending from Stern layer away from
clay surface is called the diffuse layer will see what are the Stern layer and diffuse layer. (Refer Slide Time: 06:55)
So, if we go so, this is the Stern you know this is the pictorial depiction of a diffused
double layer. So, let us see this is the highly negative clay colloid here and it is first
surrounded this negative charges for satisfied by the by the cations at the nearest vicinity
creating the Stern layer. Here the Stern layer is basically here this black zone which is
surrounding this highly negative colloid. And, as a result if you see as we move forward
as a move ahead from this you know from the surface of the negative colloids the
concentration of the cations is getting decreased and this zone is called the diffused layer.
And obviously, after certain distance after the certain distance you will see the ions in
equilibrium in the solutions. So, there will be both positive cations and negative anions. 
So,  the  Stern  layer  is  the  layer  of  cations  tightly  adsorbed  by  the  colloid  located
immediately vicinity of the colloid which is almost black in color in this picture as the
diffuse  layer  is  the  layer  of  cations  beyond  Stern  layer  diffused  due  to  combined
electrostatic force and diffusive force. So, if you consider this is the Stern layer and this
will be the diffused layer. I hope that now I hope that it is you know you can understand.
Now, obviously, at the equilibrium with the when the ions will be equilibrium solution
you see both positive counter ion and negative counter ions, ok. The positive counter
ions are this you know you know relatively you know this white circles whereas the
black circles and negative colloids, ok.(Refer Slide Time: 09:01)
So, let us move ahead and see: what are the different models for expressing the diffuse
double layer. So, the first model work is the Helmholtz double layer model which was
given by the scientist Helmholtz is the first given double layer model. Now, in this model
you can see the negative charge on the colloid is considered to be evenly distributed over
the surface with the charge density of sigma and the total counter charge in the second
layer is concentrated in a plane parallel to the surface at distance x.
So, if the medium has a dielectric constant D, then the electrokinetic potential zeta is the
same as the total potential psi. And, we can calculate the total potential by using the
formula. And, the electrochemical potential is maximum at the colloid surface here and;
obviously, at it drops linearly as you can see it drops linearly at the location with
increasing distance over here, when you are increasing distance it drops linearly.
So, obviously, you can see this line represent potential distribution with the distance and
incase of Helmholtz double layer; obviously, there will be positive cations as you can see
here the positive cations are congregated at the clay surface parallelly. So, obviously, this
is the you know the total counter charge in the second layer is concentrated in a plane
parallel to the surface and you know further as we move ahead will see that you know
the potential is linearly decreasing. So, this is the Helmholtz layer.(Refer Slide Time: 10:45)
So, let us see what is the next layer. What is the further modification? Now, the further
modification is Gouy-Chapman double layer model now the negative charge is again
considered distributed evenly over the colloid surface; however, the counter ions are
dispersed into the liquid layer as are the gas molecules in earth’s atmosphere and this
theory is therefore, called the diffuse double layer theory of Gouy and Chapman. So, you
can see here this is the bulks we know this is soil solution and this is the distance x from
the clay surface the potential  distribution you can see there is a I mean there is a
exponential decay in the potential as we go from the clay surface. 
So, the concentration distribution in the liquid zone follows the Boltzmann equation and
the  Boltzmann  equation  can  be  denoted  by  this  equation.  So,  C  x  is  basically
concentration of the cations in mol per liter at distance x from the surface and C x0 is
basically concentration of the cations in the bulk solution mol per liter and z is valence
and e is electro electronic charge, psi is electrical potential, k is the Boltzmann constant
and Ti is the absolute temperature. So, we know we have seen: what is this Gouy-
Chapman double layer model.(Refer Slide Time: 12:12)
Now, because of the attraction by the negatively charged surface cations in the solution
phase tend to distribute themselves over the colloid surface, so that electro neutrality is
maintained. Obviously, when their will be negative charge it will be you know this you
know the cations will try to distribute themselves over the surface to maintain the electro
neutrality. And, and the tendency for these ions to diffuse away is counteracted by van
der Waals attraction.
Obviously, when there will be congregation of cations; obviously, there will be charge of
you know mutual repulsion and mutual repulsion will also be counter balanced by the
van  der Waals  attraction  force. A  deficit  of anions  is  usually  present  in the  liquid
interface and the total charge of the surface is considered to be balanced by excess
cations, we know all these things. So, the initial electrical potential at the colloid surface
is maximum and decreases exponentially with the distance from the surface as follows
we know all these things.(Refer Slide Time: 13:21)
So, you know let us go ahead and see what are the assumptions of Gouy-Chapman
double layer. There are four major assumptions of Gouy-Chapman double layer the
surface first of all the surface is flat and infinite and uniformly charged. Second the ions
are assumed to be point charge distributed according to the Boltzmann distribution;
thirdly this solvent is represented solely by dielectric constant and electrolyte is assumed
to be symmetrical. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:46)
Now, all this both Helmholtz and Gouy-Chapman they try to describe these adsorption
you know they try to describe this diffuse double layer or double layer the distribution of
the counter ions in the in the in the soil and liquid interface. However, both of them has
some you know have some limitation. So, Stern gave another model which we call Stern
double  layer  model.  Now,  Stern  double  layer  model  basically  it  combines  both
Helmholtz and Gouy-Chapman double layer concept. So, how so, you know according to
Stern you know potential follows a linear distribution in Stern layer. So, this is called the
Stern layer. In the Stern layer obviously, there will be you know the counter ions or
cations will be tightly adsorbed over the clay surface.
However, away from the Stern layer there will be a diffuse layer where the further
cations will diffuse away with the increase in the distance. So, this is how we call a Stern
double layer model. So, you can see there will be both linear and exponential decay of
the potential from the clay surface. So, if you remember in case of Helmholtz they say
there is a linear decrease of potential as we increase the distance from the clay surface
and in case of Gouy-Chapman there is a you know exponential decay of potential from
the clay surface and these basically a synthesis of both of these. So, you can see a
combination of both linear as well as you know exponential decrease of the exponential
decrease of potential. So, this is how it is called Stern double layer model. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:43)
So, comparing how is the let us compare this three models. Helmholtz model, obviously,
counter ions are held by a fixed layer between clay surface and soil solution and Gouy-
Chapman model – a diffuse double layered due to the thermal energy of cations causing
a concentration gradient which leads to a condition of maximum entropy or diffuse
double layer; you know entropy means the degree of randomness. So, maximum entropy
is maximum randomness and as a result they will diffuse away.
Stern model basically it combines the above two model and double layer comprises of a
rigidness rigid region next to the mirror surface and a diffuse layer joining the bulk
solution. So, this is how this Stern model combine both this model.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:27)
So, again this also shows a very good representation. So, this is Stern model you I have
already discussed there is a linear and exponential decay of potential. So, the first one is
basically Helmholtz, the second one is Gouy’s layer. So, this is basically synthesis of
these two model.
So, another here you can see in the Helmholtz the counter ions are you know are you
know adsorbed parallel in the parallel plane just in the vicinity of the clay surface.
However, in the Gouy you can see you know the most of the cations are concentrated;
however, there is a you know exponential decay of concentration of the cations as we
increase the distance and in case of Stern they are two types of layers: one is the fixed
potassium layer here and there is a further diffuse you know of not potassium layer andthe cation layer adjacent to the clay surface and this cations will further diffuse away as
we increase in the distance. So, distance from the particle surface in the x-axis. So, this is
basically how we can visually you know if you visually compared this double layer
models we can see these differences, alright.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:47)
So, now this is very important concept. You see there are thickness of the double layer it
is it is variable. How do you know: what is the thickness of the double layer and how it
varies? Now, thickness of the double layer is dependent on several factors first of all
with the increase in the distance ions diffuse away because when there will be increase in
the distance from the clay surface, obviously, they will try to defuse away because their
attractive force will decrease and as a result they will further diffuse away to the bulk
solution. And, more the cationic concentration if you add more cationic concentration it
will reduce the concentration  gradient in the liquid interface and as a result of the
reduced the reduction of the concentration gradient in the liquid interface you know it
will make the double layer thickness reduce .
So, it will reduce the double layer thickness. Obviously, because how because when we
increase the cations concentration it will try to congregate all the cations at the clay
surface and as a result of their communication at the clay surface; obviously, we know
the tendency of cations to defuse away will reduce an ultimately it will reduce theconcentration gradient in the liquid interface and ultimately it will make the you know
the thickness of the layers smaller. 
And, at equivalent electrolyte concentration, monovalent cations in exchange positions
yield thicker diffuse double layer than divalent cations. So, if the cation is sodium it will
produce  thicker  you know  diffuse double layer  than  that  of a divalent  cations  like
calcium, than that of a trivalent cations like aluminum. So, obviously, it depends on the
valency of the cation; obviously, when there will be sodium present the that thickness of
the diffuse double layer will be highest followed by calcium and then so on so forth.
So, obviously, based on the electrolyte concentration when we increase the electrolyte
concentration and when we increase the valency of the cations which are present in the
electrolyte, obviously, the thickness of the diffuse double layer will decrease. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:08)
So, what is the implication of this thickness of the diffuse double layer? This is very
important, that is why we are learning this diffuse double layer and its theories. Now,
you  know  that  clay  carries  a  negative  charge  and  which  are  ordinary  balanced  by
exchangeable cations adsorbed on their surface and in suspension the cations tend to
diffuse away from the clay surface into the bulk solution to balance the counter the
concentration difference occurring between the interface in the bulk liquid phase, it is the
natural phenomena. However, a large portion of these cations especially those in the
immediate vicinity of the clay surface cannot move very far away because of the strongextraction from the negative charge on the clay surface. And, the cations aggregating to
the interface there by forming electrical double layer. We have known all these things so
far which can vary in thickness from 50 to 300 angstrom. So, you can see it is the large
range.
Now, whenever such clay particles approach together for example, let us see this clay
particle  with  high  congregation  of  the  cations  this  is  another  clay  particles  with
communication of cations. So, when this two clay particle clay 1 for example, clay 2
they will you know they will they will move you know they will approach to each other.
Obviously, there will be repulsion between these positive charges. 
So, as a result of this repulsion between the outer parts of the double layer have the same
type  of charge.  So,  the  suspension  is  this  considered  stable  because  as  a  result  of
repulsion they will not come close together, they will not form a aggregate. As a result
they will be dispersed into the soil into the soil solution. As a result of the dispersion to
the soil solution there is this will be you know then it will be called a stable suspension.
And, the suspension is this constable and the place considered to be dispersed. 
Again, due to the you know due to the presence of positive charge cations in the clay
particles. When the clay particles will come close together there will be repulsion. As a
result of repulsion they will not from the you know they will not form aggregate as the
result  of non-formation  of aggregates  they  will remain  to the solution  in dispersed
condition; as a result the suspension is considered stable and you know there will be no
flocculation. (Refer Slide Time: 22:49)
Now,  because  of  this  approach  because  of  this  approach  the  diffuse  counter  ion
atmosphere of the two particles interfere with each other and amount of work to bring
about the changes is called repulsive energy repulsive potential which is denoted by V r;
Vr at the given distance. Now, the range and effectiveness of the repulsive potential
depends on the thickness of the diffuse double layer and the repulsive force decreases.
Obviously, at you know usually exponentially  with increasing distance between the
particles  because when the particles  will be the further away the repulsion will be
decreased. So, you can see here the repulsive force which is denoted by Vr is decreasing
continuously with the increase of the distance inter-particle distance. (Refer Slide Time: 23:50)
So, this is clear. So, let us see what are the other implications. Opposite to the repulsive
force the clay suspension is also subjected to interparticle attraction. So, there are two
forces:  one  is  repulsive  forces  and  another  is  attractive  forces  and  these  forces  of
attraction are usually called the van der Waals attraction or Va; this is van der Waals
attraction force. Now, the van der Waals attraction is only effective at very close distance
and it decays rapidly with distance as you can see it decays rapidly with distance and
when the interparticle distance decreases to 20 Armstrong or less van der Waals force
will become dominant and the clay particle will flocculate.
Now, as a result of this van der Waal attraction when the interparticle distance is less
than 20 Armstrong; obviously, these two particle will further club together and it will it
will flocculate.  And, at the interparticle  distance  of greater 20 Armstrong repulsive
forces are dominant creating a stable clay suspension. So, again it all depends upon the
interparticle distance.
When the interparticle distance is greater than 20 Armstrong the repulsive forces will be
dominant. As a result of the repulsive forces there will be repulsion between the two
particle because of the similar positive cations in the outer surface and as a result the
state the condition will be stable; that means, that with the soil will be dispersed, there
will be no flocculation. However, when the interparticle distance comes goes down
below 5 Armstrong there will be van der Waal attraction, as a result of the van der Waalattraction the resultant you know as a result of the van der Waal attraction these particle
will you know will club together and create the flocculation.
So, repulsion will dominate at low electrolyte concentration obviously, because at low
electrolyte concentration the thickness of the diffuse double layer is greater. The clay
particles  are  shielded  by  relatively  thick  double  layers  in  case  of  low  electrolyte
concentration decreasing the possibility of mutual approach. So, if there is no mutual
approach, obviously, there will be you know there will be you know no attraction. So, I
mean the repulsion will dominate low electrolyte concentration because the decreasing
the possibility of the mutual approach. Mutual approach will be very less for mutual
approach you need interparticle distance less than 5 Armstrong as we have already know.
So, I am sorry 20 Armstrong 20 Armstrong.
So, when it is less than 20 Armstrong van der Waal attractive force will be dominant.
However, when the repulsive will be dominated low electrolyte concentration and the
clay  particles  will  be  shielded  by  relatively  thick  double  layers  and  decreasing  the
possibilities of mutual approach and at high electrolyte concentration the chances of
close approach are made possible by compression of the double layers. We know that
when we increase the more electrolyte concentration the thickness of the double diffuse
double layer will decrease and as a result will be there will be further compression and
you know in this condition van der Waal attractive force may overcome the repulsive
force and coagulation and flocculation particles occurs rapidly.
So, resultant force will be more and as a result there will be flocculation or coagulation.
So, which one is better? The question is which one is better? Well, for well aggregation
obviously, it is better to have a well aggregate I mean for better plant growth and better
soil physical and chemical properties you need to have a better aggregated soil. So, you
must encourage soil flocculation and coagulation for better aggregation. If the soil is
dispersed this is not good for soil physical as well as biological activities and chemical
activities. We will discuss that later on.
Now, another important  aspect  let us see. So, in a nutshell you see that  when the
interparticle distance are higher; obviously, repulsive forces will be dominant were more
than 20 Armstrong and when the you know when the interparticle distance is less than 20
Armstrong attractive forces you know van der Waal forces will be dominant and all thisdepends on the thickness of the double layer and thickness of the double layer you know
can be changed by increasing the concentration of the electrolytes and you know and
also  you  know  the  changing  the  valency  of  the  cations  which  are  present  in  the
electrolytes. 
So, let us stop here and in the next lecture will be covering zeta potential and then will go
to our next topic that is adsorption isotherms.
Thank you very much.