Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 02
Weathering and Soil Formation
Hello friends. So, today in this Soil Science and Technology course, we are going to start
a new chapter that is Weathering and Soil Formation and it is very much important for
the point from the point of view of the soil development. So in the first lecture, we talked
about what is soil, the definition of soil, the major functions of soil and also we talked
about what are the major components of soil, what is a volume wise distribution of
different components, what do you mean by mineral matter, what is the percentage of
organic carbon or organic matter. And, what is soil air, soil water and what are the
different sizes of mineral fractions, we talked about different sizes of sand silt and clay
and how they differ in different types of physical and chemical properties. So from that
lecture, we had an overview of different aspects of soil and today onwards we are going
to start a new chapter that is weathering and soil formation. 
Now, before going to before going in details about weathering and soil formation, you
must know that soil, I mean the soil generally forms from rocks and rock is basically the
precursor of any soil. So, it takes millions and millions of years to create one inch of soil
and it generally occurs from rock. Now, there are 2 processes involved in the formation
of soil from rock, these are weathering as well as pedogenesis. So, let us start. (Refer Slide Time: 02:19)
So, in this lecture we will be talking about both weathering as well as pedogenesis. Now
weathering is basically is of 3 types, one is physical, another is chemical, another is
biological, we will talk about them in details later on. And there is another process called
soil pedogenesis, which is basically addition, losses, transformation and translocation of
different components within the soil. So, unless these 2 processes occur, a soil cannot be
developed. So, a soil formation is basically combination of these 2 important steps. So,
let us first focus on what is weathering. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:06)
Weathering is the disintegration and decomposition of rocks at the earth surface by
different physical, chemical and biological activities. So, it involves both destruction and
synthesis and; obviously, it is the precursor of pedogenesis. So, unless weathering stops,
I mean weathering is although it is a continuous process, unless there is a considerable
amount of weathering products the soil pedogenesis process cannot start. So, as you see
in the definition weathering is basically, it is physical as well as chemical and biological.
Now, the other name of physical weathering is mechanical weathering or disintegration
and another name of chemical weathering is decomposition. 
Now, biological weathering is a third kind of weathering, which is basically combination
of both physical weathering as well as chemical weathering. And in case of physical
weathering, please remember that there is only change in the size of bigger rocks to
smaller rock fragments. So, there is no chemical changes. So, the chemical composition
of the smaller fragments, which occurs through the physical weathering process has the
same chemicals  makeup  as  that  of the original rock; however, in case of chemical
weathering there will be a complete alteration of chemical characteristics from one form
to another form. So, these are important aspects of physical and chemical weathering. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:52)
So, if you see in this picture, I have shown 4 panels which shows chronological events
for soil formation as you can see in the first panel, the parent rock from which of the soil
is formed is shown and which is acted upon by different you know by you know rainfall,which is a physical force and these rainfall, I mean helps in physical breakdown of this
of this rock to smaller fragments. So, as you can see here, these rocks you know the
original parent bedrock, which is the disintegrating rock breaks down into these smaller
fragments and these smaller fragments, we call them parent material. 
Now, once this parent material is formed; obviously, there are some organic matter
deposition at the surface, because of fresh litter fall as well as decaying plants and animal
bodies. So, it creates a layer at the surface. And as we can see as the time goes on;
obviously, there are some distinct horizon which are present in the soil. At the bottom,
you will see the bigger fragments are there rock fragments are there and this is called C
horizon and; obviously, some intermediate size fractions  are there just above the C
horizon and A horizon is basically, a mineral horizon and above the A horizon, there is
an organic horizon or O horizon and; obviously, you know in the O horizon, you will see
mixture of mineral particles and organic matter. 
And; obviously, the C horizon will contain above mainly the parent material and in the
final panel, you will see that a complete distinct you know horizonation has been formed
in this soil, where you can see A horizon as well as B horizon as well as C horizon and at
the top there is a completely developed O horizon. So, this is we call soil profile and
unless this soil profile occurs in any soil, we cannot term that technically as a soil. And
these you know formation of soil profile is dependent on you know both weathering as
well as pedogenesis process, because not only weathering, but also different types of
addition losses transformation and translocations are required for development of these
horizons. So, let us see in details about the physical weathering in the next slide. (Refer Slide Time: 07:45)
So, before going to the physical weathering let us make a quick recap of rocks and I am
sure that you have already covered these things in your school. So, just to give you a
quick recap before we go for weathering. Now magma you know, there is a molten rock
whereas, igneous rock basically you know, it is a cold and solid magma and sedimentary
rock  basically,  occurs  from  material  deposited  from  suspension  or  precipitate  from
solution. Whereas, metamorphic rocks you know it basically, forms from change in heat
and pressure and it is it all you know, it is an transform form of both igneous as well as
sedimentary rocks. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:36)
Now, in the next slide you will see some, I have given some pictures of igneous rock as
well  as  sedimentary  rock  and  metamorphic  rock.  To  talk  about  some  examples  of
igneous rock, you know granite and basalt, these are 2 important igneous rock and or I
would say these are the 2 most prevalent igneous rocks over the surface and some
example  of  sedimentary  rocks  are  limestone,  sandstone.  So,  these  are  examples  of
sedimentary rocks whereas, some examples of metamorphic rocks are Gneiss and then
quartzite and then schist. So, these are some marbles. So, these are some examples of
metamorphic rocks. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:25)
Now, all these rocks are precursor of soil formation and weathering basically occurs, it
basically starts from this rocks. Now depending upon the chemical nature of this rock,
they vary in their susceptibility to weathering; obviously, in this picture you can see that
the left most, I mean the left most rock it is a slate rock, which we know in 1798 and it is
very resistant to weathering as compared to the other rock, which is a marble rock, which
is 1875 and which is basically susceptible to weathering. So, these 2 rocks that are
present since, I mean 100 years apart, but you know depending on the chemical makeup
and chemical nature of these 2 rocks, they differ in their susceptibility for weathering. (Refer Slide Time: 10:23)
Now, let us see what are the different types of physical and chemical weathering or
different process of physical and chemical weathering. Now as you can see, the physical
weathering you know there are several forces of physical weathering. For example, it can
be temperature driven, it can be water ice or wind driven or it can be plant and animal
driven and in case of chemical  weathering, it is basically, I mean characterized by
several  processes,  these  are  for  example,  hydration,  hydrolysis  dissolution,  acid
reactions,  oxidation  reduction  and  complexation.  So,  all  these  processes  are
indispensable part for chemical weathering, 
Now, as you can see biological weathering has I have already told you at the beginning
of this lecture that biological weathering is basically a combination of both physical as
well as chemical weathering, because biological agents like you know microorganisms
and several microorganisms and plant roots can exert physical pressure. For example, the
roots of the plants they can pry the rocks into smaller fragments and ultimately helps in
physical  degradation  or  physical  disintegration  as  well  as  they  can  secrete  some
chemicals  or  acid  along  with  some  microorganism,  which  also  can  secrete  some
chemicals and these chemicals helps in change and altering the chemical nature of one
mineral to another mineral. So, it is evident that the biological agents, you know helps in
both physical disintegration as well as chemical decomposition. (Refer Slide Time: 12:12)
So, let us focus on physical weathering first. Now another name of physical weathering
is  mechanical  weathering  or  disintegration  and  one  of  the  major  characteristics  of
physical and mechanical weathering is that there is no change in chemical composition,
there is only just disintegration into smaller pieces. 
Now, as you can see this rock we starts weathering and so this is stage 1 and ultimately
as time passes ultimately, these bigger rock fragments converted into this smaller rock
fragments  or  parent  materials.  Now  this  is  an  example  of  physical  or  mechanical
weathering, because as you can see there is only creation of smaller pieces. So, the
chemical nature of these smaller fragments will be same as the chemical composition of
this bigger this is a primary criteria of physical weathering. So, there will be no chemical
alteration only change in size. So, this is an example of physical weathering.(Refer Slide Time: 13:38)
Let us see, what are the what is chemical weathering or decomposition. Now, in this
slide you can see that, chemical weathering is characterized by breakdown as a result of
chemical reaction. So, this is the major criteria for chemical weathering. Now as you can
see  here,  the  calcite  or calcium  carbonate  or  limestone  as  you  know  it  is  calcium
carbonate, when it reacts with carbon dioxide and water inside this well now how this
carbon  dioxide  comes?  Basically,  you  know  in  the  soil  millions  and  millions  of
microorganisms  are  there  like  bacteria,  fungi  as  well  as  you  know  algae  and  then
protozoa, nematodes and due to their respiratory action as well as respiratory action from
plant roots, there is the generation of carbon dioxide and; obviously, the partial pressure
of carbon dioxide in the soil atmosphere is quite high. 
And the and you know as compared to the atmospheric at the soil air contains 10 times
higher carbon dioxide concentrations. So, when there is a high partial pressure of carbon
dioxide, they reacts with the water vapour, which is present inside the soil and forms the
carbonic acid and these carbonic acid basically, reacts with calcium carbonate and as you
can see it changes into calcium ion as well as bicarbonate. So, there is a complete change
in chemical nature. So, that is why it is called chemical weathering or decomposition;
that means, change of composition ok. (Refer Slide Time: 15:25)
So,  what  are  the  you  know  what  are  the  different  aspects  of  physical  breakup  in
mechanical weathering? Now; obviously, there are certain forces which are responsible
first of all pressure release, second water due to its freezing and thawing cycles and
crystallization of salts in the cracks as well as thermal expansion and contraction, these
are 4 major processes in physical weathering, which participate in disintegration. 
And all these increases the total surface area exposed to the weathering process. Now as
I have told you that, due to the physical disintegration, the size of the particle goes down
and as a result the size of the particle goes down; obviously, the reactive area, I mean the
surface area, the total surface area also increases simultaneously and when the total
surface area increases, it gives more opportunity for chemical weathering. So, these are 4
major process for physical disintegration. (Refer Slide Time: 16:32)
Now,  let  us  see  one  by  let  us  see  them  one  by  one  first  of  all  let  us  talk  about
temperature; obviously, as you can see that rock is as you know bad conductor of heat
and in some extreme condition, when for example, when there is an hot climate I mean
hot environment; obviously, there will be a temperature gradient present in the rock
because, the outer surface of the rocks will be comparatively warm as compared to the
inner core of the rock. So; obviously, there will be formation a there will be a formation
of temperature gradient and when there is a formation of temperature gradient, there will
be contraction and expansion and as a result of that due to the lower confining pressure a
sheet of rock will break apart from the original rock and this is called exfoliation or
flaking,  I  will  show  you  the  picture  of  exfoliation  and  flaking  later  on,  but  this
exfoliation flaking is a major you know type of physical or mechanical weathering,
which occurs due to the temperature variation. 
Another important is frost wedging, now you know that water seeps into the small cracks
freezes and then expands. Now, when water freezes to ice and you know it expands in
volume and when it expands in volume, it enlarges the cracks in the sidewalks or holes in
the roads and as a result it breaks apart this the rocks. So, this is an example of also
physical and mechanical weathering, organic activity as I have already told you that
plant roots can loosen the rocks and make cracks larger or grass in sidewalk, we call it
root pry. Another important aspect of physical weathering is abrasion, which is basically
wearing away of rocks by particles carried by wind and water and these rough edges ofthe particle scrape of the parts of the rock. So, these are some major forces of physical
weathering. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:39)
Now, in this slide you will see 2 examples of water driven physical weathering as well as
ice driven physical weathering; obviously, in the second picture, you can see that the ice
due to the formation of ice and it enlarged in you know it expands in volume and you
know it gave a huge amount of tremendous amount of pressure, which breaks apart this
rock. So, these are 2 examples of physical and mechanical weathering.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:14)
Now, this one shows the example of exfoliation just like peeling an onion. So, you can
see that the top layer of the rock breaks apart parallelly due to the contraction and
thermal  expansion  and  this  is  called  exfoliation  and  the  second  picture  shows  the
exfoliated  domes  in  Yosemite  Mountains  of  Sierra  Nevada,  which  is  situated  in
California State of USA. So, you can if you go there you will see this type of exfoliation
occurs, I mean temperature mediated mechanical weathering. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:04)
Now, this 2 picture shows the examples of frost wedging, now you can as I have already
told you that water moves into these cracks and due to the lower temperature, it freezes
and  when  it  freezes  it  converts  into  the  ice  and  these  ice  enlarge  in  volume  and;
obviously, exert a tremendous pressure and as a result, there is further breakdown of
rocks.(Refer Slide Time: 20:35)
So, we call it frost wedging. Not only that, the thermal expansion due to the extreme
range of temperature can shatter the rocks in desert environment, where there is an
extreme climate and extreme temperature events can occur. For example, in the desert
area, you will see that in the daytime there is a high you know very hot environment;
however, in the night the air gets very much cold. 
So,  there  is  a  extreme  temperature  environment,  you  know  extreme  temperature
occurrences as a result thermal expansion occurs a thermal expansion of the rock rocks
occurs and in the desert environment and; obviously, the repeated swelling and shrinkage
of minerals with different expansion rates will also shattered rocks as you know that rock
is composed of different types of minerals and based on the mineral internal, I mean
mineral you know crystal chemistry, which I will talk which I will discuss later on you
will see that due to the different types of swelling and shrinkage properties, different and
different expansion it also shattered the rocks. (Refer Slide Time: 21:51)
Now, why we need physical weathering, what is the role I mean of physical weathering?
Now there are 2 major roles of physical weathering, first of all it reduces rock materials
to smaller fragments that are easier to transport this is the first one, the second one you
will see that, it increase it increases the exposed surface area of rocks making it more
vulnerable to further physical and chemical weathering. 
Now, as you can see here, we are having a cube with 1 meter of size and the total area of
this surface area of this cube is 6 square meter and when we. So, if this is a parent rock
from  which  soil  is  formed  as  you  can  see  physical  disintegration  further,  I  mean
decreases the size of the rocks and ultimately it will reduce to very small fragments. For
example, in this case there is also another cube with the size of 0.1 millimetre. Now as
you can see here, the total area goes to 10000 square meter. So, that is equivalent to 2.5
acres or 1 hectare of land. So, it can be easily you know seen that as a result of physical
weathering, there will be several folds increase in surface area and when there is an
increase  in  surface  area;  obviously,  that  will  give  more  opportunity  for  subsequent
chemical weathering ok. (Refer Slide Time: 23:59)
Also now you will see that rate of physical weathering or disintegration is different for
different areas, I mean here you can see that a joint in a rock or a pathway, I mean here
in this picture it is clearly evident that there are some joints in the rocks and water moves
through these joints and these joints basically enhances the physical weathering. So,
these are the primary sites, where physical weathering is more prevalent. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:37)
Now,  chemical  weathering  now  chemical  weathering  another  name  of  chemical
weathering is decomposition, because due to this type of weathering there is a completealteration  of  chemical  nature  of  rocks  that  is  why  it  is  called  decomposition.  For
example,  mineral  breakdowns  like  carbonate  dissolves  and  primary  minerals  to
secondary minerals. So, these are some examples of chemical weathering. Now let us
also  discuss  about  what  is  primary  mineral  and  secondary  mineral.  Now  primary
minerals are the minerals, which are originally present in the rock from where soil are
formed,  now  this  is  this  primary  minerals  when  undergoes  chemical  changes  and
converts to another type of mineral that is called secondary mineral. 
Now, some example  of primary  minerals  are  quartz,  feldspars, olivine,  hornblende,
etcetera where as some examples of secondary minerals are vermiculite, kaolinite, illite,
we will discuss these secondary clay minerals in details, just remember that the most
predominant primary minerals in that surface is quartz followed by feldspars whereas,
these quartz and feldspars basic you know can be basically found in the sand and silt
fraction that is why sand and silt are chemically inert in nature. Because, these sand
quartz and feldspar are chemically inert and secondary clay minerals, secondary clay
minerals,  the  other  name  of  secondary  clay  mineral  secondary  minerals  are  clay
minerals. And, these clay minerals can be found in the finest fraction of soil that is clay
and these minerals are highly reactive and also these minerals show their implication in
physical chemical and biological properties of the soil. 
So, we will discuss in details about the different process of chemical weathering in our
next lecture. So, to sum up in this lecture we have covered the definition of weathering
and definition of soil formation or basic overview of soil formation and then I showed
you how a soil form forms in different steps, then we talked about different you know
aspects of physical weathering and chemical weathering, what are the major factors of
chemical weathering physical weathering like temperature, like frost wedging and all
these stuff. And, what are the roles of physical weathering and what is the difference
between physical weathering and chemical weathering and we also talked about in brief
about the biological weathering. So, let us wrap up here and in the next lecture, I will
start from here and we will discuss about different processes of chemical weathering.
Thank you very much. 