Soil Science and Technology
Prof. SomsubhraChakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 27
Adsorption Isotherms
Welcome, friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology and in this week 6.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:29 )
And, today we will try to finish the electrical you know diffuse double layer theories and
will move ahead and go to our next topic that is Adsorption Isotherms and then will try
to finish that. So, the last lecture we have covered the basics of electrical double layer
you know electrical double layer that is diffuse double layer theories and its properties,
its assumptions and I talked about you know different diffuse double layer theories like
Helmholtz  double  layer  like  you  know  Gouy-Chapman  layer  and  then  you  know
Helmholtz double layer Gouy-Chapman layer then Stern layer.
And, then we talked about what is the basic what are the differences between these three
theories and we talked about their assumptions and then we talked about the practical
implications of diffuse double layer and its thickness. So, if you remember in the last
lecture we have talked about that we know how the thickness of the diffuse double layer
is influenced by the valency of the ions as well as the concentration of the electrolytes.
And, if you remembered that opposite to default repulsive forces the clay suspension isalso subjected to the interparticle attraction we call it van der Waals force and the van
der Waal attraction is only effective at very close distance.
And, you know which is less than 20 Armstrong and it decreases we know it decreases
rapidly when the interparticle distance goes beyond 20 Armstrong. And, you know the
interparticle distance is very important and the repulsion will dominated low electrolyte
concentration and the clay particle are shielded by relatively thick double layers and
decreasing the possibility of mutual approach. And, remember that at high electrolyte
concentration  the  chances  of  close  approach  are  made  possible  by  you  know
compression of the double layer and in  this condition van der Waal reduction may
overcome the repulsive forces and coagulation and flocculation of the clay particles
occurs rapidly.
And, I have told you that this coagulation or flocculation is important soil as far as is soil
physical properties concerned because it helps in aggregation as we know as opposed to
the dispersion of the clay. At dispersion basically occurs due to the you know you know
due  to  thick  diffuse  double  layer  than  when  the  soil  is  dispersed  it  creates  the
unfavourable physical and as well as different other properties for you know soil you
know for the growth and germination of the crops.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:30 )
So, let us move ahead and go to next slide and see what is zeta potential. Now, when a
colloidal suspension is placed in a electrical field remember that the colloidal particlesmove in one direction and towards the positive pole we know that because, they are
negatively  charged  and the  counter ions  move  in another  direction  we towards  the
negative pole and the electric potential develops at the solid liquid interface is called zeta
potential. And, this zeta potential basically you know the site of the zeta potential is
basically is the shearing plane or slipping plane between the bulk liquid and the envelope
of water moving with the particle.
So, if you consider this is a particle and there is an envelope of water you can see which
is surrounding the soil particles. The slipping plane is basically the plane which is which
occurs at the you know at the juncture of this bulk solution, here is a bulk solution in a
that is you know envelope of water. So, here you know at the at the junction of the bulk
solution and at the you know with the outer we know boundary of the liquid film or
envelope, this is called the slipping plane and this slipping plane is a place where, the
zeta potential occurs. And, remember that because the position of the shearing plane is
unknown and you know the zeta potential you know represents the electric potential at
an unknown distance from the colloid surface.
So, we can see here the zeta potential develops at the slipping plane and again the
slipping  plane  is  a  juncture  between  the  outer  boundary  of  the  liquid  envelope
surrounding and particle and the surrounding bulk solution.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:40 )
So, let us move ahead and see what are the other features of zeta potential. Now, zeta
potential influenced by the high electrolyte concentration; as you remember that when
they are high into electrolyte concentration the thickness of the diffuse double diffuse
double decreases at the same time due to the thick due to the reduce thickness of the
diffuse double also zeta potential also decreases.
So, high electrolyte concentration or high valency finance also decreases this the zeta
potential and isoelectric point is the point where zeta potential is critical it is value of 0
and below the below the iso electric point clay particle cannot present as dispersing the
medium and they try to flocculate and coagulate and in other words isoelectric point is a
pH at which the total surface charge is 0 that is you know. So, this is called the iso
electric point. Now, the iso electric point at the critical level below the iso electric point
we know the zeta potential reaches you know in certain value where the clay particles are
cannot remain further into the solution and they coagulate.
At the zeta potential depends on the surface potential of the clay particles and it is
determined  from the  electrophoretic  mobility  of the  suspension using the following
formula where V e equal to you know sorry where Ve equal to D Z E by 4 eta and pi and
where  Ve  is  the  electro  kinetic  velocity,  D  is  dielectric  constant,  E  is  the  applied
electromotive force and eta is the viscosity of the fluid. So, by using this formula we can
calculate the zeta potential.
So, also a one important thing that you can see here there are two electrolyte you know
you  know  one  electrolyte  is  given  here  in  low  concentration  another  is  in  a  high
concentration. So, when there is a high concentration of electrolyte, obviously, the zeta
potential decreases. So, highly potential high electrolyte concentration always decreases
the zeta potential and helps in coagulation of the clay particles.(Refer Slide Time: 08:08 )
So, practical implications of zeta potential flocculation or coagulation occurs when zeta
potential is below the critical value. This critical value is called the isoelectric point.
And, the greater the zeta potential the more stable the suspension the particle tense to the
repel each other hence, prohibiting the natural tendency to aggregate and this repulsion
and you know this repulsion and stable suspension is not helpful for the growth of the
plan because it creates unfavourable soil physical condition.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:39 )
So, we have finished the diffuse double layer theories. Obviously, you can follow these
two standard books one is the Nature and Properties of Soil by Nyle C. Brady and Ray R.
Weil. And, The Principles of Soil Chemistry by Kim H. Tan, 4th edition and you will
have more you know more detail idea about this diffuse double layer while you read
these two books in details.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:15 )
So,  guys  let  us  move  forward  and  you  know  start  a  new  topic  that  is  adsorption
isotherms. Now, adsorption isotherms is basically deals with adsorption process. Now,
we  will  cover  this  following  concept  what  is  adsorption  isotherm  and  then  basic
adsorption isotherms and then types of adsorption isotherms.(Refer Slide Time: 09:23 )
So, what is adsorption? Adsorption can be divided into you know physical adsorption or
chemical adsorption. Another name of absorption physical adsorption is physisorpition
and chemical  adsorption  is chemisorption.  So, in case of adsorption remember  that
adsorption  is  surface  phenomena  where  you  know  one  you  know  the  adsorbate  is
attached on the surface of the adsorbent and it is a you know it is a reversible. Obviously,
as you can see here and adsorbent is the material on which surface adsorption occurs and
adsorbent is the material which get absorbed. 
So, and also there is a bulk solution. So, this you know this shows in a nutshell about the
adsorption process and opposite of adsorption is desorption. Remember that adsorption
again is a surface phenomenon it is you know where as absorption which is AB is a
intern you know which is in which is not surface phenomenon which is an internal
phenomenon and the opposite of adsorption is called desorption. And obviously, in case
of adsorption process adsorbate and adsorbent takes part in you know basically reacts
with each other.(Refer Slide Time: 10:43 )
So, what is adsorption isotherm? Obviously, the process of adsorption is usually studied
through graphs known as adsorption isotherms and it is graph between the amount of
adsorbate x. And you know adsorbed on the surface of adsorbent m where, in this case
we know in our case in case of soil science we consider these adsorbent you know as soil
and  at  a  constant  pressure  and  temperature;  and,  two  methods  are  available.  So,
adsorption isotherm is basically again showing the you know is the relationship between
the amount of adsorbate adsorbed on the surface of the adsorbent and we know at a
constant pressure and temperature.
And, two methods are available in the use of adsorption isotherms to study the behaviour
of the adsorption isoreaction. First is the identification of the shape and curvature of the
adsorption  isotherms  will  see  in  details  and  finally,  the  statistical  formulation  of
adsorption isotherms and the statistical formulation of adsorption isotherms are also
called statistical models. So, will discuss them you know in a while.(Refer Slide Time: 12:00 )
So, let us first start with the shape and curvature of different adsorption isotherms. Now,
identification of shape and curvature of adsorption isotherms is basically focused on four
basic types of adsorption isotherms. First of all S type and then L type, then C type and
H type and remember that these you know shape and curvature are used to identify the
nature of adsorption of solutes from aqueous solution.
So, in this case you know here the adsorbent is basically if you if you remember the
difference  between  adsorbent  and  adsorbate  in  our  case  the  adsorbent  is  soil  and
adsorbate is a particular molecule which is getting adsorbed on the adsorbent from the
solution or soil solution. So, here using this shape and curvature of adsorption isotherms
we used to identify the nature and adsorption of solutes from aqueous solution. So,
solutes is basically adsorbent. Now, I am the sorry solid is again in our case here the
adsorbent is basically soil and adsorbate is basically solute and here is a solution. I hope
that now it is clear.(Refer Slide Time: 13:21 )
So, let us move ahead and see what is S type. Now, S type is represent the adsorption
reaction when the solid has a high affinity for the solvent. See you can see this shows the
relationship between equilibrium concentration and amount adsorbed. See you can see
there is an S shape curve and these S shape curve basically denote the with the that the
solid has a high affinity for the solvent.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:49 )
And secondly, there is an L type adsorption isotherm. These L type suggests that solid
has a high affinity for the solute. So, in case of S type the solute the solid has a highaffinity for the  for the solid has high affinity for the solvent. However, in case of L type
the solute has high affinity for the solute. So, this is an S type and this is again the L
type. So, both S type and L type adsorption curves are considered to predict similar
things as the Langmuir adsorption isotherm. We will cover the Langmuir adsorption
isotherm  when  we  will  discuss  about  the  different  statistical  models  of  adsorption
isotherms later on. But, just remember that this S type and L type adsorption curves are
considered to predict similar things as Langmuir adsorption isotherm.
So, again S type where when the solid has high affinity for the solvent and L type when
the solid has high affinity for the solute.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:47 )
So, what is C type? Now, C type curve is also known as the constant partition isotherm.
Now, you can see there is a straight line between the equilibrium concentration and
amount adsorbed. So, the C type curve is also known as the constant partition isotherm
and the adsorption process is characterized by a constant partitioning of solute between
the solution and the adsorbent. And, remember that according to Weber scientist this
type of adsorption is common when new adsorption sites become available as the solute
is adsorbed from the solution.
So, again this S type and L type we already covered. Now, C type is called the constant
partition  isotherms  and  the  adsorption  process  here  in  case  of  C  type  is  basically
characterized  by  a constant  partitioning  of  the  solute  between  the  solution  and  theadsorbent or in our case it is soil finally, the H type adsorption isotherm. Now, the H
type curve also known as the high affinity curve represents adsorption reaction when the
solute has a high affinity for the solid. Here remember that solute has a high affinity  for
the solid in case of S type solid has a high affinity for the solvent, in case of L type solid
has a high affinity for the solute. However, in case of H type the solute has a high
affinity for the solid.
Now, this type of curve is considered a special type of L curve. Obviously, it is a
modification of the L type curve and the entire solution the solute is often completely
adsorbed and no measurable amount is left into solution. So, it basically takes this type
of form in case of H type.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:40 )
So, we covered the basic curvature and basic shape of adsorption isotherms you know S
type, L type, C type and H type. Let us let us let us see what are the different statistical
formulation of adsorption isotherms or in other words what are this different statistical
models of adsorption isotherms. So, four major types of equations have been formulated
and are used today to describe the adsorption process.
So, these four equations or models are the most you know common you know forms of
adsorption isotherms which scientist use nowadays we call it first of all the Freundlich
equation and or the Freundlich you know adsorption isotherm, second is a Langmuirequation, third is a BET equation BET comes from three scientist name that is Brunauer,
Emmett and Teller equation and finally, that Gibbs equation.
So, we will cover them one by one. So, let us start with a Freundlich equation.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:40 )
Now, in case of Freundlich equation the adsorption isotherm in many dilute solution now
the famous under the name of the Freundlich equation and is conventionally we write
this Freundlich equation as x over m equal to kC to the power 1 by n, where this x is
basically the amount of material adsorbed, m is the amount of adsorbent in our case it is
soil C is the you know concentration of the equilibrium solution. And, k is the Freundlich
adsorption you know Freundlich adsorption constant and n or in other words 1 by n is a
basically the Freundlich exponent.
The Freundlich equation obviously, has no theoretical foundation and is purely empirical
in nature remember that. So, we have now we have seen the basic you know form of
Freundlich  equation,  let  us  let  us  move  ahead  and  see  what  are  the  physical
interpretation.(Refer Slide Time: 18:44 )
Now, remember that the value of 1 by n or in other words the Freundlich exponent is
usually between 0.2 to 0.7 and for many pesticides at dilute concentration 1 by n equals
to 1. So however, if 1 by n equals to 1 the equation becomes a linear equation because x
by m equal to kC where you know the power 1 by n becomes equal to 1. So, the curve
according  to the equation  is  usually  parabolic  which is exponential  and exhibit the
following  characteristic  features.  First  of  all  there  is  no  single  point  indicating  the
process is completed and there is no region of discontinuity. So, these two important
assumption.
So, again the Freundlich adsorption isotherms when the Freundlich adsorption you know
Freundlich exponent that is 1 by n becomes 1, it becomes you know it becomes a linear
equation that is x by m equal to kC. However, the curve according to the equation is
usually  parabolic  you  know  exponential  in  nature  an  exhibits  the  following  two
assumptions,  characteristic  features.  But  so,  by  replacing  the  concentration  C  for
pressure P, obviously, the Freundlich equation can also be used to describe adsorption of
gases by the solids. So, we just have to we just have to replace the C by this pressure P.
So, basically it will also you know it will be also be applicable for the adsorption of the
gases by the solid. So, adsorption of the gases by the solid also follows the Freundlich
equation.(Refer Slide Time: 20:28 )
So, let us move ahead and see what is Langmuir equation now another method of
statistical formulation of adsorption reaction is given by Langmuir in 1918 and the
Langmuir equation originally derived for the adsorption of gases by solids is formulated
as follows. Obviously, theta equal to bP theta equal to bP by 1 plus bP where theta is the
amount of gas adsorbed per unit area b is the constant related to the free energy of
adsorption and obviously, P P equals to equilibrium gas pressure.
So, basically it was applied originally to applied for the adsorption of gases by the solid.
However, we can  modify  it  for you know  in case  of solid  in case  of solute solid
interaction also adsorption also. So, for adsorption of solids into the solution P can be
replaced  by C which is equilibrium  concentration  of solute  in the solution and the
equation assumes the following formula where x by m just like the Langmuir equation k
1 C by 1 plus k 2 C and here remember that this is a basic form of the Langmuir
equation.(Refer Slide Time: 21:40 )
However, the x is a obviously, the similarly just like just like the Langmuir equation x is
the amount adsorbed m is the amount of adsorbent and k 1 and k 2 are the constant and C
is  the  concentration  of  equilibrium  solution;  this  far  you  know  these  are  fine.  So,
remember that the differences of the Langmuir from the Freundlich is that at very high
concentration the value of k 2 C, this term k 2 C in equation reaches such a high value
that the factor 1 can be neglected.
So, we know that x by m equal to k 1 C plus 1 by k 2 C. So, when the C is very very high
very high basically what happens this one we can neglect it. So, basically the equation
becomes k 1 C by k 2 C. So, obviously, is become x by m equal to k 1 by k 2. So, this
formula shows that that x by m becomes constant at high concentration. So, in other
words at high value of C the surface of the adsorbent become saturated and adsorption
reaches a maximum. So, this is one implication of this Langmuir equation.(Refer Slide Time: 23:10 )
However, on the other hand at a very low concentration at a very low concentration the
value of k 2 C becomes so low that compared to the factor 1 that it can be neglected. So,
then equation turns into, obviously, we know that x by m equal to k 1 C plus 1 by k 2 C.
So, here it will you know the value of k 2 C becomes so low so, we know the factor k 2
C can be neglected. So, basically it will be k 1 C, so, the equation change into x by m
equal to k 1 C. So, the Langmuir equation is useful remember for monolayer adsorption
which is generally in case of chemisorption or chemical adsorption and adsorption for
the solution and physical adsorption of the gases.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:14 )
So now, you have know idea about the Langmuir equation and Freundlich equation so,
let us go ahead and see what is BET adsorption isotherm. Now, BET theory put forward
by  these  three  scientists  Brunauer,  Emmett  and  Teller  explained  that  multilayer
formation  is  the  true  picture  of  the  physical  adsorption.  Now,  one  of  the  basic
assumption of Langmuir adsorption isotherm was that adsorption is a monolayer in
nature. 
However, this BET assume that there are multilayer adsorption you know multilayer
adsorption is possible. So, for multilayer adsorption the use of BET equation is suggested
and in this respect the BET equation is considered as an extension of the Langmuir
equation. It is considered as a extension of Langmuir equation and the BET equation you
can see this is the formula of the BET equation.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:05 )
So, let us go ahead and see what are the meaning of these terms. So, in this BET equation
expression P is the equilibrium vapour pressure, P 0 is a saturation vapour pressure, V is
the volume of gas adsorbed, V m is the volume of gas adsorbed when the solid is
converted with a monolayer and C is the constant related to the heat of adsorption. So,
this is basically the, that the equation of BET of the BET isotherm and these are the
meaning of the individual corporate.
Now, what are the assumption? Now, the assumption of BET equation is the heat of
adsorption in the second third and n-th layer are the same as the heat of adsorption in themono layer that is heat of liquefaction or condensation of the gas. And, secondly, the
adsorption takes place on a free surface than at P 0 that is saturation pressure of the gas
at infinite number of the layers can be built up on the adsorbent. So, these two are
assumption basic assumptions of the BET equation.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:11 )
So, what are the advantages of the BET equation? Obviously, it describes the multilayer
adsorption and it yields the volume of gas required for the formation of the mono layer
and it can be used to calculate the surface area of the soil by multiplying V m with the
cross sectional area of the adsorbate molecules. So, these are the three advantages of this
BET equation.(Refer Slide Time: 26:38 )
Finally, the Gibbs equation the Gibbs equation describes the processes in relation to
surface tension and it is formulated as follows: where is tau equal to minus a over RT
and then d gamma by da subscript T, where tau is surface concentration of adsorbed
material in moles per square centimetre. And a is the activity of the solute in mole in
moles and R is the you know is the gas constant you know that, T is absolute temperature
in Kelvin and you know the gamma is the surface tension in dynes per centimetre.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:23 )
So, this Gibbs equation takes this form and the solute is adsorbed when the surface of the
adsorbent is d gamma by da is negative. So, if you consider if you if you remember this a
negative term. So, if this d gamma by d a which is this term is negative. So, ultimately
tau is positive. So, this type of adsorption we call it positive adsorption, when the tau is
positive when the you know it is called the positive adsorption.
So  therefore,  positive  adsorption  occurs  when  the  solute  decreases  surface  tension,
remember that. Now, what is negative adsorption negative adsorption is just opposite.
So, when the d gamma by d a is positive delta gamma by delta a is positive that means,
that tau is negative. So, the solute is more concentrated in the bulk solution that in the
interface region. So, in this just opposite to the positive adsorption and the latter you
know it is called that negative adsorption and in this case, solute increases the surface
tension.
So, in case of positive adsorption solute decreases the surface tension in case of negative
adsorption solute decrease increases the surface tension and the Gibbs equation finds
primary application in adsorption at liquid gas interface, obviously, and it is very very
difficult to use this equation for in adsorption reaction at solid liquid interface because it
is impossible to measure the surface tension of the solid interface or solid surface. It is
easy to measure the surface tension the liquid surface. However, it is impossible to
measure  the  you know  surface  tension of solid  surface.  So, that  is  why the  Gibbs
equation is applicable for in adsorption at liquid gas interface.(Refer Slide Time: 29:06 )
So, guys we have completed this adsorption isotherms and their basic you know their
curvature and the shape and the statistic four statistical models of adsorption isotherms.
Adsorption isotherm is a very very important when there is a adsorption of solutes from
the bulk soil solution to the you know soil solids or the clay surfaces.
So, it is very very important. Please read this book again the Nature and Properties of
soils by Nyle C. Brady and Principle of Soil Chemistry by Kim H. Tan, fourth edition to
get more thorough knowledge of this adsorption process. Obviously, we cannot complete
all the you know physical and chemical you know you know physical and chemical
forces which are responsible for different types of adsorption. So, I request you to go
through these books in more details to learn in details about different types of adsorption
isotherms.
But, however, I have you know I hope that you have now got basic idea about the
adsorption isotherms. So, we are going to finish this lecture and the next lecture will start
from the soil acidity and different other problematic soils. 
Till then, thank you.