Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 35
Fertilizers
Welcome friends to this last lecture of week 7 and we will cover Fertilizers which are
very very important topic, which is very important topic and then in this lecture we will
basically cover only the inorganic fertilizers. However, we will not have you know we
will we will not cover the manures in this lecture, which is basically the organic forms of
fertilizers or organic fertilizers.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46)
So, the concepts which we will cover in this lecture is basically what is fertilizers and
then classification of fertilizers, different straight fertilizers, liquid nitrogenous fertilizers
and different customized fertilizers  like you know and also different  micro nutrient
fertilizers.(Refer Slide Time: 00:59)
So, what is fertilizer? Fertilizer is a material which contains one or more essential plant
nutrients, required for the plant growth and development.
So, basically we apply fertilizer to maintain the soil fertility status. Soil fertility is the
ability of the soil to supply the plant, the required amount of nutrients and to maintain the
soil fertility we have to apply the soil fertilizer; we have to apply the different chemical
and organic fertilizers; however, in this lecture we will be discussing only the chemical
fertilizers.
So,  the  fertilizers  may  be  solid,  liquid  or  gaseous  substances  of  definite  chemical
composition and high analytical value, and we will see what are the different classify you
know what are the different classes of fertilizers.(Refer Slide Time: 02:02)
So, if we classify the fertilizers they will be there will be three major classes. One is
straight fertilizers, second complex fertilizer and finally, mixed fertilizers.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:11)
So, straight fertilizers are those which can supply only one primary nutrient namely,
nitrogen or phosphorous or potassium example urea, ammonium sulphate, potassium
chloride and potassium sulphate. So, these are basically the straight fertilizers because
they can supply only one primary element. You can see here in case of urea it can supply
only nitrogen, in case of ammonium sulphate only supply nitrogen which is a primarynutrient and also in case of potassium chloride, it will supply potassium in case of
potassium sulphate it is also only potassium. So, these are called the straight fertilizer.
So, what is the complex fertilizers?
Complex fertilizer contain two or three primary nutrients of which, two primary nutrients
are in a chemical combination and these fertilizers are usually produced in granular form
example diammonium phosphate, nitrophosphate etcetera. So, the complex fertilizer you
will see two or more primary nutrient; it could be either nitrogen phosphate or phosphate
potassium or nitrogen phosphate potassium.
So, it has to be a minimum of two macro nutrient and also they are present in chemically
combined form. Example is DAP or diammonium phosphate where you can see nitrogen
and phosphate are fixed in you know are chemically combined finally, mixed fertilizers.
Now, mixed fertilizers are basically the physical mixtures of straight fertilizers and they
contain  two  or  three  primary  nutrient  elements,  and  mixed  fertilizer  are  made  by
thoroughly mixing the ingredients either mechanically or manually.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:56)
So, also fertilizer can be classified based on its physical forms. So, basically there are
two types  of you know  physical  based on the  physical  forms, we can classify the
fertilizer into solid fertilizer and liquid fertilizers. We will discuss liquid nitrogenous
fertilizer later one; however, let us discuss about the solid fertilizers.So, solid fertilizer can be found in powder form example, single superphosphate which is
the most common phosphatic fertilizer in India most popular phosphatic fertilizer in
India you know also we call SSP we will discuss that later on. Then crystals of you know
example  is ammonium sulphate,  then prills  of fertilizer  example  urea, diammonium
phosphate and super phosphate and then the granules which are Holland granules, and
then super granules, urea super granules and briquettes are like urea briquettes.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:56)
So, these are some pictures of the commonly used fertilizers in India. For example, you
can see ammonium sulphate it contains only 20.6 percent of nitrogen, then single super
phosphate which contains only 16 percent P 2O5 of phosphorous pent oxide and then DAP
which contains 18 percent nitrogen and 46 percent of phosphorous pentoxide, whereas
MOP the last one this is the MOP. This one is murate of potash or MOP which is
contains which contains 60 percent of potassium oxide or K 2O.
Now, remember guys, whenever we are presenting the phosphate contain and potassium
contain in fertilizer we generally express them in terms of either phosphorous pentoxide
or P2O5 or K2O or potassium oxides.(Refer Slide Time: 05:53)
Now, you can see these are some urea granules, and this is the most common nitrogenous
fertilizer in India and it is the it is the most rich nitrogenous fertilizer contain 46 percent
of nitrogen and we will discuss that later on.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:14)
So, let us start with the nitrogenous fertilizer first. So, the straight nitrogenous fertilizers
are those which contains nitrogen either in the form of ammonium it is NH4 plus or
nitrate or both ammonium and nitrate and amide form or cyanide form or so, cyanamide
form.So, out of this  the ammonium  and nitrate  forms are inorganic  whereas, amide  and
cyanamide forms are organic in nature some examples are given below. First of all
ammonium  sulphate:  some  ammoniacal  forms  of  ammoniacal  form  containing
nitrogenous fertilizer ammonium sulphate, then ammonium chloride, then anhydrous
ammonium.and in case of nitrate sodium nitrate then calcium nitrate, potassium nitrate
and in case of combined ammoniacal and nitrate form you can see ammonium nitrate,
calcium ammonium nitrate or CAN or ammonium sulphate nitrate and in case of amide
fertilizer; obviously, urea and calcium cyanamide.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:26)
So, example by the way the cyanamide can be also divided in the into sub divided into
the cyanamide form. So, both this urea and calcium cyanamide are organic in nature. So,
let us start with urea; obviously, contains 46 percent of nitrogen and this was first
produced you know from urine in 1773, and in the lab it was first synthesized in 1928 by
Wohler German scientist Wohler, where in the you know basically chemically combined
this NH3 with HCNO to get this urea and this is the first organic compound form from
two inorganic materials  and now basically we produce this urea by combining  this
ammonia and carbon dioxide to form this ammonium carbonate, and this ammonium
carbonate further decomposes to form water and this urea.(Refer Slide Time: 08:38)
So, urea also needs some 0.3 to 0.4 percent formaldehyde mix because it improves the
physical strength and resistance to caking. So, urea is very very soluble in water and also
very very susceptible to caking; that means, if you leave it, it will easily observe the
moisture from the atmosphere and forms the cakes.
So, we to improve the physical condition and to prevent the caking generally 0.3 to 0.5
percent of formaldehyde is basically mixed with urea and that is why it is called a
conditioner.  What  are  the  other  conditioner?  The  conditioners  are  china  clay  talc
etcetera. Now also urea also contains a chemical called biuret this is a formula of biuret
and this biuret is very very you know toxic, when it is a greater than 2 percent and it
basically damages the foliages and biuret sensitive crop is basically citrus.
Citrus is very very biuret sensitive. So, the level of biuret has to be monitored very
carefully while producing the urea fertilizer.(Refer Slide Time: 09:55)
So,  synthesis  of  nitrogenous  fertilizer  basically  occurs  through  different  process
industrial  different  industrial  process;  obviously, the  first process  is  the Cyanamide
process where the end product is calcium cyanamide and it is not produced in India
basically. Secondly, the electric arc process where the end process is end product is nitric
acid.
Finally the Serpek process where end product is ammonia and the most common and
popular is Haber Bosch process where end product is ammonia it is popular method for
the production of direct ammonia from the atmospheric air and the power requirement is
also less compared to cyanamide and arc processes. So, this is very very popular process.(Refer Slide Time: 10:39)
So,. So, this basically schematic diagram of the Haber process. So, Haber Bosch process.
So, you can see here is not you know first of all that is a production to synthesis mixture.
So, we basically the mixture of methane and water is inside water vapour is inserted,
where this methane reacts with water vapour to produce carbon monoxide and hydrogen.
And also in the subsequently you know oxygen and nitrogen is inserted in here through
here, and you can see this carbon monoxide and this hydrogen and this nitrogen goes
through here and ultimately through the catalyser  at 500 degree centigrade, ultimately it
produces the nitrogen hydrogen and carbon dioxide..
And this hydro you know this water and carbon dioxide get released from here ultimately
producing the nitrogen and hydrogen, and these nitrogen and hydrogen goes towards the
heater and ultimately goes towards the reactor, which where it forms the liquid ammonia
and this you know unused NH 2 you know nitrogen and hydro you know hydrogen
basically goes back to the reactors.
So, there is you can see ultimately it is a production of ammonium fluid. And this
ammonia fluid is basically the raw material for different nitrogen fertilizer production
industries we will see how they are helping in different nitrogen fertilizer production.(Refer Slide Time: 12:18)
So, this is a very good slide which shows the how you can produce different nitrogenous
fertilizer from ammonia. So; obviously, the starting point is ammonia which we produce
due to Haber Bosch process and you can see through the dehydration process you can
produce anhydrous ammonia, which is 82.2 percent of nitrogen, then reaction with HCL
or hydrochloric acid produce the ammonium chloride which is 25 percent of nitrogen,
reacting  with H2SO4 it produce the ammonium sulphate, which is a very important
nitrogenous fertilizer 20.6 percent of nitrogen.
Then reacting with HNO 3 it produce the ammonium nitrate which contains 34 percent of
nitrogen. Now this ammonium nitrate is highly explosive. So, to prevent the application
and the and the market of ammonium nitrate, you know now they are produced another
you know we generally produced another fertilizer called CAN, when CAN is basically
the mixture of calcium  carbonate and ammonium nitrate.  So, in the in the ratio of
ammonium nitrate and calcium carbonate in the ratio of 6 is to 4.
So, ultimately calcium ammonium nitrate if formed which contain 25 percent of nitrogen
and when it is mixed with carbon dioxide ultimately it produces urea which is 46 percent
nitrogen and ammonia when mix with H 2P2O4 in one is to one ratio it produces the mono
ammonium phosphate, which has the grade of 11 is to 52 and then 2 is to 1 ratio it will
produce DAP or diammonium phosphate and you can see here these are the 18-46-0 and11-52-0; that means, this fertilizer 100 kg of this fertilizer will contain 11 kg of nitrogen
52 kg of P2O5 and 0 kg of K2O.
Similarly, here it will be 18 kg of nitrogen and then 46 kg of P 2O5 and 0 kg K2 O. So,
again  when  ammonia  is  mixed  with  a  single  super  phosphate  it  will  produce  the
ammonium super phosphate and ultimately when it reacts with urea it produce urea
ammonium phosphate or UAP or Gromor which as a grade up 20 is to 20 is to 0 and 28
is to 28 is to 0.
And the also there is a process called  Odda process and through odda process we
generally produce the nitro phosphate or suphala. Suphala is very important phosphatic
you now important fertilizer which as a grade of 15 is to 15 is to 15 and then when mixed
with the you know H 2SO4 and H3PO4, it produces ammonium phosphate sulphate and
you know with these two grades that is 16 is to 20 and 20 is to 28 and mixing with H 2
SO4 and HNO3 it is produced ammonium sulphate nitrate and also through Ostwald
process it produces the nitric acid.
So, you can see whole bunch of different fertilizer can be produced from this ammonia
which is produced through this Haber and Bosch synthesis.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:34)
So, let us go ahead and see what is a phosphatic fertilizer what are the phosphatic
fertilizer.  The  original  source  of  phosphatic  fertilizer  in  the  early  manufacture  ofphosphatic fertilizer where bones are different animal bones which contain high amount
of phosphate.
However  due  to  the  exhaustion  of  those  bones  you  know  worldwide  demand  of
phosphate and also due to the high worldwide demand of phosphatic fertilizer, it is not it
is right now it is produced from the rock phosphate. And this rock phosphate occurs in
nature as mineral phosphate in very deposits mainly you know maybe igneous may be
sedimentary  or  metamorphic,  which  contain  apatite  which  is  the  phosphate  bearing
mineral along with the other accessory minerals such as quartz, silicates, carbonates,
sulphates, sesquioxides etcetera and commercial grade rock phosphate basically contain
32 percent of P2O5.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:24)
So, if we classify the phosphatic fertilizer you will see three different types. First of all
water soluble phosphatic fertilizer examples are monocalcium phosphate and you know
water soluble is monocalcium  phosphate example  is single super phosphate or SSP
which contains 16 percent P 2O5 or 6.88 percent of P. Then double super phosphate which
contains 32 percent of P 2O5, then triple super phosphate which also contains 46 percent
of P2O5  and DSP also called enriched super phosphate, which is basically mixture of
single super phosphate and triple super phosphate.
Secondly citric acids soluble phosphate which is basically dicalcium phosphate CaHPO 4
and which contains 34 percent of P 2O5 and insoluble which is both water and citric acidsoluble. So, tricalcium phosphate or examples you know tricalcium phosphate is an
example  you  know  you  know  rock  phosphate  is  basically  example  of  tricalcium
phosphate which contains 20 to 40 percent of P 2O5 and only soluble only you know
soluble is strongly acid soils are organic peat soils.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:38)
So, let us see how rock phosphate creates different types of phosphatic fertilizer. So, you
can directly use this rock phosphate, because it is a acid soluble fertilizer or insoluble
fertilizer you can directly apply to the highly acidic soil. When it mixed with the H 2SO4
it will produce the single super phosphate, when it is mixed with H 3PO4 it will produce
the triple super phosphate.
And due to the thermal or elemental process and due to acid treatment, it will also
produce the phosphoric acid and this phosphoric acid basically you can directly apply the
phosphoric acid also you can mix the phosphoric acid react the phosphoric acid to
produce  the  monoammonium  phosphate,  when  it  is  reacting  with  2  molecules  of
ammonia to it produce the diammonium phosphate or DAP, and also ammonia mix you
know when phosphoric acid is mixed with ammonia and then H 2SO4 and ultimately it
produces DAP and ammonium sulphate phosphate ASP, and you can see here no.
The phosphoric acid I am sorry when phosphoric acid will be mixed with ammonia and
H2SO4 it will produce ammonium sulphate phosphate and from phosphoric acid we will
get  super  phosphoric  acid,  when  it  this  super  phosphoric  acid  further  reacts  withammonia  it  produce  ammonium  poly  phosphate.  So,  you  can  see  how  these  rock
phosphate  basically  reacts  with  different  compounds  to  form  different  types  of
phosphatic fertilizer.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:21)
So, it is clear now. Now let us discuss about the single super phosphate. Now single
super phosphate is basically the having the formula of this CaH 2PO4 whole two and this
is the most important phosphatic fertilizers in India in basically in use. And it contain 16
percent of P2O5 in available form, and it is a grey ash like powder with good keeping and
storage abilities and finally, phosphatic fertilizer hardly moves in the soil and hence they
are placed in the root zone we will discuss that later on.(Refer Slide Time: 19:54)
So, let us start with potassic fertilizer. Now potash fertilizer are commercially prepared
from potash bearing minerals namely sylvite which is basically potassium chloride, 63.1
percent of K2O langbeinite which is K 2SO4.2 MgSO4 which contains 22.6 percent of K 2O
and then kainite which contains KCl and Mg magnesium sulphate and it contains 18.9
percent of K2O and carnallite which is basically potassium chloride and magnesium
chloride which is contain which contain 17 percent of K 2O.
So, the most important potassium fertilizers are muriate of potash that is MOP and
sulphate of potash that is SOP. So, muriate of potash basically contains 60 percent of
K2O and it is basically manufactured from sylvite and a mixture of you know mixture of
sylvite and halite and after you know and there is a beneficiation process where you
know they remove different types of impurities to form this MOP.
Now, remember one major thing that MOP contain 60 percent of K 2O. In case of sulphur
you know you know sulphur of potash sulphate of potash and SOP which contains 48
percent of K2O and 18.3 percent of sulphur and basically its manufactured by treating
sylvite with sulphuric acid you can see here sylvite is KCl when it is mixed with H 2SO4,
then it forms a K2SO4.(Refer Slide Time: 21:40)
Now, MOP is potassium chloride or muriate of potash, it is a white or red or crystal
contains 60 percent K 2O. Secondly, it is completely soluble in water and thereby readily
available to the crops thirdly, it is not lost from the soils as it is a absorbed on the
colloidal surfaces finally, it can be you know it can be applied at sowing or before or
after the sowing.
The chloride content is about 46 percent and the chloride content is objectionable to
some crops like tobacco potato etcetera where quality is the consideration. So, in for this
crops only you know this is application of sulphate of potash is recommended.(Refer Slide Time: 22:28)
So, we have covered the primary nutrients, let us see some secondary nutrients.
So, some secondary nutrients examples are magnesium sulphate, you can see MgSO 4
calcium sulphate Ca you know calcium chloride that is CaCl2,6H 2O and also different
types of sulphate fertilizers, basically we apply for a correcting the sulphate deficiency
specially for oil such crops like mustard. Now sulphur is a very much required for oil
such crop like mustards. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:02)
So, there are also different micro nutrient fertilizers also. You know there are 6 to 7 you
know there  are different micro  nutrients  and these micro nutrients  are also applied
sometime  to  foliar  spray sometime  to  fertigation.  Fertigation  is  joint  application  of
fertilizer and irrigation water. So, we can apply this small you know micro nutrient
fertilizer they require in a smaller quantity as compared to the macro nutrient fertilizers.
So, most of the time we apply through spray on to the crop and the crop basically hinges
those you know micro nutrients directly through their leaves. So, you can see some
examples  first  of  all  ferrous  sulphate  heptahydrate, it  is  a  water  soluble  fertilizer
containing 20 percent of iron and also iron chalets are important EDTA,EDDPA these
are chaleting agency, which can basically chalet the iron and also they are suitable for
application as foliar  nutrient.
So, this  chalets basically  we apply through foliar application. Second is zinc sulphate
heptahydrate and it is basically water soluble whitish salt containing 23 percent of zinc
and it is applied as foliar nutrient and it is acidic you know action its acidic action causes
corrosion damage to plants, then zinc oxide which contains 70 percent of zinc and it is
slightly soluble in water.
Then sodium molybdate which supplies a molybdenum and molybdenum content is 40
percent and ammonium molybdate also it contains 54 percent of molybdenum and then
manganous sulphate, manganous sulphate it is well known water soluble manganese
fertilizers  and you know it is pink salt containing 24 percent of manganese, and it
dissolves in water and its suitable for foliar application and also manganese chelates Mn-
DTA which contain 30 percent of which contain 13 percent of manganese and it place a
important role in crop fertilization and borax; obviously, 11 percent of boron it is hot
water it is water soluble white salt; obviously, and it can be applied through as you know
as a soil dressing or foliar application you can directly spray into the crop.
Boric acid also which contains 18 percent of boron and it is a white crystalline powder,
and it is applied through foliar nutrient. So, these are some important micro nutrient
fertilizers. Similarly for copper also we have copper sulphate which is an important
micro nutrient fertilizers.(Refer Slide Time: 25:57)
Liquid nitrogenous fertilizer, liquid nitrogenous fertilizers are the principle forms of
mixed fertilizers and the main advantage are these are very low cost unit you know
advantages are the low cost per unit nitrogen and easy to handle and apply you know if
suitable equipment is available.
However these are corrosive and require special applicator and storage container, and the
important nitrogenous solution is the mixture of urea, ammonium nitrate and water often
referred to as UAN which is a you know solution containing 35 percent of nitrogen and
liquid nitrogenous fertilizer can be also applied either as foliar spray, through irrigation
and it is called the you know also through irrigation which is called the fertigation
process.(Refer Slide Time: 26:48)
So, what is fertilizer grade? Fertilizer grade refers to the guaranteed minimum percentage
of nitrogen phosphorous and potash containing in the fertilizer material. So, the number
of number representing the grade are separated by hyphens and are always stated that the
sequence of N and P. So, for examples label on the fertilizer bag with a grade up to 20 is
to 28 is to 0 indicate the 100 kg of fertilizer material contain 28 kg of nitrogen and 28 kg
of P and no potash.
So, different grades of fertilizers are also available in India some of them are 28-28-0,
20-20-0, 14-35-14, 17-17-17 and 14-28-14, by the way these forms of P is basically 28
kg of P2O5.(Refer Slide Time: 27:45)
So, fertilizer some other let us let us discuss some other important terms also.
So, fertilizer ratio is the refers to the ratio of the percentage of the N,P 2O5 and K2O in the
fertilizer mixture. So, basically the fertilizer grade of 12 is to 6 is to 6 as a fertilizer ratio
of 2 is to 1 is to 1 then conditioner; conditioner are low grade organic materials like peat
soil, paddy husk, groundnut etcetera which are added to the fertilizer mixture, during
their preparation to reduce the hygroscopicity and to improve their physical condition
you can see this is a peat soil and this is a saw dust and filler what is a filler?
Filler is a weight make material like sand like soil, coal powder etcetera and added to the
fertilizer ingredients. So, as to produce a mixture of the desired grades.(Refer Slide Time: 28:39)
So, the last slide of fertilizer is the method of fertilizer application. Now there are several
methods of fertilizer application the broad we know broad classify the majors major
process are broadcasting, placement, band placement and pellet application.
Now, broadcasting are again divided into two parts one is called the basal application
and another is top dressing. Now basal application is when you mix the fertilizer during
the preparation of the land through the soil and this is called basal application. And top
dressing is when we when we when we give the fertilizer when we spread the fertilizer in
a standing crop, for specially  in case of nitrogenous fertilizer  like in case of close
standing crop like you know rice, wheat etcetera then it is called top dressing.
Now, top dressing as some problem because you know there are some weed growth you
know it encourages the weed growth, also sometime it cannot reaches the plant root for
their uptake also. So, there are some drawback of top dressing also. So, these are two
major type basal and top dressing again. Basal apply during the land preparation time
and top dressing is when there is a crop standing.
So, placement we know there are also three types one is plough sole placement, then
deep placement and localized placement. So, placement you know plough sole placement
is during the ploughing time, when there is a fertilizer place just at the ploughed layer
then  it  is  called  the  plough placement.  Deep  placement  generally  occur  in  case  of
ammoniacal  fertilizer  they  are  placed  in  the  deep  anaerobic  zones  to  reduce  thevolatilization  loss.  And  localized  placement  also  generally  we  you  know  localized
placement is also given for certain fertilizer around a plant or seed.
And band placement is also very much important band placement is of two types one if
hill placement which is given for different orchids, and we know row placement is
basically perform standing crop like sugarcane, where we know apply the apply the
fertilizer  in  the  rows  and also  some  pellet  application.  Now  pellet  applications  are
basically  done  in  case  of  urea,  urea  pellets  are  produced  and.  So,  these  are  some
application of solid fertilizers.
So,  I  hope  that  you  have  learned  some  new  concepts  of  fertilizers,  and  their
classification,  how  they  apply  this  fertilizers  and  what  are  the  different  types  of
important macro nutrient, micro nutrient and secondary nutrient fertilizers what are the
nutrient contents. So, guys we have finished this week 7 of lecture. So, we will we know
in the next lecture we will start our week 8 of lectures. 
So, thank you and let us meet next in the next lecture bye.