Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 31
Essential Plant Nutrients
Welcome friends to this week-7 lecture series of Soil Science and Technology. And in
this lecture series, I mean in this coming 5 lecture series, we will discuss about the
different types of essential plant nutrients, and you know their functions. And the first
topic, we will cover that is the essential plant nutrients.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:53)
And we will cover several aspects in this lecture, and the basic aspects which we will
cover are what is a essential plant nutrients and what is the what are the criteria for
essentiality, how we consider a particular element as an essential plant nutrient and then
how we can classify the different  essential  elements,  and finally  we will see some
deficiency symptoms of different essential nutrients. (Refer Slide Time: 01:21)
So,  guys  let  us  start.  And  so  what  is  an  essential  element  or  essential  nutrients.
Sometime, we will use this term interchangeably essential element or essential nutrient
now. An element without which a plant cannot survive or complete its life cycle is
termed as an essential element essential nutrient or essential element. 
Now, you remember that there are 17 elements, which are considered as a essential
nutrient for the plant growth and development and these are basically these 17. So, these
17 starts from carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium,
magnesium, sulphur, iron, manganese, zinc, copper, boron, molybdenum, chlorine, and
nickel.
So, remember these 17 elements  are considered as essential  nutrients  for the plant,
because  plant  cannot  complete  its  life  cycle  without  these  17  essential  elements.
Regardless of their quantity required, so we will discuss each of them you know each of
them individually in the current in the coming slides.(Refer Slide Time: 02:38)
So, let us go, and see what are the criteria based on which we can term in a particular
element as an essential plant nutrient. Now, you know that total of 17 elements are
essential for growth of the full development of higher green plant. And these criteria of
essentiality were given by two scientist called Arnon and Stout in the year 1939. 
And these three criteria are first of all a deficiency of an essential nutrient makes it
impossible for the plant to complete the vegetative or reproductive stage of its life cycle,
so this is the first one. The second one is you know such deficiency specific to the
element in questions and can be prevented or corrected only by supplying this element.
And finally, the element is involved directly in the nutrition of the plant quite apart from
its possible effects in correcting some unfavorable microbiological or chemical condition
of the soil or other culture medium. 
So, in other words a you know this three criteria’s are first of all the deficiency of that
particular  element  will  make  you  know  you know,  if there  is  a  deficiency  of  that
particular element plant cannot survive or plant cannot complete its life cycle. This is the
first criteria. Second criteria is the role of a specific element cannot be corrected by
supplying other element, so the role is very very specific. And third this element must be
involved in plant metabolism. So, these are very very important criteria’s for considering
a particular element as an essential or not essential. So, based on these criteria’s, we have
selected the 17 elements as essential plant nutrients. (Refer Slide Time: 04:31)
So,  the  essentiality  of  the  most  micro  nutrients  for  higher  plants  were  established
between 1922 to 1954. And the essentiality of nickel was established you know it is the
latest established essential nutrient, I know it was established in 1987 by Brown et al,
although there is no unanimity among the scientist as to whether nickel is essential or
beneficial.
However, we will not go to that, we will not go that you know argument, and we will
consider nickel as an important plant element or an important essential element. So, the
list may not be considered we remember that however you know, although we have we
are considering 17 elements as essential plant elements. However, this list may not be
considered as final, and it is possible that more elements may prove to be essential in
future, because it is a continuous discovering process. (Refer Slide Time: 05:32)
So, let us see what is the chronology of discoveries of essential nutrient elements of the
plants. So we will see in which year the  essentiality  criteria  or essentiality  of that
particular element was discovered or established by certain scientific groups or research
groups. 
So, you know let us start with the, you know the oxygen, and these oxygen you know it
its discovery has been you know you know since time immemorial. So, we do not know
exactly which year its establishment were you know its essentiality was established and
similarly, for hydrogen. 
And in case of carbon, it was established by Priestley et al in 1800. And in case of
nitrogen you know it was first established by Theodore de Saussure in eighteen hundred
you know four and phosphorus by Sprengel in 1839 and also potassium and magnesium
and  calcium  by Sprengel in 1939. So, Sprengel  has  established  the, you know  the
Sprengel has established the essentiality of these four important minerals that is K, K,
Mg, and K, Ca. And as far as sulphur is considered, it is essentiality was established by
Sachs and knop in 1860. (Refer Slide Time: 07:02)
And the in case of chlorine, it was established by T.C. Broyer, A,B. Carlton, Johnson and
stout in the year 1954. And iron was by E.Gris in 1843. Boron by Warington in 1923 and
manganese by McHargue in 1922 and zinc by Somme and Lipman by in 1926.
Copper by again Somme, Lipman, and McKinney in 1931. And molybdenum by Arnon
and Stout who has given that essentiality criteria, and it was in 1939. And the latest one
is nickel by Brown Welch and Cary in the year 1987. So, these shows this list shows
basically the chronology of establishment of essentiality criteria of those establishment
of essentiality of these 17 essential plant nutrients. (Refer Slide Time: 08:11)
So, once you know that okay these 17 are the important or essential plant nutrients. Now,
let us divide them into several classes based on their relative importance or relative
amount needed by the plant for maintaining their vegetative and reproductive cycle. So,
if we start with the 17 elements broadly, we convey we can we can classify these 17
elements into two groups. One is called the frame work elements, and taken you know
the frame work elements are basically the carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. And basically
these three type of elements are you know taken from air and water, we will discuss this
later on. 
And  these  frame  work  elements  are  required  for  you  know  for  the  production  of
cellulose, and other building block the molecules for plant body. And the other elements
basically we call other the 14 elements we call them mineral elements, because they are
basically taken in ionic forms and or mineral form. And we can divide further divide
those minerals into two groups. One is called the macro nutrients, and other is micro
nutrients based on the relative amount needed by the plant to maintain their life cycle. 
So, there are 6 macro nutrients, and only 8 micro nutrients. So, 6 macro nutrients are
again sub divided into primary nutrients and secondary nutrients. So, there are three
primary nutrients, and there are 3 secondary nutrients. And remember that these primary
3 nutrients that is nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium required in you know higherquantity  than  other  elements.  And  that  is  why,  these  3  elements  that  is  nitrogen,
phosphorous, and potassium are the common element, which are present in fertilizers. 
And  secondary  nutrients  are  calcium,  magnesium,  sulphur,  and  these  elements  are
required in moderate quantity. However, micro nutrients are required in minute quantity,
however they are you know they are essential, so that means you know the irrespective
of their you know little amount needed by the plant they are essential. So, if they are you
know if they are not present inside the soil that will reflect in their deficiency symptoms
in the plant in the plant system.
So, the micro nutrients are basically 8. Starting from zinc, then copper, then manganese,
then iron, then boron, molybdenum, chlorine, and nickel, so that is why you know this
chart you know this slide shows basically the classification of essential plant nutrients.
So, I hope that now it is clear. So, let us move ahead.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:53)
And see what are the other beneficial plant nutrients. So, there is a basic difference
between essential plant nutrients and beneficial plant nutrients. Now, beneficial elements
have been reported as you to enhance resistance to biotic stresses such as pathogen and
herbivory, and to abiotic stresses such as droughts, salinity, and nutrient toxicity or
deficiency. And they are not required by all the plants, but appear to benefit certain
plants.So, they are they are beneficial to certain plants, they are not required by all the plants,
so that is why they are not considered as essential plant elements. However, they show
several  benefits  for  certain  plants,  so  that  is  why  they  are  called  beneficial  plant
nutrients. So, what are these beneficial plant nutrients there are 4 to 5 beneficial plant
nutrients specially cobalt, sodium, vanadium, and silicon. So, these four are sometime
called as beneficial plant nutrients. 
And remember that cobalt is required for nitrogen fixation in legumes. And we will
discuss about the nitrogen fixation by legumes crop in coming lectures. And silicon is
found in plant cell walls and appear to produce tougher cells. So, it helps in you know
protecting  the cells  by you know making the plant  cell  wall  more sturdy, and this
increases the resistance of these plants. So, when the silicon is present in the cell wall,
and make it sturdy and hard enough, it increases the resistance of these plants to piercing
sucking insects and decreases the spread of fungal diseases, so that is why this you know
the silicon is also considered as an beneficial plant nutrient for certain plants. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:43)
So, let us let us also discuss the frame-work nutrient elements that the frame-work
nutrient elements are basically these three carbon, oxygen, you know and hydrogen.
Now, the carbon and oxygen basically plants are getting from the gases carbon dioxide in
the process of photosynthesis. However, the hydrogen is obtained from the water also inthe process of photosynthesis. So, these three elements plants are getting directly from
the air and water. 
And these three elements are required in large quantities for the production of plant
constituents such as cellulose or starch, I have already told you. And many times they are
referred  as  a  frame  work  elements.  So,  oxygen,  carbon,  and  hydrogen  makes  up
remember 95 percent of plant biomass, and the remaining 5 percent only made by all
other elements, so that is why they are frame work elements. And they are required in
major quantity of plant biomass, and only 55 percent is required by only 5 is made up by
all the other you know mineral nutrient.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:59)
So, let us see, what are you know what are the different features of mineral nutrients. So,
14 mineral nutrients we have already shown you, and they are called mineral nutrients,
because they are taken up by mineral form or inorganic form. And they are traditionally
divided into two groups like macro nutrients and micro nutrients, I have already told you,
and according to the relative amount of required.
So, this 14 mineral elements are taken by plants by specific chemical form regardless of
their source this is very important. For example, nitrogen is essential plant elements or
you know it is an important macro nutrient or primary nutrient. And this nitrogen is
present in soil in different forms organic forms, inorganic forms.However,  either  plant  can  only  you  know  uptake  nitrogen  in  two  forms  nitrate  or
ammonium forms. So, these two forms are considered as available forms of nitrogen, so
it does not matter if the soil has high amount of total nitrogen that does not show the
availability to the plant. Plant is the growth and yield and nutrition of plant is depended
on the available fraction of the total elements.
So, similarly is also true for other element just like in case of phosphorous, you know
you  know  phosphorus  is  you  know  is  taken  by  the  plant  by  either  primary
orthophosphates and secondary orthophosphates. So, these two are the available forms of
phosphate for the plants. So, these 14 elements are taken up by the plants in specific
chemical forms regardless of source, so we call them available forms. We will discuss
the available forms later in this lecture, what are the available forms for individual
mineral. 
Now, the difference in plant concentration between macro nutrients and micro nutrients
is enormous. Obviously, I told you the basic idea behind dividing these elements or the
mineral nutrients into macro elements and micro elements is the relative amount required
by the plant. 
So, the relative contents of nitrogen and molybdenum in plants is in the range of 10,000
is to 1. So, plant is about 40 times more magnesium than Fe. So, I mean you can have an
idea  about  the  differences  between  macro  nutrients  and  micro  nutrients  or  relative
quantity of the macro nutrients or micro nutrients required by the plant. (Refer Slide Time: 16:49)
So, let us talk about the macro nutrients. Macro nutrients are basically you know there
are  six  macro  nutrients,  starting  from  nitrogen,  phosphorous,  potassium,  calcium,
magnesium,  and  sulphur.  So  again  nitrogen,  phosphorous,  potassium,  calcium,
magnesium, and sulphur. 
And N, P, K are often considered to as a primary nutrients, because they are required
they  are  the  most  common  elements  found in commercial  fertilizers.  And they  are
required in large amount and they produce wide-spread deficiency symptoms. So, most
of the deficiency symptoms which you can see in the plant due to mineral deficiency are
coming from this either N, P, and k deficiency.
And also calcium, magnesium, sulphur are referred as a secondary nutrients as they are
also found in fertilizer and soil amendments. And they are moderately required by the
plant. And they produce deficiency symptoms in patches, and they are applied through
fertilizers containing primary nutrients like Single Super Phosphate or SSP. Now, the
single super phosphate apart from you know apart from supplying the phosphorus, it also
supplies the sulphur. So, this is the secondary element, so that is why it can support it can
it can supply both primary and secondary nutrient to the plant. (Refer Slide Time: 18:12)
Now, micro nutrients are you know there are eight micro nutrients, then iron, manganese,
zinc, boron, copper, chloride, and molybdenum, and nickel. And micro nutrients are
required in relatively very minute quantities. But, they are regardless of their quantities
again I am saying they are essential, even if they are required in very minute quantities
their presence in their absence will go will you know their absence will cause deleterious
effect in plant life cycle and plant cannot complete its life cycle without their presence. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:55)
So, so what are the typical concentration of macro nutrients sufficient for plant growth.
Let us see in this table you can see here, the nitrogen is required in 15,000 ppm or 1.5
percent  relative  number  of  atoms  is  almost  you  know  1,000,000.  And  obviously,
potassium is 10,000 ppm and 1 percent and 400,000. And calcium you know 5,000 ppm
or 0.5 percent and 200,000 atoms.
And magnesium 2000 ppm 0.2 percent and 100,000 ppm 100,000 of atoms. In case of
phosphate you know 2000 ppm, and obviously 0.2 percent and 30,000 number of atoms.
In case of sulphur, it is 1000 ppm and only 0.1 percent and it contains 30,000 atoms,
which is relatively number of atoms. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:02)
So,  so  relative  concentration  essential  plant  nutrients  some  you  know  some  micro
elements also can be toxic for plants at level only somewhat higher than the normal. So,
in the majority of the cases this happens when the pH is low to very low. So, when the
pH is very low to very low some micro nutrients are there, which shows toxicity. For
example, you know manganese is one of the one of the important micro nutrient, which
shows toxicity in acid soil. So, aluminum and manganese toxicity are the most frequent
ones, in direct relation to the acid soil. So, manganese is an you know is an essential
micro nutrient for the plant.(Refer Slide Time: 20:45)
Now, if you see the typical concentration of micro nutrient elements sufficient for plant
growth, you will see for chlorine is only 100 ppm. And it is for iron it is also 100 ppm,
boron is only 20 ppm, manganese is 20 ppm, and then copper zinc is 20 ppm, copper is 6
ppm. And molybdenum and nickel is required in you know in the lowest quantity that is
almost 0.1 ppm. See you can see among the all the micro nutrients also the relative you
know relatively chlorine, and iron is required in higher quantity that is 100 ppm as
compared to the other six micro elements or micro nutrients.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:29)
Now, how about classifying these you know these nutrients based on the biochemical
behavior or physiological function. Now, Mengel and Kirkby these two scientists in
1987 has divided the essential plant nutrients into four groups. 
So, let us study what are these four groups. So, the group-1 include C, H, O, N and S.
These five which are the major constituents of organic plant materials like carbohydrate,
like proteins, fats, etcetera. And group-2 minerals are phosphorous and boron, which are
involved in biochemical reactions such as esterification. Third one third group basically
contains potassium, calcium, magnesium, manganese, and chlorine. And these elements
are present in the free ionic state or are absorbed to indiffusible organic anions that
means, an absorption of calcium by carboxylic group of pectins.
And finally, group-5 elements that is iron, copper, zinc, and molybdenum, these elements
are predominantly present in as chelates in the plant. So, you know about the chelates is
that these are basically compound of organic matter you know these are compound of
organic matter and metals. So, so we have learned about these four groups, and their
physiological functions, so let us move ahead.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:05)
And see what are the, you know essential forms of different micro nutrients or macro
nutrients, and what are their specific physiological functions. So, as we have already told
that in case of group-1 obviously carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulphur. Incase of carbon, the forms in which carbon is taken up by the plant is basically carbon
dioxide, and sometime bicarbonate ion.
H is basically taken as H 2O. Oxygen by oxygen itself and nitrogen by ammonium,
nitrate, and elemental nitrogen or gaseous nitrogen in case of fixation. And sulphur is
obviously, in case of sulphate, and sulfur dioxide. And the sulphur dioxide basically
happens, when there is a gaseous absorption in the leaves. And phosphorus is basically
primary orthophosphate that is H 2PO4 minus, and secondary orthophosphate that is HPO 4
2 minus. And boron is uptaken by B(OH) 3 or boric acid form or at this boron is required
for esterification with native plant alcohol, and phosphate esters are involved in this
energy transfer.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:32)
So, if you see group-3 obviously, this group-3 is a contains this 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 different
nutrients. So, starting with the potassium, and forms in which potassium taken up by the
plants is K plus. And magnesium is present in Mg 2 plus, calcium Ca 2 plus, manganese
is Mn 2 plus, chlorine this an anion that is chloride iron that is Fe 2 plus, and copper that
is Cu 2 plus. 
So, these group-3 elements are having non-specific function, and basically they involves
in  establishing  different  types  of  osmotic  potential.  And  calcium  is  a  complete
component  of  plant  structural  parts.  So,  you  know  plant  cell  structure  is  basically
depends  on  the  calcium  content.  And  these  iron  and  copper  are  presently  presentpredominantly in the chelated form in prosthetic groups, enable electron on transport by
valency charge. So, each of them has their own biochemical and physiological functions.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:42)
So, this chart is very very important, and this you know not chart, but this slide shows
the deficiency symptoms of the nutrient elements. So, let us see them one by one, this is
very important. So, the color we represented are you know indicative and also, they may
vary from plant to plant.
So, let us see starting from the nitrogen, you can see nitrogen basically shows stunted
growth. And extremely pale color in the lower leaves, and upright leaves with light green
and yellowish, and appear burnt in extreme deficiency. So, this is a nitrogen deficiency
symptoms. So, basically again in the absence of the nitrogen you will see the yellowing
of the lower leaves.
In case of potassium, obviously small spots on the leaf tips, and edges of pale edges of
pale leaves, and spots turn rusty, and fold sat tips. So, these are the deficiency symptoms
of potassium. In case of molybdenum, and leaves get light green or lemon yellow orange,
and spots on whole leaves except the veins, and sticky secretion from under the leaves.
In case of copper, it is pale pink between the veins, and wilt and drop basically these are
the symptoms. In case of iron, leaves are pale no spots major veins are green in color.And in case of calcium, the plant are dark green tender leaves are pale, and drying starts
from the tips and eventually leaf buds die.
And in case of boron, discoloration of leaf buds and breaking and dropping of the buds is
important. In case of sulphur, leaves light green, veins pale green, and no spots. In case
of manganese, leaves pale in color, veins are venules dark green and reticulated. Zinc,
obviously leaves pale narrow and yellow, and short veins short veins dark green, and
dark spots on leaves and edges.
In case of magnesium, paleness from leaf edges, you can see paleness from leaf edges,
and  no  spots  edges.  And  a  cup  shaped  fold  and  leaves  die  and  drop  in  extreme
deficiency. And phosphorous is very very important phosphorous plant short, and dark
green, and in extreme deficiency turn brown or black, and browns color under the leaves.
So, these are the you know deficiency symptoms of these individual elements.
So, guys so in this lecture, you have learnt about different types of different essential
elements, and why we call them essential element, what are the essential you know
essentiality criteria of these nutrient elements. And then we talked about the essential or
the  available  forms  of  different  nutrients.  Remember  that  the  total  amount  of  any
particular element does not mean that the total amount is available to the plant, and
availability to the plant depends on the available forms.
For example, in case nitrogen it is and nitrate and ammonium. In case of phosphorous, it
is primary orthophosphate and secondary orthophosphate. And in case of potassium, it is
k plus. So, again nitrogen phosphate phosphorous and potassium are the macro elements,
and  they  are  present  in  most  of  the  commercial  fertilizers.  And  these  commercial
fertilizers you know supply these elements to the supplement this element to the deficient
soil for plant growth.
And micro nutrients are also very very important, especially in India you know certain
micro nutrients are deficient in certain zones, and these micro nutrients also causes also
cause a lot of yield reduction. So, regardless of their quantity required, we should be very
very  careful  about the  micro  nutrient  status  of the  soil.  And we have already  also
discussed the different deficiency symptoms of the nutrient elements.So,  plant  shows  different  signs  of  the  deficiency,  and  by  identifying  the  proper
deficiency symptom, you can identify what is the particular nutrient which is lacking in
the soil. So, guys I hope that you have enjoyed this lecture, and you have learned
something new. And from the next lecture onwards, we will be starting you know we
will be starting nitrogen and their different transformation of the nitrogen.
Thank you very much.