 Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 38
Soil Organic Matter
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology. And in this lecture,
we will be trying to finish this soil testing and then we will be starting the Soil Organic
Matter. So, in the last two lectures, we have talked about different aspects of soil testing;
obviously, it is a very huge, we know, topic. And we know; obviously, we cannot cover
each and every, you know, little bit step of little bit aspects of soil testing. But before
wrapping the soil testing, let us discuss some advanced methods of soil testing.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:52)
So, you have known that from our last lectures that we have got, you know, individual
extractant for extracting the specific nutrients. However, there is an, you know, advanced
method of we call it Mehlich 3 extraction. And Mehlich 3 is basically combination of
different chemicals, it is a collection of different chemicals. And which helps in, you
know, extracting not only the first person potassium, but also calcium, magnesium and
micronutrients.So, it is a very much comprehensive method for extracting different, you know, available
nutrients. So, Mehlich 3 extraction basically reagent basically composed of these 0.25
molar of ammonium nitrate and then 0.015 molar of ammonium fluoride, 0.001 molar of
EDTA, 0.2 molar  of acetic  acid  and 0.013 molar  of nitric  acid.  So, it is  basically
composed of individual these components.
And each individual component has a specific role for extracting these micronutrients
and macronutrients. So this is an advanced method. So, once we extract this Mehlich 3
using this Melich 3 extractant; obviously, the next step is to measure their concentration.
For measuring their concentrations, generally nowadays the most advanced method is,
the most advanced method is ICP-OES.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:21)
The  full  name  of  ICP-OES  is  Inductively  Coupled  Plasma  Optical  Emission
Spectroscopy.  Now,  this  is  an  advanced  method  which  basically  works  on  optical
emission  spectroscopy.  Another  method  which  is  available  also  we  call  it  Atomic
Absorption Spectroscopy or AAS. So, there are two methods  generally,  you know,
scientist are using one is called AAS, another is ICP. But ICP is much more, you know,
precise I would say. 
And so let us discuss what is ICP. The full name of ICP is basically inductively coupled
c o u p l e d plasma and then optical emission spectroscopy. So, why we are calling it,
you know, inductively coupled plasma? We will see in the next slide.(Refer Slide Time: 03:28)
So, ICP-OES is basically inductively coupled plasma. And they are at least two times as
hot as flames or furnaces. So, if you remember in case of flame photometry the source of
excitation is generally the flame which is generated through LPG gas. However, in case
of ICP we generate the flame or plasma instead we generate the plasma instead of flame
which is two times as hotter.
And this is basically argon plasma and the argon plasma is a result of the flow of argon
ions in a very strong localized radio field which we created around the torch ICP torch,
we call it ICP torch. Now; obviously, we get a 6000 to 10,000 Kelvin of temperature
which is very common. And it is very hot enough to excite most element so they can
emit the light. Because most of the elements will they, you know, will be energized and
they will go to the upper, you know, higher energy state and then they will revert back to
their ground state and in doing so they will emit some energy which will be measured.
So,  this  high  temperature  is  hot  enough  to  prevent  the  formation  of  most  of  the
interferences  and  breakdown  the  oxides  and  eliminate  most  molecular  and  spectral
interferences. So, this high temperature is very much important for removing any type of
interferences that could be possible in other methods.
So, the way to do the atomic emission spectroscopy is basically now it is in advanced
countries in a more advanced laboratories they use this method for measurement of these
available nutrients.  (Refer Slide Time: 05:14)
So, you are seeing here a ICP torch. Now how it works? In the ICP torch, you will see
some concentrated quartz tubes, you know, concentrated. Now generally we generally
the argon is flow which is, you know, we call it argon plasma. So, argon is flow through
a tangential flow and sample is injected from here.
And you can see there are two coils, induction coils  and magnetic  field. So, radio
frequency electrical current and associated magnetic field is given. So, radio frequency
electrical current and associated magnetic field is given. And we generally use a Tesla
coil to spark or ionize this argon. And ultimately the argon will ionize to form electrons.
And these electrons, the electrons which are produced from this ionization of argon will
be accelerated by this magnetic field. And obviously, the energy will be transferred from
the electrons to the gas by collision so the gas is heats up.
So, basically, we are incorporating the argon here and this argon is moving through these
quartz tubes. And while it is moving through this quartz tubes, we are ionizing it through
a Tesla coil which is creating electrons. And these electrons basically moving through,
we know we know, in high acceleration in the influence of magnetic field. And as a
result of a, as a result of that, high energy is transferred when these electron is collided
with the gas and as a result the gas is heats up. So, at the top you can see, the plasma is
generated. So, this is the emission region. So, production of high concentration of bothexcited atoms and ions. So, this is the principle behind this, you know, inductively
coupled plasma.
Ultimately there will be two detectors; and this detector will, you know, will measure the
emitted light intensity. And from there, it can measure the concentration of a particular
element. So, the element which are present in the sample so we are incorporating that.
When these are coming in contact with the plasma; obviously, they will be going to, they
will be excited and going to the high energy state. And as a result, they will emit the
energy which will be further measured by the detectors. So, this is the principle behind
ICP-OES
(Refer Slide Time: 08:07)
And finally guys, I would like to show you another, you know, portable tool generally
we use in the field the soil testing the scientist generally use in the field. We call it soil
testing kit. Now, it is a portable kit which enable farmers to take it to the fields and take
the measurements. And most common kits helps us to find the pH and primary nutrients
N, P, K and with organic carbon.
And kits can also help in finding all the nutrient, but it is expensive. So, soil sample is
first taken using a spade or trowel. And then you will see inside the kit, inside the soil
testing kit you will see several types of small tools; starting from cuvettes, starting from,
you know, test tubes. And then and using and you have to put the soil sample within the
test tube.And there will be several chemicals and you have to add those chemicals directly into the
test tube and then you have to develop a colour by a mixing these reagents. And this
colour will be finally compared with the standard colour chart which is given within the
soil testing kit. And from that, you can qualitatively ascertain what is the nutrient status
of that field. So, this is the very quick and rough method; obviously, this is a qualitative
method, it is not a very much accurate quantitative method.
But it is very much useful when you are considering onsite evaluation of soil fertility.
And from that you do not need to go for soil drying and soil grinding. And there are
some, you know, scoops are already there, which can measure around 2 or 2.5 gram of
soils. You can use wet soils directly and you can we can and these testing kit can be used
for measurement of most of the routine soil tests. So guys, so this is about the soil testing
kit.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:27)
I hope that and these are the references. I hope that you have got a basic overview of soil
testing. And you got an idea of different aspects of soil testing. Obviously, I did not
complete I did not cover all the important aspects because the limitation of time. But
however, I would expect that you will go ahead and, we know, consult different books
and different scientist for measurement of soil samples on other parameters.
So, let us wrap up here and these are the references. So, in the next topic will be very
important that is soil organic matter and climate change.(Refer Slide Time: 11:16)
So, let us see what is soil organic matter? Obviously, soil organic matter consists of a
complex system of substances which is ranging from components of organic residues
undergoing  decomposition,  metabolic  products  of  microbes  and  then  products  of
secondary synthesis and humic substances. So, this is a complex mixture of different, we
know, organic fractions.
Now, this organic matter, soil organic matter is basically present in the soil if you if you
remember, in the first lectures we have talked about that volumetrically it constitutes
about 5% in the soil. But it is very important as, you know, since it has got high amount
of cation exchange capacity as well as high amount of nutrient holding capacity.
And so the organic matter or organic, we know, matter contains several organic fractions
starting from the fresh litters which is present over the soil surface. Then decaying
organic matter, then a stabilized form of organic matter which is resistant to further
decomposition, we call it humus. And remember that, the humus is the major fraction of
organic matter that is responsible for soil physical, chemical and biological properties.
So, we will discuss the humus in details later on. So, basically soil organic matter serves
as a soil conditioner, nutrients source, substrate for microbial activity, preserver of the
environment and major determinant of substantial agricultural productivity. Why? We
will see.(Refer Slide Time: 12:59)
So, if we consider the global carbon cycle; obviously, the carbon is recycled within this
major reserve. You can see soil, then ocean and lakes, then carbonate rocks, then fossil
fuels, then atmosphere, vegetation. These are some big big pools of or major pools of
carbon  in  the  earth  and  surrounding  atmosphere.  And  you  can  see  that  how  these
movement of carbon is maintained from one pool to another pool.
Obviously, the global carbon cycle, you know you know, you can see here the numbers
which you are seeing inside the box are basically indicating the pentagrams of carbon
stored in that major pool. So, in case of soil; obviously, 3 to 4000 pentagrams of carbon
stored in, you know, carbons. So the number by arrow shows the amount of carbon
annually flowing in pentagram per year by various processes between these pools.
So, also you have to note down that the soil contains almost twice as much as carbon as
the vegetation and the atmosphere combined. So this is very very important. So, you can
have a basic idea about how this carbon is moving from one pool to another pool and it is
very huge huge amount. And obviously, soil is considered as one of the major important
pool of carbon global carbon cycle which contains twice as much as carbon as the
vegetation and the atmosphere combined. (Refer Slide Time: 14:42)
So, let us see what is organic matter decomposition in soil. So, decomposition basically
involves the breakdown of large organic molecules into smaller, simpler components.
Plant residues are the principle components, you know, undergoing decomposition in the
soil. So, the plant residues are the primary source of soil organic matter. Obviously,
plants are present in huge amount in the soil surface.
So, they are the primary source of soil organic matter. Now, the rate of decomposition
depends on the composition of the plant residues and the soil environment and moisture
content in the soil. So, decomposition process can be divided into two major category;
one is aerobic decomposition another is anaerobic decomposition. (Refer Slide Time: 15:27)
Now, if you see if you consider the organic matter composition in the soil decomposition
of the soil, obviously, you have to talk about the composition of plant residue because
this is one of the major indicator of how these different fractions of organic, you know,
organic matter will undergo decomposition. So, volumetrically you can see; there are,
you know, composition of plant residues.
Obviously, you can see there are 75 percent of water here where a dry matter is only 25
percent. So, if you see the dry matter; obviously, the dry matter contains 42 percent of
carbon and then 8 percent of hydrogen and then 8 percent of ash and oxygen 42 percent
or in another words if we if we concerned about the type of compounds, obviously, you
see the majority is cellulose which is the 45 percent followed by lignin that is 20 percent,
Hemicelluloses 18 percent, polyphenols 2 percent, fats and waxes 2 percent and sugars
and starch is 5 percent and proteins 8 percent. So, these are the chemical composition or
biochemical composition of the plant residues. And; obviously, depending on that, you
know, organic matter decomposition or rate of organic matter  decomposition  varies
obviously.(Refer Slide Time: 16:58)
So, rate of decomposition; obviously, depends on these factors. For example, you know,
you can see that there in the plant residues; obviously, there are sugar, starches and
simple proteins, crude proteins, hemi cellulose, cellulose, fats and waxes, and lignin and
phenolic compounds are there. Remember that, this sugar, starches and simple proteins
are under, you know, generally undergo rapid decomposition. And as we go from the top
to bottom; obviously, their resistant to decomposition increases.
So,  lignins  and  phenolic  compounds  are  the  most  resistant  to  decomposition  and
followed  by  fats  and  waxes,  cellulose  and  hemicellulose.  So,  these  are  very  very
important aspects you have to take care of, you have to consider. And so the rate of
decomposition; obviously, depends on the composition of the particular organic matter. (Refer Slide Time: 17:58)
So, let us talk about the decomposition of organic matter in aerobic soil. So, plant carbon
compounds are enzymatically oxidized as you can see in this reaction, it is enzymatically
oxidized to produce, you know, carbon dioxide and then water and energy huge amount
of energy and decomposer biomass obviously. So, essential nutrients such as nitrogen,
phosphorus, sulphur, are released and are immobilized by a series of specific reactions
that are relatively unique to that element.
We have already discussed about those in our previous lectures. So, new compounds are;
obviously, synthesized by microbes as cellular components or as a breakdown products
or secondary metabolites. And some of the original plant compounds, their breakdown
products  and microbial  compounds become physically or chemically protected  from
further microbial decay and via interaction with the soil environment.
So, these are some important aspects or important dynamics which occur in the aerobic
decomposition of soil aerobic decomposition of organic matter. So, again here this is an
organic matter; obviously, where aerobically decomposed in the presence of enzymes
and producing carbon dioxide, water, energy and biomass of the decomposers. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 19:24)So, let us talk about decomposition in anaerobic soil. Obviously, this decomposition
process is slower than that of aerobic soil. And it generally, you know, you can see this
type  of  decomposition  in  wet  and  anaerobic  condition.  And  because  of  this  slow
decomposition in this anaerobic process, this type of soil that is wet and anaerobic soil
tends to accumulate large amount of partially decomposed organic matter.
Because  of  mainly  two  reasons  under  low  oxygen  anaerobic  condition,  the
decomposition takes place much more slowly than that when the oxygen is plentiful.
And secondly, certain products of anaerobic metabolism are toxic to many microbes and
acting as a preservative for organic matter. So, the end product, you know, still contains
the energy.
So, that is why alcohol and methane which are the major end products of these anaerobic
decomposition produced, you know, are used as a fuel. But remember that some products
are toxic to the plant growth and contribute  to the climate  change,  specifically  the
methane which is a very very important greenhouse gas. (Refer Slide Time: 20:34)
Now, the following reaction you can see here first of all propionate is reacting with in the
presence  of  bacteria  producing  acetate,  carbon  and  methane.  In  the  anaerobic
decomposition it is again important. And here you can see, acetic acid is anaerobically
decomposed to produce the methane and this carbon dioxide is again, you know, reacting
with hydrogen to produce a methane.
So, this  methane  is  a very very  notorious  greenhouse gas  and which increases  the
greenhouse gas effect in our earth. So, obviously this anaerobic decomposition is not
environmental friendly, per say. But this methane can be also used for as an energy
source.(Refer Slide Time: 21:24)
So, what are the factors? Obviously, you know, the bacteria which generates methane are
called  methanogenic  bacteria.  And  remember  that  there  are  several  methanogenic
bacteria or methanogens  which plays a key role in this anaerobic decomposition of
organic matter.
So, let us see what are the factors which control the rate of decomposition. Obviously,
there are, you know, several factors starting from temperature, then moisture, then C/N
ratio of the plant residues, then availability of nitrogen in the soil and then soil ecology
and quality of litter, lignin and polyphenol content. All these are very very important as
far as the rate of decomposition is concerned.
So, in this graph, we can see this is a relation between time after planting residues on
soils in days and at the biomass remaining. So, you can see here there are three different
crops here. So, first of all this line this solid line is basically is representing rye. And this
green is basically represented by vetch.
And in case of vetch; obviously, the C/N ratio is very very low, you know, only 10 and
in case of rye it is 87. So, obviously from our previous lecture we know that when there
is a, you know, when the C/N ratio is low, obviously, the mineralization is encouraging,
you know, it encourages the mineralization.And that is why you can see the decomposition of organic matter is quite rapid in case of
vetch as compared to the rye because in case of rye the C/N ratio is quite wide. And as a
result, mineralization  and decomposition  is quite  slow. And when we make the 50
percent,  we  know,  vetch  with  50  percent  of  rye;  obviously,  you  can  see  some
intermediate trends. So, that shows that the C/N ratio of the plant residues is very very
important which controls the rate of decomposition of organic matter.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:42)
So, another important is quality of organic matter. Obviously, you can see here this
portion is basically, sorry, this portion is basically indicating the net mineralization and
this  is  net  immobilization.  So,  here  you  can  see  different  graph  showing  [diff]
decomposition rate or mineralization and immobilization rate for different components.
So, you can see here different composition.
So, you can see here this basically shows low lignin and polyphenols and low C/N ratios.
So, that is the ideal condition because you know that lignin and polyphenols are resistant
to a decomposition. And when we have low C/N ratio; obviously, it will also encourage
the  mineralization.  So,  obviously,  we  are  getting  high  amount  of  mineralization;
however, when there is a high lignin and polyphenols and low C/N ratio, obviously, the
increasing trend is, you know, we are getting, but it is somewhat low because of the
presence of high lignin content. Now in case of high lignin and polyphenols and high
carbon nitrogen high C/N ratio; obviously, there will be net immobilization. And lowlignin  and  polyphenol  and  high  C/N  ratio;  obviously,  that  will  also  go  with  net
immobilization.  So,  that  shows  the  quality  of  organic  matter  is  very  important
determinant of rate of decomposition all right.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:07)
So, now, you see how organic matter basically forms. So, this is a very good, you know,
representation of, you know, formation of organic matter. So, let us see how it goes. So,
for describing the slide I will go back and forth with the next slide. So, let us see.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:28)
So, the microbial biomass or upper right is we can see this upper right the microbial
biomass produces enzyme that breakdown plant residues. So, this microbial biomass
basically  produces,  we  can  see,  enzymes  which  basically  decompose  all  the  plant
residues. So plant, you know, contain different types of components as you know that,
you know, cellulose, hemicelluloses, starch, sugars, lignin.
So,  basically  they  decompose  all  the  components,  these  enzymes.  And  when  these
compounds are metabolized by microbes to obtain the energy, most of the carbon is
released as carbon dioxide while the other element may be released into the soil solution.
Now, we have already seen, in case of aerobic decomposition that carbon dioxide is
generating due to this enzymatic oxidation.
And, you know, after carbon dioxide is released, the nitrogen, sulphur and phosphate
they are already, you know, they dissolved and also released. So, may be released into
the soil solution. So, the labile carbon that is upper half of the diagram, so, this is the
labile carbon and this is the humus or stabilized form of carbon. Remember that this
labile carbon is subjected to rapid metabolism. Some components become stabilized.
So, this labile carbon becomes, you know, rapid decomposed. And some component
become stabilized and goes to this pool that is humus. And bits of plant tissue and
microbial  cell  wall  that  is  particulate  organic  matter  may  become  inaccessible  to
microbial attack and micro aggregates from around them.
So obviously, some dissolve organic matter and plant tissue particulate organic matter
they are protected by, you know, inside the micro aggregates and becomes inaccessible.
So, they move from this labile pool to the stabilized pool. And microbial oxidation create
zone of polarity in formerly hydrophobic biomolecules, allowing their carbon to become
protected by bonding to mineral surfaces.
So, we can see protecting, they know, by sorption to the mineral surfaces; obviously, so
this is another way. So, this is the whole dynamics of soil organic matter that goes on
within the ecosystem. And you can see the labile pools in this fraction. Basically this
fraction is basically the labile pool and this is the most stabilized pool or humus which is
responsible for soil physical, chemical and biological activities. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 28:13)So, if we see now, if we divide the soil organic matter into labile pool and slow to
decompose pool or stabilized pool, obviously, this labile pool shows rapid turnover of
carbon or labile organic matter whereas this slow to decompose pool shows protected or
slow turnover of carbon. We know that, humus is protected or slow turnover of carbon.
Humus is kind of stabilized product. So, for this labile pool; obviously, you know, we
got some living organism biomass and then free identifiable dead tissues and detritus we
call it detritus. And then free bits of partially degraded tissues or particulate organic
matter. And then, free or dissolved biomolecules  and degradation products all these
comes into the labile pool.
And they can show rapid decomposition and changes. However, in case of humus;
obviously, you can see protected bits of degraded cell walls and tissue that is particulate
organic matter. And protected biomolecules or supra molecules and degradation products
and black aromatic products of fire we call it char. So, these type of compounds and, you
know, can be seen within a soil organic matter.
So, obviously, soil organic matter again we can divide it to labile pool and non labile
pool or stabilized pool. And labile pool goes rapid decomposition or rapid changes;
however, stabilized pool is more or less stable. Humus is important component in the
stabilized pool. And in case of labile pool, you know, living organisms, free, identifiable,
dead, detritus tissues and particulate organic matter all this represent the labile pool.
 (Refer Slide Time: 30:03)So, guys we have covered this, you know, this slide up to, you know, let us wrap up here
in this lecture. And in the next lecture, we will be trying to finish this organic matter.
And then will be discussing about different organisms which are present in the soil.
So, thank you and let us finish this in the next lecture. Bye.