Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 33
Biological N Fixation
(Refer Slide Time: 00:22)
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology. And in this lecture,
we will be trying to finish the nitrogen cycle. And then we will go and discuss about
biological nitrogen fixation, which is one of the most important nitrogen you know
transformation process. (Refer Slide Time: 00:51)
So, in our last lecture, we covered up to ammonia volatilisation. So, let us go ahead, and
see  what  is  nitrification?  Now,  nitrification  you  know  that  it  is  the  conversion  of
ammonium nitrate into ammonium nitrogen into nitrate nitrogen, and it is basically
executed in two in a you know consecutive steps.
In the first step, you can see it is basically you know you know oxidation of ammonium
with oxygen, and it is mediated by a bacteria called nitrosomonas and ultimately it
produces nitrite. And then you know it produces protons, which basically causes the
acidity. And also it produces water and 275 kilo joule of energy.
And in second step, these nitrite is very very short lived and very very, it is very toxic to
the plants. So, this nitrite is very very short lived; and again, it you know oxidized by the
help of bacteria called nitrobacter. And ultimately, it produces nitrate and 76 kilo joule of
energy.  And  this  nitrate  is  the  major  you  know  major  species  available  species  of
nitrogen  that  is  being  up  take  by  the  plant.  So,  you  know  this  you  know  so  this
conversion of ammonium form of nitrate to nitrate form ammonium form of nitrogen to
nitrate form of nitrogen is termed as nitrification. And it is basically oxidation process,
where nitrosomonas, and nitrobacter bacteria you know plays a very important role.(Refer Slide Time: 02:36)
So, let us go ahead, and see what are the different factors which effect nitrification?
Obviously,  the  substrate  availability  is  the  major  issue.  If  there  is  no  ammonium
availability of obviously, there will not be there will not be any nitrification; because
ammonia is a starting point ammonium is a starting point of nitrification process. And
then obviously, the temperature lower the temperature, and slower the nitrification. So,
we have found that the 20 to 30 degree centigrade temperature is optimal for you know
nitrification process.
Aeration  is  required,  because  the  aerobic  environment  enhances  nitrification  is  in
oxidation process. And moisture content we take as well drained soils to enhance the
nitrification, and generally around 60 percent of you know of the water filled pores are
optimal for curve you know for nitrification process. And also it depends on the pH and
as well as the type of clay.(Refer Slide Time: 03:33)
So, what is denitrification? Denitrification is just opposite of nitrification, so it is a you
know it is a reduction process, where nitrate nitrogen through a successive steps of
reduction, ultimately produces these dinitrogen gas, which ultimately escapes to the
atmosphere. So, if you can see here, it is a basically loss of nitrogen by sequential
reduction of nitrate in soil. So, the starting point obviously, here is a nitrate, and here you
can see the valence state of nitrogen here is plus 5 in case of nitrate.
And as a result of oxygen in a continuous sequential reduction, there is a continuous loss
of oxygen as you can see here. And ultimately the second steps, it forms the nitrate ions.
And third step is nitric oxide gas. And then the nitrous oxide gas, which is very important
you  know  green  house gas.  And finally,  it  produces  the  dinitrogen  gas. And  these
dinitrogen or nitrogen you know along with nitrous oxide, and these nitrogen escapes
into the atmosphere.
So, this is you know this is denitrification process. And you know it is also mediated by
the different microbes, and because you know the microbes basically, and it basically
occurs  in the anaerobic condition,  because microbes  utilise oxide in the nitrate for
respiration there by reducing them. So, in the reducing condition, when there is no
oxygen available for these microorganism they uses these nitrate for their oxygen. And
ultimately,  they  reduce  this  nitrate  to  dinitrogen  which  ultimately  escapes  into  the
atmosphere.So, end product of denitrification depends on the bacteria involved and soil conditions
obviously. And low lying, organic rich, and oxygen depleted zones are more prone to
denitrification.  And  denitrification  results  in  loss  of  valuable  nitrogen  in  nutrient
management obviously, you can see the nitrogen the final the end product is nitrogen
which is being escaped to the atmosphere. So, you know it is useful in removing the
nitrogen from waste water. So, this is the only the plus point, which this denitrification
process has. So, guys we have you know we have completed this denitrification process
also.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:03)
So, let us go ahead, and see no we have to you know  there are some pictures  of
denitrification, you can see these are temporarily waterlogged soil obviously. In the
waterlogged soil, all the pore space will be filled up with water. So, there will be no there
is there is very little amount of oxygen, which is present in the pores in the pores all the
oxygen all the or in other words all the air will be removed by the water. 
And as a result of that all the microbes you know the microbes basically, they are
facultative anaerobes. These facultative anaerobes basically use this nitrate as a terminal
electron acceptor, and then it converts this nitrate into dinitrogen. So, also you can see
here the schematic diagram of denitrification in flooded systems, and obviously please
remember that deep application of fertiliser helps in loss of nitrogen in flooded systems.
So, this is you know this basically to give you an idea about denitrification.(Refer Slide Time: 07:04)
And remember that denitrification has the time passes, the nitrogen concentration. And if
you see, the time in hours the relation between the time in hours and the nitrogen
concentration, you can see here the nitrous oxide gas, and these nitrogen gas you know
forms. And obviously, these are the times after the sub-merges, so after keeping the soil
moist. So, you can see continue you know both nitrous oxide as well as nitrogen you
know gas their concentration is increasing. And obviously, due to the absence of oxygen,
the concentration of nitrate is getting decrease. So, this is basically the denitrification
process.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:51)
And  let  us  see,  what  is  anammox  process.  The  anammox  process  is  basically  the
anaerobic oxidation of ammonium yielding to nitrogen gas. So, it is anaerobic oxidation
of ammonium, so that is the anammox process. And these basically caused by unusual
bacteria of phylum “planctomycetes”. And it occurs in redox transition zones like upper
layer of saturated soils, rhizosphere etcetera. 
Because, you know that I have told you in our submerge soil lecture that there is a very
thin,  you  know  oxidised  layer  which  is  present  in  the  saturated  soil,  especially  in
submerged soil. And these anammox process basically occurs in that redox transition
zone, because it is just these zones basically lies above the reduced zone, which is
present below. And so basically there are two steps, one is aerobic, and another one is
anaerobic. So, in the first step you can see this ammonium is getting oxidised to form
nitrite, and you know it is creating the protons, and water it is in aerobic oxidation
process.
In the second step, obviously these nitrite which is denoted in the first step will react
with ammonium to produce dinitrogen as well as water. So, if we combine both these
both these, we can see this ammonium plus oxygen. So, this is an oxygen, this is an
oxidation of ammonium, and ultimately it produces nitrogen, and then protons and water.
So, it is again the oxidation of ammonium in anaerobic condition, and ultimately the
production of dinitrogen or nitrogen gas. So, this is called the anammox process. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:50)
So,  nitrogen  loss  and  environment;  obviously,  nitrogen  loss  by  denitrification.  And
anammox obviously, in case of anammox also nitrogen dinitrogen forms, and which
ultimately escapes to that you know atmosphere. So, nitrogen loss by denitrification, and
anammox is detrimental to plant growth in soils, whereas it is beneficial in waste water
management. Obviously, we want to that nitrogen which is present in the waste water
getting to be removed.
So, nitrous oxide and you know nitric oxide are greenhouse gases, and you know they
cause acid rain, and ozone depletion, etcetera. Because, these nitrous oxide when they
went to atmosphere, they also create this acid rain and all this things. So, slow release
nitrogen fertilizers and deep placement of fertiliser also can reduce the loss of nitrogen,
because the slow release nitrogen fertiliser they control the release of nitrogen, because
nitrogen  is  highly  soluble  in  water  specially  the  nitrate.  And  this  deep  placement
basically, it helps them to reduce the reaction with atmosphere, and ultimately control the
nitrogen you know nitrogen mobility. So, this how we can you know, we can reduce the
loss of nitrogen.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:09)
And so guys we have finished this nitrogen cycle. And let us go to a new topic that is
biological nitrogen fixation, it is very important you know important topic of nitrogen, so
that is why we will discussed this slowly as a topic.(Refer Slide Time: 11:28)
So, let us see what are the different concepts, which will covered in this lecture in this in
this  topic  that  is  what  is  a  biological  nitrogen  fixation,  what  is  the  importance  of
biological nitrogen fixation, then the mechanism of nitrogen fixation, then different
fixation systems will discuss different fixation system, and also we will be discussing
different factors, which are affecting the nitrogen fixation. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:49)
So,  what  is  the  biological  nitrogen  fixation?  Now,  it  is  basically  next  to  plant
photosynthesis, biological nitrogen fixation remember is the most important biochemicalreaction for life. Because, this you know in the biological nitrogen fixation converts the
inert dinitrogen gas of the atmosphere to reactive nitrogen that becomes available to all
forms of life through the nitrogen cycle.
So, basically it is a conversion of nitrogen gas which is present in the atmosphere to rid
some reduce form or organic forms of nitrogen. And ultimately, so by you know and
these  processes  mediated  by  different  microorganisms,  so  that  is  why,  it  is  called
biological nitrogen fixation. We are fixing the atmospheric nitrogen into the soil, and into
the body of different microorganism. So, this I how this is why it is called biological
nitrogen fixation. And the process is again carried out by a limited number of bacteria,
including  several  species  of  rhizobium,  actinomycetes,  and  cyanobacteria  formally
termed as blue green algae, and we will discuss that later on. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:59)
And what is the importance of biological nitrogen fixation. Well basically due to the
biological nitrogen fixation, it helps to increase the yield of the crop, and it reduce the
need of manufacturing the nitrogenous fertiliser, and you know because going there is a
formation of biological. When there is a biological nitrogen fixation obviously, the need
for adding supplemental inorganic fertiliser nitrogenous fertiliser is reused.
And therefore, lowering the amount of reactive nitrogen circulating into the environment,
and ultimately due to these there is reduction is nitrous oxide emission, which is animportant  or  you  know  very  very  dangerous  greenhouse  gas.  So,  this  is  the  basic
importance of biological nitrogen fixation.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:47)
And  let  us  see  the  mechanism  of  nitrogen  fixation.  Obviously,  the  regardless  of
organisms involved, the key to biological nitrogen fixation is the enzyme nitrogenase.
So, biological nitrogen fixation is mediated through enzymes called nitrogenous, which
catalyses which catalyse the reduction of dinitrogen gas to ammonia. And you can see
here,  you know  here  nitrogen  is  getting  you  know  due  to  the  nitrogenous  enzyme
complex, which basically contains iron and molybdenum, and they are basically reduced
to form ammonia.
The ammonia, in turn combine with organic acids to form amino acids, and ultimately
proteins. So, these ammonia when reacts with organic acids ultimately forms the amino
acids,  which  in  turn  you  know  develop  proteins,  and  because  proteins  is  basically
polymer of different you know it is a it is made of these amino acids. And the site of
nitrogen reduction is the enzyme nitrogenase, a complex constituting protein a complex
consisting of two proteins. The smaller of which contains iron, while the larger who you
know unit contains the molybdenum sulphur and iron, we will see that in the next slide. (Refer Slide Time: 15:15)
So, if we go to the next slide, you will see there is a nitrogenous enzyme complex.
Obviously, there are two units the first the smaller units is basically, we can see here.
And the larger unit basically contain the smaller unit basically contain iron contain iron,
whereas the larger unit is basically contains iron, molybdenum, and sulphur. So, let us
see how this nitrogenous enzyme complex, you know takes part in nitrogen biological
nitrogen fixation.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:49)
So, you can see these two proteins or these two units of these nitrogenous complex. The
larger protein converts the ammonia to the larger protein converts atmospheric nitrogen
to ammonia; you can see here the atmospheric nitrogen is getting converted to ammonia
here using the electrons, which is provided by the smaller protein. You can see electron is
moving from this smaller protein to this bigger protein. And also as a result of this
conversion hydrogen you know gas is produced and energy from ATP conversion to
ADP. 
Obviously, you can see energy from ATP conversion to ADP along with electrons from
ferredoxin reduces the Fe 3 in the smaller Fe-protein. So, in the smaller Fe-protein you
can see the Fe  3 is getting reduced to Fe  2. And these reduction of Fe  2 is basically
mediated through this conversion of ATP to ADP or adenosine tri phosphate to adhesion
di phosphate. And also from this conversion of ferredoxin reduced to you know reduced
version of ferredoxin to oxidised version of ferredoxin. And ultimately, you know iron 3
that is ferric is getting reduced to ferrous, and ultimately there is a movement of you
know of this electron to the larger protein, which contains the molybdenum iron and
sulphur.
So, the molybdenum-iron-sulphur cluster in the large protein capture nitrogen from the
air, where while the iron in the clusters receives the electron provided by the small
protein,  so  that  nitrogen  can  be  reduced.  Further  reduction  of  nitrogen,  you  recur
electron. And these electron is basically moving from this smaller protein to this larger
protein, and ultimately it is reducing the nitrogen to ammonia.
And this nitrogen fixation in nature may be limited by the insufficient supply of sulphur,
iron,  molybdenum,  and  phosphorous,  it  is  quite  natural,  because  this  nitrogenous
complex is made of these all these compounds and also phosphorous is an important
element of ATP. So, any you know insufficiency or deficiency of any of these element
will cause you know nitrogen fixation process to you know to stop. So, these are some
important factors for nitrogen important factors for nitrogen fixation, and I have told you
the mechanism of nitrogen fixation.(Refer Slide Time: 18:34)
So, let us go ahead and see, what are the other important and exciting facts about
nitrogen fixation? Obviously, you remember that the dinitrogen has to be converted to
ammonium. So, this triple bond between this nitrogen-nitrogen has to be braked has to be
broken, and these you know these requires a great deal of energy. And obviously, the
microbial process is greatly enhanced, when it is carried out in a association with the
plants, which can supply energy from the photosynthesis.
So, nitrogenase is obviously is getting destroyed by free oxygen. And so the organism
that is fixed nitrogen must protect the enzyme from exposure to oxygen. And the fixation
takes place in the root-nodules which has Leghaemoglobin. And this Leghaemoglobin
basically binds the oxygen to protect the nitrogenase. So, if the oxygen is coming you
know if the oxygen comes in contact with the nitrogenase, it will get destroy, and this
biological nitrogen fixation will not occur. So, these Leghaemoglobin basically binds
oxygen to prevent it to you know prevent it to you know oxidise in nitrogenase.
And the  reduction  reaction is  end-product  inhibited  obviously, and accumulation  of
ammonia which is the end-product will inhibited the inhibit nitrogen fixation. Also, too
much nitrate in the soil will inhibit the formation of nodules. Because, when there is an
abundant amount of nitrate which is already present in the soil. So, there will not be
further nitrogen fixation. And obviously, the accumulation of ammonia will also you
know reduce the rate of production for end products. So, nitrogen fixing organisms havea relatively high requirement for molybdenum, iron, phosphorous, and sulphur, this quite
obvious.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:26)
And let us see what are three different fixation system. The three different fixation
systems are symbiotic fixation systems with legumes, then symbiotic fixation system
with non-legumes, and thirdly it is non-symbiotic fixation. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:39)
So,  what  is  symbiotic  fixation  with  legumes?  Plants  of  legume  family  that  is
Leguminosae  family  are  famous  for  their  distinctive  ability  to  provide  the  majorbiological sources of fixed nitrogen in agricultural soils. So, they are basically known for
their  biological  nitrogen  fixation  ability.  And  they  basically  do  that,  because  their
association with the several genera of bacteria, you know in the in the sub class of alpha-
proteobacteria  collectively  termed  as  rhizobial  bacteria.  And these  bacteria  includes
species in the genera basically rhizobium, then mesorhizobium, bradyrhizobium, and
ensifer.
So, the legume plants and rhizobial basically forms the relationship that is symbiotic
relationship, it is the mutual benefit relationship in which the host plants supplies the
bacteria with carbohydrate for energy, and the bacteria reciprocate by supplying the plant
with reactive nitrogen with which to make the essential plant compound such as protein
and chlorophyll. So, basically this is a symbiotic relationship, the plant supplies the
bacteria with carbohydrates for their energy, which is required to which is required for
breaking the dinitrogen. And also this bacteria will give them the plant, this reactive
nitrogen  which  is  required  for  their  production  of  their  proteins  and  as  well  as
chlorophylls.
So, in the conversion involving many specific signalling these conversion is a you know
it is a complex procedure, and it involves many specific signalling compounds. And the
rhizobial bacteria find and infect the legume plant root hairs and colonize in the cortical
cells and form root-nodules. So, these bacteria basically forms root-nodules in the in the
roots of the Leguminosae plant, and that serve as the site of nitrogen fixation. So, these
root nodules are basically the site for nitrogen fixation remember that. (Refer Slide Time: 22:39)
See you can see you know first in the first picture, you can see root nodules of sunhemp
or dhaincha you know you know used as a cover crop or for adding nitrogen into the soil.
So, root nodules of sunhemp as a cover crop to add nitrogen in soil. And the second
photograph, you can see cross section of nodule in a soybean plant. And it basically
shows a red colour of the oxygenated Leghaemoglobin.
And finally, you can see in the third picture you can see this single plant cell within
soybean nodules which you know shows that it is stuffed with the Bradyrhizobium
japonicum  bacteria.  And  remember  Bradyrhizobium  japonicum  responsible  fixing
nitrogen in association with soybean plant and you can see, these are the numerous
Bradyrhizobium japonicum bacteria. (Refer Slide Time: 22:43)
So, you can see some example these again the pea plant and you can see root nodules.
And this rhizobium leguminosarum nodules. So, pink colour in the leghaemoglobin a
protein that carries pink colour basically suggest the presence of leghaemoglobin, which
is a proteins that carries oxygen to the bacteroides. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:01)
And again this is again the soybean root nodules. So, these root nodules are the basically
the sides, where defer you know this nitrogen fixation basically takes place.(Refer Slide Time: 24:10)
So,  remember  that  specific  micro-organism  can  be  associated  with  specific  group;
specific plant for fixing these atmospheric nitrogen that means, these rhizobium, and
legumes symbiotic relationship is very very specific. A specific organisms can you know
form symbiotic relationship with a specific species. So, you can see here, just to give you
some example you know rhizobium lupine, it can produce the root-nodules in lupinus or
lupinis.
And as a rhizobium species, they can form produces stem nodules of sesbania rostrata,
these sesbania rostrata is actually the dhaincha. And you know mesorhizobium loti, they
forms this symbiotic relationship with lotus. And also you can see Bradyrhizobium
japonicum.  So,  Bradyrhizobium  japonicum  basically  you  know  helps  in  fixing  the
nitrogen in soybean or glycine max.
And so this you know rhizobium leguminosarum is responsible for fixing nitrogen in
case of peas and lentils. So, so bv phaseoli is responsible for fixing the nitrogen in case
of phaseolus spp, which is basically dry bean or string bean. And bv. viciae is responsible
for  you  know  peas  and  lentils.  So,  you  can  see  that  specific  micro-organism  is
responsible for fixing the nitrogen in specific host legume. So, specific host legume.(Refer Slide Time: 26:03)
So,  let  us  move  ahead,  and  see  what  is  a  symbiotic  fixation  with  non-legumes.
Obviously,  there  are  some  you  know  there  are  some  nodule  forming  non-legumes,
obviously there are 270 species of eight plant families that are known to develop nodules
and to accommodate symbiotic nitrogen fixation, when their root hairs are invaded by
soil actinomycetes. And these soil actinomycetes is basically from the genus Frankia.
And on a worldwide basis, the total nitrogen fixed in this way may even exceed that
fixed  by  agricultural  legumes.  Because,  because  of  their  nitrogen-  fixing  ability  of
certain tree-actinomycetes associations are able to colonize infertile soils as well as
newly formed disturbed lands, so which may have extremely low fertility as well as their
condition that limit the plant growth.
And remember that you know certain cyanobacteria are also knows to develop the
nitrogen-fixing  symbiotic  relationship  with  green  plants.  And  one  involves  nodule
formation on the stem of Gunnera, and angiosperm common in marshy areas of the
southern hemisphere and in this association, cyanobacteria of the genus Nostoc can fix
10 to 20 kg of nitrogen per hectare per year.(Refer Slide Time: 27:16)
And so let us see some nodule forming non-legumes. Some examples are given, you
know genus alnus, the myrica, then casuarina, and all these are nodule forming non
legumes ah. So, they form you know the nodules for fixing the nitrogen. 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:38)
And also symbiotic fixation with non-legumes, so fixation without legumes. So, let us
see fixation without legumes. So, among this  most  significant  non-legume nitrogen
fixation systems are those involving the cyanobacteria, among all the non-legumes. Themost  important  nitrogen fixation  systems  is  basically  occur  basically  occur  through
cyanobacteria.
And one system of considerable practical importance is Azolla, and Anabaena complex.
Now, azolla is a water fall, and anabaena azolla is basically a algae which and this azolla
and  anabaena  complex  or  you know  symbiotic  relationship,  basically  produces  this
biological nitrogen fixation. And it flourishes in certain rice paddies of tropical, and
semitropical areas. And the anabaena cyanobacteria inhabits cavities inhabit cavities in
the leaves of the floating fern azolla, and fix quantities of nitrogen which is comparable
to those of more efficient rhizobium legume complexes. So, it is very important.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:47)
And you can see here the Azolla-Anabaena complex, this in Azolla fern. And obviously,
at the bottom of the Azolla, you know these anabaena you know colonies can be found.
And basically this type of symbiotic relationship can be found in you know paddy soils,
and which is also responsible for fixing atmospheric nitrogen in this type of soils.(Refer Slide Time: 29:14)
So, non-symbiotic nitrogen fixation, certain free-living microorganisms also present in
soils and water, and also they are able to fix nitrogen. Because, this organisms are not
directly associated with higher plants, these transformation is referred to as the non-
symbiotic or free-living. And there are two types of non-symbiotic nitrogen fixation. One
is fixation by heterotrophs, and another is fixation by autotrophs.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:39)
So,  several  different  groups  of  bacteria  in  case  of  heterotrophs.  Several  groups  of
bacteria are known for non you know non-symbiotic nitrogen fixation examples areazotobacter, azospirillum, and beijerinckia. And in case of anaerobic condition also the
clostridium bacteria also known to fix the nitrogen. So, these organisms obtain there, you
know  carbon  either  from  root  exudates  or  in  the  rhizosphere  or  by  saprophytic
decomposition of soil organic matter, and they operate best where the nitrogen is limited
obviously. When the nitrogen is abundant why, they should fix the atmospheric nitrogen.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:14)
And fixation by autotrophs. Obviously, if the presence of light, certain photosynthetic
bacteria and cyanobacteria are able to fix carbon dioxide and nitrogen simultaneously.
And  the  contribution  of  photosynthetic  bacteria  is  obviously  uncertain,  but  that  of
cyanobacteria is thought to be some significant, especially in wet land in case of rice
paddies I have already told you. So, in some cases, cyanobacteria contribute a major part
of the nitrogen needs by the rice, but non-symbiotic species rarely fix more than 20 to 30
kg of nitrogen per hectare per year. (Refer Slide Time: 30:51)
So, here you can see the levels of nitrogen fixation from different systems, obviously
symbiotic you can see different symbiotic nitrogen-fixation, obviously they varies from
hundred to 500 kg of nitrogen per hectares per year. And you know in case of alpha alpha
you can see you  150 to 250.
So, the symbiotic nitrogen fixation is known to produce high amount of nitrogen through
symbiotic relationship. In case of non-legumes, obviously some little bit amount you can
see casuarina, there is producing 10 to 20 kg of nitrogen. And in case of azotobacter, and
azospirillum, they are producing obviously, less amount that is 5 to 30 kg of nitrogen per
hectare as well as cyanobacteria relationship they produce huge amount 150 to 300 kg of
nitrogen per hectare. And some in case of non-symbiotic bacteria like clostridium, they
produce 5 to they can fix 5 to 20 kg of nitrogen per hectare per year. (Refer Slide Time: 31:54)
Now, rhizobacteria, rhizobacteria are bacteria adapted to the life in the rhizosphere are
called rhizobacteria. And rhizobacteria that benefits the plant growth and developmental
known  as  the  plant  growth-promoting  rhizobacteria  PGPR.  These  are  very  very
important. And many PGPR bacteria belong to the genera of spirillum, rhizobium, and
azotobacter. And these microorganisms obtain their energy supply for their nitrogen
fixation from the exudates of plant roots. These microorganisms are nowadays a being
utilized in different formulation for application into the field, for you know for several
beneficial action, for the growth of the plant. 
(Refer Slide Time: 32:36)
And this might be you know couple of slides. So, the factors affecting nitrogen fixation,
obviously the natural population of the rhizobium is soil is too low to fix nitrogen. So, in
this condition, special mixture of the appropriate rhizobial bacteria may be applied in the
as an inoculant, either by coating the legume seed or by applying the inoculant directly in
to the soil. And the legume-rhizobium association generally function best on soil that are
not too acid. And the soil should be well supplied with essential nutrients, and have
sufficient amount of organic matter. And high amount of nitrogen sometimes in soil
inhibits the nitrogen fixation.
(Refer Slide Time: 33:18)
And  remember  that  one  thing  that  increasing  amount  of  nitrogen,  when  you  are
increasing the nitrogen fertilizer application, obviously the nitrogen fixed by nodulated
bacteria getting reduced. Although, the total nitrogen total nitrogen in the plants may
remain fixed. However, you know there is a decrease in the nitrogen fixed by nodulated
bacteria, when we increase the nitrogen fertilizer. 
So, guys we have covered the one of the major processes of nitrogen cycle that is
biological nitrogen fixation. Obviously, we cannot we cannot complete all the important
details the nodulation processes, which is very much intricate. And you know require
some complex signalling process, we did not have time to discuss all of these.
But, I hope that you got a basic idea about the biological nitrogen fixation, and I will
encourage you to go ahead, and you know you know consult several books to get a betterknowledge of in its of in depth knowledge of biological nitrogen fixation, because it is
very very important for soil and plant growth. So, guys thank you. And let us meet in our
next lecture with when we will start soil phosphorous and potassium.
Thank you.