Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 37
Soil Testing - II
Welcome to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology and in this lecture we will
be trying to finish this Soil Testing topic, which we have started in our last lecture. So, in
the last lecture, we have covered soil pH, soil electrical conductivity and the soil organic
carbon. Now in this lecture, let us start with the very important, that is available nitrogen.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46)
Now  guys,  you  know  that  available  nitrogen  is  basically  the  summation  of  both
ammoniacal as well as nitrate nitrogen. Because plant can absorb, plant can avail both
forms of nitrogen for their growth. Now, this measurement of available nitrogen in the
laboratory is basically based on the method given by these two scientist called Subbiah
and Asija in 1956. And now, remember that nitrogen availability to a plant depends on
mainly on its mineralization and therefore, available nitrogen is measured by measuring
amount of mineral inorganic nitrogen, that is ammonium and nitrate. 
And the principal is basically, a known weight of soil is treated with an excess amount of
alkaline potassium permanganate which extracts easily oxidizable fraction of organicmatter. And as a result, ammonia is evolved which is basically absorbed in a known
volume of a standard acid and the excess of that acid will be titrated against a standard
alkali using methyl red as an indicator. So, this is the simple principle of this method.
And so, this, you know, let us see: what are the reactions which are involved in this
method.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:21)
 (Refer Slide Time: 02:23)
So, here are different methods. So, the first step; obviously, you can see here. In the
alkaline medium which is basically created by adding sodium hydroxide, this is alkalinein condition, this potassium permanganate basically produce this manganese dioxide and
obviously, this nascent oxygen. And this nascent oxygen basically reacts with whatever
organic nitrogen fraction present in the soil. So basically, you can see this is the formula
of amino acids and from this amino acids they are releasing the ammonia. So, that is why
this process is called oxidative deamination because we are using oxygen here.
So, in the oxidative deamination process, ultimately we are releasing the ammonia and
remember that, this ammonia will be the source of both ammoniacal nitrogen as well as
nitrate nitrogen for the plant growth. So, we have to basically measure these evolved
ammonium. Now this ammonia will be further distilled to form ammonium hydroxide
and this ammonium hydroxide will be reacting or will be absorbed by a standard acid
that is H2SO4 to produce ammonium sulphate and this is called the absorption step. 
And in the final step, this unused H 2SO4 will be titrated against sodium hydroxide which
is another standard acid to calculate what the amount of unused H2SO4 is. So, when we
calculate the amount of unused H 2SO4, obviously, we can calculate the amount of used
H2SO4 and from that, we can calculate what is the amount of ammonia evolved and from
that, we can calculate the available nitrogen in the soil because all this, we know, by
weight. Now, this method is also known as Kjeldahl method and this total process in
some time is, you know, we execute through a flask called Kjeldahl flask or Kjeldahl
assembly. 
You can see here I have given here; obviously, this is a round bottom flask, we call it
Kjeldahl flask and in this Kjeldahl flask, we take first soil sample and then we mixed
with potassium permanganate and sodium hydroxide, obviously, and then we heated and
ultimately ammonia produced and this ammonia gets condensed within the condenser
and ultimately it absorbed within this known volume of a standard acid, in our case it is
H2SO4. So, after we absorb and after we collect this ammonia which is evolved from this
oxidative deamination, ultimately some amount of H 2SO4 will remain unused. So, we
will calculate this unused by using some titration against a standard alkali of sodium
hydroxide. So, this total process is also known as Kjeldahl process.
So guys, these are the available nitrogen steps; obviously, these are very important and
please  keep this as a ready reference if you want to do any future testing of soil.
However, I am not going to detail all these steps because it is not necessary at this pointof time and you do not need to remember all these steps for your exams and assignments
also ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:59)
So, let us go ahead and see what are the importants. Let us see about the, you know,
these are the calculation. So, I have already given the calculation. So, you can correlate
the previous slide with this slide and see how we calculate this available nitrogen first in
ppm and; obviously, this one point I would like to mention here. You can see first of all,
when we are calculating the percentage, suppose it is Y% and from Y% to ppm, we have
to multiply it to 1,00,000 to get Z. And finally, available nitrogen in soil is basically 2.24
multiplied by Z. So, this is very important, available nitrogen in kg per hectare, we have
to multiply by 2.24.
Now, the interpretation of this available nitrogen is, if we can calculate the available
nitrogen in kg per hectare which is the final value, is less than 272; obviously, it will be
low. The medium range is 272 to 544, that is medium. If it is more than 544, it is high.
So  basically,  the  interpretation  will  be,  when  the  soil  contains  medium  amount  of
nitrogen, we may not want to go for further application. In case of high, we should not
apply any further application because that will be toxic in nature and in case of low
condition only, we will be applying the nitrogenous fertilizers. So, this will be the final
interpretation.(Refer Slide Time: 07:36)
Now available phosphorus; obviously, phosphorus is one of the major plant nutrient
which plants uptake as primary and secondary orthophosphates. So, H 2PO4; obviously,
ions dominate in acidic range, that is, 4.0 to 7.5 while HPO 4 ions dominate in alkaline
range of pH, that is, 8.0 to 12.0. So, both these ions are present at around, you know, in
neutral condition. Both these ions are present in equal concentration at a, you know, just
like here mentioned that pH 7.2. These ions have equal activity and Bray and Kurtz
number 1 method is useful for acidic and neutral soil. So, we will be discussing this only
here.
However, remember that for alkaline soil, we will be it basically generally basically we
use another extraction which is called Olsen extraction. And so basically, now you can
understand why we measure pH at the first of any soil testing program because, it, you
know, it helps us to take some major decision for selecting the appropriate extracting
agents for subsequent nutrients.(Refer Slide Time: 09:06)
So, the principle behind this is you know that in the soil, phosphorus is basically fixed in
three major forms. In acidic soil, it is mainly fixed in aluminium phosphate and iron
phosphate and in alkaline soil, it is mainly fixed in as calcium phosphate. So, in this Bray
and Kurtz method which is useful for acidic soil, basically we shake the soil with an
extracting agent which is called Bray and Kurtz number 1 extractant.
So, what is the composition? The composition is basically 0.03 N of ammonium fluoride
in 0.025 N of HCl at pH 3.5. So, this is called Bray and Kurtz number 1 extractant and
how it helps? Because, it contains both ammonium fluoride and, you know, and HCl, It
basically dissolve the fractions of soil P that is aluminium phosphate and iron phosphate.
So, ammonium fluoride is basically responsible for dissolving the aluminium phosphate
and iron phosphate and HCl results in the dissolution of calcium phosphate in addition to
this; however, this is very negligible amount in this pH range.
So, this is the principle behind this Bray and Kurtz number 1 method. So, the preparation
of reagents: they have several reagents, you have to prepare like ammonium fluoride
first, then HCl 0.5 N, then you have to create the extracting solution, then you have to
create the Dickman and Bray’s reagent which is basically ammonium molybdate and
then you have to, you know, you have to prepare the stannous chloride because this is a
colouring reagent.And remember that, in this method basically when we extract the phosphate, we add
different types of, you know, we add the stannous chloride for development of a colour.
Generally in the presence of phosphorus, there will be development of blue colour and
the  concentration  of  blue  colour  will  increase  based  on  the  concentration  of  the
phosphorous which is present. So, the concentration of the phosphorus will be finally,
measured through spectrophotometry or colorimetry and we will discuss that later on.
So, in the spectrophotometer, we will create first a standard curve using some standard
phosphate solution and once you create the standard curve, from that standard curve we
will be calculating the phosphate concentration of an unknown sample ok. So, the steps
are given.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:11)
You have known the principal now. So, the steps are given with 5 gram of soil, you
know, you know how to extract and how to create the phosphate solution of known
concentration for the standard curve and how to create the standard curve.(Refer Slide Time: 12:22)
All these are given and how to measure the available phosphate; all these are given here.
So, please keep this as a ready reference for your future use.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:31)
Now you remember that, once we develop these, you know, colour, we have to use a
colorimeter  or  spectrophotometer  to  measure  the  concentration.  And  within  the
spectrophotometer  or  colorimeter,  we  use  a  monochromatic  light  to  measure  the
concentration based on Beers and Lambert’s law and what is Beers and Lambert’s Law,
we will discuss later on.(Refer Slide Time: 13:00)
These are the calculation, you do not need to remember all these things at this point of
time; however, you must remember that, whatever phosphate we get here available P
here in the soil is in kg per hectare; if you want to convert into P 2O5 which is the
standard,  you know, conversion  for measurement  of different  fertilizer  requirement.
Obviously, available P 2O5 you can see here, you have to multiply with these factors. So,
if you want to convert from P to P 2O5; obviously, you have to use this 2.29 to convert
into P2O5.
 (Refer Slide Time: 13:43)
What is the interpretation? Obviously, again based on the available P 2O5 in kg per hectare
so; obviously, when it is in-between 22.5 to 56, it is considered medium and when it is
less than 22.5, it is considered as low and when it is greater than 56, then it is considered
high. So, this is the based on these we will recommend whether your test soil has low
amount or medium amount or high amount of available phosphate.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:17)
 Now, you know, the final major or macronutrient is I would say final, you know,
primary nutrient I would say is potassium and available potassium is also very very
important  for measurement  of the soil fertility  status. So, potassium is abundant in
nature; however, plant available potassium is always limited. You know that there are
four  major  pools  of  potassium  occuring  in  soil  out  of  which  only  exchangeable
potassium at clay sites and potassium in soil solutions are available to plants. We have
already discussed it in our previous lecture.
Now the principle of potassium measurement is the available potassium in the soil is,
basically we extract using a neutral normal ammonium acetate extractant because the
ionic diameter of potassium and the ammonium is almost similar. In case of potassium, it
is 0.233 nanometre where in case of ammonium it is 0.286 nanometre. So, both of them
can  easily  replace  them  self.  So,  ammonium  can  easily  replace  potassium  in  the
exchange site clay and release them into the solution. So after extraction, potassium thatis,  solution  plus  exchangeable  potassium,  generally  we  measure  through  flame
photometer.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:46)
Flame photometer basically we generally basically used for measuring the potassium and
it works on the emission spectrometry principle and the sample basically we introduce
into the flame at a constant rate and filter selects which colour of the photometer detects
and excludes the influence of other ions. And when potassium in the solution is excited,
the electrons from outer orbital of potassium goes to the higher energy states for fraction
of a second and when it returns back to stable state, it releases the energy which is a
specific.(Refer Slide Time: 16:23)
So, this is the principle. Now for that again, you have to create a measurement of
potassium, you have to again create a standard curve of minimum five points and then
you have to prepare the reagents. Here all this procedure is given.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:37)
 (Refer Slide Time: 16:39)And finally, the available potassium recommendation will be, you know, low, medium,
high you can see. If it is varying from, it should be 136 to 337.5, then we call it medium
and when it is less than 136, we will call it low. When it is greater than 337.5, we will
call it high. So, these are the different grades of available potassium in, you know, in kg
per hectare.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:17)
Now, before we discuss in details about, you know, about the flame photometry which is
based on, you know, atomic emission spectrometry, let us discuss about colorimetry.
Now colorimetry we basically use for measuring the concentration of phosphate andcolorimetry  basically  depends  on  some  principle  of  relationship  between  percent
transmittance and light path length and concentration.
 (Refer Slide Time: 17:54)
So, let us first see what is the basic parts of a colorimeter, then it will be lot clear to us.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:08)
So, if we go back and see what is the component of a colorimeter. So, in the colorimeter,
first of all there will be a light source and from that light source, there will be a further a
collimator or lens which will basically, you know, align on the light source directly into
the monochromator which is prism or grating. And from that monochromator prism orgrating, that will grate the light and finally, there will be a wavelength selector which
will select only a particular wavelength; that is why we call it monochromatic radiation.
Now this particular wavelength will go through a particular sample.
So, for example, we have extracted the phosphate and we have developed, we have
extracted the, you know, soil phosphorus and then we have developed the intense blue
colour by adding the stannous chloride. Now for measuring the concentration of that blue
colour or the phosphate, you have to basically take that solution into a cuvette which is
basically quartz or, you know, fibre made container transparent container. And then
basically what you have to do? You have to basically we are taking the sample solution
here.
So, the monochromatic radiation is going through the sample solution. So, I 0 is basically
incidence radiation and I t is basically transmitted radiation and ultimately finally, there
will be detector. At this detector we will finally, digitally display the result or basically
this photocell will convert this, you know, the intensity of the radiation into electrical
energy. So, that is why that is how a, you know, a colorimeter works. So, that is why we
generally, you know, add different solutions here and based on their concentration, we
will get their different transmittance or absorbance ok.
Now, what  is  the  basic  principle  behind  this?  What  is  the  basic,  you know, basic
principle which governs this colorimetry? This is governed by Beers and Lambert’s law.
So, let us see what Beers and Lamberts law is. Let us go back. So, the colorimetry says
this  is  the  relationship  between  the  length  of  the  solution  or  path  length  and  the
percentage  transmittance.  So  obviously,  as  the  length  increases  the  percentage
transmittance decreases exponentially. Similarly if the concentration increases, then the
percentage transmittance decreases exponentially. 
So, transmittance, you know, it is I t / I0 which is transmittance reaction by intensity of the
of the incidence radiation which is generally we can denote by this, where alpha is an
extinction constant and c is the concentration and I is the light path length, sorry, l is the
light path length. So, you can see now one thing is very very clear that depending on the
path length; that means, the width of that cuvette and concentration of the chemical
which is present within that cuvette, this transmittance will vary. So, what we are doing?
So,  the  observance  is  basically  increases  linearly  with  concentration.  So,  as  theconcentration increases; obviously, it will absorb more light and it will transmit less
amount of light.
So, here it is called the Beers, ok. So, when it is depends on the length; obviously. So,
when it depends on the length only, then we call it Lambert’s law and when it depends
on the concentration, we call it Beer’s law. Now in case of cuvette, you see, we are only
changing the concentration of the liquid inside the cuvette because the path length is
always fixed because the cuvette size is almost fix. So, if we combine both beers and
lamberts law, then we are only varying the concentration by keeping the length of the
Lambert’s; keeping the length of the, you know, path as constant.
So, that is why we call it Beer’s and Lambert’s law. So, you can see here we are taking
the log of I0 by It and then you can see, it is αcl and then it is log 10. Converting into log 10,
we are getting ε and then c l. So, here basically the beers lamberts law says that A equal
to  absorbance  will  be  equal  to  the  equal  to  or,  I  am  sorry,  absorbance  will  be
proportionate to the concentration and length. So, this is the combination.
So, in the Beer’s and Lambert’s law; obviously, when we are applying this Beer’s and
Lambert’s law to colorimetry or colorimeter, we are nullifying this l and we are only
playing with this c that is the concentration inside the cuvette. So, that is why we
measure the concentration, that is how we measure the concentration of the liquid inside
the cuvette and that is why we measure the concentration of phosphate. So, basically we
will take some standard solution and using the standard solution we make a standard
curve because we know their we know their.
So, for example, if you if you if you take 0 ppm and then for example, 1 ppm, 5 ppm, 10
ppm  up  to  100  and  then  we  get  their  absorbance;  obviously,  as  we  increase  the
concentration, their absorbance will increase. So, we will draw a standard curve and
from the standard curve, if there is an x sample for which we do not know.
So, we will extract that using the standard process and then we will use this standard
curve to get the concentration from here. Because we will be getting the absorbance
directly from the colorimeter and by plotting that, you know, absorbance value, we can
directly measure the concentration. So, this is the basic principle behind, you know,
behind this colorimetry. (Refer Slide Time: 25:33)
So,  another  important  thing  is  flame  photometer.  Now  using  the  flame  photometer
basically we measure sodium, potassium, lithium and calcium. And basically this flame
photometer it is a control flame test with intensity of the flame colour quantified by
photoelectric circuitry. Remembered that, it works on at emission spectroscopy and the
sample is introduced to the flame at a constant rate and the filter selects which colours of
the photometer. So, the basic principle is first of all we take the extracted, first of all we
will  take  the  extracted  solution  which  contains  the  potassium  ions  in  the  extracted
solution.
So, there is an aspirator here you can see, this is an aspirator. So, this aspirator will suck
this solution and inside a chamber, it will create an aerosol and for creating the aerosol
you need some kind of air. So, air is inserted from outside through this air pump and
from  this  air  pump,  it  will  we  create  an  aerosol.  And  this  aerosol  will  be  further
vaporized, you know, in contact with a flame and there will be a flame inside and the
flame will be and the fuel for this flame is basically LPG or liquid petroleum gas.
So, using the flame energy, this aerosol will the potassium which is present in the
aerosol, will be going from, will be showing some thermal dissociation in flames. So, it
will be, you know, if there is any electrons which is present in the ground states, it will
be go to the exciting states. And then form the excited states when it will revert back to
again its ground states, there will be some amount of energy in, you know, in the form oflight. And the particular wavelength of this emitted energy is basically very very specific
for a specific element. So, by measuring that particular, you know, concentration of that
or intensity of that emitted light, we can measure what is the concentration of that
particular element within the solution. So, this is how a flame photometer basically
works. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:11)
So, for individual, you know, element the emitted wavelength range is different. You can
see in case of potassium its 766, in case of lithium it is 670, calcium 622, sodium 589,
barium 554 and; obviously, observed colour of the flame will also vary depending on the
different elements. So, that is how it measure different these important elements using
this flame photometry method.(Refer Slide Time: 28:46)
So, if you see the inside, you know, the schematic of in, you know, of the inside view of
a flame photometer; obviously, you can see there is a nebulizer or aspirator which will
aspirate. And, further it will mix and there is a mixing chamber and in the mixing
chamber, it will create the aerosol and mix and further this will go to the burner. So, this
is the burner and there is a gas inlet so, there will be a flame.
So, ultimately  it will go to the flame  and take the energy and finally,  the emitted
radiation  will  be  goes  will  be  going  through  this  lens  and  this  filter  and  finally,
photodetector. And this photodetector will ultimately convert this electrical, sorry, this
light signal into electrical signal through amplifier and read out. So, this and waste
material will be going through this waste U tube. So, this is the inside view of a flame
photometer.
So, I hope you guys you have learnt something new in this lecture and we will be
stopping here and in the next lecture we will be still couple of slides are left for soil
testing. So, I will be trying to finish; wrap up those slides in the next lecture first and
then we will go to a new topic.
Thank you very much.