Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 39
Soil Organisms
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology. And in this lecture,
we will be trying to finish this soil organic matter, and then we will be discussing about
the Soil Organisms. So, obviously in the last lecture we if we remember that we talked
about different types of organic matter decomposition, how organic matter decomposed
based on the organic matter quality, then we talked about different pools of soil, different
pools of carbon, and then, you know, how organic matter forms.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37)
So, let us starts from here. And in this, in this in this slide, you can see the soil organic
matter distribution. Obviously, if you see the top, you know, at the top layer of the soil,
the concentration or the amount of organic matter is always higher as compared to the
subsoil. So, as we go down from top layer to sub soil layer, obviously the organic matter
percentage of organic matter always goes down. 
And if you see the, you know, organic matter, obviously these hydroxyl groups, and you
know acidic groups are there, and these groups basically undergoes dissociation, andbasically they attract these positive cations. So, we will discuss in details later on. So,
this is just an, you know, this just gives an idea about how these organic matter attracts
different types of cations onto their surface. So, distribution of organic matter depends
from, it varies from one soil to another soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:51)
So, let us talk about the humus. Now, humus is a complex and resistant mixture of brown
and dark brown amorphous and colloidal organic substances that results from microbial
decomposition  and  synthesis  and  has  chemical  and  physical  properties  of  great
significance of soil. So, it is we have already discussed that humus is a more resistant
product; it is developed from different types of microbial decomposition. And you can
see here, this is a three-dimensional view of a humus molecule which is very very
complex.
And one other, you know, another simplified diagram showing the principal chemical
group, which is responsible for high amount of negative charge on humus colloids. If
you remember humus in case of humus, the CEC is quite couple of folds higher than that
of the CEC of clay. So, obviously you can the three groups, we can see here are basically
carboxylic group, sorry, basically carboxylic group, and then phenolic hydroxyl group,
and alcoholic hydroxyl group. So, and also the dissociated forms are given here. So, you
know this dissociated you can see, they are negatively charged. And as a result, they can
attract these positively charged cations. And also some positively dissociated charge inwhich can attract the negative, you know, the anions also, so that is the large, you know,
you can see that is why it can absorb a large amount of plant nutrients for maintaining
the soil fertility. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:35)
So, what is basically, you know, this humus is composed of. So, the humic groups. If you
if you see humic substances are aromatic type of structures, and the humic substance are
classified. If you break down a humus, we will get basically three types of humic
substances. One is called humic acid, another is called fulvic acid, another is humin. And
these substances are classified based on their resistance to degradation and solubility in
acids and alkali. So, we will see that later on. (Refer Slide Time: 04:19)
Again humic acid, fulvic acid, and humin; so, what is humic acid. The fraction of the
humic substances that is not soluble in water under acidic condition that is pH less than
2, but is soluble in a higher pH values. And they can be extracted from soil by various
reagents and which is insoluble in dilute acids. So, again remember that humic acid is
insoluble in acidic condition less than pH 2, however it is soluble in alkaline condition. 
The second important component is fulvic acid. And the fraction of humic substances
that is soluble in water under all pH condition, and they remain in solution after removal
of the humic acid by acidification. So, the fulvic acid is basically soluble under all pH
condition, whereas humic acid is only soluble in the higher pH values. And third one is
humin. The fraction of humic substances that is not soluble in water at any pH values and
in any alkaline or in alkali. So, humins are black in colour. 
So,  remember  that  the  low-molecular-weight  fulvic  acid,  the  fulvic  acid  has  low
molecular weight. They have high oxygen, but lower carbon content than high molecular
humic  acid.  And  fulvic  acid  contain  more  functional  groups  of  an  acidic  nature
particularly  acidic  group. And  the  total  acidity  of fulvic  acid  is  900 to 1400 milli
equivalent per 100 grams. And are considerably higher than that of humic acid which has
only 400 to 870 milli equivalent per 100 gram. 
So, another important difference is that while oxygen in fulvic acid can be accounted
largely in known functional groups, that is acidic group, phenolic group, and carbonylgroup, a high portion of the oxygen in humic acids  seems to occur in a structural
component of the nucleus. So, these are some important features of these fractions.
Obviously,  again  humic  acid  is  insoluble  in  acidic  condition,  soluble  in  alkaline
conditions. Fulvic acid is soluble in all the condition, insoluble fraction is called humin,
and it is black in nature. Fulvic acid contains more oxygen containing group more acidic
in nature. And humic acid contain more carbon content, and it is more molecular weight,
it is having more molecular weight.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:47)
So, this slide shows that what are the different features of this humic fraction. So, if you
can see, the fulvic acid are light yellow to yellow brown in colour, humic acids are dark
brown to grey black in colour, and humin is black in colour. So, obviously if you go
from fulvic acid to humic acid, increasing the intensity of the colour you can see here.
So, when we are going from fulvic acid to humin humin, obviously you can see the
intensity  of  the  colour  increases.  Also  increase  in  the  degree  of  polymerization
obviously, fulvic acid is simpler, however humin is much more complex. 
And then increase in molecular weight obviously, it is quite understandable, because
fulvic acid is low molecular weight, and increase in carbon content, decrease in oxygen
content. So, remember fulvic acid contains more oxygen containing functional groups.
And then decrease in exchange acidity, and obviously decrease in degree of solubility,
because fulvic acid is soluble in all condition. Humic acid is soluble in only alkalinecondition, humin is insoluble. So, this shows a very good comparison of these three
fractions. And obviously, these are humic acids of peaty sandy soil, and, you know, these
are electron-microscope view of these humic acids. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:17)
So, let us see how we can separate these humic fractions. So, this soil from the soil
organic matter, we can separate these humic fraction based on their solubility. So, if you
start with the soil organic matter, let us first, you know, treat with the alkali. So, it will
separate the humic substances which will be soluble, and humin, and non-humic matter
which are basically insoluble. 
So, in the first step basically humin and non-humic matter are separated from humic
substances. In humic substances contains both humic acid and fulvic acid. So, in the
second step, when humic substances is react is mixed with the acid, obviously the fulvic
acid will be soluble. However, humic acid will be insoluble, because we know that
humic acid cannot be soluble in acidic condition. 
So, this fulvic acid which will be soluble, then if we can adjust the pH to 4.8 obviously
that  will  be  separated  into  fulvic  acid  which  is  soluble,  and  beta  humus  which  is
insoluble and humic acid which was insoluble with acid reaction. If we reflex that with
the alcohol, it will convert into two major fraction. One is hymatomelanic acid which is
soluble, and another is insoluble humic acid. Now, this insoluble humic acid, when we
treat with neutral salt it will again further divided into soluble brown humic fraction, andinsoluble  grey  humic  fraction.  So,  you  can  see  how  based  on  the  solubility,  these
fractions are separated from soil organic matter. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:53)
So,  there  are  three  different  foom,  you  know,  there  are  different  humus  formation
theories obviously. The lignin theory which was given by scientist Waksman in 1936;
then Kononovas theory, and then polyphenol theory which is the recent one given by
Flaig and Sochtig in 1964. So, these theories basically show basically tells us about how
this humus form formation takes place. 
So,  according  to  lignin  theory,  humic  substances  are  formed  due  to  incomplete
degradation of lignin. And Kononovas theory says that humic substance are formed by
cellulose  decomposing  mycobacteria  earlier  to  lignin  decomposition.  Whereas,
polyphenol theory says that as per this theory, the humic substances are formed from the
condensation of the phenolic compounds. 
And  the  polyphenols  of  lignins  are  oxidized  to  quinones.  And  these  quinones  are
condensed with low molecular weight microbial products to form humic molecules. And
the  microbial  product  are  amino  acids,  nucleic  acids  and  phospholipids.  So,  these
basically three theory shows the pathway through which these humus basically forms ok.(Refer Slide Time: 11:05)
So, what is the influence of organic matter into the soil, why we are studying this organic
matter, because, you know, dark, you know, organic matter is dark in colour. So, dark in
colour will facilitate soil warming. And also it will improve the physical condition of the
soil, because divide of organic matters soil will be physically less I mean less I would
say that when the soil contains more amount of organic matter, the soil aggregation
formation is much more. And as a result, soil physical condition is improved. 
And also soil, you know, these organic matter is a reservoir of plant nutrients because of
high amount of charge which develops over its surface. The clay-humus complex has a
better buffering and the exchange capacity and also organic matter can form stable
complexes with some metals, and influences their availability to the plants by forming
some chelated compounds.
And biodegradation of different chemicals like pesticides through the interaction with
organic matter is an important phenomenon in relation to the human and animal health,
we have already discussed it in our previous lectures. So, the organic matter is huge
important as far as the soil physical, chemical, and biological properties are concerned.(Refer Slide Time: 12:25)
So, how we measure the soil organic matter, obviously we talked about this Walkley and
Black method in our soil testing lectures. And, but remember that this Walkley and
Black method, we can measure up to 6 percent of soil organic matter. When it is more
than 6 percent of soil organic matter, generally we prefer two methods. One is called LOI
or loss on ignition method, we call it Loss on Ignition method given by two scientist
called Nelson and Sommers in 1996, which basically, you know, tells the what is the
what is the, you know, it basically gravimetrically measures the loss of carbon when we
put a known weight of soil within an oven, and, we know, we oxidize all the carbon at
high temperature. 
So, when the all the carbon which is present in the soil get oxidized to carbon dioxide
obviously, there will be difference in the weight. And this weight difference will be
measuring and gravimetrically, it will calculate the soil organic matter. And finally, CN
analyser  this  is  an  advanced  method  Carbon  Nitrogen  Analyser.  And  generally  in
advanced, you know, soil testing lab, we use that and it is very very precise.(Refer Slide Time: 13:57)
So, the so the working principle of CHN analyser in a there is a sample holder. And there
is an ignition chamber, we incorporate oxygen through it. So, the sample is injected here
there is a pre-packed column.
And ultimately the sample the carbon, which is present within the sample get to co
oxidized to carbon dioxide, and this carbon dioxide move through these GC or gas
chromatography column. And ultimately it is detected through TCD detector a thermal
conductivity detector, and it will give the spectrum of the compounds, and from that we
can calculate the concentration of carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen ok. So, this is the
principal of the carbon CHN or both are same CHN and CN analyser. (Refer Slide Time: 14:51)
So, how to manage the soil organic matter? Now, there are several ways to manage the
soil organic matter. First of all, the conservation tillage is one of the important aspect.
Then providing the cover crops, then crop rotation, crop residues applying, and then
nutrient management, organic amendment, commercial humates; all these are different
management strategies for maintaining the soil organic matter.
Obviously, conservation tillage helps in maintaining the soil organic carbon, because you
know they less disturb the soil. Then cover crops, crop rotation, crop residues, all these
add organic matter into the soil. And then organic amendments like different types of
organic manure, when you apply different types of bulky organic manure, concentrated
organic manure when you apply that also adds to the soil organic matter. (Refer Slide Time: 15:45)
Now, what is the implication of soil organic matter in the climate change. Now, if you
see here, this  is the proportion  of the gases responsible for the global warming  or
greenhouse gas effect. So, obviously carbon dioxide is responsible for a large portion of
it apart from nitrous oxide, methane, and fluorine gases.
So, soil of basically cultivated land is the major source of these gases, because when we
cultivate the soil, it exposes the soil. And whatever carbon is present that will exposed,
and that will be oxidized by, you know, by the oxygen which is present in the air. And
ultimately, this carbon will, you know, will be released into the atmosphere in the form
of carbon dioxide. 
So, it is clear that among the many strategies, sequestering more carbon into the soil
under crop lands and grazing lands and restoring formerly drained wetlands are the three
most  important.  So,  again  sequestering  carbon,  so  this  is  very  important.  Carbon
sequestration what is carbon sequestration, carbon sequestration means we will prevent
the movement of carbon from soil to atmosphere. So, how could you do that? So, another
one way is to conservation tillage. So, in the conservation tillage, we are not exposing
the soil. So, as a result the carbon oxidation and formation of carbon dioxide is reduced.
So, it is a one of the strategy of, you know, of this carbon sequestration.
And that fortunately, these measures are quite feasible as their implementation would not
only reduce greenhouse gases, but also they improve the soil quality and provide thebenefits of enhanced soil function and productivity to the owners. So, these are some
strategies, and remember that that is why soil carbon sequestration is very very important
nowadays ok. So, we have finished this soil organic carbon lecture. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:45)
Let us go ahead, and start soil organism guys. In this lecture, we will be covering these
following concepts. What are the different types of soil organisms, and then role the
roles of these soil organisms, then classification of soil organisms, and different types of
soil organisms. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:01)
So, soil organisms are the, you know, the basically if we consider the soil, the soil is
having abundant and millions and millions of living organisms which makes it a living
and dynamic system. And these organism not only help in development of the soil, but
also carry out a number of transformation facilitating in the availability of the nutrient to
the plant. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:29)
As you have I have we have already discussed in case of nitrification process. Say for an
example,  in  case  of  nitrification  process,  it  is  mediated  through  different  types  of
microorganisms. The ammonification is mediated by microorganism. The decomposition
of  organic  matter  is  mediated  by  microorganisms,  because,  you  know,  it  requires
extracellular enzymes for oxidations. And, you know, for oxidation into carbon dioxides,
so if you remember those things. So, all these are very very important.
Now,  this  role  of  microorganism  in  soil  fertility  is  first  of  all  if  they  helps  in
decomposing  the  organic  matter,  and  also  plant  nutrient  transformation  through  for
through maintaining different cycles like nitrogen, sulphur, all these cycles. And then
soil organisms are also useful for the preparation of different bio-fertilizers and compost,
we will discuss compost too. And these bio fertilizers and compost will help in building,
the soil fertility or increase the soil fertility for better crop growth. So, these are very
very important, these without these microorganisms, the soil would be literally a dead
system. (Refer Slide Time: 19:39)
So, what are the class what is the classification of soil organism. So, organism in soil can
be broadly classified into soil flora and soil fauna. Now, soil flora and soil fauna, we
should, there should be a discontinuity here. So, basically organisms are, you know, soil
flora. The soil flora is again divided into micro flora and macro flora. And within the
micro flora and macro flora, the in case of macro flora, that is the plant roots and macro
algae are there. And in case of micro flora, bacteria, actinomycetes, fungi, and algae are
important. 
And in case of soil fauna, there are some macro fauna and micro fauna. And in case of
macro  fauna,  obviously  earthworm,  termites,  ants,  grubs,  slugs,  snails,  centipedes,
millipedes are important. And in case of micro fauna obviously, protozoa, nematodes,
and rotifers are important. So, you can see here basic overview of the soil organism
classification ok.(Refer Slide Time: 20:47)
So, what is the size, relative size differences of these organisms? So, you can see if we
consider sand, silt, and clay obviously, the sand is the coarser portions. So, vertebrates
here, so earthworms are in the sand, arthropods, obviously nematodes. Then protozoans,
you know, comes in between then plant roots, then fungi, algae, bacteria, archaea, and
viruses.
So, remember that viruses are the most minute fraction, and in the soil micro flora,
obviously bacteria are the smallest organisms ok. So, algae and algae comes in between
bacteria and fungi, and in between algae and bacteria, there is also actinomycetes.(Refer Slide Time: 21:39)
So, let us start with the macroorganisms in the soil. So, the macro organisms in the soil
include different different organisms like acari, like collembola, like, you know, like
isopoda, then amphipoda, earthworm and so on so forth. So, a population estimation is
highly difficult as they are not uniformly distributed. So, the population is lesser than the
microorganism. Remember that, in the case of macro organism their population is lesser
than the microorganism. And why they are very very useful? They are very very useful,
because they help in mixing, churning, and fragmentation of the plant materials which
accelerates  the decomposition process, because for decomposition we need to break
down the soil organic matter first. 
Secondly, they forms burrows and tunnels which increases soil aeration and drainage, so
that is also important, because without the, you know, presence of oxygen, this oxygen,
you know, organic matter decomposition does not take place. And they also ingest the
soil into the guts of the earthworms, and you know and they converted into a worm cast,
we call them mull humus, other name is vermicompost we will discuss that. And they
also feed on microorganisms including plant pathogens. So, these are some of the, you
know, utility of these macro organisms. (Refer Slide Time: 23:03)
So, let us start with the earthworms. Now, earthworms can be of two type. One of this
one  is  called  epigeic  type  of  earthworm,  another  is  endogeic  earthworms.  Epigeic
earthworms are surface feeders, so they remain on the surface feed on the surface litters.
Endogeic are feed on the different materials within the soil. 
The geophagus species of earthworms, you can see this is an epigeic earthworm, and
these are the burrows made within the soil by endogeic earthworms. So, the geophagus
species of earthworms is, you know, ingest materials per day which is 5 to 36 times of
their body weight. And the worm cast, they create is rich in nitrogen, phosphorus,
calcium, and the casting rate is 2600 tons per hectare per year. So, it is a huge amount of,
you know, cast worm cast they produce per year, which further helps in building the soil
fertility status.
So,  earthworm-worked  soils  are  generally  have  high  porosity,  high  water  holding
capacity, then water infiltration rate, water stable aggregates, and different nutrients you
can see. The burrows which are made and these are helpful for water movement, and also
they helps in aggregation of the soil. And the earthworm increases the surface area, and
the availability of organic matter for microbial action by mixing it thoroughly within the
soil.  So,  these  are  some  activities  of  the  earthworms,  beneficial  activities  of  the
earthworms. (Refer Slide Time: 24:41)
Another important is vermicompost, we will discuss vermicompost details in the next
lecture. So, earthworms are being used for hastening the decomposition of the farm
produce and waste for composting, and the product is called the vermicompost. And the
species  which  are  generally  used  for  vermicompost  are  Eisenia  foetida,  Eudrilus
engeniae, and Perionyx excavates. Eisenia foetida is reported to be the more efficient
than  others.  So,  you  can  see  this  is  the  vermicompost  which  is  made  through  the
earthworms, we will be discussing this vermicompost later on. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:33)
Termite, termite also disturb the soil while preparing the nest. So, they are also important
for water and air movement within the soil. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:35)
Plant roots, they are macro flora. Plant root exert a physical pressure on the soil particles,
you  know,  influencing  their  aggregation.  And  also  the  environmental,  you  know,
remember  that  rhizosphere,  this  is  very  important  term.  So,  this  rhizosphere  is  an
environment under the influence of the roots. So, this is very important habitat for
microorganisms.
And  also  the  root  produce  different  types  of  chemicals  like  exudates,  secretions,
mucigels,  lysates,  which  are  also  like  helpful  for  different  types  of  nutrient
transformation,  at  different  and  accelerating  different  bio-chemical  processes.  So,
because of these chemicals  a different  types of niche is formed in the rhizosphere.
Remember  rhizosphere is  very  very chemically  active  and biologically  active  zone,
where different types of nutrient transformations are going on. (Refer Slide Time: 26:27)
So, let us start with the bacteria. Now, bacteria is the smallest and most numerous of the
organism present in the soil. And they are having different types of shapes like spherical,
known as cocci, you know, you know, spherical, cocci, rod-shaped, you know, bacillus,
and spiral-shapes are known as spirilla. 
And  common  bacterial  genera  found  in  soil  are,  you  know,  pseudomonas,  then
arthrobacter,  clostridum,  bacillus,  achromobacter,  micrococcus  and  agrobacterium.
Remember that I have highlighted this bacillus, because this is the most abundant soil
bacteria you can see here bacillus here. And followed by pseudomonas, pseudomonas is
the second most abundant bacteria in this soil, and this clostridum is strictly anaerobic.
Now, apart from this soil bacteria also, the soil also contains some other bacterias like
bdellovibrio,  myxococcus,  and  polyandium.  And  these  genera  help  to  maintain  the
biological population by keeping a check on the growth of the other bacteria. So, this is
very very important for maintaining the biological equilibrium within the soil. (Refer Slide Time: 27:47)
So, what are the roles of bacteria in the soil, obviously you know that nitrogen fixation is
an important role. You have already, you know, we have already discuss about the
rhizobium, and how they fix atmospheric nitrogen, then phosphate solubilisation, organic
matter decomposition, synthesis of humus, nitrification, denitrification in water-logged
soil,  protein  decomposition  ammonification,  transformation  of  various  macro,  micro
nutrients in the soil. So, all these are very, you know, mediated through bacteria in the
soil. So, these are these are very very important, you know, activities of the bacteria. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:21)
The second important is actinomycetes. Now, taxonomically actinomycetes are in the
evolutionary face between bacteria and fungi, because they are called fungi like bacteria,
because they are like bacteria which possess aerial hyphae like fungi. So, you can see
here strands of actinomycetes. Now, they are generally found in dry soils, and common
genera  found  in  soils  are  Streptomyces,  micromonospora,  nocardia,  thermo-
actinomycetes. Remember that the population of actinomycete is high in compost pits. In
fact, they are the highest, you know, microorganism highest population microorganism,
which are present in compost pit. And they are nutritionally heterotrophic and tolerant to
high temperature.
And they play the most important role in humus formation, and pigmentation of the
humus.  And  they  cannot  compete  with  bacteria  and  fungi,  so  they  grow  on  such
substances  which  are  not  decomposable  by  bacteria  and  fungi.  So,  these  are  some
important points of actinomycetes remember that streptomycetes. Streptomyces is a most
important soil actinomycetes, and they are the most abundant soil actinomycetes.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:41)
So guys, so let us wrap up here in this soil microorganisms. And in the next lecture, we
will start we will we will try to finish this soil microorganisms as well as we will talk
about the composting methods also.
Thank you.