Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 32
Soil N
Welcome friends to this new topic of the week 7 lectures and today we will be starting
about, we will be starting Soil Nitrogen. We will discuss about different processes of soil
nitrogen. So, let us start and let me show you what are the different concepts, we will be
covering in this lecture.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:35)
First of all we will see importance of nitrogen , then we will see different forms of
nitrogen and then, we will see the nitrogen cycle and different processes which are
involved in a nitrogen cycle and finally, we will see the fate of nitrogen in soil.(Refer Slide Time: 00:53)
So, let us start with the nitrogen importance. So, why the nitrogen management is
important? Now, you know that the nitrogen is an integral part of amino acids and
chloroplasts and nucleic acids. So, it is an integral part of you know of you know it is of
protein which is building block of any biological organisms and it hugely impacts the
world ecosystems obviously . 
So,  imbalance  of  nitrogen  cycle  basically  leads  to  the  global  warming  and  ozone
depletion because, of the formation of the nitrous oxide and we will discuss why nitrous
oxide forms basically nitrous oxide forms due to the process of denitrification . We will
see that process later on. So, remember that nitrogen is very very important because, you
know without nitrogen the you know the plant body cannot be constitute .(Refer Slide Time: 01:47)
So, influence of nitrogen on plant growth you can you know see you know based on the
abundance of nitrogen in the plant . We can divide their status as nitrogen deficiency ,
optimal nitrogen and excess of nitrogen . So, obviously in case of nitrogen deficiency you
will see chlorosis condition that is in case of older lower leaves , they are turned you
know pale, they are turned yellow in colour. So, we call it chlorosis and we have seen the
you know we have seen the chlorosis in our previous lecture and also it will show the
stunted growth and it will give the less protein and more sugar ,  mature quickly than
healthy plants. 
And finally, it will give the premature senescence which is the ageing of the plant and so;
these are the deficiency symptoms of the nitrogen for the plant body. However in case of
optimal nitrogen, you will see that they are deep green leaves and increased vegetative
growth and you know they are more protein content and finally, you will see that more
grain  yield.  So,  this  basically  indicates  the  optimal  nitrogen  content  and  excess  of
nitrogen that is also harmful. So, when the deficiency is also harmful and excess of any
particular element is harmful.
So, when there is an excess of nitrogen , you will see some deleted effects on the plant
health that is excessive vegetative growth and you will see weak plants and subsequent
lodging of the plants , delayed maturity, then healthier plants and harmful build up ofexcess nitrogen in tissues. So, these are the different effects based on the nitrogen content
in the plant.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:50)
So, let us see some pictures of let us see some photos. So, you can see that chlorosis of
older leaves in corn. So, obviously the nitrogen deficiency will be seen in the lower
leaves and it will turn yellow. So, we call it chlorosis of leaves and you will also see the
stunted  growth  and  in  case  of  excess  nitrogen, obviously  there  will  be  excessive
vegetative growth and weak plant s. 
As a result when there is you know when there is a wind blow or any you know
automatically the plants will lodge and we can see here lodging of the paddy due to
excessive vegetative growth. So, this is also harmful for the growth of the plant. So,  we
can see the two extent conditions when in one case there is nitrogen deficiency and in
another case there is a excessive nitrogen. (Refer Slide Time: 04:46)
What are the different forms of nitrogen ? Obviously, you can see there are two major
forms of nitrogen plant can uptake ; one is ammonium and another one is nitrate. So,
these are inorganic forms. So, available forms are basically ammonium and nitrate and
ammonium uptake lowers the rhizosphere pH. I already told you in my week 6 lectures
that whenever the plant will uptake ammonium and they will release the they will release
the protons to  balance, these nutrient imbalance to balance these transfer of  nutrients,
transfer of ions and as a result there will be lowering of the p H because uptake of
ammonium again will release the H plus and these H plus is required for soil acidity.
So, soil acidity will increase when there will be ammonium uptake with the rhizosphere
region, however the similar the voice you know the opposite effect is found in case of
nitrate. So, obviously when there is a nitrate removal or when there is a nitrate uptake ,
obviously you will see the opposite effect. So, there will be there will not be any
reduction of pH. So, dissolved organic compounds also supplying you know nitrogen in
organic forms and among these various forms uptake depends on their availability and
the crop. We will see that later on.(Refer Slide Time: 06:28)
So, let us see what are the different organic nitrogen pool. So, if you see there is a total
organic nitrogen, total organic nitrogen has two different other pools also . One is called
the  SON;  another is called the  DON. The  SON basically denotes the  Soluble  Organic
Nitrogen and DON basically denotes the Dissolved you know Organic Nitrogen.
So, the soluble organic nitrogen basically portion of organic nitrogen which can be easily
extracted using salt solutions like KCl or water and the DON is basically the portion of
soluble organic nitrogen present in salt solution and drainage waters and reasons they are
basically these DON is the reason for inherent fertility of some forests and basically they
are  easily  leached.  So,  there  is  a  potential  state  for  environmental  you  know
environmental contamination specially in downstream areas. So, you can see these two
nitrogen  organic  pools , however  again  remember  for  plants  the  essential  forms  are
ammonium and nitrate.(Refer Slide Time: 07:38)
So, what are the different you know you know in if you if you consider the terrestrial
ecosystem and marine ecosystem , what are the different pathways of nitrogen transfer ?
You can see some anthropogenic courses are you know anthropogenic causes are given
here.  And anthropogenic causes for nitrogen fixation , you know nitrogen addition are
industrial nitrogen fixation obviously  and then agriculture nitrogen fixation and then
fossil fuel burning.
So, all these are anthropogenic causes and also there is a natural nitrogen fixation. So, all
these are inputs of nitrogen, however nitrogen in the atmosphere basically goes in the
form when the denitrification takes place. So, denitrification is basically conversion of
nitrate into gaseous nitrogen by different micro organism specifically in the anaerobic
condition.  We  will  discuss  that  in  detail.  So,  denitrification  basically  converts  the
inorganic form of nitrogen ultimately to the gaseous nitrogen. So, these gaseous nitrogen
ultimately release into the atmosphere. So, this is called the denitrification process and
also, there is a marine denitrification and marine nitrogen fixation.
So, all these process are occurred you know all these process are occurred in terrestrial
ecosystem  basically  soil  ecosystem  as  well  as  marine  ecosystem.  So,  this  is  very
important to learn these dynamics while you know study the soil nitrogen cycle.(Refer Slide Time: 09:14)
So, this is the soil nitrogen cycle or nitrogen cycle in nut shell. So, please understand in
very very carefully and you can see here first let us start with the plant. So, when the
plant dies, their bodies are plant residues will basically decompose and they will go
towards this organic nitrogen . As a result of decomposition , all the organic nitrogen
which is present in the plant body will be released and these organic nitrogen will
ultimately immobilization in the form of you know they will basically mineralise to form
mineral forms of nitrogen. So, the first mineral form of nitrogen from organic nitrogen is
ammonium and this ammonium will further you know you know in the process of
nitrification in the process of nitrification, it will convert into nitrate and the opposite
process of conversion of this mineral ammonium to the organic forms of nitrogen is
called immobilization.
So,  again  first  of  all  the  when  the  plant  dies , their  plant  residues .  As  a  result  of
decomposition, organic nitrogen will generate and these organic form of nitrogen will
further you know convert into the ammonium for m. We call it mineralisation and this
conversion  of  organic  form  into  inorganic  form  is  called  mineralisation  and  this
ammonium form will further convert into nitrate form in the process of nitrification and
the opposite of conversion of ammonium the opposite process that is conversion of
ammonium to organic form is called the immobilization.Now, this nitrate nitrogen is highly mobile with water , so highly soluble. So, when it is
highly soluble, it is also there is also chance of losing this nitrate by the leaching process
and leaching is basically downward movement of you know water dissolved dissolving
in different salts. So, this nitrate will dissolve easily in the in the in the water and it will
leach  down  and  further  in  the  anaerobic  condition .  These  nitrate  will  convert  into
atmospheric nitrogen . You can see here it is converting into the atmospheric nitrogen
here  to  the  process  of  denitrification  and  this  denitrification  occurs  in  anaerobic
condition. Also these nitrate can you know removed from one place to another place in
the through the process of run -off and erosion.
Now, these atmospheric nitrogen , these atmospheric nitrogen you know we can use that
for industrial fixation in the case of different producing , different commercial fertilizers.
So, when we produce some commercial fertilizer , we add. You know  one of the major
ingredient is nitrogen gas and this nitrogen gas is basically coming from atmosphere
nitrogen. So, it is one is it is a way of industrial nitrogen fixation and ultimately these
commercial fertilizer who will ultimately goes to these ammonium pool because it will
react with the soil and ultimately goes to the ammonium pool.
Remember that from this ammonium pool and nitrate pool, these two will go to for plant
uptake because plant only can take this to forms of nitrogen . Another important aspects is
in the you know sometime this ammonium also release into the atmosphere to the
volatilization process. So, this ammonium ion will convert to gaseous ammonia as this
gaseous ammonia will go to the atmosphere and finally, it will reach the atmospheric
nitrogen.  So,  this is called  the  Volatilization  process  or  Ammonium  Volatilization
process. When the crop is getting removed and after the harvesting , this is another way
of loss.
So, basically and the so I have covered all of them. So, you know  some of them are here
so, atmospheric nitrogen  so  atmospheric fixation and depositio n. Obviously, when the
atmospheric nitrogen is mixed with some water vapour and produces some you know
some nitric acid and ultimately deposits into the soil to form different in the form of acid
rain that is also atmospheric fixation and deposition.Animal manures and bio solids also are organic forms of nitrogen . They will come after
decomposition, they will come to this organic nitrogen form and then further it will
continue this way and the biological nitrogen fixation by legumes is another way through
which they can fix this legumes crop basically fix atmospheric nitrogen to different
organic forms. So, again this is a nitrogen cycle . The blue are the basically the inputs. So,
you can see the industrial fixation by producing by application fertilizer plants , plant
residues, biological nitrogen fixation , animal manure and these atmospheric fixation and
deposition are the inputs.  
Different  types  of  lightening  effects  also  helps  in  this  atmospheric  fixation  and
deposition and these red blocks are basically different types of losses like leaching is a
permanently leaching is a kind of loss , denitrification is a loss to the atmosphere , run off
erosion is an loss. Obviously, volatilization is further a loss and crop harvest. So, all
these are loss and forms are given in this green cell you know oval shape oval shape
form.
So, you can see atmospheric nitrogen is one of the form and then , ammonium nitrate and
organic nitrogen are the other forms. So, basically these are the snap shots of nitrogen
cycle. Nitrogen cycle is more complex , however you can basic idea about the different
processes which are going on in the soil nitrogen by just looking at this cycle diagram.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:45)
So, so what are the different fate of nitrogen in the soil ? Obviously, these ammonium and
you  know  and  nitrate  they  are  they  are  converted  into  different  forms  based these
processes. So, immobilization we have already told that immobilization is a conversion
of ammonium nitrogen to organic form of nitrogen. So, inorganic to organic form of
nitrogen and ammonium also get you know up taken by rice plant. So, it is a you know
plant uptake is a fat e. Obviously, anammox we will discuss that later on.
V olatilization  is  a  conversion  ammonium  to  ammonia  gas  and  then , nitrification  is
obviously conversion of ammonium to nitrate and fixation several clay minerals also fix
these ammonium ions and that we will discuss later on. In case of nitrate,  obviously, this
nitrate  is  immobilization  because  the conversion  of nitrate form  to organic  form is
immobilization plant uptake . Plant you know loves this form and they uptake this nitrate.
Anammox process that we discuss later on.
Denitrification is a conversion of nitrate to atmospheric nitrogen or gaseous nitrogen in
the anaerobic condition . Dissimilatory condition is another way of nitrate conversion and
finally,  leaching which is  the  removal of nitrate  through water downwards  the soil
profile. So, these are basically given the snapshot of different pages of these two you
know available forms of nitrogen and we will discuss them one by one.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:25)
So,  let  us  start  with  the  immobilization  and  mineralization.  The  mineralisation  and
immobilization basically conversion of organic nitrogen form to inorganic forms and
vice versa. So, when the organic form of nitrogen converted to the inorganic form of
nitrogen, then  we  call  it  the  mineralisation  and  the  opposite  process  is  called  the
immobilization and these two processes are basically radiated by various microorganisms
which are present in the soil and specially the bacteria and net nitrogen depends on
carbon nitrogen ratio.
So, let us see the conversion of different mineral of different forms of nitrogen. So, R
NH 2 basically denotes the organic forms of nitrogen or amino acids. So, you can see this
RNH 2 further getting you know breaking down into ammonium and then some alcohol
and these you know ammonium further oxidized to produce nitrite and this nitrite further
oxidized to produce nitrate.
Remember this, the conversion of ammonium to nitrite and the nitrite to nitrate is known
as the nitrification process. So, this is the nitrification process . We call it as nitrification
process and the conversion of organic form of nitrogen to inorganic forms of nitrogen is
called  the  mineralisation  process  and  immobilization  process  is  the  conversion  of
inorganic forms to organic forms.
Remember that the CN ratio that is carbon to nitrogen ratio is very very important for
maintaining these or determining which will dominate which process will dominate ,
whether the mineralisation will dominate whether the immobilization will dominate .
Remember that generally the optimum CN ratio is considered  20 to 25 is to 1. So, where
the CN ratio goes below 20, then mineralization is I am sorry when the CN ratio goes
below 20 mineralisation is pre-dominant and when the CN ratio is where beyond 20 to
25, then we call it when we will see that immobilization will dominate. So, why they
dominate we will discuss later on.(Refer Slide Time: 19:58)
So, importance of carbon nitrogen ratio, now let us see what see what is the direct
impact. Now, this  CN ratio  has direct impact on residue decomposition and nitrogen
cycling.  So,  optimum  CN ratio  for  maintaining  the  biological  activity  of  the
microorganism is generally  20 is to 1 because all these conversion that is mineralisation
or immobilization or nitrification depends on microbial or microorganism activity.
Now, basically the optimum nitrogen or CN ratio for maintaining their activity is 20 to
25 is to 1. Sometime you will find it 20, and in some books you will get it 25. So, either
is fine. So, remember that these ratio if there is a ratio 20 is to 1, that means the 20 units
of carbon per units of nitrogen. So, suppose there is a there is a n element, there is a
residue plant residue which has CN ratio less than 20 is to 1, suppose 10 is to 1.
So, that means there will be mineralization. Why there will be mineralization? Because
all the microorganisms will eat away these carbon first because carbon is present in
lower quantity as compared to nitrogen and then , they will release the unused or excess
nitrogen to get decomposed further. So, as a result there will be mineralisation and when
these ratio below C below carbon nitrogen ratio is greater than for example 80 is to 1
which we find in case of straw rice straw for example .
So, when we add this rice straw which have which is having higher  CN ratio, then
microorganism you know will immobilize the nitrogen in their body. So, there will be aconversion of ammonia , conversion of inorganic forms to organic forms. So, again this
optimum CN ratio is 20 to 25 is to 1. Higher the ratio, longer the time for decomposition
and vice versa and hence the higher CN ratio results in immobilization. So, if you want
to enhance the rate of decomposition , we must add substance which is having lower CN
ratio than 20 is to 1, ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:41)
So, ammonium fixation within the clay minerals you know that ammonium being a
positive ion also attracted to the clay surface because it generates the negative ions ,
negative charge in the clay surface ,  however due to its size it is trapped on the non -
exchangeable sites and you can see here the silica layer is denoted by these and also , this
is aluminium hydroxyl layer that is silica tetrahedral layer aluminium octahedral layer.
So, these two silica tetrahedral layer and this is the one aluminium octahedral layer and
these fixed ammonium in illite. 
So, due to the small , due to the size it trapped in non -exchangeable sites and it happens
mainly in the 2 is to 1 type of clay as their ionic radii allows them to feet exactly space
and a slowly reserver is basically created with release rates slower than the rate of
fixation and it basically effects the indigenous nitrogen supplying the capacity of the soil.
So, you can see that this a fixed ammonium is basically at the intelliar space because the
inter layer space is quite small . It is if you remember illite the inter layer space is dominated by the potassium and it is
basically collapsed. So, that is why illite is called the non -expending two to one mineral
and only the ammonium can feet in that small space because ammonium has the similar
ionic radii as that of potassium. So, you can see the ammonium can get fixed in the inter
layer space also.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:32)
So, what is ammonia volatilization ? Well when ammonia when there is a high level of
pH, then  the  pH the  high  pH drives  this  reaction .  For example,  you  can  see here
ammonium ion is reacting with hydroxyl and to produce the water and this ammonia
which is escaping to the atmosphere. So, when there is a high p H in the soil, these drives
this reaction to the right and ultimately it produces the ammonia which is further released
to the atmosphere. So, this is called Ammonia volatilization and volatilization results in
losses of valuable nitrogen. 
So, this is one of loss of nitrogen and high temperature and less clay content also speed
up the volatilization loss of nitrogen. So, how we can prevent volatilization loss of
nitrogen? We can apply fertilizer at certain depth rather than at the surface , so that it
cannot direct came come into contact with these hydroxyls and also irrigating the field
when fertilizer is applied to the surface. So, these are some ways through which we can
prevent the volatilization ammonia volatilization process.(Refer Slide Time: 25:51)
And  the  this  graph  basically  shows  the  relation  between  the  ammonia  you  know
volatilization loss of ammonia and days after application and you can see as the and also
basically shows the affect of irrigation on ammonia volatilization. So, you can see when
you give more and more irrigation , obviously the loss of ammonia will be less . As you
can see here the lowest ammonia released in case of this solid blue line because we are
adding highest amount of irrigation water that is 21.6 millimetre of irrigation water. So, it
basically shows the effect of irrigation on reducing the ammonia volatilization. So, it
basically justify the solution which we discussed in our last line a nd also we can see here
the effect of pH and temperature on ammonia volatilization.
So, basically you see that when with the x axis we are putting days after urea applied to
soil surface which is a nitrogenous fertiliser and nitrogen volatilised as ammonia in the y
axis, you can see as the temperature increases from 7 to 16 to 24 to 32, obviously the
nitrogen volatilization  loss  increases  and here you can  see also with  the with  the
decrease in pH here it is 7.5, then 6.5, then 5.5. So, obviously this higher p H condition
that  is  alkaline  condition  basically  favours  the  nitrogen  volatilisation  or  ammonia
volatilisation, however the acidic condition lowers the ammonia volatilisation.
So, guys we have covered some basic process of nitrogen transformation and we have
discussed about the nitrogen cycle and important process. And in the next lecture , wewill  try  to  finish  this  and  we  will  try  to  cover  all  the  other  important  nitrogen
transformation  processes, nitrification and then denitrification, anammox and  so on so
forth.
And thank you and let us meet in our next lecture of week 7.