Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 36
Soil Testing – I
Welcome friends to this week 8 lectures of Soil Science and Technology and in this
week, will be covering some very very important topics of soil science and technology.
We will be starting with Soil Testing which is one of the most important aspect of soil
and then, we will be talking about soil organic matter and then, we will be talking about
soil organisms and composting and all this kind of important issues.
So, in this first lecture of week 8, let us start with the soil testing. And in this, you know,
soil testing, basically we will be covering what is soil testing first, then collection and
processing of soil samples and then, soil testing for pH and electrical conductivity and
then, testing for soil organic carbon and then major nutrients as well as soil testing kit.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:08)
So, we will be covering, we will be trying to gain a basic overview of all these aspects in
this topic of soil testing.(Refer Slide Time: 01:33)
So what is soil testing basically? So, soil testing is an acceptably accurate and rapid soil
chemical  analysis  for  assessing  available  nutrient  status  for  making  fertilizer
recommendation. And you know, whenever you want to do any recommendation for a
farmer; in other words, you want to check the soil fertility status; that means, the soil is
fertile or non fertile, you have to analyze the soil. And for analyzing the soil, this soil
testing method basically analyze the available nutrients as you have already known that
available nutrient is that fraction of the total nutrient which governs the growth and yield
of crops.
So  basically,  it  is  measuring  the  available  nutrient  status  for  making  fertilizer
recommendation. And the major steps in the practical soil testing are basically, first of all
soil sampling. This is the most important step and then preparation of the soil samples
and  then,  extraction  or  analysis  of  available  nutrients  by  an  appropriate  laboratory
method. We will be discussing that. And finally, interpretation of soil analysis data.
So, this is also very very important and sometime we skip that, you know, but remember
that this is the most, one of the most important step and you know by excluding this
interpretation of soil analysis data, soil testing is incomplete. So, let us go ahead and see
the first step, which is soil sampling.(Refer Slide Time: 03:16)
Remember, the soil sampling is one of the major source where most of the error occurs.
So, we have to be very very accurate while collecting the samples because we want to
collect some samples which is a true representative of a particular field. We should not
take some samples which are not representative of the field.
So, I will discuss some of the, you know, cautions which you need to take care of while
collecting the samples, but before that, let us see what are the different types of tools. So,
you can see here there are different types of tools like khurpi, auger, spade, post hole,
you know, diggers, hydraulic core samplers and all this kind of things. So, you can see
here, there is a spade and there is a handled auger. Auger is a specialized kind of
instrument for soil sampling and there are different types of auger depending on the soil
types. Some are, you know, some augers are made for hard soil, some augers are made
for very clayey type of soil. So, depending on the soil texture and soil condition, these
augers can vary.
So, remember that, how many soils you know. So, first question comes in our minds. So,
for soil testing, how many soil samples should we take? So, general rule is generally for
1 hectare of area, we take around 20 soil samples. So, generally, we do not take any soil
sample from recently fertilized plot and then, bunds and channels and, you know, marshy
tracts where the water is stagnant and then near area, you know, near area trees and thenwells, compost piles, border areas etcetera because if we collect the soil sample from
those area, they will not be true representative of the soil fertility.
So, how to collect the soil sample? Obviously, you can see here, we are taking some
zigzag  pattern  while  collecting  the  soil  sample  because  we are  trying  to  cover  the
heterogeneity of soil fertility which is present inside the soil, in the field, because soil is
very very heterogeneous. So, one portion of the soil of a particular space may vary in
their fertility status from a soil which is very near to it. So, we must cover the hole in a
zigzag pattern so that, we can get a representative soil sample. So, this is the rationale
behind the zigzag soil sampling.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:50)
Now, soil sampling must be true representative of the field or the part of the field being
treated because we can see, there are three different, you know, three different soil
sampling scheme has been given. Now the scheme A is random, scheme B is zigzag
which I have already talked about. So, this A and B schemes are basically we generally
use for field up to 1 hectare of area. However, when the field is around 15 to 16 hectare
of area, we will go for the scheme C which is called the sub sampling of a large field.
So, what we do? We generally, you know, generally take some, you know, nearby
samples for a particular spot. We first select some particular spot and near this particular
spot, we collect some 4 to 5 samples and then, we make a composite soil sample. So, this
type of scheme is useful when the area is the very very large.(Refer Slide Time: 06:53).
So, what is the depth of the sampling? Now the question comes what is the depth of the
sampling. Well, it also depends on the type of the crops which are grown in that field,
because you can see here in this table that, for cereals, vegetables and seasonal crop,
generally depth of sampling varies from 0 to 15 centimeter. So, we generally collect the
soil for most of the field crops from 0 to 15 centimeter depth.
However, in case of deep rooted crops and in case of longer duration crops like cotton,
sugarcane, banana and then, we know, vegetables etcetera, we generally, you know,
sample should be collected from different depth depending on the situation. For example,
in case of plantation or fruit crops, we generally take from 0 to 30 centimeter or from 30
to 60 centimeter or 60 to 90 centimeter and 4 to 5 pits dug in generally half hectare of
area. 
And in case of saline alkali soil, which is a problematic soil, we have already discussed it
in our previous lecture; we generally go for 0 to 15 centimeter and for grasses and, you
know, grassland area we generally go for 0 to 5 centimeter. So you can see, depending
on the crop which is standing or which is grown in that field; obviously, the sample
depth or sampling depth generally varies.(Refer Slide Time: 08:24).
So, what is the procedure of collecting the sample? This is very very important. Now the
first process is to remove all the surface litters, grass, debris etcetera from the sampling
points. So, first you have to decide a sampling point and then you remove all the debris
which is present on the surface. Now; if you have auger, you can see here, I have put
some examples of augers. 
So, these are different types of augers you can see. So, these are called tube augers. So,
you can see here in the second picture here, this is called tube auger and we are inserting
the tube auger and there is an another auger called, you know, screw auger. So, screw
auger is very very helpful in case of hard soil. So, you can see, in case we have augers,
we can drive the auger to a plough depth which is 0 to 15 centimeter and to draw the soil
samples.
So, when using the auger we are collecting 10 to 15 samples from each sampling unit or
in sampling point and place in a bucket or tray and mix it thoroughly. So, this is one way.
The most popular way is when you have a spade instead of auger. Now using the spade
what you do? You do a V shape cut just like this and up to 50 centimeter of depth
because we are concerned about the field crops at this point of time. 
So, once you get this plough, you know, V shape cut up to this plough depth of 15
centimeter, then you remove a thick slice. You can see here thick slice you know fromtop to bottom of the exposed face, that is, the thickness of the slice should be 2.5 to 3
centimeter. It is around 1 inch.
So, you take the slice of the soil which is 2.5 centimeter to 3 centimeter of the V shape
cut and place in a clean container. Now collect the soil at one place and then mix
thoroughly by hands and spread on a paper. As you can see here, we are spreading on the
paper and then, you know, spread on a paper with a clean plastic sheet and make 4
quarters. As you can see, we have made 4 quarters. 
So, once you make 4 quarter, remove the opposite 2 quarters. So, you are removing this
one and this one and retain the other 2. just like here you can see here. We are removing
this and retaining these 2. So, and we have to repeat the process until we got 500 grams
of samples.
So, once you get 500 grams of samples, we will go ahead and we will dry the soils in
shade and we will then, you know, powder it through different methods. We can either
uses some mortar pestles to grind the soils or we can use some mechanized soil grinding
machine  to grind the soil and after grinding  the soil, we will sieve it through a 2
millimeter sieve because you remember that by the definition of soil, soil is a material
which has, you know, particle size of less than 2 millimeter. So, the highest particle in
case of soil is sand and this is the highest particle size with 2 millimeter. So, less than 2
millimeter will collect. So, this is the representative soil.
So, once we collect the soil remember that, we have to put them into the plastic bag and
clearly label because if the label is missing, then the total process will be meaningless.
So, you have to clearly label all the information. First of all, the name of the farmer and
the particular identification of that field and if possible, then we will take a GPS reading
which we are taking right now in India and also we will be taking, we will be writing
down the name of the previous crop and the crop which the farmer wants to grow in that
field and all this important stuff you have to write down. So that, it will be useful for
future  recommendation  purpose.  So,  this  is  the  process  of  soil  collection  and  soil
preparation.
 (Refer Slide Time: 12:45)So, let us see some photographs of the soil collection a soil preparation. As you can see,
first of all, we are removing the surface litter and then, you can see here, you know,
sample collected using a v shaped cut here; you can see this is a v shape cut and
obviously, sample is thoroughly mixed then and then divided into 4 compartments, then
opposite 2 compartment discarded and sample labeled and packed. So, these are the step
by step process  of collecting  and processing the  soil  sample  before we go for the
standard analysis.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:17)
So, while collecting the samples, we have to keep couple of things in our mind. First of
all, the best time for sampling is before sowing and or planting. So, each sample shouldhave a label describing the field identification, farmers name and address, previous crops
and the crop for which nutrient recommendation is sought I have already talked; I have
already told you that. And for soil sampling, special augers with a core diameter of 1 to 2
centimeter are convenient, but the small spades can also be used. In any case, a uniform
slice of soil should be taken from top to bottom of the desired sampling depth. Now this
is called GPS receiving unit.
Nowadays, we also use this GPS receiver unit for collecting and, you know, the GPS
points and GPS basically we will collect, we will have a full lecture on GPS in coming
weeks; however, you know this GPS basically collects the geographical position of a
particular point. 
It can be measure the latitude, it can measure the longitude of a particular point and
sometimes, it measures the elevation from the mean sea level. So, using this GPS, we
clearly mark down any soil sample and we can repeatedly go to that soil sample location
after certain period of time to take further sample from that particular spot. So, that is a
beauty  of  using  GPS.  So,  GPS  clearly  marks  the  samples  and  clearly  gives  it  a
geographical context. So, let us see.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:02)
So, we have collected the samples and we have processed the samples. So, let us see
what  are  the  important  soil  testing  parameters.  So,  in  the  laboratory  generally,  we
measure soil pH, soil electrical conductivity, soil organic carbon, soil available nitrogen,soil  available  phosphorus,  soil  available  potassium  and  then  available  calcium,
magnesium and sulphur and available micronutrients. So, these are the general, you
know, soil testing parameters.
However, in a routine soil testing laboratory you will see that, they are going for soil pH,
EC,  soil  organic  carbon,  N,  P,  K  and  it  requires  specialized  kind  of,  you  know,
instruments  for  measuring  the  available  micronutrients  like  atomic  absorption
spectrophotometer or ICP spectrophotometer. And also, available calcium, magnesium,
sulphur is also done in some special cases. So, generally for, you know, in the normal
soil testing labs in India, they generally go and, you know, measure these first six
important parameters. ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:19)
So, once we collect the samples, the next step we the process the sample, the next step is
to  measure  it  through  some  standard  methods.  And  remember  that,  for  all  these
macronutrients and micronutrients like available nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and
then different micronutrients boron, molybdenum, we have to make sure that we will be
extracting all the nutrients in the extracting solution and using that extracting solution
further, we will measure their concentration.
So, the step is, basically the idea is, the soil basically attract or adsorb these cations and
anions on their surface due to different types of charge and bonds. So, these cations and
anions have to come into the solution before they can be measured through differentinstruments. Now, for releasing those anions and cations into the soil solution or into the
extracting solution, we need to use certain kind of extractants or chemicals.
So, there are different types of chemicals based on different types of parameters. So, you
can see here, I have listed couple of them. So, for available nitrogen, we generally use
alkaline potassium permanganate extractant and for available phosphorous, we generally
use,  mostly  we  use  two  methods  based  on  the  soil  pH.  So,  first  of  all  is  sodium
bicarbonate for neutral or alkaline soil.  We call it Olsen method. Another is call the
Bray and Kurtz 1 method. So, it is useful for acid soils. 
And for available potassium, we will be using neutral normal ammonium acetate. And
for  micro  nutrient,  we  will  be  extracting  the  micronutrient  basically  zinc,  copper,
molybdenum and iron using DTPA method. DTPA is a chelating agent and the full name
of DTPA is diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid and for boron, we extract using hot water
and in case of molybdenum, we use Grigg’s reagent which is basically ammonium
oxalate of pH 3.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:32)
So, these are some well-known extractants which generally, you know, scientists use in
the soil testing lab to extract different nutrients, whether they are macronutrients or
micronutrients. Now let us start, you know, let us start discussing the major parameters
which most of the soil testing laboratory do in our country or in India. Let us start with
the soil pH.So, we will  be basically  covering  soil pH, soil electrical  conductivity,  soil  organic
carbon, then available N, P, K. We will not cover, you know, micronutrients extractions;
however,  we  will  be  showing  you  some  advance  methods  for  measuring  the
micronutrients.  So,  the  soil  pH  is  basically,  you  know, the  acidity  or  alkalinity  or
neutrality of a soil which is measured using, you know, proton concentration or H+ ion
concentration. 
So, as you know that pH is basically negative logarithm of hydrogen ion concentration.
And principle says that when, water is hydrolyzed, it produces 1 proton and 1 hydroxyl
group. And obviously, this K w is basically 10-14 for pure water at 25° C where K w is
basically the ion product of water. So, for water, the concentration of H+ and OH- are
basically equal because water is neutral. So, H+ concentration will be equal to OH- and
this is equal to 10-7.
So, pH of water is always 7 because it is neutral, but whenever pH of any soil or any
material goes beyond 7, it is alkaline or below 7, it is acidic in nature.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:34)
Then let us see how we measure the soil pH. So, generally we measure the soil pH in the
lab using a pH meter. So, you can see here, you know, I have shown here a pH meter.
Now pH meter basically has two electrodes. One is called reference electrode, another is
called standard electrode. Now the pH meter, basically we submerge it into the soil water
solution. How we create the soil water solution? We will discuss. So, this beaker  is basically  containing  the soil water solution and basically  we are
dipping this pH meter. Now in the pH meter, you can see it is basically glass electrode.
So, it is basically a very very thin glass membrane which is very much sensitive to H+
ions. So basically, this is proton selective electrode and which is surrounded by a, you
know, reference electrode with a fiber salt bridge and this reference electrode and this
glass membrane electrode basically combines together to measure the soil pH.
Now, the difference in H+ ion concentration between soil suspension and glass electrode
gives rise to an electrometric potential. When we dip this electrode into the soil water
suspension, there is a potential difference which develops between these glass membrane
electrode  and  the  reference  electrode  and  which  basically  generates  a  electrometric
potential  and this  potential  is  measured  and  converted  to the  pH  units.  So,  this  is
basically in short form or in a simpler form, it is basically the principle of measurement
of soil pH.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:36)
Now these are some steps of measuring soil pH; obviously, pH meter is first calibrated
using a known pH solution and we call it buffer. Generally we use three buffer for
calibrating the pH meter. That is, pH 4.0, pH 7.0 and pH 9.2. And then, what you do?
We create a 1:2.5 soil water suspension by mixing 10 gram of water with 25 ml of
deionized water, then we mix well with, you know, with glass rod and allow it to stand
for 30 minutes with intermittent stirring. And then, we can stir the suspension every 10minutes during this period. Now, after 1 hour, we have to further stir the suspension and
then we will take the reading and if there is a change in the ambient temperature,
obviously, temperature correction has to be made.
 (Refer Slide Time: 23:33)
So,  once  we  get  the  pH  value  directly  from  the  pH  meter,  the  next  step  is  the
interpretation. Without interpretation, you know, soil testing is incomplete. So, you can
see soil pH, they have divided into different pH ranges starting from extremely acidic to
very and strongly alkaline and you can see slightly acidic and neutral range basically
they are saying that the neutral range is 6.6 to 7.3. So, it varies from extremely acidic
condition to very strongly alkaline condition and there is some intermediate grades;
obviously.
So,  depending  on  in  which  range  your  tested  soil  pH  comes,  you  will  basically
recommend, you will basically identify whether the soil is alkaline or acidic or mildly
alkaline  or  mildly  acidic  and  based  on  that  you  will  give  the  recommendation.
Obviously, if you remember our soil acidity lecture, if the soil is acid, we will go for
lime application. If the soil is alkaline, we will go for Gypsum application.(Refer Slide Time: 24:45)
The  next  important,  you  know,  parameter  is  electrical  conductivity.  An  electrical
conductivity is the capacity of soil to conduct the electricity. So, basically, you know,
since ions basically contribute to electrical conductivity and EC basically tells us about
the salt concentration of the soil. So, basically soil contains some salts and these salts
basically contain several ions and electrical conductivity is maintained through ions
movement. And so, this is how, this is why it is called the electrical conductivity and
electrical  conductivity  we generally  measure  in  terms  of, I am  sorry; the electrical
conductivity basically represent the soil salinity.
Now these are again the steps of soil salinity measurement using conductivity meter.
Now you can see here, I have shown here one conductivity meter. Here again, we have to
make 1:2 soil water ratio and then, you know, the suspension is to be mixed occasionally
for 30 minutes and then conductivity meter has to be immersed and reading is taken and
then temperature correction has to be applied. So, all these steps are important.(Refer Slide Time: 26:04)
And basically, finally, the interpretation says that when the electrical conductivity is
greater than 4 dS/m, it will be saline soil and when it is less than 4 dS/m, it will be non
saline soil. So, this is the final interpretation.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:20)
Now, third important and one of the most important is soil organic carbon. Now soil
organic carbon basically we measure through a method given by two scientists called
Walkley and Black in the year 1934. And basically, the principle of this method is
basically,  when a known weight of soil is treated  with excess standard K 2Cr2O7 orpotassium dichromate in the presence of concentrated H 2SO4, soil organic carbon is
oxidized to carbon dioxide. And the excess of K 2Cr2O7 which is not reduced by SOC is
titrated back against standard ferrous ammonium sulphate in the presence of sodium
fluoride or H3PO4 using a diphenyl amine indicator. So, it is very very simple.
Remember, a soil contains high amount of organic matter, soil contains, you know, I am
sorry, varying amount of organic matter. Especially in Indian soil, it is very very low.
So, when we treat a known, you know, weight of soil with concentrated H 2SO4 at excess
of standard K2Cr2O7. Basically they are oxidizing agents. So, they basically oxidize
whatever carbon is present in the organic matter in the soil and ultimately they generate
carbon dioxide.
So, obviously, when this carbon will be oxidized, this K 2Cr2O7 will be reduced. Now, the
excess of K2Cr2O7 which still remains and is not reduced, we have to calculate that by
using titration against a standard ferrous ammonium sulphate and for that, we need, we
know, we need an indicator for indicating the color change that is diphenyl amine and
there should be H3PO4 also. So, this is the soil organic carbon measurement protocol, you
know, principle.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:27)
And this is the reaction which is involved. So, you can see here K 2Cr2O7 and H2SO4
basically reacts with the carbon to produce the potassium sulphate and then chromic
sulphate and finally, water and carbon dioxide.So basically, these are the oxidizing agent then, these carbon gets oxidized and this
K2Cr2O7 is basically reduced to K 2SO4 and then, you can see here in the titration step,
basically  ferrous  ammonium  sulphate  is  acting  to  this  ultimately  producing  the
ammonium sulphate and then ferric sulphate and water. So, this is the reaction in a
nutshell for this organic carbon.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:17)
And these are the steps of measurement of organic carbon. I am not going to detail all the
steps. Just I am putting this in the slides to, you know, for your ready reference in the
future.(Refer Slide Time: 29:31)
Just to know that, I have, I just need to mention a couple of important points; in this
slide, basically, the soil organic matter calculations are given. So, you can easily see how
we calculate the soil organic matter. Just remember, after we calculate the percentage of
organic carbon using this method. Suppose it is a X. This Walkley Black method has
average of 77% recovery. So, it cannot go for 100% recovery. So, when we go for 77%
recovery, the correction factor obviously, will be 100 over 77 that is 1.3. So, percentage
of organic carbon is, or true percentage of organic carbon or corrected is X into 1.3
which is now denoted by R.
Now once you calculate the percentage organic carbon, how to get the organic matter
percentage? Remember that organic matter contains 58% of carbon. So, if you see 58%
of carbon and if you see, so 100 by 58, you will get 1.724 and this is why, to get the
percentage of organic matter from the percentage of organic carbon, we have to multiply
with this 1.724. And this 1.724 is known as Van-bemmelen factor. This is very very
important.  Van-bemmelen  factor,  1.724  and  this  1.724  basically  comes  from  this
assumption that organic matter contains 58% of organic carbon.
 (Refer Slide Time: 31:33)So, this is the final organic matter percentage and final interpretation of organic carbon
percentage on the basis of organic carbon percentage. If it is less than 0.5%, then it is
low. In Indian condition, obviously. In medium, 0.5 to 0.75 and while it is greater than
0.75%, it is high. So, in Indian condition remember that, the average organic carbon,
national average of soil organic carbon is 0.5% or below. So, our soil contains very very
less amount of organic carbon. So guys, I will be stopping here in this lecture in this
session and in the next lecture we will be trying to finish the soil testing and till then, bye
bye and let us see in the next lecture.
Thank you.