Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 34
Soil P and K
Welcome friends, to this new lecture of Soil Science and Technology. And in this lecture
we will be covering the two important plant nutrients; macro nutrients. These are soil
phosphorus and potassium. And so the concepts which we will cover in this lecture are
basically phosphorus and it is available forms and then fixation of phosphorus.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:44)
Then potassium and it is available forms, and then fixation of potassium, and then
phosphorus and potassium fertility management.(Refer Slide Time: 00:48)
So, let us starts with the phosphorus you know that phosphorus is very important for
plant  growth  it  is.  Because  it  is  an essential  component  of ATP, DNA,  RNA  and
phospholipids and phosphorus is found in very limited amount in soil. And there are
several problems with phosphorus we will discuss them later on. But it is found in very
limited quantity in soil and majority of them is also held in non available form.
So, phosphorus present a major problem. So, whatever amount of phosphorus is present
majority of those fraction majority of that phosphorus is basically you know fixed by
different chemicals which are present into the soil. So, most of the available phosphorus
are in accessible to the plants.
So, deficiency phosphorus also very important and because of this fixation process and
the deficiency of phosphorus causes stunted growth bluish green leaves and delayed
maturity. As we can see in this picture it is showing the stunted growth and as well as the
bluish green leaves. And you know where sometime reddish in colour and also sometime
delayed in maturity.
So,  this  are  the  important  deficiency  symptoms  of  phosphorus.  Now  also  highly
weathered warm and humid regions have major phosphorus deficiency. Because you
know we will see what are reasons behind; but just remember that in this region there is a
high amount of different aluminium and iron bearing minerals. So, this aluminium and
iron basically fix this phosphorus in this conditions so creating phosphorus deficiency.(Refer Slide Time: 02:33)
So, if you take a look in the phosphorus cycle it is very important. Now this is the
phosphorus cycle; so let us start with the plant issue. So, when the plant dies ultimately
you know when also the leaves it ultimately goes to the soil organisms, you know, and
you know plant animal and human wastes. And also you know wastes are from animal is
coming wastes from human is coming.
So, from their; obviously, it will be converted into soil organic biomass. From soil
organic  biomass  there  will  be  soluble  organic  phosphorus  and  also  insoluble  ester
bonded organic phosphorus. So, these three soil  organic organisms  biomass  soluble
organic phosphorus and insoluble ester bonded organic phosphorus basically composed
this organic forms of phosphorus in the soil. And also these soil organism biomass
soluble organic P and this insoluble ester bonded to organic P are interchangeable among
themselves.
So, and from this insoluble ester also you know phosphorus can move to the soil organic
biomass. So, you know this soil organic biomass again mineralised to form different
inorganic  forms  of  phosphorus  which  comes  into  the  soil  solution;  so  this  is  the
mineralization  process  we  have  already  discussed  the  mineralization  process  while
discussing the nitrogen and the opposite process is obviously, immobilization; where you
can see that inorganic forms of phosphorus are being immobilized in the organic form.And also soluble or from soluble organic phosphorus forms also they can come into the
directly soil solution. So, this one way and finally, you can see soil solution from soil
solution there are some losses by leaching. And obviously, those fraction which are
present in the soil solution will be available for the plants you know to up take by root or
different types of mycorrhizae, what are the mycorrhizae? We will discuss later on.
And  also  there  are  some  deposition  through  dust.  And  also  if  we  can  apply  the
phosphatic fertilizer through phosphate rocks and other chemicals they directly helps in
you know building this inorganic phosphorus in the soil solution. So, directly you can
see here their a fraction of it coming directly into the soil solution. However, a major
fraction is getting you know getting you know fixed by different chemicals. So, you can
see a major fraction is coming in this way and there are some readily soluble calcium
phosphate.
And obviously, there are some very slowly soluble calcium phosphate minerals. So,
basically in a calcareous soil or in alkaline soil these phosphorus are fixed as calcium
phosphate; this is the one of the major form. And in and dominant forms of inorganic
phosphorus in acidic highly weathered soils are basically iron aluminium phosphate. So,
in this case phosphorus sorbed in clay and iron aluminium oxide surface just like here.
And  also  phosphorus  occluded  in  iron  aluminium  minerals  which  are  extremely
insoluble.
So, these are basically inorganic forms of phosphorus you can see basically the inorganic
forms of phosphorus are either iron or aluminium bounded phosphorus or the calcium
bounded phosphorus. So, dominant forms are basically changes depending on the soil
pH. So in acidic soil this iron aluminium phosphate predominant. However, as in case of
in case of calcareous soil this calcium phosphate is predominant. However, from this soil
phosphorus in clay and iron oxides and aluminium oxides there are some desorption
occurs.
And as a result of desorption this basically goes to the soil solution. And opposite
reaction opposite conversion is also happened when the soil solution H 2PO4 for an HPO4
get absorbed in this P in this clay and iron aluminium oxide surface. And ultimately get
you know inaccessible to the plants creating deficiency So, phosphorus is very low in
soil solution and very immobile.Remember  that it is phosphorus all very low and it as very slow diffusion to root
surfaces. Whatever root is there; so very slow diffusion is their we require symbiotic
mycorrhizal fungi to extract phosphorus from areas normally inaccessible to plant roots
thereby supplying phosphorus we will discuss that later on. And unlike nitrogen not
usually lost from the soil in gaseous form we know that.
And also we know soil loss of phosphorus occurs to basically erosion leaching and plant
uptake. And for efficient P uptake of crops satisfying the phosphorus fixed phosphorus
capacity of soil should be considered while fertilizer management. So, the fixation of
phosphorus is very much important while considering the phosphorus management. So,
this is the phosphorus cycle in a nutshell.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:32)
So, let us go ahead and see what are the different forms of phosphorus again. Obviously,
in  organic  phosphorus  are  basically  present  as  mono  esters  or  inositol  phosphates
examples are; phytic acids. And they are most common in you know they are the most
common  organic  forms  of  phosphorus.  Apart  from  that  phosphorus  is  present  in
phospholipids di esters like nucleic acids and sorry phosphate di esters like nucleic acids.
And finally, they are also present in phospholipids. And you know type of phosphate
present depends on the; obviously, soil types. You can see here the phosphorus contain
in different soils varies based on the soil type because in mollisoil you can see organic
phosphorus concentration is higher at the surface. However, it gets layer at the you knowat the depth of the at the you know at the sub soil whereas in case of ultisoil and aridisoil
the comparatively less amount of organic phosphorus is present at the surface soil.
And you know also it get depleted in the surfaces you know sub surfaces soil. And
inorganic phosphorus contain increases as we go to the lower depth specially in case of
mollisoil and aridisoil. So, you can see based on the type of soil present they are also
changing I mean the concentration of organic phosphorus and inorganic phosphorus
changes with depth.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:53)
So, organic phosphorus basically undergoes mineralization and immobilization. You can
see here organic phosphorus forms basically they are also you know converted to H 2PO 4
which is a soluble phosphate and this is a available form of phosphate.
And you know these basically conversion of organic phosphate to inorganic phosphate
that it is called the mineralization process we know that. And this mineralization process
again mediated by different microbes. And once this H 2PO4 is formed they are getting
fixed by either iron either aluminium or calcium to form this iron aluminium and calcium
phosphate which are basically insoluble and fixed phosphate.
And opposite of the mineralization is immobilization where the some fraction of this
fixed phosphates or you know inorganic soluble phosphates are converted into organic P
forms. So, organic P is the major supplier phosphorus in highly weathered soil.(Refer Slide Time: 10:00)
So, let us move a head and see what are the different chemicals fractions. Obviously, the
inorganic  phosphates  are  very  immobile  in  nature  and  calcium  phosphates  are  the
dominant  P  supplying  in  highly  alkaline  soil  we  know  that.  And  iron  aluminium
phosphates are dominant in acid soil. And phosphorus gets fixed in the soil and the you
know the longer we you know we keep the phosphate phosphatic fertilizer or phosphorus
into the soil it will get fixed.
So, you can see here it is the reaction relation between the soil pH and distribution and
you can see as the soil pH goes towards the alkaline range. Obviously, fixation mostly as
calcium phosphate and in the acidic range fixation is mainly by hydrous oxides of iron,
iron manganese and aluminium. And some fraction in the extremist conditions you can
see there are some chemicals fixation by soluble iron aluminium and manganese.
And relatively available phosphorus you can see here at the pH range of 6 to 7. So, this is
the optimum range of phosphorus you know phosphorus availability. So, we know more
precisely it is 6.5 to around 7.5 you can say. So, these are different chemical fractions
which are present as inorganic phosphate form. So, let us move ahead and see; what is
the influence of pH on different forms of phosphorus.(Refer Slide Time: 11:30)
Obviously as we have seen that in the lower pH then; obviously, phosphorus will be
mainly present as phosphoric acid form whereas, in case of high alkaline conditions in
alkaline conditions it will present as divalent condition. And in the pH that is in available
range starting from 6 to 7 around 6 to 7 it will be present an H 2PO4 minus.
So, it is an H2PO4 form and this is a HPO 42 minus form. And at pH 7 point around I
would say 7 to 7.5 these H 2PO4 and HPO4 are almost in you know equilibrium condition
almost present in equilibrium condition. So, this is a primary orthophosphates and this is
a secondary orthophosphates and those are you know available to the plants.(Refer Slide Time: 12:32)
So, so let us see what are the different mechanisms of phosphorous fixation. So, one of
the mechanisms is precipitation reaction and as you can see here these aluminium you
know these basically fixation occurs specially in one is to one type of clays dissolved
irons are precipitated. So, here the dissolved aluminium and you can see it is of you
know phosphoric group.
And ultimately you know the protons are formed here and this are this chemical is
getting you know precipitated. So, it is in one of the way of phosphorous fixation.
Another way of phosphorous fixation is you can see here it is a clay silicon, aluminium
and in the clay age you know that these hydroxyl groups are there. And these hydroxyl
groups  are  basically  you  know  due  to  the  negative  due  to  the  positive  charge
development due to pH depended charge or variable charge they attract this negative
charge sulphate.
And you can see this is a primary orthophosphates ion and this primary orthophosphates
and basically exchange with this sulphate. So, bringing the sulphates to the soil solution
and you can see here there is a formation of anion exchange reaction anion exchange
outer sphere complex. So, this is an outer sphere complex. The third way is a formation
of inner sphere complex a by reaction with aluminium and iron oxide surfaces.
So, you can see here again this is an you know clay age. And obviously, sorry hydroxide
surface  and  obviously,  there  are  hydroxyls  and  you  know  these  H 2PO4 or  primaryorthophosphates iron is here. And ultimately you can see these hydroxyl and one you
know and these hydroxyl OH 2 and 1 H from here released as a form you know as you
know water ultimately forming this compound.
And the second step there is a formation of binuclear stable binuclear bridge which is an
inner sphere complex. So, basically in the stable binuclear bridge they are again you
know there is a release of water ultimately it is a binuclear bridge you can see. So, this is
another forms of fixation. 
So, for the P replaces the structural hydroxyl ions and forms an inner sphere complex.
And this P is very tightly bound and availability is very very low. And finally, the
phosphate becomes an integral part of oxide minerals and this P is relatively unavailable
in this case. So, now you have idea about the different mechanism of phosphate fixation.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:05)
So, let us go ahead and see what are the different factors which effects the phosphate
fixation. Obviously, the amount of clay present the more the clay present more the
phosphate fixation and less release of phosphorous to the plant. Types of clay present;
obviously, the most phosphorous fixation we will see in case amorphous iron aluminium
manganese oxide and clay minerals like allophone.
And; obviously, the least fixation you will get in the two is to one type of clay. So, you
can see a series of different minerals and you know the relative orders in which they canfix phosphate. And also pH in very important because greatest fixation occurs at pH
extremes and lower fixation occurs at pH 6 to 7 which are optimum pH which is the
optimum pH range.
And  amount  of  organic  matter  obviously,  the  organic  matter  reduces  phosphorous
fixation because the different types of organic acids which releases due to the organic
matter decomposition they can replace these fix phosphate from different iron aluminium
and calcium phosphate. So, these are some benefits of organic matter and these are some
factors which affect phosphorous fixation.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:14)
Now,  let  us  see  what  are  mycorrhizae.  Now  mycorrhizae  is  basically  a  symbiotic
relationship between fungus and root of certain plants. Now that is why it is another
name is myco. Myco term comes from the myco you know fungus and rhizae means
root. So, it is basically symbiotic relationship between fungus and roots and they are
mutually benefit as symbiosis is you know as there is a symbiosis.
Because carbohydrates you know you know plant you know fungus get carbohydrates
from the plants. And also plant and plant get phosphorous zinc and copper water and
nitrogen from the fungus; how? We will see. And there are two different types of you
know mycorrhizae one is called the endomycorrhiza and ectomycorrhizal.Among the endomycorrhiza very important one is vesicular arbuscular mycorrhiza or
VA mycorrhiza or in short it is called VAM. And other type of mycorrhizaes are ericoid
mycorrhizae orchid endo you know orchid endomycorrhiza so on so forth. But these two
are major are you know and very very important; first of all the vesicular arbuscular
mycorrhiza and you know ectomycorrhiza we will discuss them.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:32)
Now vesicular arbuscular mycorrhiza the short form is VAM. And you can see here in
the inside root; obviously, they can form different types of intra intercellular mycelium.
So, this is a you know this is basically external mycelium and you can see this is a
internal mycelium. So, they are any basically penetrating within the cell and they are
intercellular mycelium.
And then intra you know intracellular arbuscules. So, these are arbuscules and basically
you know tree like haustorium used for nutrients swapping between the plant cell and the
mycorrhizae and between the fungus. And obviously these are some structures we call
them vesicles which contain basically the results. And outside the root you will see some
you  know  spores  which  are  basically  multinucleate  basically  they  are  reproductive
chlamydospore.
And also  hyphae  you can  see  here  these  are  these  are  basically  thick  runners  and
filamentous hyphae. And these basically the outer sphere and inner you know inner
inside root and outside root they basically forms an extensive network of hyphae evenconnecting  different  plants.  So,  this  is  what  we  call  VAM  or  vesicular  arbuscular
mycorrhiza.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:58)
Now, some examples you know some photographs of VAM as you can see this is an
arbuscule of Glomus species where you can see extensive branching provides large
amount of surface area through which nutrients can be exchanged. And also this is an
outside root network of hyphae and spores you can see how intricate network of this
hyphae and spores can be developed. So, this mycorrhizal association.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:22)
So, another important mycorrhizae is ectomycorrhiza or EM. And this ectomycorrhiza
you can see inside root I mean the name suggest that they are outside basically present in
outside. And you can see inside root they are basically forms intercellular hyphae and
where they do not enter into the soil just like the VAM or endomycorrhiza did. Because
they forms this arbuscules within the cell.
 However, they only form this intracellular hyphae and this intracellular hyphae called
net like structure you know forms this net like structure we call it hartig net. And outside
root you can see thick layer of hyphae around the root and they are calling the fungal
sheath and this lateral roots becomes stunted.
And this is you can see this is the fungal sheath; obviously, hyphae also mass about equal
to root mass forms extensive network of hyphae even connecting different plants. So,
this is an ectomycorrhizal fungi.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:24).
So, why we need mycorrhiza? Well you can see here the roots and root hairs cannot enter
into the smallest pores for extraction of the nutrients. Especially in and this is very much
important so and this extraction is very much important in nutrients limited conditions.
Especially where the nutrients is deficient or nutrient is fixed.
So, you need some mechanism to extract those nutrients from some smaller spores. Now,
the mycorrhizal fungi are one tenth of diameter of the root hair. So, they can easilypenetrate into the into different into very small you know pockets and they have increase
surface area. So, they can easily extract the nutrients from different pockets or different
places where the roots are basically cannot access. So, that is why we need mycorrhizal
association especially in nutrient rich environment.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:19)
So, how we can enhance the phosphorous availability to the plant? Now enhancing
mycorrhizal  symbiosis  by  crop  rotation  and minimum  tillage  is  one  of the  way  to
enhance the phosphorous availability. And also growing phosphorous efficient plants
which can withstand low amount of phosphorous. And also phosphorous application to
overcome the P fixation capacity of the soil, localized placement of the soil, you can see
band placement of phosphorous is you know is done.
Basically they are placed in bands around the root of the plant around the or around the
plant. So, that the phosphorous has not you know you know if the less amount of reactive
surface of clay is available for the phosphorous. So, that is why you know the band
placement for phosphorous is recommended and also using organic matter form P, P
efficient  crop  as  mulch.  And  also  use  the  phosphorous  efficient  cover  crops  and
maintaining pH 6 to 7 by liming and acidification are some examples by which you can
enhance the phosphorous availability.(Refer Slide Time: 22:28)
Now,  let  us  start  with  the  potassium.  Unlike  nitrogen  and  phosphorous  potassium
remains  in cell  solution  rather  than as component. Now  it is enzyme activator  and
responsible for maintaining osmotic potential. Remember phosphorous is taken up by the
plant as K plus.
 I am sorry potassium is taken up by the plant as K plus. Now potassium increases the
hardiness of the plant and makes it more resistant to insects pests and diseases and
environmental stress and remember a balance should be maintain between potassium and
other nutrients.(Refer Slide Time: 23:04)
So, basically it is involved in different types of activation of enzymes. Now deficiency of
potassium is important because it can be easily identified by chlorosis on leaf edges. So,
you can see here and also white necrotic spot may also appear.
So, you can see here necrotic margin in brinjal. And; obviously, white necrotic spots you
can  see  here  in  alfaalfa  and  also  chlorotic  margin  in  soyabean.  So,  all  these  are
deficiency symptoms of potassium.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:36)
So, what is the potassium cycle? So, you can see here this is the potassium cycle;
obviously, the plant is the you know plant is there over the surface. And when the plants
and different types of animals residues goes as a you know general you know builds up
they goes to leaching and decomposition and ultimately produces the biomass.
From this biomass soil solution phosphate soil solution potassium basically came which
is present in only 0.1 to 0.2 percent. And from there you can see exchangeable form
which is 1- 2 percent and fixed in 2 is to 1 types of clays that is non exchangeable 1 to 10
percent. And finally, micas and other you know elements are present which are 90 to 98
percent.
So, this exchangeable fixed and you know mineral forms of phosphate get easily you
know easily removed through erosion. And you know potassium which is present in soil
solution get lost by run off. So, plant basically takes up the potassium from this solution
which contains 0.1 to 0.2 percent and also we add different types of phosphoric fertilizer
like MOP SOP we will discuss that later on. And these basically generates the potassium
in the soil solution.
Sometime these solution P also get you know lost by leaching process. And conversion
of  solution  to  exchangeable  and  exchangeable  to  non  exchangeable  and  non
exchangeable to primary mineral fixed, are basically reversible processes and when the
solution  phosphate  solution  potassium  is  getting  depleted.  Sometime  this  non
exchangeable forms of potassium get to the solution. And then sometime this you know
mineral or you know mineral primary mineral fixed potassium goes to the soil solution,
but soil solution to replain, is that, but the process is very very slow.(Refer Slide Time: 25:45)
So, what are the problems in potassium management? Well through potassium is found
in positively large amount you know they you know the potassium is present in large
amount in the soil. However, it is plant available form is very you know relatively low
because it readily lost by leaching.
So, liming helps in reducing leaching in potassium why? Because you can see here there
are two type of soil one is acid soil and limed soil. So, liming helps in fixation of
potassium  because  calcium  ions  are  easily  paste  exchangeable  with  potassium  and
instead of aluminium in otherwise acid soils so in aluminium in acid soil. Obviously, the
exchangeable sides are exchange complex will be saturated by aluminium. So, and in
case of alkaline soil the exchange complex would be saturated by calcium.
But  calcium  can  easily  replaced  by  potassium  so  there  by  it  get  fixed.  However,
aluminium cannot be easily replaced by potassium. So, that is why liming helps in
reducing the phosphate potassium you know leaching.(Refer Slide Time: 26:52)
So,  what  is  the  luxury  consumption  of  potassium  luxury  consumption  is  when  the
potassium is present in excess amount in soil. And plant consumes more potassium than
needed and that is called the luxury consumption of K. So, you can see here this is a
relations between potassium available to the plant and potassium content of plants. And
this is the in the secondary y axis this is the relative plant growth or yield.
So, we can see as we are increasing the potassium available potassium in the soil and
potassium content of the plant is getting increased  obviously in this direction. However,
this line basically shows the potassium required for optimal growth. So, above which all
these are basically luxury consumption which are basically not needed.
So, similarly you can see the plant will response to the added potassium up to this level.
And after that you know the rate of increase will decrease and ultimately it will reach a
plato where there is no further relative growth of the plant. So, this is called the luxury
consumption of potassium.(Refer Slide Time: 28:03)
So, what are the different forms of potassium; we have already seen. Four major forms of
potassium are found in the soil. Potassium in primary minerals, which are unavailable to
very very slowly available, then secondly, non exchangeable potassium in secondary
minerals which are also slowly available; then third, is exchangeable potassium on soil
colloids then potassium soluble in water.
And these two are readily soluble in for plants. And the two readily available forms are
in  equilibrium  with  each  other.  So;  obviously,  non  exchangeable  potassium  to
exchangeable  potassium  conversion  process  and  it  is  reverse  process  is  very  slow.
However, the conversion of exchangeable  form to soil  solution potassium and it is
reserve process is fairly rapid.(Refer Slide Time: 28:45)
So, what are the factors which affects potassium fixation in the soil? Type of clay and
moisture is very very important. So, two is to one type of clay have more potassium
fixation capacity then one is to one type of clay. And secondly pH as you know that pH
you know liming increases the potassium fixation. And alternate wetting and drying and
freezing and thawing you know during our clay mineralogy discussion.
We have discussed that how due to how this potassium are getting fixed in the inter layer
space of mica. And from this mica or fine grained mica in illite how due to different
types of weathering process these interlayer potassium get replaced by manganese. And
ultimately the produce the ultimately produce the vermiculite. So, this is how and this
conversion of mica to vermiculite basically made through alternative wetting and drying
or freezing or thawing process so that is being shown here.(Refer Slide Time: 29:53)
So, also it is a last slide. So, managing potassium fertility; obviously, it is a frequent light
application may reduce the luxury consumption of potassium. And also liming helps in
overcoming the leaching losses of potassium. Well weathered soil provides a good native
potassium availability. And finally, while harvesting the forage crops residues should be
returned back to the field so that there is a continuous supply of potassium.
So obviously these are four different ways of inputs of potassium; obviously, plant
residues and animal excretions. And you know atmospheric depositions fertilizers slowly
available potassium minerals whereas, the losses are fixation, erosion losses, and then
leaching losses and plant removal. Obviously this fixation also goes to slowly available
potassium minerals because they are intern also very slowly available to an ultimately
helps in building the potassium concentration in the soil solution.(Refer Slide Time: 30:54)
So, guys we have finished this lecture. And this reference is again The Nature and
Properties of Soil by Nyle C. Brady and Weil. And I hope that you have learnt something
new in this lecture about potassium and phosphorous. And let us stop here and we will
start fertilizer in our next lecture.
Thank you.