Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 30
Submerged Soils
(Refer Slide Time: 00:27)
Welcome friends to this new lecture of Soil Science Technology in week-6. And in this
final lecture of week-6, we will try to finish the soil salinity, and alkalinity, and then we
will try to finish the submerged soil. So, in the last lecture, we stopped here while
discussing about the leaching requirement. So, we discuss about the salt balance equation
by you know discussing this four inputs and four salt outputs. So, let us see what is
leaching requirement.(Refer Slide Time: 00:49)
So, the main concern is to balance in case of leaching requirement the main concern is to
balance the salt coming in with the irrigation water and the leaving the salt that is leaving
with the drainage water. So, obviously we will be concerned about whether the salt
which is coming irrigation water equals to the salt which is moving you know through
the drainage water or not.
The amount of salt is calculated as a product of the volume of water in centimetre and
the amount of salt. So, obviously the, you know the volume of water in centimetre and
the amount of salts. So, you can see it is a multiplication factor D multiplied by E C. So,
the equation will be DiW multiplied by ECiw, so Diw is basically the volume of the
water in of the irrigation water of and Ddw is the volume of drainage water, and ECiw
and ECdw are the respective electrical conductivity or salt concentration. So, obviously
so in from these equation we can see ECiw by ECdw is equal to Dcw by you know Ddw
by Diw. So, ECiw by ECdw is basically termed as leaching requirement. So, this is the
formula of leaching requirement.(Refer Slide Time: 02:09)
So, let us go and see one example numerical example of leaching requirement. So, here
consider the situation where the irrigation water has an ECiw of 2.5 deci Siemens per
metre  and a moderately tolerant crop like broccoli is to be grown. For a moderately
tolerant  crop,  and  we  generally  we  can  use  the  8  Deci  Siemens  per  metre  as  the
acceptable e d ECdw to produce 90 percent of the maximum yield. 
So,  obviously  you  know  here  we  can  see  the  leaching  requirement  is  leaching
requirement  is  ECiw  by  ECdw.  So,  2.5  by  8  that  is  0.31.  Now,  0.31  is  basically
multiplied by the amount of water. So, 12 centimetre of water, we can see here. So, if
there  is  a  12  centimetre  you  know  of  water,  so  that  is  3.7  centimetre  or  this  3.7
centimetre water is the minimum amount of water needed to maintain the root zone of
salinity at the acceptable level.
So, this you know 3.7 centimetre of water is a minimum amount of water that needed to
maintain the root zone salinity at the acceptable level. So, this is how we calculate the
leaching requirement. And let us move ahead.(Refer Slide Time: 03:39)
And see some more you know more aspects of soil salinity, obviously how to manage
the soil salinity, obviously irrigation giving the irrigation water; you know good quality
of irrigation water is the one of the major way of controlling the soil salinity. Irrigation
water testing has to be done before applying the irrigation water into the soil, because
soil sometime irrigation water itself is saline. 
So, the quality of irrigation water is very much important. And split application of
irrigation water is always better than ponding of irrigation water. And Secondly, the
growing of salt tolerant crop is very much important for managing the salt you know soil
salinity, it is the most effective way for getting some productivity from this region of
problematic soils.(Refer Slide Time: 04:27)
So, management of soil salinity you know. At the reclamation of saline-sodic and sodic-
soil obviously, the sodium ion is replaced by cations like calcium. And pH of the soil is
basically reduced by adding the acid forming substances.
Generally, gypsum we use now gypsum is generally used to reclaim sodic soil where
exchange  complaints  does  not  have  calcium  ions.  So,  otherwise  any  acid  forming
substance can be used for reclamation where calcium ions are present in the exchange
complex.  So, when  the  exchange  complex  is  not  having  any  calcium,  we  can  add
gypsum. And if the exchange complex is having the calcium, we can add any acid
forming substances, which will further reduce the pH of the sodic soil. (Refer Slide Time: 05:09)
So, when we add the gypsum, you can see sodium gypsum formula is you know you
know basically it is calcium sulphate. So, sodium bicarbonate as you can see reacts with
calcium  sulphate  to  produce  the  calcium  carbonate  and  sodium  sulphate  which  is
leachable, and carbon dioxide and water at this you know this is for sodium bicarbonate.
And in case of sodium carbonate obviously, the calcium sulphonate again reacts to form
insoluble calcium carbonate, which is precipitated out and leachable sodium sulphate,
which is getting out from the soil.
And obviously, when the colloidal exchange complex is dominated by sodium, when you
add calcium the one calcium cation can replace two sodium to form sodium sulphate,
which is basically leachable, and you can see the exchange complex is again occupied by
calcium. So, these are the  ways through which gypsum reclaim the soil sodicity. If the
gypsum complex is already having the sodium already having the calcium, then you
know obviously we have to use some other salt you know acid producing compound.
So, obviously you know we are adding some H 2SO4. So, you can see sodium bicarbonate
is reacting with H2SO4 to produce sodium sulphate, which is again leachable. And in case
of sodium carbonate is again reacting with H 2SO4 to produce sodium sulphate, which is
again reachable. So, these are some of the ways to manage chemically the sodic soils. (Refer Slide Time: 06:43)
So, there is another problem, we must solve. Now, how much gypsum is needed to
reclaim a sodic soil with an ESP of 25 percent and catenation capacity of 18 mole charge
per kg. Now, assume that you want to reduce the ESP of the upper 30 centimetre to about
5 percent, so that a crop like alfalfa could be grown. 
Now, in case of solution you can see, we have to first determine the amount of sodium
ions that to be replaced by multiplying the CEC which is 18 in our case by the change of
sodium saturation desired. So, our initial sodium saturation was 25 percent. Now, we
want that you know you know now we want that it has you know to this sodium
saturation percent should be 5 percent. So, the reduction is 25 minus 5 that is 20 percent
you can see here. Now, obviously now the next step we are multiplying 18 charge per kg
with 0.20 or 20 percent. So, we are getting 3.6 cent mol charge per kg, so this is the first
step.(Refer Slide Time: 07:47)
So, let us see the second step. So, from the reaction that occurs from the gypsum that is
calcium sulphate 2H 2O is applied you can see here two sodium is getting replaced by one
calcium you know calcium, and ultimately it is producing the colloid with calcium and
sodium sulphate and water. 
So, you can see here from this reaction 3.6 centimole charge of calcium sulphate 2H 2O
will be needed to replace 3.6 centimole charge of sodium, it is you know that. So, 3.6
centimole charge of sodium, we have already calculated that has to be replaced by 3.6
centimole charge of calcium sulphate.
Now, secondly calculate the weight in grams of gypsum needed to provide these 3.6
centimole charge per kg of soil. Now, this can be done by first dividing the molecular
weight of calcium sulphate 2H 2O that is 172 by 2, because calcium ion has two valency
two charges, and sodium has only one, and then by 100 further. Then we have to divide
it further by 100, because we are dealing with the centimole rather than the mole. So,
basically if we see in the next slide.(Refer Slide Time: 08:59)
Ultimately, we are dividing the 172 by 2 that is 86 gram of calcium sulphate; we need 86
gram of gypsum or molecular charge. And then further we are converting it to you know
0.86  gram  of  gypsum  per  cmol  charge  or  centimole  charges  required  to  replace  1
centimole charge of sodium.
So,  the  3.6  centimole  charge  sodium  per  kg  would  require  3.6  centimole  per  kg
multiplied by 0.86 centimole charge. So, we are getting 3.1 gram of calcium sulphate or
2H2O. So, we are basically getting 3.1 gram of gypsum per kg of soil. Last to express
this in terms of amount of gypsum needed to treat 1 hectare of land to a soil depth of 30
centimetre, we have to multiply by 4 into 10 to the power 6, which is twice the weight of
kg of 15 centimetre deep hectare-furrow slice.
So, if the furrow slice depth is 15 centimetre which is also 6 inches, so that the weight of
these 15 centimetre furrow slice is basically 2 multiplied by 10 to the power 6 you know
kg. However, in case of 30 centimetre, obviously that will be doubled. So, 4 into 10 to
the power 6 kg, we have to multiplied by that.
So, 3.1 gram per kg multiplied by 4 into 10 to the power 6 kg per hectare, and we are
getting this. So, basically we are getting 12,400 kg of gypsum per hectare. So, this is the,
this is the final solution of this problem. So, guys I hope that you have understood this
understood  this  solution.  And  if  you  have  any  further  queries,  you  can  email  me
regarding its regarding its explanation, I will be more than happy to answer it. So, let usmove ahead, and go to our next topic that is submerged soils. Obviously, submerged soil
we will cover.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:07)
The submerged soil its types, and then characteristics of different submerged soils, and
importance of submerged soils.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:13)
So, you know that submerged soils are the you know soils that are submerging water for
a sufficient period of time to give the distinct horizon development differentiating from
other soil is called submerged soil. First submerged soils material generally influence thetype of soil, which develops from it. Secondly, the type of aquatic life and crop it
supports and finally, the capacity of these sediments to act as a sink for terrestrial waste.
So, these are important influences of submerged soils.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:45)
So, there are four types of submerged soils. What are those first of all waterlogged soils,
secondly marsh soils, third is paddy soil, and finally subaquatic soils. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:55)
So,  in  case  of  waterlogged  soil,  we  call  it  gley  soil.  So,  characteristics  of  these
waterlogged soils are given by these distinctive gley horizons. So, you can see distinctivegley horizon, you can see here. So, a mottle have a partially oxidized gley horizon. So,
this gley horizon have a partially oxidized gley horizon. And a mottled intermediate zone
and bluish green permanent reduced zone, you can see it is bluish green permanently
reduce zone. 
And obviously, the waterlogged soil can be found in any climatic zone. And saturation
may be due to the impervious  soil layer or high groundwater table. So, this is the
characteristics of waterlogged soil or gley soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:37)
Second important marsh soils. So, mostly permanently saturated or waterlogged, these
are mostly permanently saturated waterlogged. And they are basically characterized by
plant residues in surface horizon or premature or permanently reduce G horizon or gley
horizon. 
So, they can be found in fringes of lakes, streams or estuaries or deltas as you can see
here. And when exposed to aeration, it gives basically raise to acid sulphate soil. We
have already discussed acid sulphate soil in soil acidity. So, this marsh soils are the
region where the acid sulphate soil can be found. (Refer Slide Time: 13:17)
Now, final paddy soils. Paddy soils are specially managed for paddy production. And
horizon developed depends on period of water logging. We generally do paddling for
making a imperviously at those there is always standing water at the base of the plant.
And iron and manganese usually eluviated from topsoil and deposits below plow sole
from this paddy soil. At submergence decreases the redox potiential Eh which promotes
the growth of the paddy. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:43)
Now, if you see the paddy soil profile obviously, you will see obviously this is the
surface water. At just below the surface water is very thin oxidized layer. And below the
thin oxidized  layer, you will see permanently  reduced layer,  where all  the reduced
fraction of different minerals and different nutrients are present will discuss them later
on. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:09)
So, another is subaquatic soil. The uppermost layer of unconsolidated aqueous sediments
of lakes, oceans and river are called as subaquatic soils and their permanently submerged
cumulative soils. And finally, they have varied horizon development you can see the
subaqueous subaqueous soil profile. (Refer Slide Time: 14:31)
And you know let us see, what are the characteristics of the submerged soils. So, first
important characteristics is low oxygen. Obviously, the oxygen diffusion is 10,000 times
slower in water filled pores than in air filled pores, and in this type of soil specially. At
this soils are anoxic below the soil water interface; because of low oxygen diffusion they
are basically anoxic in nature.
And a thin oxidized zone is created the upper 1 to 2 cm due to diffusion of oxygen from
the atmosphere. So, as I showed you in case of paddy soil profile, there is a thin 1 to 2
cm upper oxidized zone due to the diffusion of oxygen from the atmosphere. And finally,
a true and anaerobic  zone below this  oxidised zone is  a typical  characteristic  of a
submerged soils. So, just below the oxidized zone, you will see an anaerobic zone.(Refer Slide Time: 15:25)
Second is oxidized mud-water interface, obviously the mud-water interface may contain
sufficient oxygen. And this oxygen reduces abruptly with depth obviously. And chemical
and micro microbiological regime in this oxidized zone is similar to aerobics soils. And
this zone is of you know utmost importance, because it acts as a sink for phosphate and
many other nutrients.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:51)
Thirdly the presence of hydrophytic plants is characterized by the submerged soils. So,
these presences of these hydrophytic plants you can see if the submerged soils, theseplants either have oxygen transport from aerial parts or they can respire anaerobically,
you can see here the adventitious the adventitious roots of maple tree. And obviously,
you  know  in  case  of  paddy  you  have  seen  the  aerenchyma  issue  to  capture  the
atmospheric  oxygen.  So,  an  oxidized  rhizosphere  zone  is  created  as  oxygen  is
transported from shoot to the roots. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:27)
And finally, the soil reduction obviously, a submerged soil is in a reduced zone due to
anaerobic conditions except the brown oxidized zone at the surface that is 1 to 2 cm
oxidized zone. And rather than a well-drained soil obviously, and will get a gray or
greenish color in this type of soil. And finally, it has reduced counterparts of various ions
this anaerobic zone basically contains different reduced counterparts of various ions.(Refer Slide Time: 16:55)
Now, very important concept is redox potential. The redox potential formula is E redox
potential generally terms in terms of Eh. The Eh is basically E 0 plus RT by nF ln log of
Ox by Red. The Eh is the voltage of the reaction that is redox potential E h is basically is
redox potential. And E 0 is the voltage when oxidized and reduced reduction you know
both at unity at that of you know Ox and Red are the activities of the oxidized and
reduced species.
So, basically E0 when the oxidized, and you know and the reduced species are having
the, you know at the same concentration. The F is the faraday constant, R is the universal
gas constant, N is the charge of valency of ion, and finally T is the temperature. So, you
can see E h basically you know represent whether a soil are oxidized or not. 
So, you can see oxidized soils, the E h value will be higher; in case of reduced soil, the E
h value will be lower. So, you can see here as a result of change in E h you know after
submerged soils. So, at the beginning there will be high pH, because high E h because of
oxidized condition. But, as a result of prolonged submergence, there oxygen will be
oxygen will be reduced.
And as a result the Eh or redox potential will be reduced further. So, you can see for all
the soils. The final after two weeks of time the final Eh is you know negative sufficiently
negative and all you know these this negative E h is basically indicates the reduce reduce
condition of the soil. (Refer Slide Time: 18:47)
So, redox potential of a submerged soil are having some important implications. First of
all E h is a quantitative measure of the tendency of a given system to oxidize or reduce
susceptible substances. And E h is a positive, obviously I have told you E h is positive
and  high  in  strongly  oxidizing  system  and  is  negative  at  low  installing  reducing
condition.
And the electrochemical property helps in distinguishing a submerged soil from the well-
drained well - drained area using the E h now. As per is the soil plant, you know plant
nutrition  is  concerned.  Obviously,  low  redox  potential  that  means,  in  submerged
condition, this submerged condition is beneficial for rice by increasing the availability of
nitrogen, phosphorus, silicon, and then iron, manganese and molecular. 
However, it causes harmful effects to the rise by decreasing the availability of sulphur,
copper, and zinc. So, all this sulphur, copper, and zinc became unavailable due to the
submergence  condition.  However,  this  specially  I  would  like  to  mention  the  iron,
because the in case of sub merged condition Fe3 plus will reduce to Fe2 plus and Fe2 plus
is more mobile. And as a result, it will you know it will be up taken by the plant more
easily. So, this so nitrogen, phosphorus, iron, manganese all these became more available
to the plants in case of submerge condition.(Refer Slide Time: 20:19)
Another another concept is pE. pE is basically used to use instead of redox potential
sometime to characterize a submerged soils. Now, pE is basically minus log logarithm of
e, which is basically electron activity. And this basically the relation is e you know pE is
basically Eh over 0.0591. Now pE is a negative logarithm of electron activity, we already
know that. And pE is the large and positive in case of strongly oxidizing system. And
low and negative in case of strongly reducing system. So, now a days we use also pE for
characterizing the sub merged soils.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:03)
So, in case of submerged soil, you will see sequential reduction of different species just
like this. So, this very important reaction, you can see all the species all the different
species  are  getting  reduced  to  their  reduced  you know  and  as  a result  their  redox
potential is also getting reduced from plus 830 to minus 930.
You can see at the start the oxygen reacts with the protons and electrons to produce the
molecular hydrogen, and then this you know nitrates will reduce to nitrite, you know
manganese oxide will reduce to Mn2 plus, and ferric hydroxide will reduce to ferrous and
so on and so forth. So, these sequential reduction will occur as a result of submergence
an as a you know simultaneously, we will see there is reduction of redox potential. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:53)
Now, electrochemical changes in submerged soil obviously, obviously they shows a
decrease in the redox potential. And obviously, increase in pH of acid soil now, this is
very important. And increase in pH of acid soils and decrease in pH in alkaline soil. This
is very important as per as the redox soils are conserned, I am sorry submerged soils are
concerned.
So, when you start submerging a soil, after a certain time if the soil is acidic, you see
their pH is rising. And if the soil is you know alkaline, you see there pH is decreasing.
An ultimately after certain period time, it will both of them will reach near to the, you
know neutral condition, which is around 6.5 to 7.5. So, obviously ultimately they will
converge to 7 pH 7 in both the cases. And also they will show the changes in specificconductance, and ionic strength. And obviously, due to the pH due to this submergence
reduction of the pH will see also drastic shift in mineral equilibrium obviously. And then
cation and anion exchange reaction and also sorption and desorption of ions.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:15)
So, guys we have finished this lecture of salinity, and you know and alkalinity, and
submerged soils. So, submerged soils is sometime problematic and sometime beneficial
obviously. Let us you know submerged soil is required for the cultivation of the rice,
because rice required a standing water with the base. And these you know submerged
condition, obviously kills the nitrate nitrogen, because it creates the anaerobic zone.
However, it produces the ammonium, which is which is also required for the growth of
the  plant.  And  also  the  phosphorus  availability  is  increased  in  case  of  submerged
condition, and you know manganese availability increase for the in case of submergence,
iron availability increase in case of submergence, however they are availability of zinc
sulphur, they are reduced in submerged soils especially in case of rice.
And Eh is one of the major indicator of the submerged soil. When the Eh will be
positive, obviously they are oxidized soil. When the E h is negative, they will consider
you know they will basically indicate the submerge condition. And in the submerged soil
obviously, you will see different you know sequential conversion of different species to
their you know to their reduced counter parts, I have already showed you. And also
saline-soil, sodic-soil are problematic soil.The saline-soil and sodic-soil can be managed by the you know different management
practices like growing different types of adaptive plants and also you know you know by
adding different types of amendments. So, in case of sodic-soil, the common amendment
is gypsum. In case of just like in case of acidic soil, the common the common you know
chemical which we add for ameliorating the acidity is lime.
So, please remember this thing, you know that demarcation of saline-soil, saline-sodic
soil, and sodic-soil, they just divide you know they are divided based on the ECe, then
their pH, then their sodium absorption ratio, and their exchangeable sodium percentage.
So, please remember these terms and their cut off values, which will be beneficial for
you during the exam.
So, I hope that you have learned some basics of you know different types of problematic
soils, and how to manage the problematic soil. One more thing, I must mention that in
case of saline soil, you must go with the salt tolerant crop as well as you must use the,
you know clean irrigation water, salinity free irrigation water, intermediate irrigation
water. And also both in case of saline and sodic soil to reclaim the saline sodic and acid
soil, another way is to adding some organic matter, because organic matter has some
beneficial effects for creating for ameliorating these problematic soils.
So, guys I hope that you have learned something new. And obviously, for this lecture the
references are the nature and properties of soil by Nyle C Brady and Weil and the
chemistry of submerged soil by Ponnamperuma. So, please read these books for getting
more thorough knowledge about these problematic soils. So, we have finish this week-6
of lecturers. And in the next week, we will start from different aspects of soil fertility and
plant nutrition.
Thank you guys.