Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 03
Weathering and Soil Formation (Contd.)
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:15)
Hello friends, welcome to this lecture of Soil Science and Technology, I am Doctor
Somsubhra Chakraborty from IIT Kharagpur. And in this lecture we will continue from
the chemical weathering and in the last lecture, we have discussed about Weathering and
Soil Formation. And we talked about what are the 2 major processes of soil formation,
there we mentioned about weathering as well as pedogenesis and soil weathering is
basically disintegration and decomposition of rocks by different chemical physical and
biological activities.
 And  we  talked  about  different  types  of  weathering  like  physical  or  mechanical
weathering then chemical weathering and as well as biological weathering, we talked
about  why  we  call  physical  weathering  as  disintegration,  why  we  call  chemical
weathering as decomposition and why biological weathering is a combination of both
physical weathering and chemical weathering. We talked about different factors which
are responsible for physical weathering now remember that again, I am telling you that
physical weathering only changes the size of rock fragments, it does not change thechemical composition of rock. The chemical weathering can only change the chemical
composition of rock and that is why it is called decomposition.
So, we talked about exfoliation we talked about frost wedging, we talked about you
know different other factors, which are responsible for physical weathering in the last
lecture. And in this lecture, we will be covering different aspects of chemical weathering,
what are the different processes of chemical weathering, I will show you some examples
chemical of chemical reactions. And then we will see some examples of biological
weathering  and  finally,  we  will  go  to  pedogenesis  and  soil  formation  factors  and
different processes of pedogenesis. 
So, let us start from chemical weathering. Now, in the last class, I have mentioned that
chemical weathering is called decomposition because, it changes the chemical nature of
the  soil  and  some  examples  are  carbonate  dissolve  dissolving  of  carbonates  and
conversion  of  primary  minerals  to  the  secondary  minerals.  I  told  you  that  primary
minerals are present mostly in the rocks whereas, secondary minerals are mainly present
in the clay fractions and some primary minerals like quartz are predominant in sand and
silt fraction of the soil. 
So, sand and silt are chemically inert in nature whereas, clay is chemically reactive,
because of the presence of this secondary clay minerals and we will talk in details about
the secondary clay minerals in their structure and their physical and chemical properties
in the coming lectures. So, let us start with different processes of chemical weathering or
decomposition. (Refer Slide Time: 04:23)
So,  first  process  is  hydration;  now  hydration  is  basically  the  attachment  of  water
molecules to crystalline structure of rocks causing expansion and weakness. So, it is an
important process of rock breakdown as well as change in their chemical composition as
you can see from this chemical reaction, where hematite which is an important iron
bearing mineral is reacting with water and as a result it creates due to the process of
hydration, it creates ferrihydrite which is a completely new mineral. 
So, this is an example of chemical weathering and when this type of we know chemical
alteration occurs, there will be; obviously, change in their physical stability and when
there is a change in physical stability or susceptibility to weathering there will be further
breakdown of minerals. (Refer Slide Time: 05:41)
So, what is the next one? The next one is the most important that is called hydrolysis. It
is a most important process of chemical weathering which says it is combination of
hydrogen and oxygen in water with rocks to form new substances. So, as the name
suggest hydrolysis mean lysis of water; that means, when water you know dissociates
into H plus and OH minus it. And this when it dissociates to H plus and OH minus and
these H plus and OH minus when it reacts with any mineral and changes its chemical
nature that is called hydrolysis. For example, here you are seeing it is a potassium
feldspar, it is potassium feldspar. 
Now, when the potassium feldspar reacts with water and in the hydrolysis process it
converts into this HALSi 3O8 and also K plus and hydroxyl. In this in the subsequently,
you will see that this HAL 3 S i O 8 reacts with water in hydrolysis process to form
aluminium  oxide or alumina  and silicic  acid. So, you can see as  a result  of water
breakdown and it is combination with potassium feldspars, we are getting 2 end products
that is aluminium oxide and silicic acid. So, the chemical nature of the minerals as we
already know is changed. 
So initially, there is feldspars and ultimately we are getting aluminium oxides as well as
silicic acid. So, this is an example of hydrolysis process.(Refer Slide Time: 08:02)
 Now. the other process of chemical weathering let us see what are those dissolution.
Dissolution is the process by which rock is dissolved in water. As we can see this is a
calcium sulphate 2H2O; that means, it is a gypsum molecule, when it reacts with water it
undergoes dissolution and ultimately forms this calcium ions, sulphate anions and water.
So, this is an example of chemical weathering. Remember one thing that this chemical
weathering  is strongly influenced  by pH  and temperature.  For example,  in low  pH
condition that mean in acidic conditions, some minerals will you know will undergo
different types of chemical changes. 
So, that is why pH is a major factor for chemical decomposition and also temperature for
example, in the with the increase of temperature, the rate of chemical reaction increases.
So these 2, pH and temperature are the major factors for chemical weathering. And when
water  becomes  saturated  chemicals  may  precipitate  out  forming  evaporate  deposits,
which is I mean you know you can see it in the salt affected soils due to the high
evaporative demand when we know when the salt solution in the water moves through
the soil and goes to the upper part of the soil and the water evaporates leaving behind
only the salts and that forms a white crust of soil. 
Now, if you go to Kutch areas of Rajasthan, you will find this type of soil and so, water
initially was saturated, but due to the high evaporative demand water evaporated leaving
behind these evaporate deposits. And calcium carbonates like you know the other namesof  calcium  carbonate;  obviously,  calcite  or  limestone  sodium  chloride,  which  is  a
common  table  salt  and  calcium  sulphate  and  gypsum  are  particularly  vulnerable  to
solution weathering. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:16)
Another important process of chemical weathering is acid reaction or carbonation. Now,
as I have already told you in the soil the partial pressure of carbon dioxide or the
concentration of carbon dioxide is quite high due to the respiratory actions of micro and
macro organisms. In the macro organism, different macro flora or macro fauna, in the
macro flora; obviously, roots of the higher plants and in the micro organisms you know
bacteria,  fungi, algae  and  you know  protozoa,  nematodes  are  there.  So, due  to the
respiratory reaction there is a you know there is a high amount of carbon dioxide in the
soil air and this carbon dioxide when it reacts with water vapour in the soil it forms
carbonic acid or H2CO3.
 When this carbon you can see it reacts with calcite, which is solid and it changes the
chemical  composition  to  CA2  plus  and  2HCO3  minus.  So,  this  is  an  example  of
carbonation, because the mineral here is reacting with carbonic acid. So, one example of
you know carbonation  here, you can see there is  a green colour mineral,  which is
basically olivine and when olivine reacts with carbonic acid it changes into other forms.
So, this is an example of acid reactions or carbonation. (Refer Slide Time: 11:58)
In the next slide, you will see feldspar is reacting with carbonic acid to form secondary
clay minerals that is vermiculite and I will talk about vermiculite in details later on. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:13)
Another important reaction is called redox reaction or oxidation reduction reaction as the
name implies, it is basically you know when one mineral oxidized to another form this is
an oxidation and vice versa for reduction and so, you can see that olivine here, in the first
step is reacting with water. So, here it is an olivine which is a primary mineral, when olivine is reacting with water
due to the hydrolysis process, it is forming another mineral called serpentine and apart
from serpentine also there is some silica solution and ferrous oxides, which are solid in
nature. And subsequently these ferrous oxides reacts with oxygen the or in other words it
oxidized to form this goethite, which is another important iron bearing mineral. So, this
is an example of oxidation or redox reaction and these type of reaction very frequently
occurs in the soil due to chemical weathering. 
Another important reaction is called complexation reaction. Now, as I have told you that
there are millions and millions of microorganism present in the soil and also so, they
secrets different types of organic acids, plant also secrets different types of organic acids
through their root system. So, when so, this oxalic acid is an important organic acid,
which is secreted by different microorganisms, our plant roots when these organic acids
reacts with this muscovite, which is a solid mineral. It forms a complex and ultimately, it
produces  potassium  ions,  hydroxyl  anions  and  a  complex  in  solution  and  another
compound, which is also remains in the solution. So, this is an example of complexation
reaction. Now, this complexation also implies that chemical weathering is mediated by
different types of biological agents, which I have already talked about. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:52)
So, we have covered  what the  physical  weathering,  we have  covered  the chemical
weathering, we have learned about different types of forces, which are responsible forphysical weathering and we have learned about different types of process for chemical
weathering. However, a question always comes to our mind that we have a you know we
have a range of minerals, which are present in the earth's surface, how can we distinguish
them based on their susceptibility to weathering, what are the criteria’s? 
Now,  to  show  the  stability  of  those  mineral  it  is  important  to  discuss  about  these
Bowen’s reaction series as well as Goldrich stability series. Now, Bowen’s reaction
series basically shows those minerals chronologically, which crystallized from molten
magma or in other words, when there is a molten magma what which mineral will
crystallize first and which mineral will crystallize second and so on so forth. This series
is called Bowen’s reaction series. So, as you can see from here, olivine is the first
mineral which crystallizes from the molten magma followed by pyroxene, followed by
amphiboles and then biotite mica, potassium, feldspars, muscovite mica and quartz. And
similarly from calcium this rich plagioclase feldspars to sodium rich plagioclase feldspar,
plagioclase feldspars it is a series of feldspars. 
Now, as you can see this is the chronological list of minerals, which will crystallize from
molten magma. And the Goldrich stability series is just opposite that is that says that the
mineral, which crystallizes first in the Bowen’s reaction series is most susceptible to
weathering or inner in other words, the mineral which crystallizes last is very slowly
weatherable.  So,  these  2  series  I  mean  they  are  in  opposite  direction;  obviously,
according to these series we can say that quartz is very slowly, I mean quartz weathered
very slowly whereas, this plagioclase calcium, rich plagioclase feldspar as well as olivine
they weathered very fast. So, when there are 2 different rocks of different composition, if
we compare their Bowen’s reaction series or Goldrich stability series, it will be easy for
us to predict which one will weather first. (Refer Slide Time: 18:10).
Now, this slide shows biological weathering, now biological weathering as I told you can
be both chemical and mechanical in nature because, as you can see roots pry apart or
splits apart, these rocks and root also produces acid that dissolves the rocks and there are
some also burrowing animals. And you know different types of; different types of plant
species, which can occur over the earth's over the rock surface and there may be some
algae’s and all these reacts on all these you know exerts pressure for physical and you
know chemical breakdown of rocks. And although these macro organism essentially
produces the physical forces for breakdown of the rocks, sometime these smaller micro
organisms like micro flora, they exert you know they secrete some chemicals, which
reacts  with  rocks  and  changes  their  chemical  structure.  So,  this  is  an  example  of
biological weathering. (Refer Slide Time: 19:27)
Now, one important thing comes to our mind that what is the reason behind the stability
and  weathering  of  soil  minerals?  So,  to  have  a  basic  idea  about  the  stability  and
weathering of the soil minerals, we need to have a good idea about crystal chemistry.
Now, the relative resistance of a mineral to weathering process is determined by it is
internal  structure  and  depends  on  the  strength  of  the  atoms  or  ions  binding  their
neighbouring ions in the crystal lattice of the mineral. And remember that there are 4
major types of binding forces between the atoms in a crystal, these are basically ionic,
homopolar, metallic and Van der Waals forces. Although, you know this ionic force is
the most important from the soil as far as the soil is concerned and the bonds in the
crystal structure of the soil minerals are considered to be mostly ionic. (Refer Slide Time: 20:34)
So, let us see what are the major coordination polyhedra in soils. So, there are 2 major
coordination  polyhedra in the soil, one is called silica tetrahedral, another is called
aluminum octahedral. 
Now, in the silica tetrahedra you will learn in details in the subsequent classes that these
are basically the building blocks, these 2 are basically the building blocks of any soil,
depending  on their  structural arrangement,  depending  on their  arrangement,  we can
differentiate  different  types  of  chemicals  and  in  the  clay  minerals  their  specialized
arrangement has developed different types of clay minerals. Now this is called silica
tetrahedron, now in the silica tetrahedra you can see at the centre, there is a silica atom or
silica cation, which is surrounded by 4 equidistant oxygen atoms. So here, you can see a
coordinates the coordination number of silica here is 4. Whereas, this is aluminium
octahedron where a aluminium iron is surrounded by 6 hydroxyl anions. So here, the
coordination number is 6 and these 2 are the major coordination polyhedra in soils and
different arrangement and different sharing of these tetrahedron and octahedron give rise
to different clay minerals and different other primary minerals. 
Now, remember one thing that with these coordination polyhedral, these 2 types of
coordination polyhedral, they share their crystal edges faces or vertices which are point
of intersects. Now, when the edge and face sharing reduces the distance between the ions
in  the  polyhedron  hence,  increase  repulsion  between  ions  with the similar  charges;obviously, there will be destabilization of the crystal structure. Obviously, when the
similar 2 ions comes in close proximity come in close proximity; obviously, there will be
repulsion and a major force for destabilization of an ionic crystal is considered the
columbic repulsion forces between cations. So, this is why one mineral shows different
susceptibility to weathering than other mineral ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:35)
 So, what are the major factors that affects weathering? I mean so, climate this is the
prime  factor  that  affects  weathering  and  specially  the  temperature  and  moisture
characteristics.  Now,  in  case  of  chemical  weathering,  chemical  weathering  is  most
effective in areas of warm or moist climates and in those climates decaying vegetation
creates different types of acid that enhances weathering. And these chemical weathering
is least effective in polar regions because, in polar region water freezes into the ice. and
if you remember all the important process in chemical weathering requires water you I
mean in starting from hydration, from carbonation, from hydrolysis, all requires water
for chemical reaction, but if water freezes into ice So, there will be no chemical reaction.
So,  that  is  why,  it  is  least  effective  in  polar  regions  and  obviously,  mechanical
weathering is enhanced, when there is a frequent freeze and thaw cycles. 
So, in a nutshell mechanical  weathering is prevalent  in extreme  weather conditions
whereas, chemical weathering is prevalent in moist and humid climate, I mean warm and
humid climate. (Refer Slide Time: 25:11)
So, these graph basically shows in which region which I mean what weathering process
is predominant. Now, in the x axis, you can see this is an annual rainfall it starts from 0
then goes to 50, 100, 150 and so on so forth into this direction. and in the in the y axis
there is a mean annual temperature from minus 10 to 0 to 10 to 20 as we can see in this
zone, where there is a high annual rainfall around 200 or more than 200 centimetre as
well  as  1,  I  mean  annual  temperature  is  also  high,  there  will  be  predominance  of
chemical weathering. Whereas, when the annual rainfall goes down to below 150, there
will be moderate chemical weathering and here weather is a low amount of annual
rainfall, there will be almost no chemical weathering. 
So, as you go from this area to this area; obviously, there will be moderate chemical and
physical frost action because, it is nearby to this 0 degree centigrade, where frosting
basically occurs. And when we go from this region to this region due to the extreme
temperature, because of this minus 10 degree centigrade there will be strong physical
weathering. So, this chart gives us an overview in which condition climatic condition or
climatic I mean combination what I mean physical weathering or chemical weathering or
other type of weather, I mean physical weathering or chemical weathering is prevalent.
So, let us wrap up here in the next session or next lecture, we will talk about more about
different factors of soil formation as well as different pedogenesis process.
Thank you.