Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 45
Organic Pollutants in Soil
Welcome friends to this 5th lecture of week 9 of Soil Science and Technology. And in
this lecture, we will be finishing this wind erosion and we will be talking about different
control measures of wind erosion and then, we will be talking about different organic
pollutants which are present in the soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:32)
And so, in the last lecture, we talked about different what is wind erosion, and how we
can calculate the wind erosion, what are the different factors of wind erosion. Now, we
will discuss about different control measures of wind erosion. So, there are you know
several  aspects  we  need  to  take  care  of  while  measuring  the  wind  erosion  while
controlling the wind erosion. 
So, soil moisture obviously, the soil moisture increases the cohesiveness and the wind
speed requires  to detach the soil particles, you know  increases  dramatically  as  soil
moisture increases; obviously, when there is a soil moisture, it increases the cohesiveness
between the particles. So, we required much more higher you know wind speed, so the
you know to detach the soil particles.Soil cover you know plant cover effectively protects the soil from blowing, especially if
the plant roots are well established. So, crop rotation that includes crop cover can be
greatly diminish the wind erosion. Plant roots are you know are having much important
effect for controlling the wind erosion because they can attach the soil particles, they can
anchor the soil particles more strongly. 
And tillage is the effect of the tillage depends not only on the type of the implement
used, but also on the timing of the tillage operation. For example, tillage can greatly
reduce the wind erosion if it is done while there is a sufficient soil water to cause the
large you know to cause of the large clods to form. 
So, when there is a large clod obviously, there is less chance of wind erosion because
there will be requiring high amount of, high wind speed to detach the soil particles or to
move the soil particles when they are forming the clods. And finally, Barriers, Barriers of
windbreaks such as the shelter belts will be talking about the shelter belts are effective in
reducing wind velocities for short distances and for trapping the trapping drifting soil.
So, significant protection against the wind erosion and extends to a distance of about ten
times the height of the barriers. So, we will be seeing that.
So, all these five, you know four aspects need to be considered while we are thinking
about any designing any method designing any as you know any management strategy
for controlling the wind erosion.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:59)
So, you can see this an example of wind erosion control in a China. So, ecological
engineers,  they  can  use  the  checker  boards  straw  checker  boards.  So,  this  a  new
technology where they are using the straw in the form of checker boards and most of the
you know some portion of this checker boards are buried into the soil and some portion
are exposed over the soil surface. 
And as a result of this checker boards, these helps in actually these checker boards are
used for erosion control and stabilizing the sand dunes and all these and if. So, also
reforestation and you know and for growing the crops. So, these are some of the ways
they have used for controlling the wind erosion in this you know Arid Ningxia province
in China. So, it is a fairly new technology that they are using.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:01)
So, also there is a the most important you know way of you know controlling the wind
erosion is the called the Shelterbelts is basically rows the fast growing trees around crop
plants that can provide wind breaks reducing erosion by the by winds. So, generally, we
plant the rows of fast growing trees along around the crops. So, you can see these are the
fast growing trees around the crops, so that wind is getting obstacle you know wind is
facing obstacle while going while flowing through these crop field and thereby reducing
the wind erosion.
So, this shelterbelts is you know is the most effective way for controlling the wind
erosion from crop field and tillage erosion.(Refer Slide Time: 04:52)
So, tillage erosion because you know there are several tillage implements such as Chisel
plow loosen and move large quantity of soil some of which is thrown into the air. I
talked about these during our discussion of vertical or turbo  tilling practice in conserve
in conservation agriculture. And the amount, and as a result of this you know the soil
large quantities of soil, which has been thrown away by this tillage implements and the
amount of this certain soil particles will be moved and distance and you know and the
distance it is move will depends on the design of the implement, depth of the tillage and
speed of the travel. 
The soil moves mainly in the direction of the travel but will move much farther when the
travel is down slope to. So, gravity assist the movement when tillage and then just
opposite condition when the tillage is up slope, gravity hinders the forward movement of
the soil. 
So, you can see here Chisel plow in action and this the direction of travel obviously, as a
result of that, these huge amount of you know soil particles which are getting detach and
you know thrown away. There we will move along with the wind and they will deposit to
other places; obviously, this movement will be much further when the travel is down
slope. So, gravity also helps in the movement.(Refer Slide Time: 06:21)
So, you can see here, these are pre tillage landscape you know this pre tillage landscape,
this is a post tillage landscape. Obviously, you know this is the whitish calcareous
subsoil material from the Mollisol is mixed into the plow layer of a conventionally tilled
filled in a sub humid region. So, these diagram basically illustrates how tillage scalps the
hilltops by throwing the soil further down the down,  down slope then upslope. 
So, you can see here, this is the wind erosion. So, soil basically from this portion thrown
by this wind and tillage go further down the slope then upslope and gravity further helps
in the movement of this soil particles down the slope here and ultimately this particles
will be deposited down the slope resulting in the net movement of soil down slope and
gradual levelling of the landscape. 
So, we can see ultimately, gradually it is being levelled and ultimately, exposing the
whitish calcareous subsoil material from the mollisol. So, you can see this pictures also.
So, ultimately as a result of wind movement, the topsoil is getting moved downwards
and helping and which is further assisted by the gravitational movement and ultimately
exposing the subsoil and ultimately levelling the ground.(Refer Slide Time: 07:52) 
So, quantification of the tillage, tillage based erosion, there are several models of tillage
erosion that are based on the relationship between the amount of soil moved by tillage in
the upslope and down slope direction of slope gradient. The most general of these
models is tillage erosion risk indicator model, we you know when the short form is till
ERI and which is the simplest form considers the product of a tillage implement factor
and a landscape factor.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:26)
So, this equation is basically, At equal to Et multiplied by El where A t is the annual rate
of soil movement down slope due to tillage operation. It is mega gram per hector per
year. And Et is basically the erosivity of tillage operations which is expressed as kg of
soil move annually per meter of tillage width and percentage slope inclination where you
know a slope of 45 degrees considered as 100 percent and El is basically the erodibility
of the land slate of the landscape.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:55)
So, how quantification of the tillage erosion, so the land landscape erodibility factor or
this El is based on slope length or small l and the slope gradient that is s factor values
and can be determined using the topographic data from the revised universal soil loss
equation, R U S L E we have already discussed about this revised universal soil loss
equation. 
At the soil properties such as water content texture and structure also influences the
vulnerability of the landscape to tillage erosion, we have covered all these things in our
previous lecture. So, I am not going to discuss this in further details. And remember that,
the erosivity of the tillage operation Et is a function of four factors. These four factors
are basically Id, Io, Im and Ib. And all these four factors are related to tillage implement
and how it is used. So, let us see what are these factors?(Refer Slide Time: 09:54)
So, these factors this Id represents the design of the tillage implement that is the type,
size, number and angle of the coulters tines and other steel parts that interact with the
soil. The second factor Io represents the mode of operation of the implement namely the
speed and depth of tillage. And the third factor Im represents the match between the
available power of the tractor and the power required to draw the implement. 
And finally, the fourth factor Ib represents the operator behaviour that is how steadily
and how and in what patterns across or up or down the slope the farmer drives across the
field. So, these tillage erosion is also an inter play between these individual factors and
all these factors are taken into account while we are collecting the tillage based erosion. 
So, guys please you know, I am just giving an overview of these erosion practices
erosion you know cultivation. There are several models available in the internet and you
can make a Google search to learn in details about this models. And I hope that you have
learned several things in this lecture or in this topic and let us wrap up this let us wrap up
this wind erosion and tillage erosion and move to our final topic of this week that is toxic
organic chemicals in soil.(Refer Slide Time: 11:30)
And so, talking about the toxic organic chemicals in the soil, there are several ways
through which this toxic organic chemicals can be present into the soil. Obviously, these
you know several ways like accidental leakage, then spills, then through planned burial
and spraying and other treatments.
Now, you can see here there is an accidental spill of crude oil or petroleum in an area in
Israel. So, that is the way through which this organic chemicals press you know organic
chemicals you know are spilled or you know present in the soil environment.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:13)
So, let us also discuss about the environmental damage from different organic chemicals.
For discussing the environmental damage from organic chemicals, we first have to you
know discuss about the Xenobiotics. Remember this an very very important term. And
xenobiotics are basically synthetic organic chemicals which are unfamiliar to the living
world and it basically comes from the Greek word Xeno; that means, strange.
So, being non-natural, many xenobiotics are either toxic to living organisms or resistant
to biological decay or both. So, this xenobiotics, I mean all this organic chemicals which
are present into the soil organic pollutants are which are present into the soil, they can
they can pose a serious threats not only to the existing you know the soil microorganisms
or macro organism, but also it poses serious threats to the ecosystem to the crops as well
as to the plant to the human health.
So, this xenobiotics again these are synthetic organic chemicals which are unfamiliar to
the living world and they are coming from this Greek work Xeno; that means, strange.
So,  being  non-natural  many  xenobiotics  are  either  toxic  or  to  living  organisms  or
resistant  to biological  decay  or  both. And  the  chemical  structure  of  the  xenobiotic
compounds  may  be  quite  similar  to  those  of  naturally  occurring  products  by
microorganisms and plant. 
And the difference, there is a obviously, a difference. The difference is commonly the
insertion of halogen atom. So, in the xenobiotics we will see there is an insertion of this
halogen atoms like chlorine, fluorine, bromine or multivalent non-metal atoms such as
sulphur and nitrogen into the structure.
So, again this xenobiotic structure may be quite similar to those naturally occurring
compounds; however, you will see the predominant of chlorine, fluorine and bromine as
well  as  multivalent  non-metal  atoms  sulphur  and  nitrogen  in  the  structure  of  the
xenobiotics.(Refer Slide Time: 14:24)
So,  let  us  see  the  representative  compounds  in  18  classes  of  widespread  organic
contaminants  which  are  present  into  the  soil.  Let  us  start  with  the  xenobiotics.
Obviously, the industrial xenobiotics, you can see we can see a PCB or polychlorinated
biphenyls. This is you know dichlorobiphenyl and obviously, this is a trichloro ethylene. 
And this is MTB; that means, methyl tertiary butyl ether and this PAH that is polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon which is with these polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon is present
when there is a petroleum spill. And TNT or 2 4 6 trinitrotoluene it is an explosive and
also a PCB that is pentachloro phenol. 
So, all these are industrial xenobiotics and this industrial xenobiotics creates a huge
amount of you know in a you know environmental effects. Specially, this PAH they are
you know they are the cause of different types of carcinogenic effects and we must be
very very careful when there is a you know when there is an oil spill and also this other
industrial xenobiotics are also very very environmentally harmful.(Refer Slide Time: 15:43)
So, let us see the insecticides you know insecticides are the major organic pollutants
which are present into the soil. And let us start with the DDT which is chlorinated
hydrocarbons. You can see in the structure as I told you the chlorines are present and you
know the chlorines are present. So, it is a chlorinated hydrocarbons, then carbaryls
carbaryls  are  you  know  carbamates  and  you  know  parathion  which  are  basically
organophosphate group of insecticide. 
So, you can see here sulphur is present as I have told you. And so, this is very very
important. So, sulphur is present in the parathion or in the organophosphate and also
phosphorous  is  present  here.  And  clothianidin  which  basically  represent  this
neonicotinoids which is also an important pesticide you can see this chlorine is present,
sulphur is present, nitrogen is present. So, multivariate or non-metal cations are non-
metal  ions  are  present  and  also  the  you  know  this  chlorine  is  present  in  the
neonicotinoids.  So,  creating  you  know  environmental  hazards.  So,  these  are  all
insecticides.(Refer Slide Time: 17:05) 
Let us talk about the herbicides  which are gaining very very importance  nowadays
because the consumption of herbicides is increasing day by day. Important herbicides
you can see here Alachlor which are coming from the  acetanilide groups. And then,
EPTC which are representing the carbamothioets and then, 2,4 D or which is basically
phenoxyalkanoic acids and then, trifluralin which is dinitroaniline and then, lineurons
which is basically substituted urease and you can see nicosulfurons which are basically
sulfonylureas  and  this  is  acetochlor  and  then  glyphosate  and  atrazine  which  are
representing triazines.
So, you can say all these are herbicides and you can see all these which I have discussed
starting from xenobiotics and then insecticides and these herbicides. This represent 18
classes of widespread organic contaminants which are present in the soil environment
and  thereby  you  know  thereby  creating  different  health  related  hazard  as  well  as
environmental hazards in the in the soil ecosystem.(Refer Slide Time: 18:27)
So, if you see the pesticide consumption trend in India, this pesticide consumption trend
in India, you can see here in 1000 tons there is a continuous increase in pesticide
consumption up to 2016 and 17 and you know you know 14, 15 and 16 and 17 and
obviously, the, so this green bar basically shows the total consumption and consumption
per hector also increases.
So, there is a continuous increase in consumption per hector. Obviously, for last two
year,  there  is  almost  virtually  stagnation;  however,  you  can  see  in  the  you  know
ultimately they have increased from the starting that is at the you know in 2000, and
2001; obviously, the consumption was fairly less. 
And if you see the state wide consumption of you know pesticide, if you see the total
consumption is higher in certain states like you know in Punjab it is very very high, in
Maharashtra it is also high you know and in Uttar Pradesh it is also high. So, all this
states like Punjab, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh. 
All these are showing high pesticide consumption as compared to you know and per kg
per hector utilization of per hector consumption of pesticide is also increase in we high in
case  of you know  Punjab  and Haryana and as  well  as  you know  other  states  like
Maharashtra and you know and so on, so forth like Kerala and Uttar Pradesh. And if you see the composite, I mean the you know thus you know the use of different
types of pesticides; obviously, the pesticides are insecticides can be differentiated into
insecticide fungicide, herbicide and rodenticide. And if you change the change in, use of
different types of pesticides  along over the time, you can see the while the use of
insecticides is getting reduced, the use of fungicide and also the use of herbicides and
also the use of rodenticide are getting continuously increase along the time.
So, you can see that the pesticide consumption trends are India showing the increasing
pattern; some states are showing high consumption of the pesticides and that is why you
know it is very very detrimental for those ecosystem. Specially, I would I will talk about
the Punjab where the per hector consumption of the pesticide in 2016, 17 you can see
this highest and as a result of that, there is always more incidents of human health
hazards like cancers and other effects. So, this shows the effect of persist you know of
this pesticides in Indian condition.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:38)
And so, what are the problems coming from the pesticides; obviously, there are several
aspects, several problems first of all public health impacts, we will discuss that and then
domestic animals death and contaminations is another effect. The loss of natural enemies
when we are continuously increasing the pesticide or insecticide, there is a you know
there is a inherent you know somewhat resistance is being grown within the pest and also
some loss of natural enemies pesticide resistance I have tall talked about it. Honeybee  and  pollination  losses,  we  are  seeing  because  of  these,  pesticide  based
poisoning crop losses increase of a increase of a serious consumption sometimes damage
the crops, fishery losses because these pesticide will ultimately move away through the
runoff and ultimately deposit into the different water bodies creating you know toxic
condition bird losses and also groundwater contamination.
So, these are the different problems which are arising from pesticide contamination in
soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:44)
Then, another important term is POP or persistent organic pollutants we also you know
these are also coming from the organochlorines as you can see DDT hexachlorobenzenes
and TCD and then 2 4 D, 2 4 5 T; are basically the herbicides whereas, DDT, CVR
insecticides. So, these are basically you can see these are organochlorines because most
all of them are having chlorine in their structure. And you know why they are called
persistent organic pollutants because they stay in the environment for a long period of
time  and  travel  long  distance.  So,  polychlorinated  biphenyls  or  PCBs  are  common
pesticides such as DDTs or dioxins are these organic or persistent organic pollutants.(Refer Slide Time: 23:40)
So, if you see the important  process which are affecting  the dissipation  of organic
chemicals or you know xenobiotics and this pesticides in the soils, you can see there are
several processes. So, it can either goes to the atmosphere due to the volatilization
process or it can be adsorbed, this organic chemicals can be adsorbed in the organic
matter or clay in the soil or it can leach down to  in the water table due to you know in
the soluble in the solution form or you know it can chemically decompose by several
microorganisms which are present in the soil or you know it can you know different
types of into different types of reaction chemical decomposition. 
Some  biological  aerobic  degradation  occurs  due to  the  microorganism  affect  at the
surface soil layers where there is an where there is a relatively high aeration as compared
to sub soil layers and then anaerobic biological degradation occurs in anoxic condition or
sub soil layers and then you can see here there is some runoff based losses of this organic
chemicals and deposition to other places and finally, absorption exudation by different
you know by crops and ultimately, by you know different human you know human body.
So, these are several  ways  through which  this  organic  chemicals  dissipate  into  the
environment and you know they are a different fates of this organic chemicals.(Refer Slide Time: 25:23) 
And  let  us  see  you  know  why  different  pesticide  adsorption  pattern  in  the  soil?
Obviously, this showing the adsorption relation between amount of adsorb adsorbent and
adsorption  percentage  for  a  particular  type  of  soil.  So,  you  can  see  adsorption  of
polychlorinated biphenyl by different soil materials here. So, it basically shows the trend
of adsorption of polychlorinated biphenyl which is an important POP by different soil
materials. 
So,  you  can  see  the  soil  loss  much  of it  is  adsorption  capacity  when  treated  with
hydrogen peroxide because they are basically removing all the organic carbon which is
present in to the soil by oxidation. The amount of soil material which is required to
absorb 50 percent of the PCB was approximately ten times as great for montmorillonite.
Obviously, you can see these are montmorillonite as for soil organic matter. 
So, we can soil or this is a soil organic matter curve and this is a montmorillonite based
curve. So, you can see, the amount of soil material required to absorb the 50 percent of
the PCBs or approximately ten times higher. So, this an amount of absorbent or soil
materials and when we are using the H 2O2 treated soil. Obviously, the amount of soil
material need it to absorb these 50 percent of the PCB is also increasing 10 times or more
ok.
So, you can see here as the basically these trend shows that as there is a continuous
decrease of organic matter; obviously, there will be less amount of adsorption of thispesticide in the soil. So, that is why there is always need for maintaining a good amount
of organic matter into the soil to retain more pesticide into the soil and restrict their
movement to other places.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:14)
Not only ok, so what is the effects of pesticide in soil microorganism; obviously, the first
effect  is  mortality  when  we  are  applying  this  pesticides  that  will  kill  the  native
microorganism.  Apart  from  organic,  you  know  mortality  these  effects  of  organic
pesticides are also very subtle. For example, you can see here you know the burrowing
behaviour  of  the  earthworm  shown to  be  dramatically  inhibited  by a neonicotinoid
insecticide. 
Here,there is no neonicotinoid insecticide is imidacloprid. So, when you are increasing,
so this is a control condition this is an you know 0.1 mg per k g concentration where is
0.5 mg per kg. So, burrowing activity, behaviour of earthworm also reduced because
their  activity  is  reduced  while  we  are  increasing  the  different  you  know  pesticide
concentration in the field.
So,  that  shows  the  deleterious  effects  of  increasing  amount  of  pesticide  effects.
Obviously, pesticides are need for controlling the weeds and controlling the pests, but
also they are having this type of you know desired you know deleterious effect.(Refer Slide Time: 28:23)
And finally, the human health effect is very very important and you can see parts of the
body absorb pesticide at different rates and the head is 4 times more you know absorbent
then that hand. And genital area is 11 times more you know absorbent. So, depending on
the different parts, different types of symptoms of pesticides injection is there and as a
result; obviously, due to the high amount of pesticide injection and high accumulation of
pesticide in the different parts of the body, there are several types of non-curable diseases
like cancer and other things are happening nowadays specifically in Punjab areas of
India. 
So, that is why we need to be very very careful while handling this persistent organic
pollutants and organic pollutants into the field in the agricultural areas and I hope that
you have learned something in this lecture. So, we are now finishing the week 9 lectures.
All the five lectures and we will be starting the week 10 of lectures from the next lecture
and we will be covering different ways to control this organic pollution as well as we
will be discussing different types of inorganic pollutants in the soil.
So, thank you guys. Let us meet in week 10 lectures, bye.