 Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 49
Soil Survey
Welcome friends to this 4th lecture of week 10 of Soil Science and Technology and in
this lecture, will be covering a very very important topic that is Soil Survey. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:32)
And will be covering this following concepts in the soil survey that is what is the first
covering, what is soil survey and then what are the objectives of soil survey, what are the
uses of soil survey and what are the basic steps of soil survey and different types,
different orders of soil survey and then mapping procedure and practical difficulties
which are present in soil surveys. (Refer Slide Time: 00:52)
So, we talked about in our week 2, we have to it talked about the soil classification and
how we can define difference soil in two different orders, suborder, about great group,
subgroup,  then  family  and  series.  And  the  soil  survey  is  basically  the  practical
application of the soil classification knowledge. And soil survey is a technique that
provides information of the spatial distribution of soil and their and their variation;
obviously. 
And the soil survey of an area is expected to provide the answer to general questions
such as you know what type of soil are present in what proportion. Secondly, what is the
type at any site of interest and finally, where can soil of a particular type or particular
range of soil properties be found.
So,  these  are  some  important  questions  which  you  require  for  better  and  effective
management planning. So, for better and effective management of soil resources, you
need to do soil survey. And remember that, whenever you plan anything whether you go
for agricultural operation or whether you go for any engineering application, soil survey
is must otherwise you cannot see we you know you cannot make a plan on which soil
you are going to build anything or you can do some further you know agriculture
operations are any other management planning. So, soil survey helps in getting this
answers and we will see how this basically the soil survey works. (Refer Slide Time: 02:35)
So, the objectives of soil survey or you know or rather the broader, the broad general
objectives of soil survey could be grouped as fundamental and applied. So, there are two
aspects regarding the objectives of soil survey. First of all, let us you know see the
fundamental objectives. The fundamentally is soil survey helps in gathering information
about the properties  genesis classification and nomenclature  of the soil and applied
aspect of soil survey includes interpretation of soil data  for  use  in  agriculture,
forestry, recreational purposes, urban, industrial and pasture development, etcetera.
So, again fundamental aspects that is soil survey helps in gathering information about the
soil genesis and it helps in classifying the soil and then name that particular soil. For
example, if you want to name the soil of you know of any areas, say above say you know
New Delhi area. So, we need to do a soil survey and then we need to properly identify
the soil properties, then we have to give them a particular name which will be use for
indicating the soil of that area. 
And secondly, the applied aspects is when we do it and when we map the soil; obviously,
then it will be serving as a you know tool for selecting different land use patterns like
whether we you want to use that soil, whether that soil is suited for agriculture purpose
or forestry purpose or recreational purpose or industrial and pasture purpose. So, these all
type of answers, you will get when you will have a map of soil survey. So, these are
basically objectives you can say of soil survey. (Refer Slide Time: 04:26)
Now, what are the uses of soil survey; obviously, they provide the information for the
development of land use plans for both arable and non-arable lands and for predicting the
long term effects of a particular land use environment. Secondly, they help in predicting
the adaptability of identified soil to various uses and also their behavior and productivity
under defined sets of management practices. So, obviously, they also you know you
know they also you know soil survey, also helps us to identify the adaptability of soils to
various land uses.
 And secondly, thirdly, soil resources inventory helps in recognizing the areas having
constraints  like  salinity,  alkalinity,  acidity,  erosion,  waterlogging,  flooding  and  also
taking  suitable  measures  for  their  management.  So,  it  is  very  much  important  for
identifying different problematic soils and their subsequent management. Finally, soil
information generated through soil survey is useful for land settlement, tax appraisal,
locating and designing highways airports and other engineering structures. 
So, you can see both for arable and land and for non arable land, both for agricultural
purposes and non agricultural purposes, engineering purposes, industrial purposes, you
can use this soil survey and it has got a very very fast the you know application domain I
would say.(Refer Slide Time: 05:55)
So, let us see, what are the basic steps in making the soil survey? The first step is
mapping of the soil. So, this is very important. So, mapping of the soil is very very
important is the first step. And obviously, characterization of the mapping units, we will
discussing about the mapping units in a few slides  and then, once we characterize the
mapping units then we have to classify in classify the mapping units. 
So, again the 1st step is the mapping of unit soil; 2nd is characterizing of the mapping unit;
3rd  is classification of the mapping units; 4th  is the correlation with other soil survey. So,
basically once a team of soil scientists completed as soil map and the map is reviewed by
other soil scientists to verify that the soil boundaries match those mapped and adjacent
areas and that the characterization of the classification of mapping units are consistent
with other soil survey. So, it is a kind of validation practice in the soil survey,  And the
5th  one is interpretation of the soil suitability for various land uses.
So, a report is written to accompany the soil map in order to describe the suitability of
each mapping unit for various land uses and the interpretive tables of the report often
reflect  many  person  year  of  experience  and  observations  as  well  as  standard
interpretation of measure soil properties. Now, this interpretation is very very important
because  it  requires  a  long  you  know  time  dedication  and  as  well  as  expertise  for
interpreting this type of soil as well as soil mapping units and then identifying what is the
best suitable practice for that soil-mapping units. And organization obviously, of all thissoils information to make it available to users in the form of maps, tabular information
and electronic data files. Obviously, most of these things have been already done main
advanced countries like US and the work is on progress in India.
So, again this 6th steps first of all mapping of the soil, 2nd  is characterization of the
mapping units, 3rd is classification of the mapping unit, 4th  one is correlation of the
others with other soil surveys are kind of validation, 5th  one is interpretation of soil
suitability for various land uses and 6th one is the organization of all this soil information.
So, these are the basic steps of making the soil survey. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:26)
And if you see the diagrammatic view schematic view of soil survey methodology;
obviously, starts with the different data sources. So, you can use either satellite data to
create a base map and also you can use some ancillary data like Topomaps and reports,
etcetera as a base maps. Topomaps also  can be used as a base map and then you can use
the visual interpretation. 
After the visual interpretation, you know pre field physiographic units can develop. And
from their ground truth collections and you know ground truth collection is mainly done
for the verification of the physiographic units and soil profile studies and collection of
samples and soil analysis and soil classification.So, we need to actually go to that area and collect some soil sample so that, we can
verify whether we know we are correctly identifying the properties of the soil for that
point. And then, once we do that, physiographic soil relationship will do and finally,
finalization of soil maps and legends and ultimately producing the final soil maps. So, it
starts again with the satellite data and ancillary data. 
Then, we do the visual interpretation and then pre field physiographic units we develop
and  from  there  we  do  the  different  types  of  ground  truth  collection  and  then
physiographic soil relationship, we have developed we develop and we then finalized the
soil maps and legends and produce the final soil map for subsequent used by different
stakeholders. So, these are basically steps of you know the of soil survey methodology
and will discuss them in details letter on. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:03)
So, guys let us talk about the base maps. The base maps are the major we know at the
starting points of soil survey, obviously. Now, there are four types of base maps will be
talking about here. Let us start with the cadastral maps. Now, the cadastral maps on the
are basically done on the scale of 1 is to 2 6 4 0 where 24 inch equal to represent 1 mile
to 1 is to 7 9 2 0 where 8 inch represent 1 mile. In plain areas and 1 is to 1200 where 52.8
inches equals to 1 mile. 
So,  in  hilly  areas  and  used  for  detailed  mapping  and  cadastral  maps  show  field
boundaries and field revenue survey number. However, we can see here these are thecadastral map units and their basically shows field boundaries and field revenue survey
numbers,  we  are  getting  some  numbers  or  we  are  seeing  some  boundaries  here.
However,  they  lack  topological  details  like  contours  alleviation  etcetera.  So,  these
information, we cannot get from cadastral maps. And we remember that these cadastral
map can be used as a base map for doing the soil survey.
Second is topographical map. Now topographical maps are published on the scale of 1 is
to 25000 or 1 is to 1 is to 50000 or 1 is to 200, 50000. So, these are basically used as
base maps for various of soil surveys in India. And topographical maps or topo maps
shows physical features and contain topographical details also in the form of contours
and elevations above the mean sea level for survey of India benchmarks. 
So, you can see these are the topograph, topo maps an you can see, the contours showing
different types of topological feature different elevations and these are very very efficient
base maps were creating the soil survey. So, we have discuss about these two important
base maps again, the cadastral map as well as topographical map.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:10)
The third one is aerial photographs. The aerial photographs ranging in the scale from 1 is
to 8000 to 1 is to 60000 are basically used in different types of soil surveys. And
successive photographs contain 50 to 65 percent of the overlap which is essential for
stereoscopic viewing and analyzing of the stereo pairs. So, basically what happens, with
general you there are low altitude flights and this low altitude flights can take this imagesfrom a certain distance above the earth surface and these are basically used in aerial
photographs. 
These aerial photographs, you can see here these aerial photographs are basically use is
the base map for further soil survey. And finally, remote sensing I can see this a remote
sensing, remote sensing data we are these remote sensing photographs are basically taken
by different types of satellite platforms and these are also this remote sensing maps are
also produces a base map for creating the further soil survey. And remote sensing has
become a very very important aspect of soil survey nowadays and we will discuss them
in our next lectures also. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:17)
So, the soil survey can be divided into several orders. Actually, the soil survey can be
you know can be different 5 difference orders starting from 1st order, then 2nd order,
then 3rd order, 4rth order and 5th order. So, let us see them. So, type of survey scale is
basically varying from 1st order to 5th order. 
So, you can see first order is basically very very intensive and in generally takes the scale
of 1 is to 1000 to 1 if 15000 and in the 2nd order is basically called detail where the
survey scale is basically 1 is to 12000 to 1 is to 32000. Then, semidetailed is the 3rd
water is the 3rd order and their the scale is 1 is to 20000 to 1 is to 65000. The 4rth order
is called the reconnaissance soil survey which varies from 1 is to 50000 to 1 is to
300000. And in the reconnaissance, 5th order is also known as the reconnaissance wherewe know the survey scaled varies from 1 is to 250000 and 1 is to kind of 10 million, you
can say here 1 is to 10 million.
So, size of mapping units also vary from 5th order to 1st order. Obviously, in case of 5th
order, the size area is quite large that varies from 2.5 to 500 square kilometer and in 4th
order it varies from 15 to 250 hectare. In 3rd order, it varies from  1.5 to 15 hectare. 2nd
order, it is more detail that is  0.5 to 4 hectare and in the 1st order smaller than 0.5
hectare. So, it is the more detailed, you know detail soil survey. 
And typically, components of map units are basically in individual map units will be
talking about the map units. Map units are the individual you know polygons, which are
present in the map, in the soil map and these a polygons are map units are basically
composed of these orders suborders and great groups in case of fifth order. In case of
4rth order, there mainly consists of great group subgroup and families. In the 3rd order is
mainly consists of families series and phases of series and 2nd order is basically contain
soil series phases and series.
Then, first order is basically contain phases of soil series will talk, will discuss what is
the phase of soil series? And kind of map unit obviously, association in case of 5th order
some consociation and undifferentiated group, will discuss this thing. And you know, in
case of 4rth order, this association and some complexes consociation; in case of 3rd
order, association  or complexes. So, you can see in case of 1st order, it is mostly
consociation and some complexes. 
So, you can see as you are going from 5th order to 1st order, it is becoming more
detailed and obviously, different types of remote sensing sources we are also using. Up
to, you know up to 4rth order from up to 4 to 5th you know, up to 5th order 4, starting
from the 2nd order to 5th order, we can use the Landsat Thematic Mapper digitized data
for remote from you know from remote sensing sources. 
Spot  image  digital  data  can  be  done  up  to  1st  order  and  higher  altitude  aerial
photography we can do from 1st order to 4rth order and low altitude aerial photography
can be done only from 1st order to 3rd order. And use of soil survey land use planning;
obviously, 5th order and 4rth order useful for resource inventory and from 4rth order to
3rd order are from project location. Feasible surveys are you know first feasible surveyscan be done from 3rd order and 2nd order and management surveys can be done using it
1st order and 2nd order.
So, this shows this basically table shows how different order sub you know, what are the
different orders of the soil survey and how they can catered, the you know different
catered to the different leaves and how they are differing in their size, how their differing
in their you know attention to details and what are their usefulness. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:44)
So, what is the mapping unit? So, soil map unit are designed to efficiently deliver soil
information to meet user needs for management and land use decisions. So, map units
can appear as individual areas like polygons, you can see it is an individual polygon here
which is denoted by R R 1, then L V 2, then L V 1. So, these are individual map units
and these are basically polygons points all lines on a map. So, a map unit is a collection
of areas defined and named the same in terms of their soil components. So, each map
unit differs in some respect from all others in a survey area and is uniquely identified on
a soil map. (Refer Slide Time: 18:26)
So, there are certain you know important you know terms which need to define. First of
all soil phase; we talked about different soil phases while you know discussing these are
different orders of soil survey. So, soil phase we know although technically not included
in the class of soil taxonomy, as a class in soil taxonomy a phase is subdivision based on
some important deviations. 
That influences the use of the soil such as surface texture, degree of erosion, slope
stoniness or soluble salt content etcetera. So, thus a Cecil sandy loam; for example, these
a soil series. So, Cecil sandy loam 3 to 5 percent slope and you know Hagerstown silt
loam, stony phase are example of phases of soil series. 
So, where you are adding some more you know characteristics or more features in the
soil series, then we are calling it soil phase because here you can see Cecil sandy loam 3
to 5 percent slope. So, adding with this 3 to 5 percent slope making it is a soil phase or
phases of soil series. Now, the second important term is consociations. 
The smallest practical mapping unit for most detailed soil survey is an area that contains
primarily one soil component. Furthermore, that component is comprised mainly of only
one phase of the named soil series. For example, a mapping unit may be labeled as the
consociation like you know Saybrook silt loam, 2 to 5 percent slope moderately eroded,
so,  this  is  a  consociations.  So,  now  you  differentiate  between  soil  phases  and
consociation. (Refer Slide Time: 20:13)
The third one is soil complexes. So, you know soil complexes you know sometime you
know contrasting soils occur adjacent to each other in a pattern. So, intricate that the
delineation of each kind of soil on a soil map becomes very very difficult. Again, some
you know when the soil with contrasting you know characteristics occur side by side in a
pattern. So, it is very difficult for us to differentiate the soils.
 Then, we call it soil complexes and in such cases, a soil complex is indicated on a soil
map and the explanation of the soil present in the complex is contained in the soil survey
report; obviously, the soil surveys report we give the explanation. The fourth one is soil
associations and broader classes; obviously, relatively large scale soil maps like third
order maps may display only soil association. 
So,  basically  these  are  general  grouping  of  soil  that  typically  occur  together  in  a
landscape and could be mapped separately at larger scales. And mapping units in 4rth
and 5th order surveys with scales smaller than 1 is to you know 100000 usually can. So,
1 is to 1000000 an usually show only broad classes of soil such as the dominant soil
orders suborder and great group present in delineated area.
 So, you can see this picture, these are basically soil association by texture. And so, you
can see these are you know the soil association is basically, sorry soil association is
basically you know basically general groupings of soil that typically occur together in a
landscape and could be map separately as a larger scale.(Refer Slide Time: 22:07)
So, these are the 4 important point. So, another important point is undifferentiated group.
Undifferentiated  groups  are  these  are  the  unit  which  consists  of  soil  that  are  not
consistently found together so, but they are grouped and mapped together because their
suitabilities and management are very similar in common land uses. So, these are call
undifferentiated groups. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:29)
So, in this slide, basically shows the early days of soil survey and obviously, remember
that whatever soil survey, we are doing here in India, we are basically following theUnited State Department of Agriculture or USDA soil survey which started long back in
18 you know in 19 centuries and you can see couple of pictures when there use the
traditional methods of soil survey. 
And obviously, at the time, more emphasis was given to the geological context rather
than the soil characteristics and you can see how they were used different types of base
maps you know they need some interpretation for cropland and the last picture shows
that 1922, reconnaissance soil survey in Texas by USDA natural research conservation
service which are responsible for this is the organization, this is the natural research
conservation service who are responsible for delineating the soil survey or undertaking
the soil survey in a united states and we are basically following there guidelines in India
also. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:36)
So, let us see, what are the you know several steps of soil mapping soil survey mapping
procedure? So, preliminary in the first step, we do some reconnaissance of the area to
investigate the major soils and their pattern of occurrence and you know this is the first
step. The second step is procurement of required base maps like aerial photographs, we
procure it from different sources, aerial you know satellite imagery topographical maps
or other maps.
 So,  and  then  third  you,  we  generally  prepared  the  mapping  legend  based  on  the
preliminary field studies. So, get first of all will do some preliminary reconnaissance ofthe area to investigate the major soils of their pattern of occurrence. Second, we buy
some base map like aerial photographs, satellite imagery, topographical and other maps.
These are expensive and we buy from different sources. Third one is preparation of the
mapping legends based on the preliminary field studies. So, after the preliminary field
studies, we make them you know the mapping legends. 
There we do the stereographic study of aerial photographs and interpretation of satellite
imagery are interpretation of satellite imagery or digital for the identification delineation
of the landforms and we want to identify these landforms like hills, valleys, terraces,
floodplains, coastal plains and sand dunes and their subdivisions based on the difference
of in the tone and relief and vegetation.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:17)
So, this is the 4th  step. The 5th  step is basically so, these are the 4th  step. The 5th step is
basically the soils are examined at some standard interval along the traverse to locate
important differences in their properties and then we further plot the soil boundaries. So,
once you plot the soil boundaries, they we do classification of the soil and naming of the
map units based on the morphological, physical and chemical properties of the soil
forming  the  map  unit  and  finally,  we  do  the  preparation  of  the  final  legends  and
finalization of the base map finalization of the soil map.
 So, these are the some of the steps which are important for you know soil survey
mapping procedure. Remember that, this is consists of several steps and each of the stepsfor doing this, for executing this steps indicates you know long time experience and you
know the people who do does this type of survey are called the pathologist and the soil
survey experts and they have the capability of delineating each and every feature of the
soil and they can they have the capability of preparation of the soil map in a most
suitable way. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:33)
And so, guys we know what are the different features  we generally examine while
describing the soil profile; obviously, each horizon, when we go and we collect the soil
sample for ground truthing what are the parameters which we consider for classification
of the soil and delineating  the soil map units. These are the features  we generally
considered as a soil scientist. First of all, the horizon symbol, then the depth of the each
horizon in layer or centimeter, then soil color under wet moist and dry conditions and
also mottling.
So,  mottling  is  basically  soil  when  it  indicates  the  periodic  iron,  reduction  and
reoxidation. So, that show some color here you can see you know the special mottle
color of the soil. So, we it mottle soil and this mottling is an important feature in
describing the soil profile and finally, the soil texture and then soil structure we have, we
have already discuss this in our previous lecture and then soil consistence under dry
moist and wet condition and then Cutans. Cutans are basically ped coatings due to the process of eluviation and then pressure faces
and  slickensides.  We  have  already  covered  the  slickensides  while  we  discuss  the
vertisols  in  our  soil  classification  lecture  and  then  different  types  of  nodules  and
concretion  of cementation,  you can  find different  types  of nodules  and concretions
specially  form  some  carbonates  and  some  other  compounds  also  secondary
accumulations. 
Then, contents of carbonates and soluble salts we have you if you remember we have
divided different types of subsurface horizons or indopedons based on this secondary
accumulation of carbonates soluble salt like Salic, gypsy can all this thing we know
calcic. So, if you remember those things, so this type of features we are also looking for
wild describing this you know individual soil for ground truthing. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:39)
And also whether there is a presence of root where we know what are the nature of
boundaries with the horizon below and then what is the pH what the hard if there is a
formation of hard pans. Hard pans generally formed due to the movement of due to
different heavy implements as well as you can other practices. Then pores, what is the
percentage of pores, then is the presence of artefacts and then features of biological
origin. 
So, all these are taken into account wild describing any particular soil profile. You can
see how a pathologist dig up a soil and actually define each and every layer and identifywhat are the important properties of this each and every layer for proper validation of the
mapping units and also based on this, they name that soil and they create the proper
mapping units of that of the soil. 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:37)
So, what are the practical difficulties of in soil survey; obviously, the distribution of the
different soil may be so complex in a field or may occupy to so small areas that their
delineation on a map at any practical scale become very difficult. And secondly, it is
difficult to follow the geographic boundaries of the soil because of the vegetative cover
and their hidden nature. Secondly, soil survey and map thirdly the soil survey and
mapping are expensive and many developing nations, may not afford them unless they
serve the practical needs.
And finally, the inaccessibility of certain areas because of transportation problem may
restricts  the  number  of  sampling  point.  So,  these  are  some  practical  problems  are
difficulties in the soil survey. So, guys I hope that you have learned about this soil
survey. And let us wrap up this lecture here and will meet in the next lecture to discuss
our final topic of week 10 that is the use of remote sensing in soil survey. So, thank you
and let us meet and to discuss this thing in the next lecture, bye.