Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 46
Remediation of Organic Pollutant
Welcome students to this week 10 lectures of Soil Science and Technology and in this
lecture, we will be starting the first topic that is remediation of soil organic pollution.
And in the last week of lectures in that means in week 9 of lectures we have learnt about
different types of organic pollutants specifically we talked about different  pesticides,
herbicides  as  well  as  different  xenobiotics which  are  responsible  for  different
environmental pollutions.
And then, we talked about how they you know contaminate you know environment
specifically soil. And in this lecture you know in this lecture we will be talking about this
remediation  of  soil  organic  pollution;  that  means,  what  are  the  different  ways  of
remediating these organic pollutants?
Obviously, remember that the available mechanisms are you know there a numerous
available mechanisms and; obviously, it will not be possible to cover each of them. But I
will try to give you a basic overview  as  well as I will try to touch the important
mechanisms which we can employ to remediate this soil organic pollutions coming from
different pesticides and other organic chemicals like xenobiotics.  So, let us start; so, in
this topic or in this lecture we will be basically covering the following concepts.(Refer Slide Time: 02:05)
These concepts are physical and chemical methods of remediation and then we will talk
about bioremediation, we will talk about phytoremediation and then we will be talking
about effect of ageing on bio availability of contaminants in the soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:23)
So, if we talk about the Remediation of soil organic pollutions organic pollutants can be
cleared by modifying the agroecosystems; specifically when we talk about the organic
pollution  agroecosystem; you can you know you can either remediate or clean this
organic pollutant by modifying the agroecosystems. And there are three major processeswhich you can employee to achieve this goal of cleaning the pollutant organic pollutants
from the agroecosystems.
These are mainly physical and these are mainly physical and chemical methods and then
bioremediation  and  phytoremediation.  And  we  will  be  discussing  this  physical  and
chemical methods first, then we will be discussing bioremediation and then we will be
discussing the bio you know phytoremediation.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:21)
So, let us go ahead and see you know what is the trends of you know what is the trends
or what is the relation between time to achieve cleanup in years as well as cost to achieve
the cleanup. So; obviously, this graph shows that and it is clearly visible that as far as the
cost is concerned; the high cost is involved in excavating any contaminated soil and then
hauling them and then washing them. 
So, this is the most expensive method which is available for cleaning the; you know
organic  pollutants  following  by  excavating  haul  and  then  composting  this  organic
compound. You know that due to the composting process all the; you know majority of
the pollutant gets remediate or cleaned up; so this is another way and another way of
dealing with it is to heat in situ to decompose or organics to decompose organic.
So;  basically  so,  these  are  the  methods  which  are  arrange  in  the  order  of  their
expensiveness. So, you can see excavating, hauling and washing; obviously, it is an mostexpensive method following guide excavating hauling and composting. And then heat in
situ to decompose the organics; that means, the organic chemicals and organic pollutants
followed by there in situ bioremediation or in situ biostimulation by adding nutrients air
and or microbes. We will be talking about this later on and then phytoremediation by
rhizosphere  breakdown  and  then,  you  know  phytoremediation  by  plant  uptake  and
removal and then, enhance inactivation and finally, natural attenuation which is the
totally natural process of remediating the organic chemicals.
So, you can see that these basically shows the you know the order of you know in the
decreasing order of cost involved for clean up and, but; obviously, although it is very
expensive to excavate haul and wash, it is very you know it is very rapid as compared to
this natural attenuation.
So; obviously, as we go down from this excavating hauling and washing to excavating
hauling and composting to all the way to natural attenuation process, it is slowing down
the process. So; obviously, the natural as attenuation, although it is the least expensive
method  and  it  is  less  disruptive  than  that  of  the  excavating  hauling  and  washing;
obviously,  these  natural  attenuation  is  a  very  very  slow  process  where  as  these
excavating hauling and washing is a rapid process.
So, whenever you need a rapid you know rapid clean up of organic pollutants from your
agro ecosystem and you do not have any you know you do not have any limitation
resource wise; obviously, the excavating, hauling and washing is the best process.
So, now you will have an idea about you know what is the tradeoff between time to
achieve the clean up and then the cost achieve the clean up. So, you can take the best
decision which one to practice based on your particular condition of organic pollution.
So, guys I hope that, this graph gives some insight on how to select the best remediation
practice for remediating soil organic pollution.(Refer Slide Time: 07:01)
So, let us go ahead and see what are the important physical and chemical methods well,
in the physical and chemical methods we generally discuss you know divide them into
ex-situ and in-situ treatment as you can see. Ex-situ means, you know you know off the
side and in-situ means on the side.
So, you can see here you know ex-situ in the you know soil is excavated and transported
in ex-situ treatment, because we are excavating the soil from his own original proportion
origin original position and then transporting to some other places. And then, you know
that incineration leaching and vacuum pumping etcetera is done to address the pollutant.
So, these are ex-situ treatments, and remember that ex-situ is a highly expensive and
disrupt the soil, but it is the only option when the soil is extremely polluted.
So, whenever the soil is extremely polluted in-situ you know in-situ treatment may not
be sufficient and then we need some ex-situ treatment to excavate the soil to disturb the
soil and transport the soil to some other places for further treatment. And in compression
to ex-situ treatment, in-situ treatment uses same process as ex-situ ex situ; however, it
reduces the excavation and transportation costs.
So, this excavation and transportation costs which you know consist a huge amount of
cost involved which involve huge amount of cost for you know for ex-situ treatment is
not present in in-situ; however, the contaminates may be eliminated or immobilized in
the  soil.  So,  this  is  the  difference  between  ex-situ  treatment  and  in-situ  treatment;obviously, again in the ex-situ treatment the you know soil is basically excavated and
transported for you know for treatment to some other side and it is generally performed
when the soil is extremely polluted.
However, in-situ treatment you know does not allow it does not allow for excavation and
transportation. So, that is you know that is why it is less expensive and in the in-situ
treatment contaminants may be eliminated or immobilized in the soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:23)
So,,let us see some physical and chemical agents which are responsible for remediating
the organic pollutants, one of them is called surfactant. And surfactant are compounds
that lower the surface tension or interfacial tension between two liquids between a gas
and liquid or between a liquid and solid. We have already discussed about the surface
tension in our soil moisture lectures.
So, I am not going to detail in you know going to further discuss on the surface tension.
But remember that this surfactants are basically you know they lower the surface tension
between two liquids between a gas and a liquid or betweens in liquids and solid, and this
surfactants may acts as a detergent, wetting agents, emulsifiers, foaming agents and
dispersants. So, generally the you know the detergent which we used for cleaning our
clothes and other washing purpose can be used as an you know important surfactants. So,
let us see how this surfactants works for you know for remediating the organic pollutant.(Refer Slide Time: 10:37)
So, surfactants are you know as a typical you know structure. So, the ability of surfactant
to  reduce  the  interfacial  energy  is  related  to  the  polar-nonpolar  structure  of  their
molecule. So, you can see there a you know this is a structure of a surfactant and;
obviously, you can see that the structure you know surfactant molecule consists of two
different groups a hydrophilic head.
So, this is the hydrophilic head and this is the hydrophobic tail. So, this hydrophilic head
you know is responsible for attracting the polar liquid such as water. However, these
hydrophobic tail can attract the nonpolar compounds; like, organic like you know any oil
or any organic pollutants which are non polar in nature.
So, when we add these  detergent  of surfactants  in an interface  between  you know
interface between a polar and nonpolar phases. For example, when some non polar
organic compound or organic pollutants are mixed with polar solvent like, water. Then if
we add this surfactants or detergents, it will you know it will reduce the energy on the
interface between polar and nonpolar phases and it does it by a specialized kind of
arrangement.
As you can see here, whenever we add this type of detergents or chemical or surfactants
in this interface between polar and nonpolar phases, they arrange in such a way that this
you know this hydrophilic head or water loving head is arranged you know in the
vicinity of water molecule and you know this is an aqueous solution; obviously.So, these all these hydrophilic heads will be arrange towards this aqueous solution;
whereas, this hydrophobic tail is arrange inside, so it should not get you know in touch
with this  aqueous  solution.  And this  hydrophobic tail  basically  attracts  this  organic
molecules or organic pollutants which are present in this solvent in this aqueous solution
and basically it attracts it binds with those organic pollutants, and then it removes all
these organic chemicals.
So, you know a surfactant molecule you know by its hydrophilic head and hydrophobic
tail, these dual structure of surfactant is essential for removing any particular you know
non polar organic compound which is present within a polar solvent like water or so this
is how the surfactant works for removing the pollutant
(Refer Slide Time: 13:51)
So, surfactants can be used to remove oil and hydrophobic compounds and surfactant
makes  the  pollutant  available  for further  microbial  degradation  and it dissolves  the
pollution which is the leached or pumped out. So, this is the three ways through which
surfactants can remove all or remediate the organic chemicals from any contaminated
agroecosystem.(Refer Slide Time: 14:16)
The second important you know important thing we should talk about these organoclays.
Now, you know that certain surfactants replace the metal cations in the clays. And
example are Quaternary Ammonium Compounds or QACs, these surfactants can replace
the potassium in the clay. You can see here these the soil colloids of untreated clay and
which contains potassium which is attached which is absorbed at the clay surface, and
this is a quaternary ammonium compounds and this quaternary ammonium compound
basically  replaces  the  K  and  ultimately  it  produces  this  modified  clay  we  call  it
organoclay.
And this modified clay or organoclay attracts nonpolar compounds and immobilize them
until natural degradation takes place. So, this is how this organoclays helps in you know
remediation of organic pollutants from the environment.(Refer Slide Time: 15:19)
So, this picture gives a snapshot of how this physical and chemical methods acts you
know act for you know removing the organic pollutants from the soil as you can see a
soil and water. As you can see here, let us consider these is an unsecured landfill where
all the municipal solid waste and other solid waste are being dumped. And; obviously,
there is some leaking wastes through is this leaches  are contaminate you know the
important contaminates are basically coming to the ground water.
At this basically, the vadose zone and this is the groundwater flow as you can see. So,
this basically shows the plume of contaminate and ultimately it is contaminating the
ground water. However, if we are injecting the soil modifier or quaternary ammonium
compound,  this  quaternary  ammonium  compound  will  basically  goes  into  this  is  a
groundwater and you can see here this is a sorptive zone which is basically immobilize
which is you know which is characterized by this immobilization and degradation of
contaminants.
So, in the sorptive zone, in the presence of quaternary ammonium compound these
bacteria are basically, you know multiplicate an ultimately these bacteria you know
degrade  this  contaminants  an ultimately  clean  water goes  to  down the  gradient  for
drinking  water  pump  and  ultimately  the  drinking  water  is  pumped  up  from  this
groundwater. So, again we are introducing the leaking wastes into the groundwater.However, we are also injecting the soil modifier or QASC which is basically you know
modified the soil and ultimately producing the organoclays.
And these organoclays basically all the either you know helps in the degradation of helps
in the degradation or attachment of organic pollutants within the organoclays. And also
bacteria also degrades these organic chemicals and ultimately this clean water you know
goes, and ultimately the drinking water pump from the groundwater. So, this is how this
physical and chemical methods work together.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:54)
So, let us go ahead and see, what is ok; one more thing we want to talk; obviously, this
distribution co-efficient we have already talked about it in our previous lecture. So, a
give; so, I am just going through very quickly. So, you know that Kd is the ratio of
pollutant sorbed in soil to the one present in solution.
So; basically, takes this format you know this formula of Kd is basically when you have
you know mg of contaminate  per kg of soil and over mg contaminate  per liter of
solution. An; obviously, the higher the Kd values is the more the contaminant in soil than
in solution. The stronger the pollutant is held by the soil and lesser it leaches, and
organic matter rich soils or you know and organoclays have higher Kd; obviously, that is
why they can attract more organic chemicals as compared to other as compared to the
soils which are devoid of organic matter and this strongly absorbed pollutant is then
naturally degraded by microbes.Now, you can see here this is a mineral particle, and these are the organic matter. And;
obviously, there is a thin layer of water molecule which is basically polar and in the polar
water film  you can see some non polar hydrophobic organic  molecules.  And these
nonpolar organic molecules are absorbed over the non polar organic matter in a quiet
high concentration as compared to the mineral particles which is basically you know as
compared to the water also.
So, this shows basically, the attraction between the hydrophobic organic matter to other
organic you know other non polar organic compounds or in other words other non polar
organic pollutants.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:53)
So, another important term is bioremediation; now bioremediation involves the use of
enhanced plant and microbes to degrade and transform pollutants to non toxic forms. So,
whenever you know remember one thing with the terms bio comes from whenever we
are  adding,  whenever  we  are  remediating  the  soil  pollution  or  any  environmental
pollution through the help of any biological organisms.
Now, this  biological  organisms  maybe  some  microbes,  you  know  some  indigenous
microbes are some microbes which we can introduce in that particular environment or
this bioremediation can be achieved through some plants. And we will be discussing
those you know microbial bioremediation and plant and plant bioremediation the other
name of plant bioremediation is basically phytoremediation and we will discuss those.So, basically these microbes and plant transform the pollutants to non toxic form and we
will see how they do it.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:03)
So, let us see what are the major types of bioremediation? There are two major types of
bioremediation, one is called intrinsic bioremediation other is enhanced bioremediation.
Now,  intrinsic  bioremediation  also  known  as  the  natural  attenuation  and,  enhanced
bioremediation known as the engineered remediation.
So, if you see the intrinsic bioremediation, intrinsic bioremediation basically, works on
the principle that let nature take its course. So, it is basically natural process and it is the
degradative activities affected by the indigenous microbes under the ambient condition,
and no intervention to alter aspects of the environment affective microbial activity is
there in case of intrinsic bioremediation.
However, in case of enhanced bioremediation; since, we are talking we are terming a as
an  engineered  remediation  you  know  there  are  couple  of  ways  we  can  you  know
engineer  this  enhanced  bioremediation.  One  of  the  way  is  biostimulation,  the
biostimulation is basically alteration of the environment to enhance the activities effected
by indigenous microbes.
And Bioaugmentation, bioaugmentation is inoculation of organisms to introduce a high
you know a type of catalysis not displayed by the indigenous community. So, again whatis the difference between bioaugmentation biostimulation? Biostimulation is basically,
alteration of the environment to enhance activities effected by the indigenous microbes
we  are  not  inoculating  you  know  foreign  organisms.  However,  in  case  of
bioaugmentation we are introducing or inoculating organisms to introduce a type of
catalysis not displayed by the indigenous community.
So, we are introducing some new community in that particular area to enhance the
microbial activity or bioremediation potential; so that is called bioaugmentation. Now, I
hope  that  it  is  clear,  what  is  the  difference  between  intrinsic  and  enhanced
bioremediation.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:09)
So, what are the some examples of natural bioremediation; obviously, I have given here
several example. First of all the bioremediation of chlorinated solvents like, you know
like Tetrachloroethylene and then PCE. And; basically, for remediating this chlorinated
solvents  you  know  or  Perchloroethylene  and  this  Tetrachloroethylene,  we  require
anaerobic environment and in the anaerobic environment in the process of reductive
dehalogenation  they  generally  you  know  they  generally  the  remediation  process  is
governed by this reductive dechlorination process I am sorry. Reductive dechlorination
process and this reductive dechlorination process ultimately produces the products of
vinyl chlorides and ethylene.Let us talk about polychlorinated biphenyls PCBs. So, in case of PCBs the environment
is; obviously, anaerobic in nature and the process is involved is reductive dechlorination.
And in the ultimate products we will get that dechlorination and dechlorinated PCBs are
having less number of chlorine than, that of the polychlorinated biphenyl which is the
starting point of this remediation process.
Then; obviously, this BTEX, BTEX stands for Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene and,
Xylene and these 4 compounds are degraded in the anaerobic environment  and the
process is basically carbon assimilation and ultimate products are biomass as mineralized
BTEX. So, you can see that these are some of the examples  of natural attenuation
process and this natural attenuation is you know again which you know what I am talked
in my earlier slides, that it is natural attenuation. Although, it is least expensive, but it
takes a long period of time to remediate all these organisms sorry all these organic
pollutants.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:12)
So, this shows this graph basically shows transformation of a mixture of PCBs to less
chlorinated  you  know  congeners  by  live  anaerobic  sediment  organisms,  and  this
histograms basically represent the PCB mixtures analyzed by gas chromatography with
increasing  peak  numbers  corresponding  to  the  congeners  with  increasing  chlorine
contains. So;  obviously,  the  PCBs  in  anaerobic  environment  transferred  by  deductive
dehalogenation and mediated by the anaerobes both growing growth supporting and co-
metabolic mechanisms. Now, the co-metabolism is a specific type of metabolism, where
two compounds are metabolize simultaneously, whether the metabolism of the second
components depends on the presence of the first compound or component.
And  the  key  process  of  the  environmental  and  this  you  know  this  reductive
dehalogenation is the key process of environmental fate of PCBs in sediment. And
remember  that  highly  chlorinated  PCBs  are  transformed  preferentially  the  less
chlorinated PCBs. And end products are also PCBs, but with fewer chlorine atom than
the parent compound, as I have told in my previous slide. So, these are some this is an
one example of natural attenuation of polychlorinated biphenyls.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:49)
So, what is; so, we have seen one couple of examples of a natural attenuation. Let us see
what is bioaugmentation; let us see ok, bioaugmentation is an example of enhanced
remedy I have you know enhanced remediation, enhanced bioremediation.
So, it should read as bio remediation and this special you know this bioaugmentation
basically you know special microbes which degrades the pollutants is introduced into the
soil. And this microbes or microorganism degrade the pollutants more readily than native
population. So, these are two important features of bioaugmentation.(Refer Slide Time: 27:44)
And then, biostimulation is assisting the degradation of pollutants by native microbial
population is called biostimulation. Now 4 major principles are followed to enhance the
native  microbial  activity,  you  can  see  here  making  the  pollutant  accessible  to  the
microbes that is by using the accessible to the microbes by using surfactants. 
You know in the surfactants they have the capability by using their hydrophilic and
hydrophobic, hydrophilic head and hydrophobic tail. Using the hydrophobic tell they can
attract those non polar organic compounds, and these non polar organic compounds
further they can make accessible to the microbes are further by degradation.
And they can provide sufficient nutrient source to the; for microbes especially nitrogen
and phosphorus and supplying the electron donor, like carbon in the form of molasses.
And supplying the electron acceptor organ you know oxygen through oxygen pumping
to the microbes. So, these are the 4 major principal follow you know we generally
followed to enhance the native microbial activity you know by biostimulation processes.(Refer Slide Time: 29:13)
And the; let us show, let us see one example of oil spill cleanup and in the oil spill
cleanup we can see that clearing oil spill in cooler and nutrient poor region is very very
slower. And this is due to the lack of nitrogen and phosphorus source for oil degrading
microscope microbes and also you know slow reaction at low temperatures. And it is
special oil soluble nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizers are applied in this case and apart
from providing nitrogen and phosphorus they also disperse the oil making them more
available to the microbes.
So, you can see here, this is an oil spill treatment in controlled verses fertilized plots
fertilized plots. So, you can see in the X axis, it is basically time after treatment in
weeks; and in the Y axis, it is basically index of crude oil remaining basically index of
crude oil remaining. So, you can see that in the fertilized plot; obviously, there is a steep
decrease in index of crude oil remaining as a time goes on. However, so; when we are
adding  the  fertilizers  in the form of you know  nitrogen  phosphate  fertilizers.  And;
obviously, this will enhances the microbial activity to degrade the oil as compared to the
control or unfertilized soil.
So, guys you know we have talked some basic ideas about you know remediation of
organic chemicals. We started with organic, you know we started with different physical
and  chemical  methods.  And  then  we  started  talking  about  different  bioremediation
techniques. You know let us wrap up here and in the next lecture we will be startingfrom here and we will try to finish this, and then will be talking about different inorganic
pollutants which are present in the soil environment.
Thank you very much.