Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 42
Universal Soil Loss Equation
(Refer Slide Time: 00:15)
Welcome friends to this lecture of week 9 lecture of Soil Science and Technology. And
in this lecture, we trying to finish this soil erosion and land degradation topic, and then
we will be starting the universal soil loss equation. So, in the last lecture we are talking
about the control of erosion in constructed sites and we talked about 5 different ways to
control the erosion soil erosion at the constructed sites.(Refer Slide Time: 00:47)
So, let us see different types of ways to control this soil erosion in constructed sites, and
these practices are generally performed in advanced developed countries and nowadays
some of these practices are also started in Indian condition also. So, let us start with
covering the exposed soil, you can see here, this instrument is called the hydroseeders
which  basically  sprays  a  mixture  of  grass  seed,  straw,  fertilizer,  water  and  sticky
polymers which ultimately established vegetation in that difficult to access areas.
So, this is another way to control the soil erosion and covering the exposed soil. These
hydroseeders helps in the spraying the mixture of grass seed, straw, fertilizer, water and
sticky polymers, and basically, ultimately you can see this established vegetation in the
ultimately which develops in the difficulty access areas. 
And, you know, erosion control mats are also another way of fighting this, you know,
water soil erosion. At the constructed site you can see, these are the erosion control mats
which are spreaded, you know, which are spreaded and these are basically these mats are
basically made up of jute and these basically holds the soil and seed in place until the
vegetation is established.
So, this is also very much important which helps in reducing the movement of soil from
one place to another place. So, these hydroseeders and erosion control mats are important
ways to fight against the water erosion, and other type of erosion movement of soil
particles from one area to another area.(Refer Slide Time: 02:36)
So, also you can control the stream bank erosion, we know, here this is an example of
controlling the stream bank erosion, you can use, you know, hard and soft armors, you
know, hard and soft armors will basically use to control the stream bank erosion.
 So, these are the rocks and armors which are, you know, present to ultimately lessen the
impact of water moving through this water body. And this is another example, this is
avoiding of gully erosion you can see here large rocks are used to control the off-site,
you know, effects of gully erosion in bare soil. So, these are called rip-rap ultimately and
these are grass sods, so ultimately it helps in controlling the, we know, gully erosion in
bare soil and so.
 (Refer Slide Time: 03:45)So, these are some of the ways to control the soil erosion and again the trapping the
sediments you can see here, we are using the straw in the end of the site to slow down
and these are the straws in the end of the site. So, slow down and lets runoff while
retaining the sediments, and here you can see this is another trapping sediments.
So, it is a sediment retention pond this is sediment retention pond and the pipe at the
upper ends, you know, allows excess water to flow out. So, basically, you can see there
is  an  inflow  of water  from  this  place,  the  water  carrying  all  the  sediments.  So,  it
deposited here and ultimately when the water level rises above a certain point, this is the
pipe at the, this is a pipe through which the excess water flows, you know, flows down or
flows out leaving all the sediments.(Refer Slide Time: 04:53)
So, these are example of trapping the sediments. So, these are couple of ways to control
these  the  soil  erosion  ok.  So,  what  are  the  other  means  of  soil  land  degradation?
Obviously, mass wasting is another means of soil degradation and it is basically the
downhill movement of unstable soil along the regolith. And basically it is of 3 types, one
is soil creep, second is mud flow and third one is land slide. In case of soil creep, it is
basically slow and downward movement of soil curving the trees and mud flows are
basically partial liquefaction of soil and their moderately rapid movement due to loss of
cohesion and landslides are basically sudden shear failure and causing rapid downhill
movement of the soil.(Refer Slide Time: 05:33)
So, in the next slide you will see the pictures of this 3 different process. The left one
shows the soil creep in UK England and this second word shows the mud flow in
Colombia. And finally, the third one is land slide; and land slide is very much visible
throughout the world and this land slide can also be visible extensively in different hilly
areas of India.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:00)
So, guys we have finished this lecture or the finished this topic of soil erosion and land
degradation the next topic we will be cover we will be starting is universal soil loss
equation.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:17)
And in the universal soil loss equation we will be covering this concepts, first of all what
is universal soil loss equation, and how we calculate this universal soil loss equation and
what is the revised universal soil loss equation.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:29)
So, let us start with the universal soil loss equation. So, you can see, it is a basically you
remember  if  you  unless,  you  know.  Now  you  have  understood  that  a  number  of
environmental factor causes soil erosion it is not only the water, not only the wind
different types of other practices management practices in the field are also important
for, you know, soil erosion.
So, based on these relation, these universal soil loss equation is developed to calculate
the amount of soil loss and this is basically these A equal to the the equation is A equal
to R into K into LS into C into P. Where A is the predicted annual soil loss and, R stands
for rainfall erosivity, K stands for soil erodibility and, L stands for slope length, S stands
for slope gradient or steepness and C stands for cover and management and P stands for
erosion control practices.
So, rainfall erosivity is basically comes under rain related factor whereas, soil erodibility
then, slope length then, slope gradient or steepness and cover and management basically
comes under soil related factors and these erosion control practices comes under the land
management factor. So, you can see here basically, we are considering both rain related
factors, soil related factors and land management factors while calculating the annual soil
loss in the universal soil loss equation. So, let us see a details, how we can, we know,
what are the different factors.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:09)
So, this universal soil loss equation basically predicts the amount of soil loss by sheet
and rill erosion in an average year for a given location. So, that is fine. So, this we use
this universal soil loss equation to predict the amount of soil loss through, you know, by
sheet and rill erosion we know about the sheet erosion, we know about the rill erosion
remember the sheet erosion when there is a sheet of soil being lost as a result of water
activity, and it basically occurs at the higher slope and higher position of the, you know,
of a slope land and ultimately the rill erosion is the creation of small channels through
which water moves the soil sediments.
And this universal soil loss equation is helpful for calculating the about of soil loss by
sheet and rill erosion in an average year for a given location and it can show varying
combination of soil land management factors contributing to erosion. And hence, aids in
decision management as we have seen it is considering both soil factors and their land
management factors as well as rainfall factors for calculating the total soil lost. And the
final and the also there is a disadvantage and the disadvantage is basically, it cannot
predict the soil loss for gully erosion. So, this is the disadvantage of universal soil loss
equation.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:53)
So, let us go ahead and see individual factors in this R K L S P. So, let us start with the
rainfall erosivity factor. So, rainfall erosivity factor or R is, you know, is an important
factor for calculating the soil loss. So, remember that rainfall is a primary cause oferosion by means of detachment, transportation and deposition of the sediment. And the
amount of soil eroded depends on the amount, intensity and seasonal distribution of the
rainfall. Obviously, when there will be torrential rain for a short period of, you know,
time that will cause more erosion than gentle rain for a long period.
So, you can see not only the amount, but also the intensity is also very important for
creating the soil erosion and also seasonal distribution of rainfall if it is evenly see, you
know; obviously, the soil erosion will be different when they are concentrated at a
particular season or they are evenly distributed throughout the year.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:51)
So, we have covered the R. now how to calculate the R. So, rain drops have obviously,
rain drops have kinetic energy and obviously, larger the drops means more the energy.
So, it is an index of kinetic energy of all the storms occurring in a particular year is
summed to give an annual index of R. So, the annual index is then averaged for many
years to obtain R for an area and intense unexpected storm causes high variability in
rainfall intensity. So, that is how R is basically calculated.
So, you can see the, this shows the influence of R factor or runoff soil loss and P loss.
So, as you can see in the x axis the R factor is given and R factor is quietly, you know,
increasing in this direction. And in the y axis, runoff is basically shown. So, as R factor
is continuously increasing the runoff is getting increased not only the runoff is getting
increased, but also simultaneously soil loss is increasing and also phosphate loss in kgper hectare is also increase, increasing; because in case of runoff the soil moves from one
area to another area including the nutrient. So, you can see with the increase of runoff, R
factor obviously, the runoff of soil and phosphorous, you know, soil, and as, you know,
runoff, soil loss and phosphate loss also increases simultaneously.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:25)
So, the second factor is soil erodibility factor or K factor, and soil erodibility is the soil
inherent susceptibility to erosion. Remember that, it is the amount of soil lost per unit of
erosive energy of rainfall in a standard plot and high infiltration capacity and high stable
and highly stable soil containing iron and aluminium oxide have less erodibility factor.
So; obviously, this erodibility factor varies from 0 to 0.1. And this erodibility increases
we know when in these direction; obviously, the erodibility increases in this direction.
So, when it is 0; obviously, less erodibility and when there is 0.1 it shows the greater
erodibility and this is the soil erodibility factor.(Refer Slide Time: 13:17)
Now, how, we know, soil erodibility factors also depends on several, you know, several
aspects. For example, there are several factors which increases K or less resistant to
erosion or factors reducing K are also there. So, let us first discuss what are the different
factors which increases K the value of K; that means, increases the erodibility. For
example,  high  silt  and  low  sand,  sorry,  high  silt  and  sand  content.  The  second  is
expansive clay, third is presence of impervious soil layers, fourth one is blocky and platy
and massive soil structure. So, high silt and sand content; obviously, the water holding
capacity will be less.
And obviously, the detachment will be much more pronounced in this case of silt and
sand content because there is no cohesive force or there is no attachment or formation of
aggregates due to the absence of clay or, you know, organic matter. Now the presence of
expansive plays the presence of expansive clays like 2 is to 1 montmorillonite is an
example for less resistant erosion. 
Because whenever they dries they creates a creates, we know, different types of large
cracks and as a result there is always a chances of erosion. Then presence of impervious
soil layers and this blocky, platy massive soil structure it helps, you know, it, it basically
hinders the movement of water into the soil and as a result there is the excess of water
goes for runoff goes through runoff and ultimately, we know, eroding away the soil.So; obviously, when there is a blocky, platy or massive soil structure there will be less
water movement and the water will be moved away through runoff and creating more
soil erosion. And factors there are several factors which reduces the K and ultimately
increases resistances to erosion are soil or high organic matter; obviously, when there is a
high organic matter that will increase the infiltration of water into the soil and as a result
of that, there will be less amount of runoff. 
Then is non expansive clay, you know, expansive expansive clay and like, you know,
kaolinite  is  an  example  of  non  expansive  clays  which  helps  in  reducing  the  soil
erodibility. And finally, the strong granular structure; obviously, they help in more water
movement it is and as a result there is a less erodibility of soil.
So, these are different factors which are responsible for either increasing or decreasing
the soil erodibility.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:55)
Let us see the topographic factor, the topographic factor is basically denoted by L and S,
and LS represents the influence of length and steepness of the slope on soil erosion.
Obviously, you can see the LS can be calculated by using this formula, where soil loss
from a given plot over soil loss from a standard plot, and the standard plot is obviously,
22 metre 22 metre long with a 9 percent of steepness. And longer the slope of given plot,
greater will be the chance for accumulation and concentration of runoff and with increase
if the slope length and steepness LS increases and hence the erosion. (Refer Slide Time: 16:49)
So; obviously, when the increase in the slope length the L factor increases and also when
there  increase  in  the  steepness,  that  is  S  factor,  these  LS  increases  and  ultimately
increasing the soil loss or soil erosion. So, let us see the relationship between LS factor
and slope gradient for 3 types of sites. You can see here, there are 3 types of site, one is
low erosion sites, that is rangeland and the second one is the moderate erosion site that is
tilled row cropped lands. And finally, there is a high erosion lands that is a freshly
disturbed sites.
So, in all these cases you can see here, as we increase the slope gradient; obviously, at
the slope length these are basically slope length 25 metre, 50 metre, 100 metre, 150
metre, 200 metre. For all this cases with the increases of the slope gradient, you know,
the topographic factor LS is continuously increasing, because, we know, both the slope
gradient  is  increasing  as  well  as  the  slope  length  that  is  L  is  also  increasing.  So,
ultimately the topography factors is also increasing in all this 3 condition.
So, for example, it is a 25 metre slope length then, 50 metre then, 100 metre, then 150
metre. So, and then, 200 metres. So, it is quite expected. Similarly, here you can see it is
for 25 metre then 50 metre then, 100 metre then, 150 metre and 200 metre. And in case
of freshly disturbed soil; obviously, we will have the same trend where is the 25 metre
then, 50 metre then, 100 metre then, 150 metre and 200 metre.However, you will see that the slope is quite high in case of high rill and interrill sites as
compared to low rill and or interrill sites or in other words a high erosion sites the
erosion or the LS factor will show the steeper increase as compared to the low erosion
sites or rangelands.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:49)
So, remember that in range lands or low erosion sites, soil steepness has high influence
on  erosion  than  the  slope  length  and.  So,  that  is  why,  we  know,  whereas,  freshly
excavated disturbed length slope length has a greater influence on soil erosion. So, that
was quite, we know, quite, you know, evident from this 2 different plots for example, in
this case slope gradient is more important here the slope length is more important.(Refer Slide Time: 19:25)
So, the another factor is C factor. So, C is basically cover and management factor which
basically shows, you know, cropping, you know, how much, you know, what is the
percentage of soil cover is present. So, you can see cropping system and vegetative cover
affects the soil erosion. And this C is basically calculated from this formula, where C
equal to soil loss under given condition over soil loss in bare soil. And you can see here,
C will approach 1 under less vegetative cover or bare soil. So; obviously, it will it will
tends to 1 when there is both soil loss and bare soil in both these 2 condition and C will
be less in case of covered soil.
So, you can see here the relation between the ground cover percentage and erosion. So;
obviously,  the  erosion  continuously  decreases  or  exponentially  decreases  when  the
increase there is an increase in ground cover as we can see where is a 5 percent cover
then, 20 percent cover then, 40 percent cover then, 60 percent cover and, 80 percent
cover. So, ultimately the idea of showing this graph is to convey this message that
greater  the  ground  cover,  lesser  is  the  erosion.  So,  as  the  ground  cover  increases;
obviously, there will be lesser erosion.(Refer Slide Time: 20:48)
So, also remember that undisturbed forest and dense grass avoid, you know you know,
they avoid erosion at the best obviously, undisturbed forest.
So, you will see less amount of runoff with that with those areas which are covered with
forest as well as dense grass. And in arid lands even a small amount of shrub can reduce
erosion drastically, because in arid lands most of the soil are, you know, are susceptible
to erosion high amount of erosion, because there is very; very low amount of soil organic
matter ultimately, you know, exposing all the soils to the erosive action of either rainfall
or wind either water or wind.
So, in arid lands even a small amount of shrubs that can help in, you know, erosion
reducing the erosion dramatically with drastically, because they will help in attaching
more soil particles and, you know, resisting the their movement through runoff. And in
cultivated lands, forage crops can prevent erosion and finally, cover crops are grown
primarily to prevent the erosions 
So, you can see this is an effect of increasing the shrub density on runoff in a semi arid
region. So, in the X axis basically it is a shrub density, and per hectare and; obviously,
soil in y axis this is soil and runoff. So, you can see here as the shrub density increases;
obviously, the soil loss is decreased exponentially, runoff also decreased exponentially
and also sediment also decreases so obviously, the increasing a shrub density has agreater impact it reducing the soil loss or runoff and sediment and, ultimately preventing
the soil erosion.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:45)
So, you can see gully erosion in a bare soil; obviously, in the left picture you can see,
you know, this is a gully; gully erosion is a, sorry, this is a gully erosion in a bare soil
and water is muddy as it carries the soil and here you can see clear water channel in a
grass covered soil. This is a another strategy to reduce the surface runoff because, we
know, we call it grass channels or grassed water ways and this grassed water ways
ultimately helps in removing, ultimately helps in preventing the movement of water,
sorry, movement of, movement of soil particles along with the runoff water. 
So, these are an effective management practice for reducing the soil loss through water
erosion.(Refer Slide Time: 23:39)
So, let us go ahead and see, what is the P factor or support practice factor? So, support
practice are done to reduce the erosion and also taken into account in the P factor. So, P
factor basically calculates by using this equation where P equal to soil loss under given
support practice over the soil loss if row crops were planted up and down the slope.
So, if there is no support practice is the; obviously, the P factor will be 1, and if the
support practice in, you know, is there, this support practice generally include contour
cropping, contour strip cropping, terracing and, you know, terrace systems as well as
grassed water ways. So, you know about the contour cropping, I showed you in the last
lecture and then contour strip cropping then terracing I have already showed you in the
last lecture. And; obviously, I have shown you just the grassed water ways, and each
support practice in the given area contributes to this C factor also.
So, these are the important factors which are responsible for calculating the universal soil
loss equation.(Refer Slide Time: 24:42)
So; obviously, the contour cultivation; obviously, crops are planted across the slope
gradient to reduce the erosion. And in the contour strip croppings, narrow strips of field
alternate with tilled row crops and it basically shortage the effective field length and the
water cannot achieve high velocity with alternate fields hence less erosion. So, these are
the, features of contour cultivation as well as contour strip cropping.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:09)
So, these are the pictures of contour cropping with graded terraces you can see here
graded terraces.So, it is the grassed water way and. So, this is the grassed water way and runoff is
moving here, and these are the contour terrace and graded channels. And; obviously, this
is an example of contour strip cropping; obviously, the grassed water ways these are the
grassed water ways and both these practices are very; very helpful for reducing the soil
loss through erosion by water agents. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:50)
So, grassed water ways let us talk about more in, let us talk more about the grassed water
ways. So, grassed water ways, you know, contour strips are augmented by grassed water
ways you can see here in the left picture this is a, we know, there is no grassed water
way; however, in the right picture there is a grassed water way and you can see the
difference in mud flow in these two conditions. And these, we know, grassed water ways
consist of permanent sods established in shallow channels as we can see here and they
carry water from the field without creating the gullies. So, they are very; very helpful for
preventing the gully erosion.
Because they help in reducing or restricting the movement of runoff which carries away
soil particles and ultimately creates the gully erosion.(Refer Slide Time: 26:47)
So, there is a another Universal Soil Loss Equation, we call it revised universal soil loss
equation or RUS RUSLE or this RUSLE or RUSLE is the computerized version of
universal  soil  loss  equation,  however,  constantly,  you know  improvised.  And  these
revised universal soil loss equation also considers the interrelationship between various
factors and it takes into account the seasonal and temporal changes and numerous sub
factors. And; obviously, more stations are taken into account for averaging and specific
corrections are applied for unique scenarios.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:25)
So, let us see the universal soil loss calculation and subsequently the revised universal
soil loss equation calculation. So, if we consider a land of Marshall silt loam. So, it is a
particular soil, soil series and it is clean tilled and fallowed. It has a slope of 6 percent
and average slope length of 100 metre. R is 2550 from map we can already, we have
already got it. And K is 0.044 for this area from Wischmeier and Smith scale, and LS
factor is 1.7 high rill or interrill ratio on bare soil, and low cover and hence C is 1 and
upper down tillage down, up and down tillage, down the hill and this P equal to 1.
So, we will all know the factors. So, basically we will be putting all these values in this
universal soil loss equation. So, you can see R values we have put 2550, K stands for
0.044, LS stands for 1.7, C stands for 1, and P at, P is basically 1. So, we are ultimately
getting 191 mega gram per hector or 85.2 tons per acre
So, let us consider the same thing with the revised universal soil loss equation. So, the,
let us consider the same soil as left with the same R and K values. However, assume let
us assume that the crop rotation is done here and mulch is left into the soil. Hence C
values will change from 1 to 0.13. Also, they are planted on the contours with terraces.
So, this also being take, you know, we are taking also taking this into account. So,
therefore, P is basically right now 0.4 instead of 1.
So, LS will now reduce to 1.4 that is moderate rill to interrill ratio. So, ultimately using
the same equation R K L S C and P, we will be getting this 2550 multiplied by 0.044,
then 1.4 then, 0.13 into 0.4. So, we are getting 8.2 mega gram per hectare. So, ultimately
it is 3.4 tons per acre. So, you can see that using the revised universal soil loss equation,
we take into account different aspects or different, you know, we we can take into
account different management practices or modification in the management practices.
And you can see the ultimately the quantified amount is different in both universal soil
loss equation and revised universal soil loss equation. So, guys we have finished this
lecture and let us wrap up here, we know, I hope that you have learned something new in
this lecture and in the next lecture, we will be starting discussion about the conservation
tillage and till then good bye and let us meet in the next lecture of week 9.
Thank you.