Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 47
Toxic Inorganic Substances in Soil
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:16)
Welcome to this second lecture of week 10 of Soil Science and Technology and in this
lecture will be starting from slide where you left in our last slide in our last lecture. And
in the in our last lecture we talk we talked about different methods or cleaning or
remediating the organic pollutants from the soil. And in this lecture will try to finish this
topic and then will start a new topic of inorganic pollution in the soil. So, guys we started
with different types of remediation technologies, we started with different physical and
chemical methods and then, we talked about different bioremediation technique.
And  then,  bioremediation,  remember  it  is  mediated  by  biological  organisms  either
microbes are plants. When it is mediated by plants we call it phytoremediation and this
by remediation is of mainly 2 types; one is natural and other is enhanced or engineered
natural bio natural attenuation. Basically, we do not enhance you know we do not modify
the  environment  of  indigenous  microorganisms.  However,  in  case  of  enhanced  or
engineered by remediation, we modify the ecosystem of you know local ecosystem ofenvironment of the microorganisms. These are manually you know we talked about 2
types of enhanced by remediation; one is bioaugmentation another is biostimulation. 
And so, we talked about the differences and we talked about this how this oil spill
cleanup takes place. So, I hope you got a basic idea about this bioremediation and will be
also discussing that later on.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:22)
So, let us go ahead and see what is in-situ bioremediation technique and you know a
snapshot of in-situ bioremediation technique can be found in this slide. And you can see
in oxygen depleted soil, you know oxygen is pumped and methane is provided as a
carbon source. You know we are introducing the oxygen from outside as well as we are
also introducing methane as a to provide as a carbon source. And so, you can see here,
this is the vadose zone and this is a saturated zone and obviously, this is the water table. 
So, when we are injecting the nitrogen phosphorus in terms of fertilizers as well as
methane as the carbon source and oxygen through this channel. And ultimately it goes
you know nutrients and other co-metabolites added. And you know you can see here, this
is a zone of contamination and this contamination basically occurs from this you know
from these industrial processes. 
And  ultimately  these  NP  methane  and  oxygen  ultimately  enhance  the  microbial
breakdown of the contaminants here. And these break down of the contaminants throughmicrobial  activity  in  the  in-situ;  that  means,  we  are  not  excavating  the  soil  and
transporting the soil to any other area. Here, we are using the in-situ you know the in-situ
process.
And  you  can  see  the  microbes  which  are  present  here  are  the  breaking  down  the
contaminants.  And  ultimately  the  contaminated  soil  are  removed  and  the  volatile
contaminants scrub form enhance exhaust air. So, this is an example of how this in-situ
bioremediation can help in remediating you know contaminate soils and remember that
coarse textured sandy soils are easy to remediate then find textured clay soils. Because,
of easy to easy of you know water movement through the sandy soils and easy of
movement of air and water through this sandy soils.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:51)
So, let us talk about brief in phytoremediation, obviously, the phytoremediation is a use
of plant to eliminate or degrade pollutants  and phytostabilization  is when the plant
stabilize  the  pollutants  in  prevent  it  from  ready  movement.  So,  it  is  a  terms
phytostabilization. And the mechanic of mechanism of phytostabilization and basically 4
types and you know the plants either this plants prevent the wind and water erosion of
contaminants. 
And then you know leaching is reduced third is the contaminant is precipitated in the
root zone and 4th is the contaminant is sequestered in the root zone. So, remember thatthe pollutant does not leave the soil, it is only stabilized. So, these are the 4 ways through
which this phytostabilization takes place. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:49)
And  you  know  hyperaccumulation  is  another  important  term;  obviously,  will  be
discussing these in details  when will be talking  about the remediation  of inorganic
pollutants from the environment. But, let us you know in this lecture, let us you know the
focus on this term. 
So,  hyperaccumulation  is  basically  accumulation  of  usually  high  concentration  of
contaminants in above ground plant tissue and these plants are specially selected for
these purposes. And the contaminants can either be eliminated by harvesting the plant
tissue or they are broken down inside the plants into non toxic secondary products. So,
again this hyperaccumulation is basically terms the name itself is hyper accumulation;
that means, enhance accumulation it is the high concentration of contaminants in the
above ground plant tissue.
And these plants are specifically you know selected for this type of hyperaccumulation
and ultimately when this hyperaccumulation takes place this highly contaminated ground
tissues of ground tissues can be harvested or they are broken down inside the plants into
non toxic secondary products. So, this is how this hyperaccumulators basically work, we
will discuss in details about this hyperaccumulators. So, will be discussing the heavy
metal phytoremediation in our coming lectures of week 10.(Refer Slide Time: 07:15)
So, let us see what is the enhanced rhizosphere phytodegradation, you can see here in
this picture; obviously, the hyperaccumulator phytoremediation you can see, this an this
a plant and this an uptake of nutrients uptake of metals or organic pollutants through this
roots. So, ultimately accumulation of metals on metabolism of organics here. 
So, this is hyper accumulator plants and ultimately if you remove this total biomass the
total a heavy metals which are hyperaccumulated in the body parts or in the dry tissues
will  be  removed.  And  obviously,  this  movement  of  uptake  of  metals  and  organic
pollutants will be enhanced by addition of chelating agents. 
So,  another  is  enhanced  rhizosphere  phytoremediation  and  obviously,  you  can  see
translocation of plant compounds to rhizosphere. So, enhance breakdown of organics in
rhizosphere,  in  organic  contaminants  move  into  the  rhizosphere  with  water  and
ultimately it you know it shows the enhance rhizosphere phytoremediation. So, in this
case basically, transformation of plant compounds in the rhizosphere and this enhance
breakdown of organics happen in the rhizosphere zone. And so, this the plant roots
excrete microbial substrate and growth regulators which enhances the activity of the
rhizosphere bacteria to degrade the; to degrade the different types of you know organic
pollutants.(Refer Slide Time: 08:57)
So, if you talk about again phytoremediation; phytoremediation is advantageous where a
large area is contaminated to shallow depths with moderate amount of pollutants. And it
is less expensive, it is less disturbance to create less disturbance to soil and it is, but it
takes longer time to remove the contaminants. So, this is you know one of the problem of
phytoremediation takes longer time to remediate the contaminants. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:28)
So, guys let us see the last topic of this you know the last important point of this first
topic, that is effect of ageing on bioavailability of chemical in the soils. If you can see thegraph here, it says that although the concentration of a particular you know xenobiotic
consider xenobiotic compound is higher, you know after a certain period of time the
biological activity gets lower down for the lower down. 
In other words bioavailability of the contaminates to degradation decreases with time and
even though their concentration is soil remain high and this happen as the contaminants
get  trapped  in  the  nano  pores  and  contaminants  are  absorbed  into  the  humus  or
contaminants get buried under the precipitated mineral coatings. So, we can see here as
the  time  goes  on  after  a  certain  period  time,  although  the  concentration  of  the
contaminants  high,  the  biological  activity  is  low.  So,  the  bioavailability  of  this
contaminants basically decrease with the time. 
So, there are couple of ways, there are couple of reasons you can see the contaminants
are  you know  these are basically  organic  contaminant  molecules  and these  organic
contaminant molecules  either absorb the soil humus. You can see here or they can
trapped into this nanopore or either the contaminants  gets buried under precipitated
mineral coatings. 
So, these are you know, this you can see this is a precipitate iron coating the red shape
and this is buried under this precipitated iron coating. So, there are three methods, the
first method is contaminant trapped into the nanopores and then you know absorbed in
the humus and then finally, it is precipitated you know iron you know buried under the
precipitated iron coating.
So,  this  how  you  know  this  deduction  in  bioavailability  of  the  contaminants  to
degradation occurs with time. So, guys we have covered this first topic of this week 10
lectures. So, we have got a basic idea about how different methods are you know, how
different  methods  act  to  remove  the  organic  pollutants  from  the  soil,  and  will  be
discussing these phytoremediation techniques in details in our coming lectures and let us
go ahead. (Refer Slide Time: 12:19)
And the ok, one more thing will I want to mention that this all these process make you
know, processes make the contaminant less prone to environmental risk. These ageing
process and this trapping of organic molecules inside the nanopores, as well as trapping
of this molecules, you know burring the of the molecules. You know benit this iron
coatings and all these processes make the contaminant less prone to environmental risk.
And  bioavailability  should  be  taken  into  consideration  before  taking  remediation
activities and removal of contaminant should be based on the bioavailability rather than
it is total concentration. 
So, bioavailability is very very important term and you should consider all the aspects
regarding bioavailability while taking a decision of bioremediation or remediating the
organic pollutants. So, let us move ahead and see the you know, talk about our next topic
that is soil contamination with toxic inorganic substances.(Refer Slide Time: 13:21)
So, guys you know the soil contamination not only occurs through organic pollutants, it
also  occurs  through  different  inorganic  substances,  like  heavy  metals  and  will  be
discussing those in this topic. So, the concepts which will cover are basically what are
the toxic inorganic substances and then, what are the you know sources of this pollutants
and then, how the accumulate the soil and some, will talk about some important toxic
metals and finally, you know some toxic metals in sewage and sludge.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:51)
So,  what  are  the  toxic  inorganic  substances  in  the  soil?  So,  toxicity  of  inorganic
contaminants released into the environment every year is now estimated to exceed that
form you know organic and radioactive sources combined. So, inorganic contaminants,
you know inorganic contaminants share say huge portion of the total contaminant which
realise each and every year in the environment. 
A fair share of these inorganic substances ends up in contaminating soils and the greatest
problem most likely involve in these metals. You know mercury, cadmium, lead, arsenic,
nickel, copper, zinc, chromium, molybdenum, manganese, selenium, fluorine and boron.
So, all these are responsible for environmental or in another soil pollution. And each of
them are producing the potential health hazards. So, to a greater or lesser degree all of
these elements are toxic to human and other elements.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:59)
So, you can see water how this toxic you know inorganic substances in soil moves in the
environment. So; obviously, they are the different sources like industrial sources, urban
sources. You can see you know the sediments are coming from different wastewater
treatment, pumps and this industrial heavy you know the heavy metals are coming from
the industrial effluents as well as they are coming from different urban waste water as
well as you know other sources. 
And heavy metals are also coming through mining discharge and also different types of
agricultural you know agricultural runoff also. So, all these are coming through differentsources and ultimately you can see inside the water body there are you know there under
going different types of these heavy metals. And undergoing different types of biological
and  chemical  transformations  and  you  know  ultimately  you  know  leading  into  the
attachment and released from the sediments.
So, and you know settling into the you know settling into the sediment and further
resuspension and storage in the streambed. Then it gain in uptake by different types of
microorganisms and sometime this heavy metal get volatilize. So, these are some of the
ways through which this toxic inorganic substances move for soil to water and then you
know ultimately get stored in the stream bed and also settle down at the below of any
you know any stream of water bodies, so, this is very important.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:48)
Now, if we see what are the different types of chemicals are inorganic substances, which
are responsible for this heavy metal pollution. Obviously, these are the this  shows the
list and obviously, arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, nickel, selenium
and zinc, all these are highly you know toxic pollutants and there are major source. 
For example, in case of arsenic, pesticides, plant desiccants, animal feed additives, coal
and petroleum, mine tailings, detergents and irrigation water are the major sources of
arsenic. And organisms principally harm that human and then, animals then, fish then,
birds. So, all these are in adversely affected by this arsenic and ultimately human healtheffects you can see cumulative poisons, cancers and skin lesions are some human health
effects of this arsenic pollution.
Cadmium: cadmium also coming from you know it is also you know important pollutant
of soil. And this cadmium comes from electroplating, pigments, than plastic stabilizers,
batteries, and phosphate fertilizers and you can see they contaminant all of the human
there you know human and then, animals and then, fish then, bird and plants. And they
can cause heart and kidney disease bone embrittlement. 
In case of chromium, it basically comes  from stainless steel, chrome-plated metals,
pigments, refractory brick manufacturer and leather tanning. And we can see you know
except plants it can also harm this human, animals, fish and bird. And human health
effects it produce the mutagenic effect and also we remember that it is also access
essential nutrients. So, these are some of the important this table basically shows the
snapshot of you know important inorganic soil pollutants and how they affect, what are
their sources and what are the positive you know harmful human health effects. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:11)
So, how we do accumulate in the soil? Obviously, some of these toxic metals are being
released  to  the  environment  in  increasing  amount  and  the  inorganic  toxins  do  not
decompose and degrade rather they usually remain in the soil and so, accumulate from
year  to  year.  In  many  places  the  metal  contamination  is  historical  resulting  from
polluting activities that are no longer practiced. (Refer Slide Time: 19:36)
So, if you can see this chart this shows the history of copper, lead and zinc contamination
of the soil in central Moscow, Russia. And  you know some of the trains you can see
here in the x, you know this is basically different PDA, you know different consent
different depth of soil. So, it is the surface soil 0 to 25 centimetre, then 25 to 70
centimetre, all the way up to 195 to 200 centimetre or 220 centimetre. 
And these dotted lines are shows the background levels of these lead, copper and zinc.
And as we can see in 1500s; obviously, the zinc concentration was quite high and which
ultimately you know defeated in 1600 and so and so forth in 1800. And then again we
show measure increase in zinc concentration due to industrial activities. And also for
lead also you can see the same you know in case of lead; obviously, in the in case of
lead; obviously, in the you know in the in this 1500s; obviously, there are low less you
know less concentration of leads. 
However, in 1600 there is an increase of lead concentration and ultimately you know the
total you know the final you know in 1900 to 1940 due to industrial process there is a
you know several folds increasing zinc concentration. 
And  in  case  of  copper  concentration  is  greatest  in  the  oldest  you  know  copper
concentration is greatest in the oldest layers because of ancient artisanal metal working
you can see copper concentration was higher in oldest layers. Because of you know
artisanal metalworking you practice in the ancient period and ultimately it get reduced.So,  this  shows  the  total  metal  concentration  scenario  or  how  they  get  accumulate
historically in the soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:50)
So, how they get concentrate in the living tissues? So, irrespective of their sources
people everywhere are exposed to this toxic elements every day, either through the air or
through ingestion of food, water and soil. And toxic metals can do you know can and do
reach the soil by direct or indirect deposits and from there they become a part of the food
chain. And this movement basically occurs from soil to plant and plant to animal and
animal to human. Unfortunately once the element becomes part of the cycle they may
accumulate in animal and human body tissues to toxic levels. (Refer Slide Time: 22:29)
So, this slideshows the sources and cycling of toxic metals as you can see here. So;
obviously, these are the sources like industrial products, burned fuel, fertilizers  and
pesticides.  And  also  rocks  in  the  earth  crust  from  there,  this  pesticides  can  occur
fertilizers can occur. And obvious, so, basically the major sources are these two and they
are basically mixed with water. 
So, this rocks in earth crust you can mixed with water and these industrial products,
burned fuel, fertilizers, pesticides they can come directly into the air. And obviously,
from air you can get it this can be accumulated in the birds, it can be accumulated in
humans, from air it can deposit in the soil, from which plant can uptake and from plants
to domestic animals and further humans and from soil to water and from water to plants
and domestic animals and human. 
So, you can see that the content of metal in organism tissue generally bills up from left to
right  as  we grow  from  left  to  right,  the  concentration  of  the  metals  you  know  an
organism tissue generally  builds  up and indicating  the  vulnerability  of the humans.
Because you see we are at the final you know humans are the secondary and tertiary food
web consumers. So, because we are eating both the secondary as well as tertiary food
web consumers to heavy metal and we are much more exposed to heavy metal toxicity
and we have to know that air water and soil may also be directly ingested by humans.So, that is why these heavy metals get accumulated in our body and ultimately results in
you know difference science and toxicity or human health hazards.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:21)
So, you can see here one example of how this toxic metals affect different you know
accumulates within some agricultural products. Obviously, so, this is a vegetable or you
know carrot which was grown you know with the vicinity of this fens and in the fens
actually they have quoted some arsenic you know containing paints. So, this due to the
presence of this arsenic containing paints the adjacent soil get contaminated.
So, you know there is you know there is a study where they have applied the compost as
well as also phosphate and they can see in and you can see that the arsenic consumed
within or arsenic accumulation within the control vegetable. That means, when we did
not apply any you know there are 2 types of vegetables you can see; one is the carrot and
other is lettuce. So, in all the 3 conditions when you are applying no fertilizer or in the
control condition; obviously, there is an increase in that shows some accumulation of
arsenic within this both of these carrot and lettuce. 
However, when you are adding the composed due to the binding action of organic matter
the accumulation is very less within both carrot and lettuce. However, when you are
adding  the phosphate  you know  it get  enhanced,  because  arsenic  can  make  certain
compounds with the phosphorus. So, that shows that how this you know elements gets
accumulated within different plants and plant parts.(Refer Slide Time: 26:21)
So, let us talk about some inorganic contaminants and their reaction in the soil. Let us
first talk about with start with arsenic, because this is a major heavy metal, which is
creating pollution specially in India as well as in Bangladesh in Southeast Asia. So,
arsenic  problem  in  its  accumulation  in  certain  orchard  soil  following  the  years  of
application of arsenic containing pesticides. And being present in an anionic form you
can see this element is absorbed and as a phosphates by hydrous, iron and aluminium
oxides especially in acid soils. 
And in spite of the capacity of most soil to tie up the arsenate long term addition of
arsenical sprays can lead to toxicities for sensitive plants and earthworms and the arsenic
toxicity can be reduced by application of sulphates you know by application of sulphates
of zinc and iron, aluminium which tie up with arsenic in the in insoluble forms.(Refer Slide Time: 27:26)
So, you can see this shows the groundwater arsenic contamination scenario of West
Bengal state of India. So, you can see these zones are very very you know this you know
this zone this red zones and yellow zones shows high accumulation of arsenic. And that
is why it is you know it is contamination is very very prevalent in this region and you
can see some of the you know toxic health effects. And ultimately it goes towards you
know goes towards deleterious health effect an ultimately it produces the carcinogenic
effects on the plant body.
So, guys we have you know, let us stop here and then we will be completing the other
heavy metals in our next lecture and will try to discussing several other methods to
remediate  this  heavy  metals  in  our  next  lectures.  So,  I  hope  that  you  have  learnt
something  and  in  the  next  lecture  will  be  discussing  some  of  the  other  important
potential health hazards which you know which potential health hazards from different
other heavy metals and how to remediate those heavy metals from the soil environment.
Thank you very much.