Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 04
Weathering and Soil Formation (Contd.)
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:15)
Hello, friends. Welcome to this lecture of Soil Science and Technology. Today, we will
be discussing about different pathways of Weathering as well as different factors of Soil
Formation. Now, in the last couple of lectures we talked about what is weathering and
what are different types of weathering. So, you know that weathering is basically the
disintegration  and  decomposition  of  rocks  and  minerals.  And,  weathering  can  be
differentiated into three major types: one is physical weathering, another is chemical
weathering, another is biological weathering.
 Now, physical weathering the another name of physical weathering is disintegration and
it is basically the you know in case of physical weathering, the rock size gets smaller and
there is no chemical alteration in case of physical weathering. So, another name of
physical weathering is mechanical weathering. However, in case of chemical weathering
there will be a complete change of chemical characteristics or chemical composition that
is why the other name of chemical weathering is decomposition and the third kind ofweathering is called the biological weathering and biological weathering is basically the
combination of disintegration and decomposition. So, it is basically composed of both
physical weathering and chemical weathering.
So,  we  have  discussed  about  different  factors  of  physical  weathering  what  are  the
different  factors  or  different  process  of  chemical  weathering  and  also  biological
weathering. So, today we will be discussing about different pathways of weathering in
how the rocks and minerals weathered in different pathways to form ultimately soils. So,
in this slide you can see that we have presented the different pathways of weathering. So,
obviously, the starting point of weathering is rock as you already know. So, there are
three types of rocks: igneous, sedimentary, metamorphic.
So, in this pathway you will see that chemical breakdown or decomposition or in other
way it is chemical weathering and here we have listed the different process of chemical
weathering like solutions, hydrolysis, organic acid solutions and then decomposition
oxidation and hydration and these are the final outcome of this chemical weathering or
final molecules or cations or anions of chemical weathering.
So, in terms of solution as you can see there are different types of soluble materials like
different cations, calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium, iron and sulfate in case of
hydrolysis, obviously, the end product is silicic acid. In case of organic acid solutions
different types of organic complexes of Al 3 plus and Fe 3 plus and you get some
decomposition oxidation and hydration, obviously, there will be hydroxides of Fe and Al
and these pathway shows the disintegration into minerals or physical breakdown or in
other words it is physical weathering.
Now, physical weathering also depending on the clay mineral internal structure or crystal
structure or depending on the crystal structure of minerals the mineral you know weather
at different pace. For example, there are some various minerals which weather there very
slowly,  there  are  some  minerals  which  weather  slowly  and  which  there  are  some
minerals  which weather very easily. For example,  in case of in case of quartz and
muscovite  they  weather  very  slowly  because  they  are  resistant  to  weathering  and
feldspars and biotite are slowly weatherable minerals and calcite, augite, hornblende all
these are very easily weatherable minerals. As we have already discussed in the Bowen’s
series and Goldich series in the previous lecture.And, all these weathered minerals will further undergo chemical decomposition to form
other silicate clays or clay minerals. So, this is in a nutshell the pathways of weathering;
obviously, these weathering processes occur simultaneously and ultimately results in
different cations and different oxides of iron aluminium or different silicate clays. So,
this is basically a nutshell about different pathways of weathering.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:17)
So, if we see weathering at a glance this slide shows weathering at a glance. Now, you
see that the first the parent material and parent material is acted upon by different types
of physical forces like frost, wind, rain, hail and ice and obviously, heat and cold. So,
they would have different types of physical factors which are acting over this parent
materials and these parent materials will undergo mechanical weathering to produce this
fine parent materials as you can see and this fine parent materials will further undergo
chemical weathering in the you know in you know while reacting with different types of
acids and moisture present in the environment or in the soil.
And, ultimately they will form different types of mineral nutrients which will comes into
the soil solution and in the forms of different cations and anions and also they will form
silica,  silt,  sand  and  quartz.  And  this  silica  will  further  undergo  different  types  of
chemical reactions with oxides of iron alumina to form three-layer clay or two-layer clay
we will discuss these details in details later on while we will be discussing about the clay
mineral structure.But, remember that this chemical weathering is one of the major factor for production of
different types of clay minerals. And, remember that this physical weathering prepares
the ground for chemical weathering or in other words as a result of physical weathering
the total surface area increases for more reaction and this more reaction will undergo,
will these more chemical reactions will ultimately produce these clay minerals.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:10)
So, we have covered the soil weathering and we know how different weathering process
occurs, physical weathering, chemical weathering and biological weathering, let us see
what is soil formation. If you remember the soil formation is basically composed of two
major  steps:  one  is  weathering,  another  is  pedogenisis.  Now,  pedogenesis  of  soil
formation is brought about by four major processes we call them pedogenic processes.
These four processes are addition, losses, transformations and translocations.
Now,  as  you  can  see  here  there  is  a  3-dimensional  you  know  3-dimensional
representation of a soil where you can see all these four pedogenic processes. Addition
losses transformation and translocation, we will discuss them in details one by one.(Refer Slide Time: 08:06)
So, what are additions? Addition is basically input of mineral or input of materials to the
developing soil profile from outside sources. When we are adding some materials or
compounds from outside sources into the soil, that is called addition. For example, in
case of rain that adds water into the soil, dust adds minerals into the soil, animals and
nutrients adds organic matter into the soil and human add fertilizers into the soil and
evaporation of groundwater adds salts to the soil. So, all these are adding something into
the soil and that is one of the major pedogenic processes.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:47)
What are the losses? Well, evaporation carries away water as you know this one form of
loss  from  soil.  Another  erosion  which  carries  away  soil  particles.  Organic  matter
decomposition is another type of loss where we are losing organic matter and it is
converting into carbon dioxide and other forms of organic matter. And, nutrients and
minerals leach from the soil and that is another type of loss. So, all these losses are also
important pedogenic processes which help in for proper soil formation.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:31)
Now, what is transformation? Transformation is basically process of modification and a
destruction of existing soil components, and remember that it always results in synthesis
of new  products. For example,  weathering synthesis  synthesizes  secondary minerals
from primary minerals and also weathering alters the size of the minerals especially the
physical  weathering  and  also  dead  leaves  transformed  to  humus.  So,  all  these  are
important transformation processes which are responsible for soil formation.(Refer Slide Time: 10:09)
And  finally,  translocation.  So,  translocation  is  basically  a  horizontal  or  vertical
movement of materials. For example, in case of water the translocation of water from by
gravity or capillary forces in the soil. This is one form of translocation and evaporation;
when evaporation translocate salts to surface that is another type of translocation and
when organism carry materials from one place to another inside the soil, that is another
form of translocation. So, all these are important forms of translocations  which are
responsible for soil formation.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:49)
Now, let us see what are the important factors of soil formation. Now, Jenny in 1941
gave one equation which we call the soil forming factors equation for soil forming
factors. Now, obviously, these soil forming factor equation is very much important for a
proper understanding of how soil forms. So, as you can see we call it cl, o, r, p, t
equation.
Now, this equation was again given by the scientist Jenny in 19 sorry 1941 and this
equation shows that soil property of a given soil is a function of five different factors. So,
five different factors first of all is climate, second is o that is organisms, r stands for
relief, p stands for parent material and t stands for time.
So, this is the first important soil forming equation given by any scientist and obviously,
there are some further modification the you know which have been proposed nowadays,
I will discuss that later on while we will be discussing the digital soil mapping. So, again
the soil any soil property is basically a function of climate, organism, relief, parent
material and time. So, we will discuss them one by one.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:07)
So, the soil we see is a basically function of all these five factors. Climate, organism,
relief, parent material, time and all these factors acts simultaneously or interconnectingly
to form soil and this is a very slow forming process and remember that for forming one
inch of topsoil it requires almost million years.(Refer Slide Time: 13:40)
So,  let  us  see  their  influence  one  by  one.  Obviously,  the  factors  themselves  act
independently on soil we will see that later on and sometimes however, one particular
factor predominates and other being constants. So, when the dominant factor is climate
we call it climosequence, the soil type is known as climosequence, when the dominant
factor is organism we call it biosequence. When the dominant factor is relief we call it
toposequence. When the dominant factor is parent material we call is lithosequence and
when the dominant factor is time we call it chronosequence.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:14)
I have given one example here of toposequence. So, toposequence basically says the
adjacent soil that showed different profile characteristics reflecting the influence of local
topography  are  called  toposequence.  Again,  soils  that  show  different  profile
characteristics reflecting the influence of soil local topography are called toposequence.
And, as you can see in this diagram the soil there are different types of soil which are
formed in this place and obviously, there is difference in the steepness of the slope.
And, this  is  the  parent  material  from  which  soil  basically  forms  and  A  horizon  is
basically a mineral of the mixed organic horizon which is present in almost all the soils
and parent materials with gravels and cobbles are shown by this dotted zone. So, as you
can see the soil profile or the thickness of the soil varies from one place to another place
based on their position on the slope. For example, this soil which is present at the plains
or concave part of the slope is showing higher thickness of the soil or a horizon which is
basically A soil horizon.
However,  the  soil  which  forms  here  is  showing  somewhat  smaller  thickness.  So,
basically the thickness of the soil or soil characteristics is differing from one place to
another place based on the local topography. So, that is why we can see the relief factor
is more predominant here and that is why we call it topo sequence.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:33)
So, climate: climate is very much important because from the point of view of both
precipitation as well as temperature we will discuss them later on. But, precipitation isthe most influential factors which affects weathering and effective precipitation and
temperature are two major climatic factors. As you can see here when there is an excess
rainfall; obviously, that will lead to excess leaching and this excess leaching will be, this
excess leaching will ultimately form well weathered soil.
Now,  leaching  is  basically  the  downward  movement  of  salt  in  solution  form.  So,
obviously, when there is an excess leaching there will be when there will be excess
leaching there will be well weathering or chemical weathering. Now, when there is a low
rainfall,  obviously,  there  will  be  excess  evaporation  when  there  will  be  excess
evaporation well there will be salt deposition at the surface. So, these are showing
basically the impact of climate for soil formation.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:43)
As you can see due to the climatic variation there are two different types of soil mean
form one is highly leached which occurs due to high amount of leaching, due to high
rainfall and another is salt affected arid soil where salts are being deposited at the surface
due to high evaporation and crusting of the soil. So, these are basically showing the
effect of climate for soil formation.(Refer Slide Time: 18:12)
Now, another here you know in this slide you can see the impact of seasonal rainfall
distribution, site topography, evaporative demand and soil permeability for you know
soil development. Now, as you know that keeping other factors constant increasing
precipitation we know increasing precipitation increases clay organic matter content and
acidity. So, let us think that in this case for example, let us consider the seasonal rainfall
distribution. Let us consider there is a 600 millimeter of rainfall and which is well
distributed throughout the 12 month period and obviously, when there will be you know
another  condition  those  600  millimeter  of  rainfall  will  be  distributed  throughout  6
months period.
So, obviously, in the second condition there will be more chance of leaching and more
chance of more leaching will are more leaching will further accelerates the chemical
weathering. So, you can say seasonal rainfall distribution is an important part for soil
chemical weathering or soil formation. Second is site topography as you can see here
obviously, the infiltration of water or effective rainfall is much higher in the relatively
flat surfaces then that of the soil which is present in this steep slope. So, obviously, the
soil development also differ in this places due to difference in the site topography.
When  there  will  be  a  higher  evaporative  demand  and  another  case  there  will  low
evaporative demand, in case of low evaporative demand water infiltration we will be
more and as a result there will be more soil development. And, obviously, depending onthe difference in soil permeability also; depending on the soil permeability you know
water movement also varies from one soil to another soil. For example, in case of sandy
soil there will be high leaching as compared to the clay soil and obviously, as a result of
that the in case of sandy soil the rate of soil formation is more as compared to clay soil.
So, this slide basically shows the impact of soil impact of different climatic factors for
soil formation.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:56)
So, what is regolith? Will we will we will discuss this term later on in more frequently.
So, let us discuss what is regolith. So, regolith is a region of loose unconsolidated rock
and dust that sits atop a layer of bedrock. So, at the bottom you will see the bedrock if
you dig down the soil vertically and ultimately you will see at the bottom there are bed
rocks from which soil forms and above the bedrock they will see some unconsolidated
rocks and dust and we call them regolith. And, these regolith contains both mineral
matter organic matter and all these things.(Refer Slide Time: 21:43)
So, and also let us see what is the impact of climate and you know precipitation in
temperature. So, this slide shows the joint impact of precipitation and temperature. Now,
as you can see here in the arctic region the in both humid condition and in arid climate
region in you know there are there are two different we are considering two different
climates: one is arid climate, another is humid climate. So, in arctic region in both
climatic situation, the soil formation the rate of soil formation will be almost same.
However, as we move from arctic region to equator region the rate of soil formation in
humid climates or in other words the rate of weathering in humid climates you know will
be more as compared to that of the arctic or arid climate. So, this slide basically shows
the joint impact of rainfall as well as temperature for soil formation.(Refer Slide Time: 23:11)
Another important factor for soil formation are organisms. Remember that microbes
enhances biochemical weathering and vegetative cover reduces solutions. Sometimes
dead leaves accumulates aluminum and iron, and vegetation in differences the soil type
and vice versa. So, let us focus on the last one how vegetation influences the soil types.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:35)
So, as you can see here two different conditions are given. In the first condition you are
seeing that grassland vegetation and here you are seeing forest vegetation. So, in case ofgrassland vegetation you are seeing that there are different types of soil horizon A 1, A 2
Bt, CB, Ck and all these form.
However, in case of forest vegetation the A horizon is very thin followed by an alluvial
horizon, we will discuss this horizon later on and also the Bt horizon and C 1 and C 2
horizon. So, the soil characteristic differs as a result of different types of vegetations and
also here in the second picture you will see we have you know I have given here two
different example one is hemlock which is a coniferous plant, another is sugar maple
which is a deciduous plant and obviously, in case of sugar maple its roots are very
effective for uptaking the calcium irons from the soil from the deeper layers of the soils.
So, and also the leaves of the sugar maple are highly rich in calcium. So, when the leaves
decompose over the soil surface they you know there will be high amount of calcium at
the soil surface. So, obviously, there will be comparatively higher ph at the soil surface
due  to the decomposition  of calcium  rich leaves  of sugar maple  and there  will  be
obviously, lower pH in the bottom layer of the soil due to efficient uptake of calcium.
However, in case of hemlock, the hemlock leaves do not have calcium in them. So, when
they decompose over the soil surface the soil pH remains somewhat near 4. So, as you
can see it is  very clear  that depending  on an another practical  implication  for this
difference in nutrient cycling is increase of sugar maple the soil weathering will be more
prevalent as compared to the hemlock. So, you can see so, the depending on differences
in  vegetation  obviously,  the  type  of  soil  varies  from  one  place  to  another  place.
Obviously, when there will be grassland vegetation there will be high accumulation of
organic matter as compared to forest vegetation. And depending on the nature of cations
uptake  and  nature  and  chemical  composition  of  the  leaves  the  adjacent  soil
characteristics  also  varies.  So,  this  basically  shows  the  impact  of  climate  sorry,
organisms.(Refer Slide Time: 27:06)
Another important factor is organism you know in case of organism is animals. And,
obviously, when the animals there are several macro fauna which are you know which
are present in to the soil and when they move from one place to another place they also
churn the soil materials within. They are also churning you know the helps in churning
the soil materials and these churning of the soil materials as a result of these organism is
called  pedoturbation  and  as  a  result  of  pedoturbation  the  physical  and  chemical
weathering increases.
So, obviously, the  organism  plays  an  important  role  for increasing  the  rate  of soil
formation.(Refer Slide Time: 27:58)
Topography as we have already discussed. Topography is basically the configuration of
the land surface in terms of elevation slope and landscape positions and depending on the
topography the characteristics of the soil you know varies from one place to another
place. As you can see the number of horizon develops differing from one soil to another
soil based on their local topography.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:24)
And,  remember  the  couple  of  point  that  depressed  areas  experience  higher  rate  of
weathering and south facing slopes tends to be warmer hence more weathering and low
lying and arid areas always show high salt build up.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:44)
So, finally, what is parent material? Now, parent material is the material from which soil
develops. So, soil greatly resembles their parent meeting for example, sandy soil often
develop from granite and sandstone and the mineralogical composition of parent material
influence is the physical and chemical weathering which is quite obvious.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:12)
So, depending on the types of parent materials also we have differentiate different types
of soil and let us wrap up here and from the next lecture we will start from here.
Thank you.