Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Lecture – 40
Compost
Welcome guys into the, in this last lecture of week 8 of Soil Science and Technology.
And will be trying to finish this soil organisms and then will be covering some basic
aspects of composting and vermicomposting. So, let us start from the fungi.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:35)
Now, fungi is another important soil micro flora. It is a smallest achlorophyllous plant I
would say and fungi are the filamentous organisms with much larger cell width than that
of actinomycetes. And the filaments are called hyphae and the network of hyphae is
collectively termed as mycelium and the hyphae may be divided by cross wall called
septa, while those without septa are called coenocytic and predominantly multiply by
sporulum sporulation. 
So, some important genera which are frequently found in soils are Pythium, Aspergillus,
and Penicillium and then, you know, Verticillium, Alternaria, Fusarium and all this
things. So, they are mostly heterotrophs and they grow basically within the dead bodies
and, you know, dead organic matter they thrive on dead organic matter and some fungiare responsible for causing the plant diseases also. So, you can see here aspergillus very
important very important fungi soil fungi. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:42)
Now,  what  is  the  role  of  soil  fungi?  So,  fungi  primarily  responsible  for  the
decomposition of organic matter and also the deposition of organic matter it is basically
it should be read as decomposition of organic matter and some fungi form a symbiotic
association we have already covered that symbiotic association we call it mycorrhizal
association and guys we have already covered this VAM thing in our phosphorous
lecture. 
So, the association  can be divided into,  you know, that  2 types  that is  ectotrophic
mycorrhizae examples are Boletus and Amenita and VAM that is basically orbuscular
mycorrhizae  examples  are  glomus  and  endogene.  So,  these  are  some  examples  of
ectotrophic and endotropic mycorrhizae and basically you know that they increases the
availability of the insoluble nutrients to the plants and also increases the mobility due to
the  faster  intercellular  nutrient  mobility.  So, that  is  why  these  fungi  are  very very
indispensable for maintaining the soil fertility. (Refer Slide Time: 02:54)
Now, let us let now next, let us talk about algae, algae you know chlorophyll containing
organism which are basically autotrophic and the soil algae they classified based on their
colour, there are 4 major classification. One is called Cyanophyta. This is the most
important or these are also known as blue green algae. 
These are important from the point of view agriculture point of view because, they
synthesize the, you know, they are important for biological nitrogen fixation, the other
groups are Chlorophyta which are grass green algae, Xanthophyta they are yellow green
algae and Bacilliriophyta which are golden brown algae. 
Now blue green algae, you know, that they can fix nitrogen in rice field and it can supply
oxygen to the aerobic organism in the flooded soil as it has photosynthesising capacity
also. So, also they synthesize plant growth promoting hormones. So, the common genera
in the soil are Anabaena, Nostoc and Tolypothrix, you know that Anabaena azollae is an
important algae which is responsible for synthesizing atmospheric nitrogen or, we know,
fixing atmospheric nitrogen in the rice field and these are also very very helpful and very
very important from the agricultural point of view.(Refer Slide Time: 04:16)
Now, next important let us talk about the soil micro fauna, protozoa let us talk about
protozoa. They are basically single cell organisms however the life cycle consists of 2
phases; one is the actively growing phases that is multiplication and secondly the resting
phase, that is where they form cyst like structure in adverse environment to protect
themselves and they can be classified on the basis of the locomotion. 
So, some moves by long whip like structures like called they are called flagella and
others  by  short  hair  like  structure  called  cilia  and  others  by  internal  protoplasmic
movement forming flexible temporary organs call pseudopodia. So, these, you know,
based on these, they, you know, they are classified, so you can see in the right side there
is  a  flagellated  protozoa  you  can  see  and  they  generally  help  in  organic  matter
decomposition as well as because they are saprophytic in nature and also they can feed
on bacteria and maintain biological equilibrium in the soil. (Refer Slide Time: 05:20)
The next important microfuana are Nematodes and among these are and they are they are
they are next to protozoa in abundance and because of the narrow long bodies, they are
also called threadworms in this and they are, you know, they may be saprophytic or
parasitic in nature. 
So, they do not have any significant role of organic matter decomposition, but they are
responsible for many diseases in the plant as we can see here, they are some, these are
some nematode which are present in the plant and this is one of the major plant disease
called root knot disease which is created by this nematode and they mainly infest the
plant roots and form this characteristic knots in the roots and most of the time vegetable
crops are mainly susceptible for this type of nematode attack and to reduce the infection,
different types of chemical fumigants and non edible Neem and Karanj cakes and, you
know, nematode trapping fungi are basically used. 
So, basically nematodes does not have any, I would say, a beneficial effect on soil, they
are mostly, you know, parasitic and they mostly create some diseases in the plants. So,
we need to take care of these nematodes and we need to eradicate the nematodes for the
better growth of the plant in the soil. (Refer Slide Time: 06:55)
Last one is the Viruses, now viruses are the smaller than that a bacteria and cannot be
seen by ordinary microscope and they do not have any role in the nutrient transformation
only they are parasitic in nature and these virus which basically parasitizing bacteria
known  as  bacteriophages  you  know  that  from  your  plus  2  knowledge.  And  if  the
population of the bacteriophages increases it will hamper all the activity done by bacteria
in soil like nutrient transformation nitrogen fixation etcetera. 
So, this is a structure of bacteriophage you can see their capsid head which contains the
nucleic acid or DNA and then followed by collar and sheath and then base plates and
then spikes and tail fibre. So, this is a structure of a bacteriophage. Viruses are also very
much abundant in the soil. So, guys we have completed these soil organism lecture and
let us go ahead and start another important topic or the last topic of this week that is
compost. (Refer Slide Time: 07:59)
So, what is compost, compost is basically an end product of composting. So, what is
composting you can ask. So, composting is a basically decomposition of plant remains I
would say control decomposition of plant remains and other once living animal materials
to make an earthy, dark, crumbly substance that is called compost and that is excellent
for adding in house plants for enriching garden soils. 
So, this  compost  is  basically  a, you know, it  is  decomposed  organic  matter  which
contains high amount of nutrient and people generally use this compost for their, you
know, everything  different  types  of garden  crops  and,  we know, different  types  of
vegetables and there are several types of composting methods and composting is one of
the major soil organic manure.(Refer Slide Time: 09:02)
Now, why we should use the compost the question may come. Now first of all, since it is
a high amount of organic it is a another it is a basically an organic matter which we are
basically adding into the soil, compost improves the soil structure, texture and aeration
and it increases the soil water holding capacity. 
Obviously, since they are having high amount of organic matter, they are increasing the
soil structure and their aggregates and also their aeration by improving the soil structure
and also they are improving the soil water holding capacity. Because, you know that
organic matter contains huge amount of micro pores which can hold a huge amount of
water and also compost loosens clay soils and help sandy soils to retain water. 
So, if we add some compost into the sandy soil, the water holding capacity of the sandy
soil will increase, whereas if we add organic matter into the compost into the clayey soil
which is hard in nature, it will loose it down and it will help in better water movement
and air movement.
So, this is the benefits of using compost into the soil and also it improve soil fertility and
stimulates  healthy root development  and organic  matter  which is present inside the
compost provide foods for microorganisms  like nitrogen, potassium and phosphorus
mineralised. So, these are a, you know, several advantages of using compost which we
should take care. You know, take into consider consideration and that is why nowadays in all the countries
this application of compost is highly recommended and it is also environmental friendly
and for I would say for any integrated nutrient management practices now a days, the
application  of  compost  is  recommended  along  with  the  chemical  fertilizer  for
maintaining the environmental sustainability. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:10)
So, let us talk about composting in India, now generally composting can be carried out in
7 techniques in India and they are basically listed here. One is Bangalore method and
then another is Indore method, then Nadep compost, then Nadep phospho compost, then
Coimbatore method, then windrow composting and vermicompost. 
Now  in  this  lecture  we will  be  covering  only  Indore  method,  Nadep  compost  and
vermicompost because these are important in India and also Bangalore method and we
know Coimbatore method is important. However, we will not have time to discuss those
in details, but if you are interested you can go ahead and search some literature which
will discuss in the those in details. So, let us start with the Indore method. (Refer Slide Time: 12:04)
So, but before that before discussing Indore method in details, let us see who develop
this methods. So, this Indore method was developed by A. Howard and Y.D. Wad at the
institute of plant industry that is in Indore, India. So, that is why this method is known as
Indore method and Bangalore method was worked out by L.N Acharya at Indian institute
of science, Bangalore and Nadep method was, you know, first demonstrated by this, you
know, at this J.N. Krishi Vidyalaya at Indore. So, these are 3 important methods of
composting in India. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:56)
Now, let us start with the Indore method. Now in case of Indore method the pits will look
like this. So, you have to create the pits and size of the pits will be the breadth will be 6
to 8 feet depth will be 2 to 3 feet it should not be more than 2 to 3 feet and length should
be 10 feet or more as per the requirement. 
So, what are the raw materials we generally use in case of Indore method? Mix plant
residues generally use, we also use cow dung, we also use weed, sugarcane we also use
urine, soap, mud and grass and wood ashes, bran etcetera. So, these are the materials
which we use as the raw materials in Indore method of composting. So, let us see how
we can create this Indore method of Indore compost.
So, first of all we have to spread dry leaves with cattle dung and in soil in the ratio of 4 is
to 2 is to 1 up to 2 inch layer in the composting pit. So, this is a first layer and pit is filled
with above material up to 1 foot above the ground level ok. Now after that once it
reaches the one foot above the ground level, then we have to sprinkle the water over the
materials and 1 more layer of bedding materials with wood ash and urinated mud should
be added. So, this is how it is created layer by layer and we can go up to 1 feet above the
ground.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:40)
So, after we place the compost for decomposition, we need to give some turning, now
turning is required for proper aeration and moisture. So, you can see the material for
proper aeration and moisture and we required at least 3 turnings. So, first turning isbasically given at 10 to 15 days after filling the pits and second turning is given 15 days
after first turning and the third turning is given basically after 2 months of second
turning. So, these turnings are necessary for proper aeration and moisture and proper
formation of compost, so this is about the Indore method of composting.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:30)
Now, let us talk about Nadep method, now this method facilitates a lot of composting
through minimum use of cattle dung and in this method the decomposition process takes
place aerobically and the tank should be located near the cattle shed or farm site and
important is the tank should be 10 feet by 6 feet by 3 feet in size and are prepared within
9 feet in 9 inch thick wall. So it should be 9 inch thick wall. 
So, proper blocks and holes of 7 inch should be left on all the 4 sides of the tank valve
for the circulation of air. So, you can see this an example of Nadep compost bed and you
can see all the holes are created for proper aeration and circulation of air and plastering
of inner wall and floor. So, the tank should be done by mixing of dung and mud so this is
very very important. So, this is how we create a Nadep compost pit and again remember
this method was first demonstrated in J.N. KV in Indore. (Refer Slide Time: 16:53)
So, in case of Nadep methods these are the materials which are required, first of all we
require farm residues because it, you know, in the previous slide you have seen that we
should make this pit near the farm. So, farm residues will be used as an important raw
material for this Nadep compost. So, we require 1400 to 1500 kg of farm residue we
require cattle dung of 90 to 100 kg, we require dry sieved soil of 1750 kg and then water
in 1500 to 2000 litre. So, these are the raw materials which we require for this Nadep
compost.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:36)
So, what are the filling process? So, there 2 at least 2 filling processes. So let us talk
about the first filling process in case of Nadep compost. So, first of all slurry made of
cow dung and water should be sprinkled on the floor and the walls of the tank and the
filling of the tanks follows this following steps. 
So, first layer obviously plant residues are spread evenly in layer of 6 inches that is 10 to
100 kg in the tank and second layer 4 to 5 kg cattle dung of biogas slurry in 125 to 150
litres of water should apply on the first layer and in the third layer 50 to 60 kg of sieved
soil added on the second layer of the tank. 
So, again in the first layer will be produce will be will be will be applying plant residues
and we will be spreading the plant residues evenly in layer up to 6 inches and then in the
second layer, we will add 4 to 5 kg of cattle dung of biogas slurry in 125 to 150 litre of
water and applied in the over the first layer and in the third over that in the third layer,
we will add 50 to 60 kg of sieved soil in the over the second layer of the tank. So, in this
way the tank is filled layer by layer up to 1.5 feet over the above the brick level of the
tank. Now this filled tank should be covered and sealed by 3 inch layer of soil that is 300
to 400 kg and it should be pasted with a mixture of dung and soil. 
So, if you go back and see the previous slide where I have shown you, so this is the
plastering you can see at the top with cow dung and soil mixture which is required for
this Nadep method. So, you spread all this required raw materials in layers by layers and
after that once it reaches a required depth after the over the bricks of the tank, then you
plaster it through the mixture of soil and this cow dung. So, this is basically the process
of first filling. (Refer Slide Time: 20:16)
Now, what is the process of second filling? At this stage, the process of the first filling is
repeated again and sealed with paste of mud and dung. So, after 20 days the plant
residues contracts and goes down in the tank by 20 to 25 inches, obviously because when
the decomposition will go on. Obviously, there will be reaction in the volume and
reduction in the weight and periodically the paste of cattle dung and water should be
sprinkled to maintain the 15 to 20 percent of the moisture. So, this is the method of
second filling in case of Nadep method. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:51)
So, guys we have completed these 2 methods important methods; obviously, the other
methods are Bangalore method and Coimbatore method you can you can consult some
literature to search in details about those methods. But let us talk about very important
process  that  is  vermicomposting.  A  vermicompost  also  called  worm  compost  or
vermicast or worm casting or worm humus or worm manure. 
So, there are several names for this, we know, compost is basically end product of the
breakdown of organic matter by some species of earth worm. Basically the epigeic earth
worms. So vermicompost is a nutrient rich natural fertilizer and soil conditioner. It
improves  the  soil  physical  chemical  and  biological  conditions.  So  the  process  of
producing vermi composting is known as vermi I am sorry. So, the process of producing
vermi compost is known as vermicomposting. 
The  earthworm  species  or composting  worms  most often  are, you know, brandling
worm. So, also known as Eisenia foetida, it is a most important worm or sometime red
wigglers like Lumbricus rubellus and also Perionyx excavates, Eudrilus eugenie. So,
these are some common, you know, common species of earth worm which we use for
producing the vermi compost. So, now, you can see this is vermicompost and how we
produce the vermi compost we will see in the next slide. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:24)
So, vermi culture which is derived from the Latin word vermis meaning worm and it
involves the mass production of earthworm for waste degradation and composting withvermicast production. So, earthworms remember they are the intestines of the earth.
Vermi comes from the, you know, vermi means worm and it involves this vermiculture
means the mass production of earth worms for waste degradation. 
So, they occur in diverse this earth worms occur in diverse habitats especially those
which are dark and moist areas and organic material like humus, cattle dung and kitchen
waste are highly attractive for some species. So, they ingest those materials some amount
they, you know, retain for their own biomass creation and they convert the other. you
know, remaining portion and they just excrete it out and that is a very very huge source
of nutrient. So, this is called the vermicompost. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:39)
Now,  what  actually  these  earth  worms  do,  so  they  basically  maintain  the  aerobic
condition in the mixture. So, basically they ingest soil and convert a portion of the
organics into the worm biomass and to respiration and to respiration products and expel
the remaining partially stabilized matter and discrete material we call it castings and
these are basically the worm cast or vermicompost. 
So, worms and aerobic mesosphilic microorganism act symbiotically to accelerate and
enhance the decomposition of the organic matter. So, that is how this is another form of
worm compost and this compost we shall add to different for encouraging the growth of
the different plants. (Refer Slide Time: 24:27)
So,  what  are  the  properties  important  properties  beneficial  properties  of  the
vermicompost,  well  they  are  very  finally  structured,  uniform  stable  and  aggregated
particles of humified organic material. And they have excellent porosity, aeration and
water holding capacity and they are rich in available plant nutrients  and hormones,
enzymes and microbial populations. And they are mostly pathogen free because, plant
and human pathogens are killed during the passage of the earth worm gut and earth like
soil building substances that forms a building a beneficial growing environment within
the in the for plant roots and their these vermicompost are valuable and marketable
products. 
So, again these if we apply this  vermicompost  into the soil, they improve  the soil
aggregation, they have excellent they increase the porosity, they increase the aeration,
increase the water holding capacity all these are beneficial in nature. Also they are rich in
plant nutrients which helps in, we know, a proper growth of the plant, they secretes some
hormones, they secrets enzyme for degradation of organic matter or conversion on or the
nutrient transformations, they are pathogen free. 
Another good thing about this vermi compost they are, you know, they are virtually
odour free, so these are very good I mean they are not producing any odour. So, plant
and human pathogens are also killed because, we know, they are moving through the
guts of the earthworms and the you can sell this products it is a very very valuable andmarketable product because, these are very very attractive things for gardening and the,
you know, vegetable crops.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:15)
So,  this  is  the  vermicompost  pit,  basically  vermicompost  can  be  done,  you  know,
vermicompost are developed in the shady area. So, basically we develop the pits you can
see  here  using  different  materials,  you  can  see  you  can  you  can  create  these
vermicompost, we know you know, vermicompost pits using some mud, using bricks
and within these vermicompost pit, you can basically spread layers of different materials.
Basically you can add farm residues or kitchen wastes and then you can add a slurry of
cow dung as well as water and after that, you can further add another layer of these a
farm residues and all these things and after that, you know, after that these earth worms
are released here in these vermi beds and we have to create a uniform moisture condition
and they are basically covered through some, you know, moist bags to maintain the
moisture condition. And after a certain period of time these microorganisms will ingest
this materials and ultimately they will convert these materials into vermi compost which
can be further sieved and, you know, further it, you know, once this material will be
produced they will be dark in colour, they will be odour free and basically they will be
harvested and then sieved pact in the as a final product. 
So, this is a vermi composting product guys. So, you can search some several materials
or literature which are we which talks about this vermi casting composting process.There are different processes of vermicomposting, but obviously one thing is common.
All  of  them  are  using  different,  you  know,  all  of  them  are  using  the,  you  know,
earthworms for production of vermicompost and these vermicomposts are very very
beneficial for the growth of the plant.
And so guys there are other also different other types of compost like kitchen compost
you can you can you can search some literature about those thing and there are some
available bio digesters which are now available which you can use in your home to
produce your, to produce the compost for your own kitchen garden, because each and
every day the kitchen waste which are generated we can recycle those kitchen waste into
the one, you know, in inside those bio digester to produce the organic compost. 
So, the, you know, composting is a very very interesting process and these composting
process is very very environmental friendly guys and these are also very very beneficial.
So, it is a very important waste management practices solid waste management practice. 
So, let us wrap up the week 8 lectures here I hope that you have learnt something new in
this week and we have covered several important topics like soil testing, like, we know,
organic matter, like macro and micro organism, then composting, then vermicomposting
all these are important topics I hope that you have got some basic overview of these
important topics. And if you are interested please feel free to email me to learn in details
or you can go ahead and search some literature to gain further knowledge. 
Thank you very much and in the next lecture we will be starting the week 9 of lectures.
Thank you very much guys. 