Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 48
Removal of Toxic Inorganic Substances
Welcome friends to this third lecture of week ten of Soil Science and Technology and in
this lecture we will try to first finish the inorganic contaminants in the soil which is
started in the last lecture.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:31)
And  then  will  be  discussing  about  different  methods  for  remediating  the  inorganic
contaminants from the soil. So, in the last two lectures of week 10 we discussed about
how to remediate different organic pollutants in the soil, we talked about bioremediation.
And we talked  about the different types  of bioremediation  we talked  about natural
bioremediation as well as the engineered or enhance bioremediation and you know that
enhance  bioremediation  can  also  be  divided  into  biostimulation  as  well  as
bioaugmentation.
And we discussed about so we will other chemical methods and then we started with the
different types of inorganic substances specially the heavy metals, we talks about several
heavy metals. Now we will discuss them one by one, so we started with arsenic and let
us see what are the problems which process in the environment. So, arsenic problem isan you know the problem of arsenic is it’s accumulation in certain orchard soil following
years of application of arsenic containing pesticides.
And being present in an anionic from this element is absorbed by you know hydrous and
iron and aluminum oxides especially, in acid soils. And in spite of the capacity of the
most soils to tie up the arsenates long term addition of arsenate sorry arsenical sprays can
lead into toxicities for sensitive plants and earthworms and remember that that arsenic
toxicity can be reduced by application of sulfates of zinc and iron and aluminum which
tie up the arsenic in insoluble forms.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:19)
So, these map basically shows the groundwater arsenic contamination scenario of  West
Bengal and if you look at it you will see that the mostly this arsenic contamination of the
groundwater in West Bengal is considered in the lower in the indo gangetic zones and
this lower  indo gangetic zones and nearby areas has suffered most for this from this
arsenic  toxicity  and  you  can  see  turtle  of  human  health  hazards  pictures  which  is
occurring from this which already occurred from this arsenic toxicity in the groundwater.
And their respective up uptake by the human being and; obviously, these leads to the
ultimately to different carcinogenic effects and that is why it is important to remediate
the arsenic from both ground water as well as the soil.(Refer Slide Time: 03:07)
Now, the next important heavy metal is lead; obviously, it contaminate you know it you
know  it  contaminates  primarily  the  urban soils  and from  different  types  of vehicle
emissions and exhaust and from old lead pigmented paints from paint chips or different
types of painted wood works and most of the lead is tied up with the soil as low
solubility carbonates sulfides and in combination with iron aluminum and manganese
oxides.
And consequently the lead is largely unavailable to the plant and not mobile enough to
readily leach to the groundwater; however, you should remember that these lead can be
absorbed by the children who pore different contaminated soils or dust in their mouth.
So, that is why it is becoming nowadays important pollutant and it is gaining importance
for environmental contamination.(Refer Slide Time: 04:01)
So, next slide will show a graph which shows basically the effect of lead in prenatal
expose you know effect of prenatal exposure to lead upon the mental development of
infants and lead exposure here is you know measured by its concentration in the blood in
umbilical cord and you can see there are 3 grade is one is lower than medium and high.
The low corresponds to the less than three microgram per deciliter and medium to an
average of 6.7 microgram per deciliter and high correspond to greater than 10 microgram
per deciliter.
And  obviously,  it  is  quite  you  know  quite  evident  then  when  the  there  is  high
concentration of lead in the blood; obviously, that returns the mental development. So,
mental in development index score is low, in case of high following by medium and low
and now different edges of testing or mass. So, that shows the importance of lead then
it’s remediation from you know from our environment for better you know for better you
know for cleanliness of the environment.(Refer Slide Time: 05:15)
So, the third important and one of the most important is mercury, remember that it is
release mainly as a burning coal to generate the electricity when it contaminates lake
sediments and wetlands the result is toxic levels of mercury among certain species of fish
and it’s shows different types of biomagnification I will talk about this in a couple of
slides.
And insoluble forms of mercury in soils and not normally available to the plants or in
turn to animals are converted to microorganism to an organic form that is called the
methylmercury we it is very important this methylmercury and which is more soluble
and available for plant and animal absorption will see that.
Then the methylmercury is concentrated in fatty acid in fatty tissues and it moves up to
the food chain, until it accumulates in some fish level that may be toxic to humans of
shop and consumption. And the series of transformation illustrate how reaction in soil
can influence human toxicities.(Refer Slide Time: 06:19)
So, let us see couple of ways through which you know there are biological and chemical
transformation of mercury in the soil you can see that how this mercury moves through
the aerobic zone of the soil as well as anaerobic zone of the soil and also in air or air
filled pores spaces. So, we can see here that you know this is the mercury which is the
starting point and; obviously, in the anaerobic layer it you know it goes you know it
ultimately released the methylmercury of reaction with the methane.
And the conversion of methylmercury to you know the mercury is very much slow and
this you know methylmercury can also add you know chlorine to produce this compound
and ultimately; obviously, this broken arrows are basically shows the movement or the
volatilization the loss of volatile forms of mercury to the atmosphere or the air filled
pores of the space.
So,  you  can  see  how  this  mercury  and  is  different  components,  different  harmful
components especially market this methylmercury can moves you know throughout the
environment as well as you know aerobic and anaerobic layers of the soil and how
transform in the soil.(Refer Slide Time: 07:45)
So, another is mercury pathways in aquatic system you can see here you know how
mercury ultimately pollutes the aquatic systems. So, if there is a mountain source; if
there is a mountain source the you know there is a in transportation of mercury an
ultimately the methyl mercury transport an ultimately deposits and you know methyl you
know through methylmercury deposition and runoff.
And ultimately this methylmercury goes out flow to the ocean and you can see here this
how this biomagnification through the food web is going on from smaller organism to
larger organisms like fish. So, this you know biomagnification is very very important in
the through food web is very very important for eventual accumulation of this mercury in
the human body parts.
And you can see you know a significant amount is getting sedimented and you know and
further the sediment resuspension is occurring from this inorganic mercury and methyl
mercury and this inorganic mercury basically get sedimented and you know resuspension
or  sediment  resuspension  basically  occurs  from  inorganic  mercury  as  well  as
methylmercury and you know and you can see here the two major factors here or two
major determinants  here inorganic mercury and methyl mercury and they when the
inorganic  mercury  undergoes  methylation  it  produces  the  methylmercury  and  when
methyl  mercury  undergoes  demethylation  produces  the  inorganic  mercury  and  this
biomagnification basically depends on mercury methylation.And so, you can see how this mercury is getting converted into different  froms inorganic
farms to organic farms and then back into the inorganic forms and how these inorganic
and organic transformation affecting the biomagnification and ultimately it is depositing
in the environment and then further moving back to the water from the deposited you
know from its deposits. So, you can see here you know this is a mercury pathways in
aquatic systems in ultimately its get accumulated in the human body parts.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:59)
And; obviously, this was the bioaccumulation of methylmercury; obviously, is see here
biomagnifications of methylmercury in the ecosystems. So, it starts with the you know
the plants which are present in the naquatic environment and then the micro you know
different  types  of  planktons  and  other  microbes  which  basically  this  eats  this
methylmercury.
And it accumulates in their body, ultimately the smaller fishes you know pray on this
planktons  and  ultimately  this  methylmercury  get  accumulated  in  their  body  and
subsequently to the larger fish and from this larger fish to the different types of birds
which are present in the water and ultimately their getting accumulated in the animal
tissue as well as other you know among the human tissue and you know other animals
and bird tissue.So, that basically shows the bioaccumulation of methylmercury in that is why you know
mercury is a very important you know environmental you know mercury is considered is
an very important environmental contaminant.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:17)
So, guys let us move here in see the chromium; chromium is also a very important it is
because in trace amounts is essential for human life, but like arsenic it is in carcinogen
which when absorbed in large doses and this element is widely used in steel alloys and
paint pigments and chromium is found in two majore oxidation states trivalent form and
hexavalent form. In contrast to most metals the more highly oxidized states is more
soluble and its solubility increases above pH 5.5 and this behavior opposite to that of
chromium three which forms insoluble oxides and hydroxides above the pH level.(Refer Slide Time: 11:59)
So, another important are you know element is fluorine and the toxicity of fluorine is
also generally localized and drinking water for animal you know drinking water for
animals  and fluoride you know fumes from industrial  processes often contain  toxic
amounts of fluorine and the fumes can be ingested directly by animals are deposited in
the nearby plants.
So, that is why it is creating several problems and if the fluorides absorbed by the soil
their uptake plant is restricted and the fluoride forms of the soil is highly insoluble at the
solubility being released if the soil has a pH above neutral and high calcium you know
saturation. Another one is selenium it derives mainly from certain soil parent materials
and can accumulation in the soil and plant to toxic levels especially in arid regions.(Refer Slide Time: 12:49)
So, what are the potential hazard another potential hazards of inorganic substances can
come from application of sewage and sludge and heavy metals in the sewage sludge you
know you know sludge and sewage is loaded with heavy metals and most attention has
been given to zinc, copper, nickel, cadmium and lead which are commonly present in
significant levels of these sludge.
So, whenever we apply the sludge into the soil we must be very very careful about the
heavy metal load of these sludge and sewage thing. So, direct injection of soil and sludge
is also important pathways for human and animals exposer. So, you know it has to be
remediated carefully you know when we apply you know the chemical sewage and
sludge in the soil.
So, guys you know this you know that you know let us wrap up this lecture not let us
wrap up this topic which gives you basic overview of different inorganic substances and
then we move ahead to new topic that is remediation of soil inorganic pollution.(Refer Slide Time: 14:03)
And the basically will be covering this following concepts what is remediation and what
are the different methods of remediation organic or inorganic remediation?
(Refer Slide Time: 14:09)
And so the definition of remediation says that it is a process of reversing or stopping
environmental  damage  and  there  are  three  primary  methods  for  alleviating  or  soil
contamination by toxic inorganic compounds are there are three major strategies for you
know for remediation from soil, first of all to the first of all to eliminate or drastically
reduce the amount of toxin applied or to or allowed to reach in to the soil.Secondly, to immobilized the toxin by means of soil management to prevent it from
moving into the food or water supplies and thirdly in the case of severe contamination to
remove the toxin from the soil by chemical physical biological methods. So, basically
there are three steps first steps you know first of all will reduce or drastically cut down
the amount of toxin which we generally applied or allowed to reach into the soil.
Secondly so it is the kind of prevention method preventive method. Secondly, once it
reaches the soil will try to immobilize a toxin by means of soil management. So, it is a
management aspect and final in case of severe contamination to remove the toxic from
the soil by different types of chemical, physical and biological remediation. So, it is a
corrective measures. So, we can see there are three major aspects of you know soil you
know inorganic contaminant remediation.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:45)
So, if we go ahead and see what are the different types of ways of cutting down the
application you know or the soil application of the heavy metal. First of all we can
reduce the unintentional contamination from industrial operation and from automobiles
trucks and bus exhaust. You can see here when there is a large number of automobiles
moves towards a road; obviously, there is a you know there is a way with you know the
heavy metal contamination chances are there from you know from different different
parts wearing of their tires.and their exhausting or burning of the fossil fuels and you can see the particulate aerosols
can transfer out to the nearby areas greater than 100 meter you know distance and also
different types of run of circles when the drainage it inadequate and these heavy metals
which are deposited over the road surface due to the  movement of automobiles they get
move from one place to another place with the run of water and then contaminant the
surrounding place.
So, this is an way of contaminating the environment soil environment. So, we can reduce
the at this unintentional contamination from we can cut down the industrial operations or
industrial exhaust and automobile and we can manage the automobile and bus and truck
exhaust. The second way is to potential contamination issues from the improper disposal
of discarded electronics, are of increasing concern you know that you know tin lead
beryllium cadmium mercury these are important parts of this electronic.
So, when you are disposing it ultimately it goes to the environment and contaminate. So,
it must be very we much deal it with very we much deal it very carefully. Also there
must be judicious reduction in intended applications to soil of toxins through pesticides.
So, there is a worldwide drive for reducing the pesticide application of pesticide and their
promoting  the  integrated  nutrient  management,  where  the  application  of  inorganic
pesticides is you know is being replaced by application of organic pesticides we does not
contain these heavy metals.
So obviously, like arsenic copper cadmium zinc and all this things and also inorganic
fertilizers also. So, these are some of the strategies for reducing or cutting down the
heavy metals which can reach into the soil environment.(Refer Slide Time: 18:19)
The second important is the management aspect that is immobilizing the toxin, now most
of these elements are rendered less mobile and less available if the pH is kept near
neutral and above and draining wet soil can be beneficial since the oxidized form of the
several toxic metals are generally less soluble and less available for plant uptake and
then are the reduced form.
So, remember that heavy phosphate application may reduce the availability of metal
cation such as lead; however, it does the opposite with the arsenic because you know you
know it increases the availability of the arsenic when we apply the heavy metals sorry
heavy phosphate and remember that when we apply the organic matter especially heavy
application of composed generally it generally reduces the mobility and bioavailability of
many of the inorganic toxins and bioconcentration in the plant.
Now bioconcentration factor you can calculate by using this formula bioconcentration
factor is basically the magnesium I am sorry the milligram of any heavy metal per kg of
plant  tissue  over  milligram  per  kg  of  soil.  So,  this  by  using  this  you  know  bio
concentration factor we can determine what is the you know what is the toxicity level?(Refer Slide Time: 19:39)
So,  also  we  can  select  food  plants  very  carefully  remember  that  generally  plant
translocate much larger quantities of metals to the leaves than their fruits or seeds and
only vegetables can also you know root so remember that root and root vegetables can
also be problematic because fruits and grains only rarely accumulate high concentration
of metals; however, this is a most important.
The greatest risk of food chain you know contamination with metals is therefore, through
leafy vegetables such as lettuce and spinach or through forage crops even by eaten by
livestock because it gets highly accumulated on this leafy vegetables. On the other hand
non food plant with a high propensity to take up metals from contaminated soil can be
put to use good use for remediation when we call it phytoremediation we will discuss it.(Refer Slide Time: 20:37)
So, bioremediation can also be done as I have told you in the last slide bioremediation
can be done by metal hyper accumulating plants. So, plant to remember that, plant differ
widely in the responses to the accumulation of high concentration of metal in their roots.
Some die some survive by sequestering the metal in their root tissue, while the others
thrive and translocate metal to their shoot.
And based on these characteristics we know plants can be grouped into four categories,
these are the four category first of all the sensitive plant, second is the indicator plant,
third is excluded plants and finally, the hyperaccumulator plant. So, we will discuss them
one by one.(Refer Slide Time: 21:19)
So, basically sensitive plants are the most of the most of the plants are basically sensitive
plants. So, by the definition of sensitive plant it tends to take up metals readily, but then
cannot tolerate the resulting high metal concentration in their tissues. So, they become
poisoned by the metals their growth is inhibited and they are likely to die if grown in
even moderately metal contaminated soils. So, majority of the crops are basically you
know heavy metal sensitive plants and they basically cannot with stand these you know
these heavy metal concentration in the tissue.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:53)
The second type is call indicator plants, the indicator plants steadily takes up you know
the metal in proportion to how much is available to the soil at this trait they you know
this trait make them useful as indicator of soil metal concentration and this survive from
very  low  to  quite  high  soil  metal  concentration.  But  they  do  not  accumulate
concentration of the metals in the tissue that exceed the concentration in the soil and they
manage and they manage to tolerate moderately high levels of metal taken up by the
sequestering  the  metal  nonsensitive  plant  parts  or  by  binding  the  metals  inorganic
compound that reduces the toxicity.
So, this is important they manage to tolerate moderately high levels of metal taken by the
sequestering of the metal non sensitive plant parts or by binding the metals into organic
compound that reduces the toxicity. So, these are the traits of indicator plants.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:51)
The third one is call excluder plants; a excluder plant can tolerate quite high level of
metal contamination, but they do so by either excluding the metal and avoiding its uptake
or by isolating the metal in the root and not translocating into the shoot. So, it takes some
measure. So, that these heavy metals can you know can be avoided to you know the
uptake of the heavy metal can be avoided or even that even they have up taken it they are
concentrated in the root and not translocated into the shoot.
So, that is the excluder plants this excluder plants has you know may exhibit high
bioconcentration factor we have already talked about this bioconcentration factor. So,they may show high amount of bioconcentration factor in the root greater than 1, but not
in the shoot which can be equal to 1.
So, this behavior may be useful in stabilizing the metal into the soil, but; obviously, this
does not facilitate the removal of the metal  from the soil altogether,  so this  is the
disadvantage of this excluder  plants.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:59)
Hyperaccumulator plants, the hyperaccumulator plants not only tolerate extremely high
metal  concentration  in  soil,  they  also  efficiently  extract  the  metals  from  the  soil
translocate  the  metal  to  aboveground  parts  from  their  roots  and  continue  to  grow
unimpaired  with  extremely  high  metal  concentration  in  their  shoot  tissues.  And
remember  that  hundreds  of  hyperaccumulating  plant  species  from  dozens  of  plants
families have been identified, but the cruciferae, including the genera Brassica, alyssum
and you know Thlaspi, stands out as the supplying many you know supplying many
hyperaccumulator.(Refer Slide Time: 24:37)
So, you can see I am showing you one example of arsenic phytoremediation at the
Chinese break fern Pteris vittata is a major arsenic hyperaccumulating plants which can
accumulate 23 gram per kg of arsenic in its fronds. So, similarly other species like Pteris
like Pteris longifolia Pteris umbrosa and this Pityrogramma this calomelanos are also
known as the hyperaccumulators and in the presence of this of available phosphate the
uptake of arsenic by the plant appears to be higher.
So,  the  root associated  you know  also the  VAM  fungi  that  is  basically  arbuscular
mycorrhiza in ferns also helps in hyperaccumulation of arsenic. So, these are this is an
example of hyper accumulation of arsenic. So, guys we have covered this basically this
different types of inorganic substances or inorganic heavy metals which are present in to
the soil and we talked about different types of the you know specific heavy metals like
arsenic and then lead and how they how they impact the environment as well as human
health.
We also talked about chromium you also talked about selenium, we also talked about
you know so as you know we also talked about florin. So, now I have shown you how
we the phytoremediation can help in remediating these heavy metals from the soil as
well as you know what are the different types of plants we talked about sensitive plants,
we  talked  about  indicator  plants,  we  talked  about  excluder  plant  and  then
hyperaccumulator plant remembered that phytoremediation has become a very importantissue now a days and it’s in a important area of research for those who want to do
research in soil and environmental chemistry I must encourage them to do more research
in hyperaccumulation. Because I mean this is one of the way through which we can we
can  remediate  our  environment  in  a  more  sustainable  manner  as  well  as  more
environmental friendly way.
So, guys I hope that you have got basic overview I would encourage you to go ahead and
do some more research and more studies refine studies in you know phytoremediation as
well as bioremediation.  I have not touched about the  microbial  bioremediation,  but
remember that microbial bioremediation is also very very important for remediating
these heavy metals from the soil there are certain bacteria and which can remediate these
heavy metals when they can take up this heavy metals in their body.
And they can we stand high concentration of the high concentration of different heavy
metal there are certain bio you know there are certain bacteria which can convert this
arsenic which is an important heavy metal to some other you know immobile compounds
and that is why they are concentration and with their toxicity in the environment can be
reduced.
So, there are several ways; obviously, it is not possible to cover each and everything, but
hopefully have got some basic ideas about this bioremediation, I would encourage you to
go ahead and do some more research thank you and let us meet in the next lecture to
discuss our next topic that is soil survey.
Thank you.