Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 44
Wind Erosion and Tillage Erosion
Welcome friends to this fourth lecture of week 9 of Soil Science and Technology. And in
this lecture, we will be trying wrap up this conservation tillage topic and then we will be
starting up the Wind Erosion and as well as Tillage related erosion. 
And in the last lecture, we talked about different aspects of conservation tillage and what
are the six different process, six different types of conservation tillage, we talked about
no till, we talked about zero till, we talked about vertical tillage, we talked about ridge
tillage practices and then so on so forth. 
And then, we talked about, we know, zero tillage and how we are maintaining the crop
residues using the zero tillage and how this air pollution, we know, also, we have
discussed about this vertical or turbo tillage system and what are their advantages what
are their drawbacks. And then, we talked about this happy seeder and how the happy
seeder is helping us to control the air pollution which is basically created due to the
burning of crop residues.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:31)
Refer Slide Time: 01:35)
So, in this lecture we will be talking about, we will be talking about different erosion
different  aspects  of conservation  tillage  and we will  be talking  about  different  soil
properties which are, you know, being affected because of some conservation tillage. So,
let us start with the erosion control by conservation tillage. 
So, remember that, in case of conservation tillage, it promotes rapid infiltration which
reduces  the  surface  runoff  losses  because  since  one  of  the  major  criteria  or  major
assumption or major criteria for conservation tillage is to maintain at least 30 percent of
the  cover  crop  cover  over,  the,  you  know,  over  the  soil  surface  and  minimum
disturbances of the soil.
So, that helps in, you know, aggregation in the soil, you know, less decay of organic
matter, less decomposition of organic matter and as a result of more binding of soil
particles. And when there is  a mould  binding of the soil particles,  more aggregate
formation that will facilitates the water infiltration and when there will be more water
infiltration; obviously, there will be less chance of water runoff. Not only that, due to the
binding action of these roots of the plant as well as the binding action of organic matter,
these soil particles are having less chance to carried away from, you know, erode away
from one place to another place along with the flowing water or runoff.
So, that is why obviously, these when we are maintaining these conservation tillage, we
are actually, you know, encouraging the, you know, encouraging the more aggregateformation  or  beneficial  aggregate  formation  in  the  soil  and  it  promotes  the  rapid
infiltration which reduces the surface runoff losses. And also, it significantly reduces the
loss of nutrient dissolve in runoff water or attached to sediments and that also maintains
the inherent fertility of the soil. So, although the difference are not as pronounced as with
soil erosion, these differences are reflected in the much lower C factor. If you remember
that C factor, which you consider in the calculation of universal soil loss equation. So,
these differences are reflected in much lower C factor values assigned to conservation
tillage systems.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:08)
So, erosion control, let us see the trends if erosion control by conservation tillage. You
can see here in the conserve, you know you know, there is a corn followed following the
soybeans  and  here  you  can  see  corn  following  the  corn  and  obviously,  in  the
conservational tillage, soil loss is high in both the systems and followed by disk chisel
with minimum tillage and in the lowest soil loss, you can get in case of this no tillage
system. 
And  obviously,  in  both  the  systems,  the  runoff  is  highest  in  case  of  obviously,
conventional tillage followed by no till system and then disk chisel system and the
similar trend you have found in case of corn following corn system also.
So, basically that shows that the importance of conservation tillage for controlling the
soil loss and also reduction of the runoff. So, again, we know, it is always recommendedto use the no till or disk till which will disk chisel with minimum tillage to maintain the
soil health.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:29)
So, what are the effects on soil properties? This is very important aspects. So, you know,
these conservation tillage has different effects on soil properties which has got physical,
you know, it has got impact on physical properties of the soil, it has got impact on
chemical properties of the soil and it has got impact on biological properties of the soil. 
So, as per as the physical properties of the soil loss are concerned, it increases the, you
know, bulk density, it increases the infiltration, it increases the water holding capacity, it
increases organic matter into the soil, it we know and also the residue cover soil are
generally  cooler  because  sometime  it  is  detrimental  for.  However,  sometime  it  is
detrimental for the seed germination this cooler temperature. 
And as far as the chemical properties are concerned obviously, it increases the nutrient
mineralization,  it increases  the cation  exchange  capacity,  but also may increase  the
denitrification sometime because of the, we know, less inversion or less air movement
sometime  and it also decreases  the decomposition  rate. So, maintaining the organic
matter  in  the  soil,  sequestering  more  carbon  in  the  soil  or  enhancing  the  carbon
sequestration. And also as mixing of soil does not takes place, so, there is a chance of
developing acidifying agent due to decomposition. So, in that case, we need lime application as you know that we are applying we or we
generally need to apply lime in case of acidic condition. And third one is biological
properties. Obviously, the abundance activity and dive, you know, and the diversity of
soil organism tend to be greatest in term in case of conventional tillage as compared to
the, you know; obviously, these are high in case of conservation tillage as compared to
come conventional tillage.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:28)
So, effect on soil properties; obviously, we can see here different effects on soil property.
Let us see here three different types of tillage system; one is Plow tillage, another is
Chisel plow or minimum till and then no till. So, you can see organic carbon; obviously,
it is lowest in case of Plow tillage, followed by Chisel plow, no till. And in the no till
system or Chisel plow, minimum till and no till system. Bulk density bulk density is
always highest in case of Plow tillage followed by chisel Plow and followed by no till
system. So, when there is a high bulk density; obviously, there will be compactness and
as  a  result  of  that,  water  movement  will  be  restricted  or  water  infiltration  will  be
restricted.
When the water infiltration is restricted there is; obviously, increased chance of surface
runoff. Infiltration, you know, this hydraulic conductivity is also increased in case of no
till  system  followed  by  the  minimum  till  system  and  in  case  of  Plow  tillage  the
infiltration rate is lowest. Available water holding capacity is highest in case of no tillfollowed by minimum till and then Plow tillage. Penetration resistance will be always
highest in case of Plow tillage just like, you know, it will be much more compact. And
then, chisel Plow minimum followed by Chisel Plow minimum till and then lowest will
be in case of no till system. Macro aggregates will be highest in case of no till system
and obviously, the, you know, corn yield will be highest in case of minimum till with the
chisel Plow.
So, you can see, all the beneficial effects of soil properties can be obtained by using this
conventional tillage by using the conservation tillage practice instead of conventional
tillage  practice  because  conventional  tillage  practice  reduce  the  organic  carbonate
increases the bulk density, increases  the penetration resistance, it increases the, you
know, it decreases the available water holding capacity. 
So obviously, from this, you know you know, if you see there is always increase in
beneficial soil properties as compared to all. There is always increase in beneficial soil
properties in conservation tillage practices as compared to conventional tillage.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:13)
So, let us move ahead and see ok. So, this shows the picture of the same soil. You know,
we are having, you know, both this picture are showing the same, you know, of, you
know, soil which are affecting the, which are affected by conservation tillage practices.
So, the left picture shows the soil condition in a no till system. You can see it is darker in
colour because of high amount of organic matter. And similarly, you can see the left theright picture; it shows the same soil and the no till system and via versus conservation
conventional tillage system.
So, you can see this soil is under no till system and this soil is under conventional
system. Now obviously, from the from the visual, you know, effect, it can be identified
that this no till system soil are having high amount of organic matter then that of the
conventional tillage practices. So obviously, the beneficial effects of soil will be much
more, we know, in this no till system soil. However, in this conventional tillage system,
you know, reduces the organic matter here. So, that basically shows the effect of this
alternate conservation tillage practices in different beneficial soil properties.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:39)
And also, you can see some other effects, you can see due to the convention conservation
tillage practices, there is a dense growth of nitrogen fixing vetch within a zero tillage
rotation.  So  obviously,  these  dense  growth  of  nitrogen  fixing  plant  helps  in  more
anchoring  the  soil  much  more,  helping  prevention  of  the  helping  preventing  the
movement of soil particles to runoff. And also, you can see development of porous soil
architecture beneath a grass crop in rotation. So, this soil architecture helps in more
water movement reducing the chances of runoff.(Refer Slide Time: 12:23)
So, these are other beneficial effects as I have already mentioned. So, let us discuss in the
final slide. So, let us discuss what is the advantages and disadvantages of Conservation
tillages.  So,  conservation  tillage;  obviously,  the  advantages  are  reduced  erosion;
obviously,  this  one  of  the  major  thing  and  then  it  saves  then  it  saves  the  fuel  of
implement different implements and then cut cost of maintenance of the field and also
tillage operation. 
It holds more soil water, it reduces the soil compaction, it allows several crops per season
and also it does not reduce crop yields and it reduces carbon dioxide release from the
soil, thereby reducing the green house effect. What are the disadvantages? Obviously,
this has, you know, conservation tillage are also having some disadvantages. It can use
increase the herbicide use for some crop because we are maintaining the ground cover. 
And obviously, there will be chances of weed infestation and also leaves stalks that can
harbour crop pests and fungal diseases and increases pesticide use for those for those
diseases and also requires investment in expensive equipments, just like I told you about
the happy seeder. However, irrespective of these things, you know, there is a great
prospect of conservation tillage for maintaining, for maintaining the soil quality and
reducing the soil erosion and specifically in country like India, require this type of
practice for maintaining their inherent soil fertility and also to prevent the continuous soil
degradation.So, guys I hope that now several things are clear to you and about the conservation
tillage practices and how it is beneficial and so, we are finishing this conservation tillage
lecture topic.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:26)
And in the next topic, will be discussing this wind erosion and tillage erosion and the
concepts  which  will  be  covering  are  reasons  of  different  wind  erosion  and  then
mechanisms of wind erosion, then prediction of wind erosion, then what is tillage erosion
and finally, prediction of tillage erosion.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:47)
So, let us start with the reasons of wind erosion. Obviously, you can see this is a
worldwide map of vulnerability to wind erosion and you can see different colour coding
for low, moderate, high and very high. Obviously, you can see here India, in Indian
condition there is always high and very high chances of wind erosion you can see most
of the areas are vulnerable. Specifically, these areas are vulnerable to moderate to high to
very high wind erosion, except these western Indian parts. 
So, so wind erosion is an important aspect of wind erosion, we know, important aspect of
soil erosion. So obviously, what are the different reasons for wind erosion; overgrazing
of the fragile land of arid and semi arid areas and also dry regions with strong wind and
no wind and no obstacles. So, region vulnerable to both wind erosion includes the Sahel
area in Africa and the pacific coast of South America and the Loess plateau in China. So,
all these areas are very very susceptible to wind erosion.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:05)
So, let us move ahead and see mechanics of wind erosion. So, wind erosion involves
three basically, three basic processes; just like in case of water erosion, it is basically
combination of detachment and then movement and depositions; similarly detachment
transportation deposition. So, similarly wind erosion is also involve also involves three
basic processes. These are basically detachment transportation and deposition. 
So, the moving air, you know, itself results in some detachment of tiny soil grains from
the granules or clods of which they are a part. And however, when the moving air isladen with, you know, soil particles it is abrasive power is greatly increased. So, there are
three processes in transportation; one is called saltation, another is soil creep, another is
suspension. We will discuss all of these. So, transportation is mediated through these
three processes; one is again saltation, then soil creep and suspension. So, let us discuss
what are these.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:12)
So, saltation is the first and most important mode of particle transportation. Remember,
this movement of soil by a series; series of short bounces along the ground forces called
Saltation and the particles remain fairly close to the ground as they bounce and seldom
raise more than 30 Centimetre or so. And depending on the condition, this process may
account for 50 to 90 percent of the total movement of the soil. So, this saltation process
is the major process which accounts for the lion’s share of the wind transfer, wind based
transportation process. 
The second important transportation process is soil creep. Soil creep is basically rolling
and sliding along the surface of the larger particles and the bouncing particles carried by
saltation strike larger particles and aggregates and accelerates their movement along the
surface and finally, soil creep accounts for the movement of particles up to about 1
millimetre in diameter and which may amount, you know, to 5 to 25 percent of the total
movement. So, this is how soil creeps and finally, suspension.Suspension is when the dust particles of a fine sand size and smaller are moved parallel
to the ground surface and upwards that is called suspension. Obviously, again remember
that these dust particles and fine sand size and smaller particles are moved parallel to the
ground surface and upwards that is called suspension. And the turbulent action of the
wind results in other particles being carried kilometres upward into the atmosphere and
many hundreds of kilometres horizontally. 
So, that is why, the winds basically carry the soil particles from one place to another
place which are far apart from each other. And the process stops when wind subsides or
precipitation wash down them and it may accounts for more than 40 percent of the total
and is generally no more than about 15 percent.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:15)
So, this is the saltation process, I mean these are transportation process which shows
different types of movement. So, you can see, this is much clearer. So, this is saltation
process, so, so saltation process slow bounces of this; so, just like as the definition of the
saltation, we saw if we go back, this is a movement of soil by series of short bounces. So,
similarly we can see the saltation process shows the movement of soil particles in short
bounces as we can see short bounces. 
Whereas, the soil creep is basically rolling of the soil particles and the suspension is, you
know, it is a movement through the air, moving air. So, again here it is a saltation and it
is the soil creep and saltation site particles and aggregates, in case of soil gives it is 0. 1to 0.5 millimetre, and it allows basically suspension size dust are generally less than 0.1
millimetre. This very important again.
Saltation size particles and aggregates generally ranges between 0.1 to 0.5 millimetre.
Whereas, in case of suspension, size of the dust should be less than 0.1 millimetre and in
the suspension, it moves along with the, you know, wind and this allows the wind, you
know,  these  allows  basically  indicates  a  relative  wind  speeds.  So,  you  can  now
differentiate between these three processes of transportation wind based transportation.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:57)
So, again this light area shows, you know, where the top soil has been eroded and
deposition of the top soil along the fences. So, this an example of, you know, wind based
erosion where wind is carried away from with the blowing, I am sorry, the soil is carried
away with the blowing wind and deposited in an area which is far apart.(Refer Slide Time: 21:22)
And let me show you some examples of wind based erosion. You can see these are the
different pictures of Dust Bowl which occurred in US in 1920’s to 30’s. So, this is an
extensive movement of dust across the great plains and, you know, up to the New York
and all this, you know, washing and other places when and basically disrupts the daily
life, you know, daily life of this United States in particularly during 1920 to 30 and these
dust bowl basically resulted from a severe wind erosion.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:09)
So, what are the different factors, which effects the wind erosion? Obviously, wind
velocity and turbulence is one of the important factor, then surface roughness is another
important factor, then soil properties and vegetation the threshold velocity. Remember
that the wind speed requires to initiate the soil movement is usually 25 kilometre per
hour or 7 meter per second. 
At higher wind speed, obviously, soil movement is proportional to the cube of the wind
velocity. In case of surface roughness; obviously, wind erosion is less severe when the
soil is rough. So, this roughness can be obtained by proper tillage methods of the erosion
which  basically  can,  you  know,  reduce  the,  and  which  can  be  reduced  by  stubble
mulching. Soil properties in addition to moisture content, wind erosion also influenced
by mechanical stability of the soil clods and aggregates and the stability of the soil crust,
bulk density and size of the erodible fractions, you know that and vegetation. 
Obviously, vegetative or stubble mulch will reduce the wind erosion hazard especially if
rows run perpendicular to the prevailing wind direction.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:16)
So, how we can predict the wind erosion? The wind erosion predict equation are WEQ
has been you in used in the since late 1960 and the formula of this wind erosion of this
equation is E equal to where E is basically function of I C K L and V where this E is
basically the amount of soil loss by wind erosion. It is a function of these five factors. I is
basically soil erodibility factor. C is basically climate factor and K is basically soil ridgeroughness factor, L is basically width of the field factor and V is basically vegetative
cover factor.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:05)
So, let us discuss these factors. So, predicting wind direction, we know, predicting wind
erosion ; obviously, an increase in mean temperature on the these these these graph
basically shows the increase, you know, a trend where there is a mean, when there is a
there was a mean increase in temperature in the Colorado plateau of United State. And
this mean temperature increase with 3 degree centigrade which basically resulted in
greater soil drying that decreases the vegetative cover from 45 percent to 20 percent. 
So, as a result of increase in, you know, increase in the mean temperature, there is a
greater drying and as a result of that the vegetative cover reduce from 45 percent to 20
percent of the ground surface. And as a result of that, you know you know, this climate
induced reduction in vegetative cover more than doubled the amount of erosion caused
by  high  winds  the  following  year.  So,  you  can  see  previous  year  mean  annual
temperature.  So,  it  was  10  degree  centigrade  and  the  next  year  it  was  13  degree
centigrade. So, you can see, we know, this basically represent 15 kilometre per hour
winds speed, 20 kilometre power, 20 kilometre per hour wind speed and this basically
represent 25 kilometre per hour wind speed.
So, in the following year all these amounts of Aeolian sediment flux or the amount of
material carried away through wind erosion, almost doubled because vegetative coverwas reduced from 45 to 20 percent. So, that shows the importance of vegetative cover for
maintaining the or to prevent the wind based erosion ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:48)
So, so predicting the wind erosion. So, let us consider all the factors, the soil erodibility
factor I relates to the properties of the soil and to the degree of slope of the site in
question and in the soil ridge and soil ridge roughness factor K takes into consideration
the cloddiness of the soil surface and the vegetative cover V and the ridges on the soil
surface.  And  the  climatic  factor  C  involves  wind  velocity,  soil  temperature  and
precipitation which helps controlling the soil moisture. 
And the width of the field factor that is L is the width of a field in the downward
direction. Naturally, the width changes as the direction of the wind changes. So, the
prevailing wind direction is generally used and the vegetative cover factor V basically
relates not only to the degree of soil surface covered with residues but to the nature of the
cover whether it is living or dead or still standing or flat on the ground. 
So, not only it not only cover the degree of soil surface covered, but it also covered it
also, it also considered the nature of that cover whether they are dead, whether they are
alive, whether they are actively growing, whether they are I mean flat or, you know, flat
on the ground, what is the standing condition. So, all these are considered and you can
see that total amount of wind erosion is basically inter related for, you know, basically,
you know, basically can be considered as a inter play of all these important factors ok.(Refer Slide Time: 27:26)
So, so, a revised more complex and more accurate computer based prediction model has
been devised and it is known as a revised wind erosion equation or R W E Q and this R
W E Q make adjustment in the residue in soil erodibility and soil roughness parameter,
based on the input information about the management operations and weather conditions.
For example, if it assume that residue decomposes over time, tillage operation flatten
standing residues and rainfall reduces the soil roughness by slaking the soil clods. So,
you can see guys, you know, while we are considering these wind based, you know,s
erosion and different types of wind based of factors, these are also very much important.(Refer Slide Time: 28:13)
And scientist  and engineers  around the world are also cooperating  in the  continual
development of a much more complex process based model known as the Wind Erosion
Prediction  System  on W E P S and this  computer  program simulates  all  the basic
processes of wind interaction with the soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:34) 
So, you know, guys let us wrap up here. And I hope that you have learned some new
aspects of wind erosion in this lecture and in the next lecture or in the 5th lecture of this
week 9, we will be trying to cover the aspects of different controlling measures of winderosion and then we will be talking about different organic pollutants which are present
in the soil and how they are polluting the environment. And thank you and let us meet in
our next or fifth lecture of week 9 of soil science and technology.
Thank you.