Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 55
PXRF Soil Applications
Welcome friends to this fifth lecture of week 11 of Soil Science and Technology. And in
this lecture, we will be talking about another advanced sensor and its application for soil
measurement and this sensor is called PXRF or portable X-ray fluorescence. So, this
portable X-ray fluorescence is an advanced radioactive sensor where it you know where
energy  released  by  replacing  of  inertial  electrons  by  outer  shell  electrons  termed
fluorescence is quantified by a silicon drift detector in the aperture of the instruments.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:45)
So, I will discuss this in details and scanning time for a given sample is typically varies
from 60 to 90 seconds. So, this is the instrument it is basically gun shaped instrument,
you can literally take it into the field directly and you can measure it. You can touch it
into the soil surface and then you can pull that trigger and it will give you reading of.
Thus you know 20 to 30 elements simultaneously directly here in the screen and in the
ppm level; so, within 60 to 90 seconds. So, this is called portable X-ray fluorescence.
Now, what is the advantage of this technology? First of all, it is field portable. It requires
no consumables, you can directly go to the field and you can touch the surface. Youtouch this instrument to the soil surface and you can pull the trigger and it will give you
directly the total elemental measurements. It is non destructive. So, even you are not
supposed to do any type of you know it does not destroy the soil. So, you can use it for
later  use  also  and  also  you  can  do  the  multi  elemental  analysis  like  providing
simultaneous analysis for 20 to 30 elements.
So, you can use this technology for getting simultaneous quantification values for 20 to
30 elements. So, what are the parameters you can generally you can measure through this
instrument? You can measure a wide range of parameters starting from soil pH, you
know  EC,  Cation  Exchange  Capacity,  phosphorus,  potassium,  calcium,  magnesium,
sulfur, micronutrient, gypsum, percent by saturation, heavy metals permafrost pH, land
use land cover, parent material, profile horizonation, geochemistry, compost electrical
conductivity  and  compost  cation  exchange  capacity,  water  heavy  metals  and  leaf
elements so on so forth.
So, you can see we can use this technology for measurement of a wide range of soil
properties which you know which would take a long time to measure with a standard
method of soil standard measurement protocol.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:55)
So, if you see the internal configuration of this PXRF;  you will see here, there is an you
know first there is an x-ray source which generates basically x-rays. So, these x-ray
basically hits the electrons which are present in different orbitals and these energy bytaking these energy these electron ejects from there and goes to higher orbitals. And after
going to the higher orbitals, it will reach back revert back to the original position and
while reverting back to its original position it releases some amount of energy. And this
energy is called the fluorescence energy.
Remember that these fluorescence energy is a characteristic feature for each and every
element. So, each and every element will release fluorescence energy at different wave
length or different you know different x-ray I would say different values of X ray energy.
So, these wavelength  or these fluorescence will be detected  by a detector  which is
present inside this instrument and then it will produce and then it will be go to a digital
signal processor and ultimately to the CPU which will further analyze and display the
results here.
So, this is how this instruments works and there is an USB port from which you can take
out the results or you can directly you know you know use the Bluetooth also to produce
to save it to other computers also and you can run it through lithium ion battery. So, you
know the lithium ion batteries can be chargeable and you can use it for on site say onsite
scanning also. So, on site you know on site measurement. And also nowadays these
instruments  are  having  these  you  know  integrated  cameras  which  can  take  the
photographs of this also while you are taking the measurement of you know it can take
the images of the soil when you are taking the images when you taking the scan.
So, guys let us go ahead and see what is the principle of working.(Refer Slide Time: 05:01)
So, basically when a electron I mean when a x-ray, you can see that any element it
contains a nucleus and there are several orbitals and in this orbitals different element you
know electrons are present and these are the electrons is red buttons are the electrons. So,
this is a K shell, L shell M shell and N shell. So, when the electrons you know these
electrons are energized by some extra energy, these electrons gets ejected and goes to the
higher orbitals and energize and go to the higher orbitals. And after a certain period of
time it will revert back and cascade down to their original position.
So, while cascading down to the original position, they will remove some energy; they
will release some energy in the terms of fluorescence and these transition can occur
through a limited number of ways. For example, when a move when a movement of
electrons from energize higher energy orbital to lower energy orbital occurs from L shell
to K shell, we call it Kα. And then you know when from M to K shell, M shell to K shell,
it is called Kβ and similarly from M shell to L shell, it is called Lα, then N shell to L
shell that is called Lβ.
So, you see these are the different types of transitions. So, each of these transition yields
a fluorescent photon with a characteristics energy equal to the difference in energy of
this initial and final orbital. And the wavelength of this fluorescence radiation can be
calculated from the Planck’s law. You know the Planck’s law says that E = nhv where h
is the  nu is the Plancks constant and v = frequency. So, the fluorescent radiation can beanalyzed either by sorting the energies of the photons or by separating the wavelengths
of the radiation.
So, when they are using this by; when they are analyze either by sorting the energies of
the photons, we call it energy dispersive analysis. And when they are separating by
wavelengths  of  the  radiation,  then  we  call  wavelength  dispersive  analysis.  And
remember these portable XRF or this or this handheld XRF is basically if an variant of
this energy dispersive x-ray fluorescence analysis. So, intensity of each characteristic
radiation is directly related to the amount of each element in the material.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:35)
So, in the next slide it will be much more clear. So, you can see this is the energy of the
x-ray varies from 0 to 26 kilo electron volt. Now and you can see these are the individual
peaks which are arise which arose due to the transition due to the you know due to the
transition of the electrons. So, these peaks generally arise at certain you know energy
levels. And for example, this is a K peaks, this is a Ti peaks, this an Mn peaks and;
obviously,  the  height  of the  peaks  is  related  to  the  concentration  of that  particular
element.
So, once this so, these instrument basically captures this peaks. And once it captures
these peaks it got an internal factory calibrated standard using what it directly you know
predict or directly gives the quantified values of each of the elements. Remember that
these instrument gives you basically the total elemental concentration.(Refer Slide Time: 08:35)
So, this is basically battery operated this an model Vanta which is one of the advanced
model produced by Olympus company. And this is this x-ray, this contains a rhodium x-
ray tube which operated at 10 to 40 kilo electron volt and then the internal calibration
based on known energy emission and obviously, it has got a silicon drift detector for
light elemental analysis.
And remember that you can use this instrument in different modes. You can use it in
Geochem modes or sometimes there has an instrument, which you can use in soil mode
also. So, basically it uses a scatter normalization algorithm in Geochem mode for soil
liquid and powders and it allows the sequential analysis of atomic numbers starting from
phosphorus  to  uranium.  So,  it  can  measure  anything  starting  from  phosphorus  to
uranium, there are some also instrument which can measure magnesium to uranium. That
means atomic number of 12 to uranium.
So; obviously, there are the it has got two beams you know basically; so, two to three
beams. So, each beam takes 30 seconds time. So, the total scanning time for one sample
is around 60 to 90 seconds and you can use this instrument for multiple soil science
applications like heavy metal assessment like gypsum, calsic, podzol horizonation, then
soil fertility measurement or CEC, then soil pH and EC measurement and so and so
forth.(Refer Slide Time: 10:07)
 And  this  basically  shows  the  limit  of  detection  of  different  elements  using  this
instrument.  So,  you  can  see  here  load  obviously,  this  color  are  showing  different
different limit of detection. And; obviously, it is visible that for most of the elements.
These instruments have a limit of detection of less than 5 ppm. So; that means, if the
instrument have if the concentration of that particular element in the environment is 5
ppm or less than that, this instrument can measure it. And also these are some other
ranges like 10 ppm, you can see here and also so you know however it cannot measure
hydrogen, lithium, beryllium and sodium and these you know gray point like you know
carbon and nitrogen.(Refer Slide Time: 10:59)
So, what are the reference methods? So, nowadays these instrument has been considered
as a reference method for soil analysis and there are three reference method which are
available. First of all the US-EPA method or United State if environmental protection
agency method 6200 which is available for which is a reference method. 
Then USDA United State Department of Agriculture NRCS method where it considered
as a important method for soil measurement. Another method is published by myself and
Dr. David C Weindorf which is professor of Texas Tech University and right now it is
considered as a official method by Soil Science Society of America which is the another
one of the most important society of soil science across the world.
So,  these  are  some  reference  method  so;  that  means,  these  instrument  nowadays
considered as an important method for soil analysis.(Refer Slide Time: 11:53)
So, application potential soil application for PXRF; obviously, the application varies
from textural determination, then pH, then salinity, then cation, exchange capacity, then
base saturation percentage, plant essential elements mineralogy. And all these you can
measure what are the advantages; obviously, this is a non destructive. As I have already
told you, it is rapid only 60 to 90 seconds, you require. It is multi element you are getting
multi elemental results.
It is lower limit of detection and wide dynamic range you are getting. Disadvantage;
obviously, it has  got several  disadvantage.  First of all it cannot  measure hydrogen,
carbon and sodium and it has got some influence of moisture effect. So, when the
moisture content of the soil goes beyond 20 percent it, it interfere with the results and
also soil heterogeneity because when the soil is highly heterogeneous. So, it has got a
very  small  aperture  through  which  it  can  measure.  So,  you  need  to  take  multiple
measurement and then average to get a average value of soil parameters. Otherwise the
soil is very very heterogeneous in nature.(Refer Slide Time: 12:57)
So, let us talk about several application of this method. So, 10 years back we started this
we started this application of this instrument for measuring the heavy metal contents in
Peri-urban soils and you can see here. We went to the field and we collected several
samples from the peri-urban agricultural areas of United States. And after bringing the
samples into the lab, we measure these heavy metal [elemental/elements] elements like
arsenic, barium and then arsenic, the barium then, cobalt, then chromium, copper and
then iron manganese lead and zinc.
And we saw there is a good correlation  between our heavy metals  and this  PXRF
reading. So, we measure this heavy metals in the land using standard ICP or method and
there we correlated using our handheld PXRF method. So, we got good correlation and
based on this correlation we develop certain models and we also produce some spatial
variability maps for this area for this individual you know for this individual elements.
So, that first shows the use of this technology for you know rapid measurement and
mapping of soil heavy metal.(Refer Slide Time: 14:11)
Also you can see we have use this for rapid measurement of soil salinity. Soil salinity is
an important parameter and you can see we have proved that use this technology, you
can predict the soil salinity using simple linear regression or multiple linear regression.
In the simple linear regression, we are using 0; we are getting an R2 values of 0.83
whereas, in multiple linear regression we are getting 0.90. So, basically we are using
these elemental content. We are getting several elements starting from starting from
magnesium to uranium.
So, using selected suit of elements we are using them as a proxy it or measurement of for
measurement of particular you know for measurement of particular soil property. In this
case it is electrical conductivity or salinity and we are getting very good result. So, that
proves that this instrument can be used for predicting soil salinity.(Refer Slide Time: 15:07)
Not only that you can predict soil pH using this PXRF because soil pH we have you
know soil pH can be of you know soil pH is basically influenced by several elements.
For example, in the low pH soil, you see the soil iron as well as soil you know the
concentration of iron and manganese is high. Whereas in high pH soil or calcareous soil,
you will see that calcium content is high and all these elements can be measured through
this PXRF.
So, basically we use this elements along with other elements as a proxy for measurement
of soil pH and we got an R2  values of 0.77. So, that shows that these elements can be
used to predict the soil pH reasonably with an good R square values of 0.77.(Refer Slide Time: 15:59)
And also we predict the soil CEC or cation exchange capacity which is an important
fertility parameter.
So, we collected three hundred sixty soils and we predict the soil CEC by using this
sample element values and we got an R2 of 0.90 and obviously, it was you know it was a
you know very good result and it was published in the journal Geoderma. So, you can
consult this paper which is published in journal Geoderma.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:33)
And also we have proved that these PXRF can be useful for identification of the horizon
in the soil profile.
So, in the soil profile if you remember in the soil classification lecture, we talked about
how we horizon how we define different horizons or also we discussed that in the soil
survey  lecture  also.  So,  pedology  is  using  there  you  know  morphology  using
morphological features after digging a feet in the field and using some morphological
differences, they calculate and they make you know qualitative differences  between
these different horizons. And from there they defined different horizons O horizon, A
horizon, B horizon. 
However,  we  use  this  PXRF  for  getting  a  quantitative  we  to  give  a  quantitative
estimation of this horizon differentiation and we developed a index. And using this index
we developed a precise plan through which we can differentiate or we can precisely
identify this horizon transition boundary. So, that was also an application for soil science
and pedology for pedology.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:43)
So, also you can see in the soil there is several degrees of carbonate development. There
are 6 different degrees of carbonate development and we have proved by using this
technology, you can predict the carbonate development stage in the field itself.So, we have proved we have produced some you know rule based algorithm and using
this rule, you can predict which is the practical which is the actual you know carbonate
development stage in the soil. So, you can see you know you know this technology can
be  also  be  used  for  extensive  use  in  you  know  extensively  used  in  pedological
parameters.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:23)
Now, heavy metals in European soil in the this study was conducted in Romania and you
see we went to the field and we collected several soil samples from different areas. And
after collecting the soil samples, we predicted their concentration using geostatistical
interpolation.
You can see we are producing the map of chromium, then copper, then zinc, then arsenic
and lead and not only that we also divides the area into contaminated, uncontaminated,
moderately contaminated and moderately strongly contaminated areas on the basis of geo
index of geo accumulation. So, we collect we calculated the index of geo accumulation
and  also we divided  or we demarcated  different  areas  which are  you know  highly
contaminated area. So, using this technology, it is possible to rapidly identify and map
the highly contaminated areas in the field itself.(Refer Slide Time: 19:21)
We also use this technology for mine tailing characterization. So, we collected samples
from four different mining sites in South Africa and we use this technology to predict
different elements, which is present in that mining tailing mine tailing soils. We got a
very good correlation between our results and standard measure. So that means, we can
use this technology for rapidly measuring the elemental content in mining soils also.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:47)
 Not only that we can also use this technology for identification of the parent material.
You know the parent material is a very important thing as you know and also shows howthe also shows the genesis of the soil from which the soil actually for which soil actually
produce. So, you have produced that we have proved that these technology can also be
used for predicting the soil parent material and different type of parent material like you
can see. Not only the predicting the parent material, but we can also map it directly into
the field.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:27)
So, right now we have whatever we have discuss is basically the application of PXRF
and DRS and you know we have shown there I have discuss their application in vary in
varying  you  know;  so,  in  measurement  of  vary  you  know  to  wide  range  of  soil
properties. So, we measure the organic carbons, sand, silt, clay and then should and then
nitrogen and then all these things using DRS. And this PXRF can be used specially for
measurement of elemental content in heavy metals.
So, you see there are have being you know there is a kind of complementarity between
these two. Organic carbon cannot be measured through PXRF; however, these DRS can
measure the organic carbon whereas, these elemental content does not have elements or
heavy metal does not have any direct spectral features in the DRS spectra; however, we
can  measure  them  directly  using their  PXRF.  So, you can  see  both  of them  these
technologies  are  complementary  to  each  other.  So,  lately  we  have  seen  that  if  we
combine the data set together; that means, we are getting the spectra from DRS and we
are getting the elemental values from the PXRF.So, if we combine them together and we use them together as predictor in any type of
prediction models will get better results which will produce it will show us better results
than either of these instrument. So, basically we will be getting a synergistic results
where will be getting 2 plus 2 equal to 5. So, you see here elemental data is coupled with
spectral data to create predictive algorithm of soil physical and chemical properties and
this allows us to onsite analysis in minutes and spatial variability application for variable
rate agriculture you know agriculture farming or precision farming you can do.
So, you can see here three different parameters, we have measured here. Soil organic
matter percentage, clay percentage and sand percentage you can see. All of them are
following this 1 is to 1 line very closely. So, that shows if we combine this technology
together, it will show us better results. So, nowadays that is an extensive focus on these
combined technology research. So, those who wants to do further research and advanced
research in this area, they can do this research in the combined sensor fusion we call it
sensor fusion.
Now, sensor fusion is now a very very hot topic and you can use this sensor fusion to
measure a wide range of soil particles or wide range of soil properties on site. And you
know there has you know you can develop some new sensor which will combine these
two you know these two and you can develop say new prototype where you can combine
these two technologies together and then you can fit it with any tractor. So, that these
tractor moves that it will directly feed the information or it will directly scan while this
tractor is moving and it will be produce and it will predict or you know one side and
produce directly the map of spatial variability of soil properties.
So, guys while try to show you couple of examples of advanced uses of this sensors.
Obviously, you know it is not possible to discuss in details  about this technologies
because it requires a huge amount of study. But I hope that you have learned about
something new thing, which is not covered in traditional courses of soils and there are
certain  other  also  advanced  sensors  like  you  know  optical  sensors  are  developed
nowadays in different advanced countries and also in India which we can use for non
destructive measurement of soil properties.
So, please focus on these because these are the future of soil science. You know a time
will come that the traditional soil analysis has to be replaced by this dry chemistrymeasurement  because  the  time  and  consumable  and  the  cost  involvement  in  the
traditional methods is cannot simply catered the need for a huge farming community like
in India. So, we have to think about some alternative. Obviously, we are not nullifying
the standard method because these are accurate methods, but this has to be supported by
these you know alternative and low cost and noninvasive methods.
So, you can go ahead and you can do some more study and you can do some more
defined research. Obviously, there are plenty of literature is available for detailing these
technologies. So, I will encourage you to go ahead and you know see some literature for
these technologies and then you can do your own research.
So, guys we have you know let me wrap up this week 11 here and hope you have got
some  you  know  overview  of  knowledge  you  know  knowledge  overview  for  some
advanced sensors and advanced technologies nowadays we are utilizing in the field of
soil science. And hopefully this will be helpful in your respective research areas also.
And so, let us meet in week twelve with a new topic that is digital soil mapping.
Thank you. 