Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborthy
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 58
Modeling Continuous Variables (Contd.)
Welcome friends to this 3rd lecture of week 12 of Soil Science and Technology. And in
this lecture we will try to cover several quantitative models for digital soil mapping and
let us start with a decision tree.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:28)
So, in the in the last lecture we have covered this linear regression which is a global
model where there is a single predictive formula holding over the entire data space.
However, sometime the soil data are nonlinearly related, so we may be interested to
explain or may be model them through non-linear methods. So, one of these models
structure non-linear model structure is called the classification regression trees.(Refer Slide Time: 00:58)
And this  classification  regression tree  or CART are a non parametric  decision tree
learning techniques that produces either classification or regression trees. And regression
trees; we use the term regression tree where our target is numeric when or in other words
it is a continuous variable. And we use the classification trees where we use a, we use to
model  a categorical  variable.  Now  categorical  variable  are not continuous  variable;
categorical variable meaning any name nominal variable are considered as categorical
variables.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:35)
So,  decision  trees  are  basically  either  regression  or  classification  are  formed  by  a
collection  of  rule  based  on  variables  in  the  modeling  data  set.  So,  remember  this
classification tree or regression tree is basically a rule based algorithm when the rule
based on variable values are selected to get the best split to differentiate observation
based on the dependent variable. And once a rule is selected and splits a node into two,
the same process is applied to each subsequent node. And the splitting stops when CART
detects no further gain can be made or some pre set stopping rules are met; alternatively
the data are split as much as possible and then tree is later pruned. 
So, here let me explain; so here you can see this is a class, this is a decision tree or
classification regression tree. Here we are trying to, you know, we are trying to model:
for example, say for a particular soil property based on our soil organic carbon based on
several soil covariates. For example, elevation, then topographic wetness index, then
Landsat  band three  reflectance  values  and  then  radiometric  potassium from gamma
radiation and so on so forth.
So, basically our target in this case is soil organic carbon and we want to differentiate or
want to divide or want to make a rule so that we can predict the soil organic carbon
based on this rules. So, in the first step we will select which among them we have four
here; four to five different predictor variables.
So, we will select the based split and or best variable values to get the best split. So, that
it can give you the maximum separation between the observation based on the dependent
variable in our case it is organic carbon. So, here it might we have selected this elevation
value of 238.7 because it gives the maximum clear separation between two groups of
data.
And once this rule is selected and split is node and this split the data into two nodes; into
two parts the same process is applied to the subsequent node. So, in the subsequent node;
so this is a first node and this is a subsequent node again we select which among these
five or four different variables are important and what are their values.
So, we have seen that in the subsequent node this t w i; value of 22.4 is a most important
splitting criteria which can split the data into two more groups and so on so forth; you
can see this process grows on grows on. So, that is why we call it recursive splitting
process. And when this splitting stops? This splitting stops when CART detects nofurther gain can be made or some pre set stopping rules. We will discuss this details what
are these gains and what are the stopping rules; alternatively the date are split as much as
possible and then tree is later pruned.
So, other way we will go we will allow this tree to grow continuously and ultimately
once these trees are grown, these are individual leaves and terminal nodes these terminal
nodes will go for pruning. You know the cutting of the branches is called pruning. So,
similarly here if we cut these branches cut this individual branch so; obviously, this will
be further clubbed together; so, this will call pruning we will discuss this later on.
So, each branch of the tree ends in a terminal node and each observation falls into
exactly one terminal. So, you can see based on this rule based thing you can; you can you
can segregate each of the observation into each of this any of this rule. For example any
observation can come in this rule where which is defined by an elevation values of less
than 238.7 and t w i value of 22.4. So, this is the rule for classifying a particular
observation into this terminal node. So, you can see each of the observation can be, you
know, generalized in terms of these rule based theme.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:17)
So, let us see good example I have found this example.(Refer Slide Time: 06:21)
So, I want to show you so that it will be very much easy to understand. So, let us see in,
you know, we have to classify or predict an outcome based on a set of predictors and the
output is a set of rules. So, example here our goal is to classify record whether a person
will accept a credit card offer or will not accept a credit card offer I am just giving an a
example  so  that  it  will  be  easier  for  you  to  understand  what  is  going  on  in  this
classification regression tree. 
So, our goal is to classify a record as either it he will accept credit card offer or he will
not accept a credit card offer. So, the rule might be if income is greater than 92.5 and
education is less than 1.5 and family is less than equal to 2.5, then class equal to 0 that is
non acceptor; so they will not accept. So, this is the individual rule we generate using
this classification regression tree.
So, also called CART decision trees are just trees. So, rules are represented by this tree
diagram as you have seen in the last slide. So, as you can see here we have classified all
the observation based on some rules. So, again here as I have told you if the income is
than less than, you know some you know, this 92.5; then there are 417 observations. 
And then based on that if the education is greater than 1.5, some index then it will further
classify into 157 observation and 260 observation and so on so forth; ultimately you can
see ultimately the end product is, you know, either it will accept or reject and reject is 0
and accept is 1. So, this is how we can differentiate any value. So, you can see all theobservations are differentiated into this individual rules. So, let us see how we create this
thing.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:24)
So, key ideas in this case is recursive partitioning and recursive partitioning as you have
known that is a repeatedly split the records into two parts so as to achieve maximum
homogeneity within the new parts. So, this splitting criteria says that we will select that
particular value of the variable as a splitting node, where we will get the two split and in
this two split the variables will be maximum, you know, will feel we will see maximum
homogeneity within these variables within this observation within a single split,
Again we will select the splitting node or the particular variable and their respective
value in the splitting node in a such a fashion so that we can differentiate the groups of
observation and in this individual outcome groups those observation in this groups will
be maximally homogeneous. So, once we get that another term is pruning which is
simplify that tree by pruning peripheral branches to avoid over fitting.(Refer Slide Time: 09:41)
We will discuss that later on. So, let us see what is how we will do this recursive
partitioning steps. So, we have to pick up one predictor variables set as x i and pick up a
value x i say pick up a value of x i say s i that divides the training data into two not
necessarily equal portions then we have to measure how pure or homogeneous each of
the resulting portions are; pure means containing records of mostly one class.
An algorithm tries to different values of x i and s i to maximize purity of the initial spilt.
So, there is, this algorithm tries several combination of x i and s i to find the best split
criteria. After you get the maximum purity split repeat the process for a second split and
so on. So, that is why the tree grows on and you can see why we call it as tree? Because a
tree has several branches.(Refer Slide Time: 10:40)
So, as you can see, you know, this classification regression tree is are also having several
branches and then sub branches and also so on so forth and then this branches again split.
Let us see one example our goal here I am just taking one example from, you know,
which I have seen lately so that it will be easier for you to understand. Let us see our
goal is to classify 24 household as owning or not owning riding mowers.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:10)
So, our predictors here is income and lot size. So, you can see these are 24 observations;
the first column shows that the first column is basically the income. And the secondcolumn is the lot size and finally, third column is the, you know, ownership either it is
own owner or either owner of that land mower or non owner. So, based on that we have
to predict using a classification regression; then here our target will be these two classes
owner and non owner.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:43)
So, how to split? So, order record according to the one variable, say, lot size and then let
us find the midpoint between successive variables. For example, first midpoint is 14.4
which is halfway between 14 and 14.8, then divide the records into these two those with
a lot size for example, greater than 14.4 and those less than 14.4. And after evaluating
that split try that next one which is 15.4 which is halfway between 14.8 and 16.
So, you can see we are trying different combination of values to find out the maximum,
you know; you know you know, to find out the best split which will give us the outputs
which will be homogeneous among themselves.(Refer Slide Time: 12:34)
So, examine let us see examine all possible ways in which categories can be split in case
of categorical variables let us see categories A B C can be split in 2 to 3 ways either A
and B C then B and A C and C and A B.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:49)
So, so with many categories the number of split becomes; obviously, huge. So, let us see
in our case in case of in this more example; the first split in our case the lot size is 19000.
So, our first splitting criteria is the lot size. So, you can see we are dividing the whole
space into two groups this black dots are owner and the, you know, and the other dot,you know, the solid dots are owner and the holdouts are non owner. So, you can see the
maximum homogeneity between these two split within this individual split.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:32)
The next step we will split based on the income value of 84000 dollars. So, you can see
there are three more split there are two splits again within this within this we there are
two more splits.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:49)
And after all the split we will get this individual split; the final results. So, these within
this individual blocks or individual areas the observations are homogeneous or maximum
homogeneous.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:09)
So, this is how these rules are basically formed. Another important term is Gini index
and Gini index for a rectangular A containing m records can be calculated by using this
formula where p is the proportion of cases in rectangle A; that belong to this class k and I
A is 0, when all classes belong to the same class and maximum values when all class are
equally represented where 0.50 in case of binary case.
So, based on this Gini index criteria we select the best split criteria again this Gini index
or rectangular A containing m records is calculated by this formula where p is the
proportion of case in rectangular A that belongs to class A, where I A equal to 0 when all
cases belong to the same class and, you know, maximum values when all classes are
equally represented.(Refer Slide Time: 15:06)
Another important term is entropy; an entropy can calculated by using this formula
where p is the proportion of cases out of m in rectangular A that belongs to class k and
entropy ranges between 0 which is representing most pure and log to m where equally
representation of the all classes.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:26)
So, what is impurity and recursive partitioning? Obviously, we have to obtain overall
impurity measures weighted average of individual rectangles. At each successive stage
we have to compare this measure across all possible split in all variables. So, we told youthat for each step we are selecting the best combination of variable as well as its value
like x i and s i. And this variable and their value combination is selected by measuring
the overall impurity measures. So, we have to choose the split that reduces the impurity
the most and choose the split point become nodes of the tree.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:12)
So, in the first split; obviously, this is the tree; obviously, we are selecting it based on the
lot size and; we are selecting 12 12 observations.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:24)
And tree after the three splits you can see here looks like this.(Refer Slide Time: 16:30)
And the tree structure; obviously, split point become nodes on the tree, circle which split
values in the center, if you see this is the split point these are the circle these are the split
individual split points from which further split is occurred. So, split points become nodes
of the tree and from these nodes further split occurs and rectangle represents a leaves.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:54)
Here the rectangle leaves these; rectangle actually denotes the individual leaves and
these leaves terminal points no further split classification value noted. So, basically here
in this terminal this is called the terminal node or leaf and from here there will be nofurther division. So, here it this branch stops; so, this is an example of how this tree
grows.
And number of lines between nodes indicates the number of cases; obviously, you can
see here they are the number of you know here the 3; that means, the number of cases
and 9 here is the number of cases obviously. So, if the lot size read down the tree to
derive rule if the lot size is less than 19 and if income is 84.75, then class is owner and so
on so forth.
Determining  the  leaf  node  level;  obviously,  each  leaf  node  level  is  determining
determine by voting of the record within it and by the cut off values. And records with
each leaf node are formed by training data and default cut off value is 0.5 means the leaf
node level is the majority class and cutoff of 0.75 requires majority of 75 percent or more
one records in the leaf to be label as one node.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:21)
So, after all the splits you can see these are the, these circles are the splitting nodes and
in the splitting nodes you see we have selected a particular variable and the particular
value of that variable which gives the lowest impurity. And then and ultimately the tree
grows and these are the branches and ultimately you see this rectangular boxes are the
terminal nodes from where there will be no further splitting. And ultimately you will see
that there is ultimately we are specifying whether they are owning their owner or non
owner which will our which is our target classes.(Refer Slide Time: 19:09)
So, what is the over fitting problem? Obviously, remember that if you continue go on
and create the trees and create this branches and all these things, ultimately a time will
come that you will perfectly fit all the observation because each an observation each of
the observation we will have their own set of rules; so you can create any set of rules to
fit any particular observation.
However, that would create over fitting. Now what is over fitting? If any calibration
model performs poor in case of new set of data or independent data set that is called over
fitting. For example, you have created very good calibration model and you try that
calibration model to predict some unknown samples and that performs miserably.
So, that is called over fitting; so natural end process of these CART or classification
regression trees is that you will get 100 percent purity of the leaf. Because you can create
any rule to put any sample, you know, you can you can you can create any rule to define
any sample and this over fits the data which ends up fitting noise in the data. So, over
fitting leads into low predictive accuracy of the new data as I have told you; so past a
certain points you see the error rate for validation data sets start to increase.(Refer Slide Time: 20:31)
You can see here as the number of splits increases up to a certain point, you can see that
if you increase the number of split a time will come that that training data error will go
down and ultimately reaches 0; as you can see in this green in this blue line. However the
problem  is  as  although  this  training  data  set  produces  very  lowest  error  as  we
continuously increasing the number of split. 
However, you will see if we if we test this training or calibration model using the unseen
data or independently drawn data, their error rate will increase after a certain split. So,
this is basically saying that this model is over fitted. So, we need to do some kind of
treatment to reduce this over fitting because our ultimately aim is to get a representative
model which can predict reasonably the unknown or unseen data. How would you do
that?(Refer Slide Time: 21:37)
Another one method is called chain method older than which is older than CART method
which is using chi square statistical test to limit that tree growth and this splitting stops
when purity improvement is not statistically significant.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:50)
The most important way for reducing these over fitting or, you know, to remove this over
fitting is the pruning and CART. Let us first of all in this pruning method; the CART lets
tree grow to full extent then prunes it back; that means, cutting the individual branches.And when we are cutting the individual branches; obviously, we are reduce we are
eliminating that particular rule.
So, idea is to find that point at which the validation error begins to rise and generally
successively smaller trees by pruning leafs when we are, you know, pruning the leaves;
obviously, it will get the trees will get smaller. And at each pruning stage multiple trees
are possible and use the cost complexity to choose the best tree at that stage.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:38)
 Obviously, we have to use the pruning across yields a pruning process yields a set of
trees of different sizes and associated error rates. And two rates of interest are there for
us for while we are doing the pruning minimum error rate that is has the lowest error rate
on validation data and best pruned tree; obviously, shows smallest tree with one standard
error of minimum error and this adds to bonus for simplicity or parsimony.(Refer Slide Time: 23:09)
So, let us see what is the actual example of use of classification and regression tree in
DSM? As you can see here we are predicting the soil organic carbon to 0 to 5 centimeter
using this classification and regression tree. And this classification regression tree you
can see here using that we are predicting; this is actually the observe verses predicted
values. The problem in classification regression tree is that you can see some specified
levels of predictions. So, this is a problem in case of classification regression tree again;
this classification regression tree you will see some specified levels of predictions.
And this is a problem in classification regression tree which we generally address by
another tree method, we will discuss them. And, but here is an example of use of
classification regression tree or we call it finite, you know, finite predictions. So, this is
an example of decision tree predicted 0.5 centimeter long log carbon stocks. So, again
this  classification  regression  tree  is  a very important  method,  non-linear  method  to
generalize the; to generalize the to produce the non-linear prediction of soil properties.(Refer Slide Time: 24:49)
The cubist model another model is cubist model; the cubist model is currently the very
popular models structure, you know you know, model structure used within the DSM
community and its popularity is due to its ability to mine non-linear relationship in the
data.
But does not have the issue of finite prediction as we have seen in case of classification
regression tree and the cubist model first partitions the data into subset within which
their characteristics are similar with respect to the target variable and the covariates a
series  of rules.  For example,  a  decision  tree  is  a  structure  may  also  be  defined  if
requested; defines this partition. And these rules are arranged in a hierarchy in each rule
has the form either if with; it is basically shows if the condition is true; then will fit a
regression model and if the condition is not true then else we will apply the next rule.
So, this is how it will fit, you know, the whole data and ultimately based on a condition
is met or not it will create a regression; in this particular ultimate terminal node. So, this
is how a cubist model works and cubist model is now a days considered as the most you
know advance method as far as the digital soil mapping of soil is concerned.(Refer Slide Time: 26:13)
And this is an example of cubist produce soil organic carbon map for a particular area of
Australia. And you can see this is the cubist predicted 0 point 0 to 5 centimeter logarithm
carbon stocks and this is the predicted verses observed values and you can see there is no
finite predictions problem as we have seen in case of classification regression tree.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:40)
Another important aspect another important method is random forest and random forest
is  a  boosted  regression tree  method.  Remember  that  random  forest is  an  ensemble
learning method for classification and regression that operates by constructing multitudeof  decision  trees  and  training  time  which  are  later  aggregated  to  give  one  single
prediction for each observation in a data set. And for regression the prediction is the
average of the individual tree output whereas, in case of classification tree votes by
majority of the correct classification mode.
So, what happens? We have known: what is a tree in case of classification regression
tree. So, in case of random forest we create thousands and thousands of individual tree
by randomly selecting the variables as well as randomly selecting the samples. And once
we create these thousands and thousands of trees based on their prediction results and;
once we create these thousands and thousands of trees we call it random forest. And
what is the output value? For regression the prediction is an average of individual tree
outputs.
So, we are getting average we are getting the individual tree output and once we are
taking the average of this individual tree output that will be the overall output or average
output of this random forest. And in case of classification, we take the majority of the
votes from these individual trees. So, that is how a random forest basically operates; a
random forest is more advanced method, a random forest is a widely used method in case
of digital soil mapping.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:24)
So, random forest forms lots of decision trees with random selection of samples random
selection of features that is why it is called random forest.First of all it is called forest because we are we are using thousands and thousands of
trees. And it is called random because we are using random selection of samples and
random selection of features for creating one particular tree. So, that is why it is called
random forest and it provides the class of dependent variable based on many trees that is
why it is called random trees; many random trees random forest.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:59)
The random forest basically assumes that most of the trees can provide correct prediction
or class for most part of the data and the trees are making mistake at different places. So,
based  on  these  observation,  it  calculates  the  final  output;  in  case  of  regression  it
calculates the average of the output and in case of classification it calculates the majority
of the vote.(Refer Slide Time: 29:24)
So, here you can see the example of random forest and random forest; obviously, you
can see these random forest predicted 0 to 5 centimeter logarithmic carbon stocks. And
another beauty of random forest is based on certain criteria you can get the ranking of the
important variables. For example, here in this random forest example we use elevation,
land sat B 3 band, TWI that is Topographic Wetness Index, land sat B 4 band and
radiometric potassium all this five covariates as predictors.
And you can see here the;  they are arranged based on their certain  properties  like
increase in mean squared error and increase in node purity. So, these are, you know,
arrange based on their importance. So, that is why random forest has the capability of
arranging the variable based on the relative importance also. So, this is an example of
random forest application for predicting, you know, this log carbons.(Refer Slide Time: 30:36)
 Another  important,  you  know,  hybrid  method  is  called  regression  kriging.  Now
regression kriging is basically  combination of both regression and kriging and, you
know, kriging is basically the best linear unbiased predictors of spatial data.
We know from our geo statistical discussion that a value of a target variable at some
location can be model as a sum of the deterministic and stochastic components. So, it is a
value of a particular variable at some location can be divided into, you know, it is a
deterministic part and it is a stochastic part and; obviously, there are some errors. So, we
know  that  both deterministic  and stochastic  components  of spatial  variation  can  be
modeled separately. So, you can see; so by combining these two approaches we obtain a
final output where ultimately this is the output of this stochastic; you know, deterministic
component and this is an output of stochastic component.
So, this is basically the deterministic component and this is the stochastic component.
So,  in  the  deterministic  component  you  can  see  this  is  basically  linear  regression
equation, where these are basically the, you know, individual coefficient and here this is
basically you can see it is a kriging; you know, kriging output where m s 0 is a fitted
deterministic part and it is a interpolated residual this is an interpolated residual and this
B k is estimated deterministic model coefficient.
So, if we are using the linear regression model, these are the model coefficient values
and lambda is basically kriging weights determined by the spatial dependence structuresof the residual where e Si is the residual at location z s i. So, basically you can see here
we are using two components first of all we are trying to produce a model output based
on the deterministic model; the deterministic model may be linear or non-linear. And
using the residual we are interpolating there and we after calculating the residual from
this model; we are basically interpolating them. So, this regression kriging is basically
the combination of deterministic model output and the interpolated residuals. So, this is
why it is called a hybrid method.
(Refer Slide Time: 33:22)
So,  how  this  works?  So,  you  can  see  this  regression  kriging  deterministic  the
deterministic model essentially detrends the data living behind the residuals for which
we need to investigate whether there is an additional spatial structure; which could be
added to the regression model prediction. These residuals are the random components of
the SCORPAN plus e model. As you can see if these are the field samples these are the
field samples, so these are basically the distribution of actually distribution of the target
variable; if we it sample it very densely. So, once we collect this samples these are the
field samples.
Our next step in the deterministic model you know this in the x axis we it is a geographic
space, in the y axis this is the target variable. So, basically we are detrending the data by
fix first fixing a regression function or deterministic part. So, this dotted line is basically
the regression function and by using this regression function we are basically detrendingthe data. So, once we are detrending the data this is the residual this difference between
the actual point and the point on the regression function or regression line. So, these
residual the next step we will basically krige the residuals and ultimately you see these
line is basically the final estimate by regression kriging.
So,  it  is  basically  the  combination  of kriging  residuals  as  well  as  the  output  from
deterministic  regression  function.  So,  it  basically  shows  the  schematic  example  of
regression  kriging  fitting  a  vertical  cross  section  with  assumed  distribution  of  an
environmental variable in a horizontal space. So, I hope now this regression kriging is
clear to you.
So, that is why now a days we not only rely on kriging we also rely on different types of
advanced models; either it is a linear model either it is a non-linear model. So, we
basically combine the output together both from kriging and deterministic model to give
the most unbiased estimator of the spatial variability and that is called the regression
kriging.
(Refer Slide Time: 35:41)
And these are the, you know, example of some regression kriging method; you can see
the  first  one  is  cubist  predicted  0.5  centimeter  logarithmic  carbon  stock  of  0  to  5
centimeter.  And  then  this  as  with  respective  kriged  residuals  and  finally,  this  is  a
regression kriging predictors  0.5 centimeter 0 to 5 centimeter  log carbon stocks by
combing these two output.(Refer Slide Time: 36:17)
So, guys let us start another important thing that is modeling and mapping of categorical
variables. Remember that we have we have covered the continuous variables and now
another important term is categorical variables and sometime it is very very important to
model the categorical variable in case of digital soil mapping also.
And remember that the spatial characteristics of categorical data and its prediction within
the model is a class is either predicted or it is not. And for binary variables the prediction
is  either  a  yes  or  no,  you  know,  black  or  white  present  or  absent  etcetera.  For
multinomial variables there are more than two cases for example, either black, grey or
white  etcetera  which  could  actually  be  in  ordinal  category  ordinal  categorical
classification rather than nominal and there is no between rather discrete entities.(Refer Slide Time: 37:07)
And  important  quality  measures  are  overall  accuracy,  user’s  accuracy,  producer’s
accuracy and kappa coefficient. Let us wrap up here and in the next lecture we will
discuss  these  different  accuracy  measures  and different  types  of categorical  models
which we use for digital soil mapping.
Thank you. 