Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 54
VisNIR - DRS Applications for Soil
Welcome friends to this lecture 4 of week 11 of Soil Science and Technology.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:23)
And we will be starting today’s you know we will be starting this lecture by describing
the basics of diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. In the last lecture was stopped here we
talked about the difference between specular reflection as well as the you know diffused
reflection. (Refer Slide Time: 00:41)
And  let  us  talk  about  let  us  go  ahead  and  see  the  basics  of  this  near  infrared
spectroscopy.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46)
So, you know about now right now what is the difference between the diffuse reflection
and specular reflection. We talked about the visible near infrared diffuse reflectance
spectroscopy. Now, let us see what is the basics of near infrared spectroscopy. So, in
classical  physics  considers  the  atom  as  particles  with a given mass  in the  infrared
absorption process and the vibration of diatomic molecules described as follows. Forexample, here it is diatomic molecules HCl and you can see the there are 3 types of you
know forces you can see one is stretch and is compress it is a just like a spring. 
So, it basically shows the mechanical model of a vibrating atomic molecule. So, when a
molecule  like  this  is  absorbs  some  infrared  radiation  it  shows  6  different  types  of
stretching and bending. So, this 6 are these are the 6 different types of stretching and
bending as you can see here asymmetrical stretching, symmetrical stretching, scissoring,
rocking, twisting, wagging. So, as a result of that and you know as a result of that there is
some special absorption and some spectral signatures. So, you know there are different
region as you can see near infrared region, middle infrared region and far infrared region
and the origin of the absorption in all these regions varies. 
For example, in case of mid infrared region you will see that fundamental of molecular
vibrations will you can see, in case of far infrared region you will see that molecular
rotation it is responsible for molecular rotation. Or in other words in the far infrared
region  absorption  will  occur  due  to  molecular  rotation  in  the  mid  infrared  region
absorption  will  occur due to  the  fundamental  molecular  vibration.  And in the  near
infrared region you will see over tones and combination bands of fundamental molecular
vibrations. So, that is why you see these different types of spectral signatures.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:36)
So, what are these spectral signatures? You see here the you know we have combined the
soil absorption you know soil spectra of this three ranges. For example, this is the visiblerange, this is the near infrared range and this is the mid infrared range. Now, in the mid
infrared range these are basically the fundamental absorption features which basically
occurs from absorbing the near infrared rays by different organic molecules groups. And
they produce different types of further you know also some overtones and combination
bands. 
And these are basically seen in this near infrared range. So, it is basically combined
visible near infrared and mid infrared spectrum of soil. And you can see these absorption
features and reflectance features and very well very very much you know we can see
that. And these absorption basically shows you know basically reflects you know this
absorption  features  basically  or reflects  the chemical  composition  of the  soil  itself.
Because, this absorption actually happens from different I would say from different you
know chemicals or organic chemicals which are present inside over at the in the soil. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:55)
So, let us see some equipments for VisNIR - DRS spectro radiometer. So, you can see
there are two equipments: one is called AgriSpec DRS by analytical spectral devices of
USA and this is spectral evolution 3500 DRS. So, it is actually PSR 3500. So, please
correct it is PSR 3500 or so, these are two important instruments nowadays available for
VisNIR - DRS measurement. So, let us go ahead and see what is the internal config of
these two instruments.(Refer Slide Time: 04:53)
So, let us see how it works. So, if you see the internal config of these instruments;
obviously, this is sample this is starting point and obviously, it is an you know hand held
probe which has a source. So, basically it is shinning halogen white light source and it is
some amount of light getting reflected back from this surface, due to diffused reflection.
And these reflected radiation goes to this fibre optic cable to a holographic grating which
basically further divides these into 3 different regions. 
One  is  called  the  visible  to  near  infrared  region  which  varies  from  350  to  1000
nanometre.  Then  short  wave  infrared  1  region  which  varies  from  1000  to  1800
nanometre region and then short wave infrared 2 that is 1800 to 2500 nanometre region.
So, this VisNIR region basically then goes from this separation filter which contains 512
silicon photodiode array which has a you know which has 512 silicon photodiode array. 
And this short wave infrared 1 is passed through this indium gallium arsenide detectors
which has 600 channels. And this short wave infrared 2 also goes through this another
detector  that  is  in  this  detector  with  600  channels.  Ultimately,  it  converts  incident
photons to electrons or photo current and ultimately produce the voltages or digital signal
and which is further measured by this control software. So, this is how this you know
instrument basically works. (Refer Slide Time: 06:39)
So, another important thing is that for each and every measurement we you know after
couple of measurement we have to standardise this instrument. So, for standardizing this
instrument we need a white reference panel and we call it spectralon panel and the
spectralon panel we assume that it has got 99 percent reflectance. So, it basically requires
for optimising the spectrometer and it requires for white referencing the spectrometer
that is simplifies the reflectance. So, reflectance remember is a function of λ that is the
wavelength and it removes the ambient temperature affect also. 
And also removes the humidity effect and optimise when we change from one probe to
another probe. So, there are different types of probe attachment, there is some handle
probe, there is some mug light which you can which you can set over the desktop and
then you can scan it from below scan a soil sample from below. So, that also can be done
by this and when we change the probes you have to optimise the instrument by using this
spectralon panel. (Refer Slide Time: 07:46)
So, let us see what is the difference between near infrared spectroscopy analysis in the
past and now why it is getting importance. So, you see in the left it is basically the mid
infrared  spectra obtained  by ATR  and the right one is the near infrared spectra  of
obtained by diffuse reflectance. Thus, the difference which you can easily observe that
the number of spectral features is more in case of mid infrared ray as compared to the
near infrared region which contains some broad absorption features also. 
So, NIR spectroscopy was neglected by spectroscopist who for long time could not find
any additional attractive information. And in the spectral religion which was of you
know which was occupied by broad superimposed and weak absorption bands. So, this is
the reason that is why the NIR are you know based technologies were not so, popular
previously.(Refer Slide Time: 08:45)
So, you can see it was difficult to interpret this broad absorption features. However, due
to the absorb due to the advancement in these 3 different or 3 to 4 different forms you
can see there is an advancement in the you know optical fibres. There is a advancement
in computing power, there is an advancement in chemometrics, there is an advantage of
interest in process analysis. So, as a result of these advancements now a days we can use
this NIR spectrometer for better management and better prediction or better analysis of
any particular soil property. 
Now  what  is  chemometric?  Chemometric  is  a  specialised  data  analysis  where  we
measure the concentration of a particular element or chemical using some you know
multivariate techniques or statistical means so, that is called chemometrics. So, there are
several methods of chemometrics generally we use different types of machine learning
algorithms for predicting as a chemometric tool like partial least square regression, then
principle component regression and so on so forth. (Refer Slide Time: 09:53)
So, if we go ahead and see what this spectral features basically look like. So, you see
here these are the spectral pre processing, this is actually the spectral signature of a raw
soil sample. So, basically what we do we generally take 4 scan or 5 scan per sample by
rotating the sample. Because, we want to take a homogenised measurement of the scan
we or we want to take we want to nullify or we want to you know we want to offset the
you know heterogeneity of the soil.
Because, you know soil is heterogeneous so, if we take several measurement and then
make an average then it will produce us more homogeneous results or more average
results. So, that is why you can see here we are taking 4 raw scan per a sample and after
that we produce using some methods we produce different you know 1 average spectra. 
And this is a typical reflectance spectra visible near infrared reflectance spectra of a soil
which you can show source of some broad absorption features. Obviously, these broad
absorption features are represented you know these absorption features are occur from
the moisture or the water molecule which is present inside the soil. (Refer Slide Time: 11:14)
So, once we get this thing then we go for the spectral pre processing. Why? Because, you
can see if we go through the last slide you can see these absorption features are quite
broad and it is difficult to identify the small absorption features or very very specific
absorption  features  which  are  responsible  or  which  are  basically  absorb  which  are
basically arising from absorption by different components which are present into the soil.
So, that is why we require different types of spectral pre processing. So, you can see here
we are doing different types of spectral pre processing this is called these are some
common spectral pre processing we call it first derivative of reflection spectra and this is
called second derivative of reflectance spectra. 
So, in the first derivative of reflectance spectra we generally take the first derivative of
the reflectance values as you know base in comparison to the wavelength. And in the
second  derivative  we  are  taking  second  derivative  of  the  reflectance  values  in
comparison to the wavelength. So, basically what are these? These are basically the
reflectance values individual reflectance values which we have recorded for each of
these wavelength starting from 350 to 2500 nanometre. 
For each of these wavelengths we have basically recorded the we have basically recorded
their reflectance values and when we are plotting these reflecting values you know these
are called the spectrum. So, this spectrum contains this broad absorption features and to remove this is or to
further get higher resolution of the spectral features we are doing different types of
spectral pre processing. Just you can see here we are doing a first derivative and second
derivative. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:58)
Now the question comes why derivative spectrum? Obviously, the derivative is basically
change in reflectance over a bandwidth which is denoted by δλ where, δλ is equal to (λj -
λi ) where, λj > λi. So, basically we take the nth derivative on the basis of this λ you
know in comparison to the λ or reflectance values. 
And you can this is an original reflectance feature and from this original reflectance
feature  which  we  are  taking  different  types  of  derivative  first  derivative.  This  is
obviously, this is the second derivative, this is third derivative and again further higher
order derivative like fourth derivative. So, you can see different derivatives you are
taking. So, what is the reason behind that?
 Obviously,  there  are  couple  of  reasons;  first  of  all  increasing  resolution,  then
background elimination you can see there are several background features which we can
eliminate through you know by taking the higher derivatives and also, we can take some
noise filtration.For example, when you are taking the spectral scan in the field there may be or in the lab
there may be some ambient light source and from those ambient light they can come and
they can you know they can create some interferences. So, this type of interferences and
you know can be nullified by using some special prepossessing. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:20)
So obviously, again  also you can see higher resolution,  this  is  a  broad reflectance
spectrum or absorbance spectrum which is basically you know of which is basically
masking this two important spectral features. So, when you are going from this original
absorbance to higher order derivatives we can see these 2 analytics 2 analytes can we
separate with similar λ max values. So, by increasing the you know basically you can see
how you are increasing the resolution to get more information about the more analytes
which are present in the soil. 
Similarly, you can see this broad absorption feature is suppressing this small absorption
features. So, when we are going from original absorption to first derivative and second
derivative how these are you know getting separated. And then how we are getting much
more you know important information. So, these are some reason that is why we have
why you use the you know spectral pre processing. (Refer Slide Time: 15:19)
Spectral resolution is also very important, the spectral resolution suppose this is a peak
spectral peak. So obviously, these difference is called the spectral resolution and this the
50 percent of the peak height. So, if this is the total peak height the 50 percent of the
peak height we call it full width half maximum or full width stands for full width half of
maximum. So, it is a half of maximum. 
So, that shows the spectral resolution. Higher the resolution; that means, you can you
know higher the resolution means lower the distance or in other words you can better
resolute the minor spectral features using the spectra radiometer. And these consecutive
points are basically shows the sampling interval. So, this is a representation of spectral
resolution in the spectral curve. (Refer Slide Time: 16:18)
So, again once so, the idea is once we have gathered this database of spectra. For
examples and we have thousands of samples and we can gather the thousands of spectra
for those thousands of samples. And once we gather the thousands of samples spectra
from these we will create a database and from this database we will do some spectral pre
processing. 
And from this spectral pre processing will be transformed the data and from using the
transformed data we will create some predictive modelling. And from this predictive
modelling we will do some interpretation and rule formation. And we will and that is
why we use this method extensively now a days for predicting different soil properties.
And we will see that in the next topics where, we discuss about the diffuse reflectance
spectroscopy for application for soil. (Refer Slide Time: 17:12)
So, let us see some specific examples of diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. You can see
here Waiser et al in 2007 they have used this diffuse reflectance spectroscopy and they
have predicted the soil clay. So, you can use that spectra visible near infrared diffuse
reflectance spectrometer for predicting the soil clay. And they have got an R2  values of
0.92 varies 0.84 and 0.92, 0.75 and 0.83 for different conditions. Not only they got good
results, but also they have identified what are the important wavelengths, which are
responsible for producing these high you know prediction results. 
So, you can see for different conditions like air dried ground condition, field moist in situ
condition,  air  dried  in  situ condition;  all  these  condition  they  have  identified  these
important  spectral wavelengths  which are responsible for producing high you know
which are responsible producing high accuracy. So, also by using their model they have
seen the good correlation or good conformity between lap clay content as well as the
visionary predicted clay content. So, you can see soil clay can be predicted by using this
technique. (Refer Slide Time: 18:40)
Another important aspect of soil is organic carbon and you know the inorganic carbon.
And these scientist Morgan et al they have proved that you can use this visible near
infrared spectroscopy, diffuse reflectance spectroscopy to produce the high you know to
produce the; to produce the quantification. Or, you can predict both organic carbon and
inorganic carbon you can see organic carbon can be predicted with an accuracy R2 values
of 0.77 that mean 77 percent accuracy. 
And in case of organic carbon or solid organic carbon basically there you can predict it
with an R2 values of 0.85. So, that shows that this instrument can be used for predicting
soil organic carbon and soil inorganic carbon without any consumables or without you
know any you know chemical used. (Refer Slide Time: 19:33)
Also you know Zhu et al in 2010 they have proved that you can use this technology for
measuring  surface  soil  moisture.  Now,  surface  soil  moisture  is  generally  you  can
calculate using some gravimetric measurement, if this is an gravimetric measurement.
And you can convert into volumetric  content of water volumetric water content by
multiplying with the bulk density ratio.
And you can see that this you know this water content can be predicted, the surface soil
water content can be predicted by using the scan results from this diffuse reflectance
spectroscopy. (Refer Slide Time: 20:16)
So, also although it you know we have although the scientists have produced this high
correlation  between the moisture content  and this  diffuse reflectance  spectra. These
moisture content sometimes produce problem for producing higher prediction accuracy.
Because, most of the time this moisture due to the absorbance of near infrared radiation
by moisture these you know the features the spectral features which are you know the
spectral features coming from other soil components are massed. 
And as a result of that there are some separation and as a result of that there is reduction
of accuracy of the modelling. So, scientist have used a new technique called EPO or
External Parameter Orthogonalization technique for removing the effect of moisture. So,
now a days you do not have to worry about the moisture content in the soil, you can
directly take the scan in the field. 
And you can use some mathematical techniques to remove the moisture impact by this
EPO  method  or  external  parameter  orthogonalization  technique  and  by  using  this
technique you can directly predict organic carbon as well as clay without any moisture
influence. So, this is the advancement of research in this near infrared spectroscopy or
visible and infrared diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. (Refer Slide Time: 21:49)
And also some Indian application I would like to show you, you can see here you know
our group has used this technology for measurement of arsenic content in landfill side
soil. So, we use this technology for measurement of soil arsenic concentration. So, we
went to a landfill area where municipal land waste or municipal solid waste are dumped
for a quite a long time. And around this landfill area there has been a huge amount of
agriculture  lands  which grow  the leafy vegetables  which accumulate  which has the
potential for accumulating these heavy metals which are coming through this municipal
solid waste. 
So,  we  thought  that  we  should  use  this  DRS  technique  for  predicting  the  arsenic
concentrations. So, we went and collected several soil samples from there. As we can see
from this is a study area and we call it the you know this is a landfill site called Dhapa
landfill site situated in Kolkata city of India and these are water bodies. So, these are the
sampling points. (Refer Slide Time: 22:53)
So, we collected the samples and then we scan using these two techniques; one is the mid
infrared spectrometer we call a drift or diffuse reflectance infrared fourier transform
technique another is visible near infrared diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:08)
And after scanning these using these two methods we also simultaneously measured their
properties like you know total arsenic content. And also not only the total arsenic content
but, also we used a specialised technique  called sequential  extraction to extract the
individual pools of arsenic which is present in the soil.(Refer Slide Time: 23:29)
So, you can see there are five different pools of arsenic which is present into the soil; one
is  called  ionically  bound  arsenic,  then  strongly  absorbed  arsenic,  then  arsenic  co
precipitated with carbonates manganese oxide and vary amorphous iron oxyhydroxides.
Arsenic co precipitated with amorphous iron oxy hydroxide, arsenic associated with
organic matter and sulphides and we measured them individually.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:52)
And then using some qualitative spectral analysis we tried to identify whether we can
identify those individual features or individual pools. So, this is the actually the visiblenear infrared reflectance spectrum and this is a mid infrared reflection spectrum of the
collected soil sample. So, you can see we have identified the goethite and hematite which
are important iron based minerals. 
And, then  we can identify the hydroxyl of clay minerals and organic matter bound
arsenic here. And also identified the kaolinites smectites in organic matter hydroxyl here
and then other features like CW of metal carboxylates and then calcite and carbonates
and all this things. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:40)
Not only we have done the qualitative analysis, but also we predicted the total arsenic
concentration and we got an very high R2values of 0.97. And the beauty of it you can use
this  technology  for  directly  mapping  into  the  field  also  or  directly  producing  the
contamination map also. So, you can see using this model you can use the geostatistical
interpolation which we covered in the last lecture.
So, geostatistical interpolation can be used to use this model predicted values to produce
the arsenic contamination map. So, you can see we are getting arsenic contamination
maps and for that area showing different levels of arsenic contamination starting from
low to very high ok.(Refer Slide Time: 25:21)
 Not only that we also produce this prediction model for individual soil arsenic pools and
produce to that you can predict this individual soil arsenic pools by using this diffuse
reflectance  spectroscopy.  And  also  we  have  identified  the  individual  significant
wavelengths by this diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:39)
Now, we are also produce the online mapping of soil properties or onsite mapping of soil
properties  by  using  some  variable  indicators.  So,  variable  indicators  uses  some
specialised  variables  between  this  350  to  2500  nanometre.  So,  these  350  to  2000nanometre shows the whole range of spectral variables or spectral wavelengths. Now, we
are selecting some spectral wavelengths from this whole range of spectral wavelengths.
And then we are efficiently utilising them in using some model to predict particular soil
properties.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:26)
So, you can see here we are producing the spatial variability maps or kriging maps of
particular soil property, actually we have produced maps of total carbon. And the you
know this is a map of sand and then map of clay and then map of shield and then total
nitrogen total carbon and loss on ignition method of soil organic carbon. So, you can see
we  have  produced  all  of  this  map  using  this  combine  predictor,  combine  variable
indicators as well as this mapping geostatistical mapping techniques. (Refer Slide Time: 26:53)
Also we approved the usefulness for mapping the soil petroleum contamination, you
know  soil  petroleum  contamination  is  a  serious  environmental  problem  because,  it
produces the neurotoxic effects.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:09)
It is so, if we collected several contaminated samples from different areas and we plotted
their you know their reflectance spectrum. You can see the differences between the
reflectance spectrum originated from the soil which has got no hydrocarbon or petroleum
and also the from the soil which are having hydrocarbon on petroleum. So, you can seewe have collected  two different  soils  and then we can  see the differences  in  their
reflectance  pattern.  Also  we  have  identified  these  red  are  the  basically  important
significant  wavelengths  which  are  responsible  for  identifying  these  petroleum
hydrocarbons.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:46)
So, we produced several types of maps on several types of models. So, we saw that we
can predict this petroleum hydrocarbon contaminated soil using great accuracy with an
R2 values of 0.98 you can see here. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:00)
And not only that we use this technology in the directly into the field for mapping as a
petroleum spilled area. So, you see there is a spilled area where there is a petroleum you
know petroleum oil spill; it is a actually hilly area we are looking from the top and
actually the oil moved through these area. So, this in an swell area so, we collected
several soil samples from this area these are the soil sampling points. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28: 28)
After collecting the soil sample points we model them using our we scan them using our
spectro radiometer we model them and this is the spatial visibility map as you can see.
Obviously, there are concentration high concentration of the petroleum is consented at
this area and it moves through this area. So, that shows the better accuracy of our
modelling.(Refer Slide Time: 28:47)
And not only that we also collected the contaminated soil samples from BP Deepwater
Horizon oil spill you know. There is a big Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010 in the in
United States. So, we went there and we collected several soil samples starting from very
clean sand to very highly contaminated sand. And these are basically the petroleum
which is mixed with the sand sample. So, we actually collected the sand samples which
and this petroleum actually came from the sea and it actually contaminated the whole
land as well as the beaches.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:29)
So, we went there and we collected the samples from the beaches. These are the actual
samples, after connecting them we scanned them with our spectra radiometer and we
used the prediction model. And you can see we are getting the R2values of 0.95 to 0.99.
So, that shows the you know that shows that you know effectiveness of our technology. 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:46)
And also we gave some on site prediction for predicting the soil arsenic soil petroleum
contamination. So, guys it is now I hope that you have got some basic overview of this
technique how it works. Obviously, it you know it is not possible to cover all these
aspects within this time frame, but I would request you to go ahead and read some
literature. This is a burning topic now a days and this the most advanced techniques that
soil scientists are using now a days for different types of soil research. 
And it can literally curve down all the efforts of soil of soil based estimation. So, you can
do some more advanced research; those who are who are pursuing some research in the
field of soil science you can do this research on diffuse reflectance spectroscopy based
modelling of different soil properties. So, guys thank you; let us wrap up here and then in
the last lecture we will be talking about another important technology that is portable X-
ray fluorescence.
Thank you.