Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 51
GIS and GPS
Welcome friends to this week 11 of you know week 11 lectures of Soil Science and
Technology.  And  that  you  know  the  highlight  of  this  week  lectures  will  be  some
advanced  technologies,  which  we  generally  used  nowadays  for  different  soil
applications. And we will be talking about GIS and then GPS or in other words they are
Geographic Information System or Global Positioning System.
And then  in the forthcoming  in the coming  lectures  we will be talking  about, geo
statistics which is a specialized branch of statistics. And then we will be talking about
some advance sensors like diffuse reflectance spectroscopy as well as portable X-ray
fluorescence sensors.
So, in this first lecture of week 11, we will be talking about two important terms these
are GIS and GPS. And nowadays, there has been extensive use of these technologies for
different soil applications, be it you know efficient management of soil resources or
precision agriculture and we will be talking in details about these terms. And then we
will be talking about their you know, their principles and different backgrounds.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:41)
So, let us start today’s lecture so GIS and GPS. So, the in this lecture we will be for we
will be covering this following concepts slight; why it is GIS and how it works, and then
what is vector data and raster data, and then I will give you some examples of GIS, and
then we will be talking about GPS and how it works.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:05)
So, let us starts with the GIS. The GIS is a short form of Geographic Information
System. So, this geographic information system or GIS is basically a computer base
system  including  software,  then  hardware,  then  people  and  geographic  information.
Obviously,  it  requires  some  software,  specialized  softwares  and  there  are  some
specialized softwares like ArcGIS, then you know QGIS, SAGA GIS. So, there are
couple of specialized GIS software which you know we people or in our scientist uses
use these days extensively.
So, it is a combination of software and then hardware you required computer system to
produce this maps, and then obviously you require some user as well as some geographic
information which is stored in the database. So, obviously GIS what is the utility of GIS
we can see, a GIS can create and then you know a GIS can create, then edit, then query,
and analyze, and display map information on the computer.
So, as we can see here in this picture, GIS basically composed of different data layers
and here you can see that there are three different data layers, which are stacked over
each other. Obviously, the first layer is the street data followed by building data andvegetation data and this street data is overlaid on some background and followed by
building data and vegetation data.
So,  you  see  that  while  we  stack  all  these  three  layers  together  we  are  getting  an
integrated data and we are getting a real world representation, where we get both street
data building and you know street building as well as vegetation.
So, basically DIS is a combination of different layers, which are stacked over each other
and after stacking them each other we you know we generalize  any you know we
generalize any real world feature. Not only that at the same time we create, edit, query,
and analyze from those real world features or real world map also; apart from that
traditional mapping.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:29)
So, let us go ahead and see what GIS can do? Now, 80 percent of the local government
activities estimated to be geographically based. For example, you know they do different
types of zoning, then you know public work you know public works like streets, you
know water supplies, sewers, planning and all these things, then garbage collections,
then land ownership and variation, and you know public safety, fire and police. So, all
these thing can be managed you know all these things are basically geography based.
And you know GIS is very very helpful for properly managing these things, which have
some geographical connotation.Secondly, a significant portion of state government has a geographic component. For
example, you know natural resource management or highways or transportation you can
use GIS. Then third one is the business and you know business use of GIS for every wide
arrays application; you can see you know different types of retail size selection, and then
customer analysis, then logistic you know logistics like vehicle tracking and routing.
And  then  natural  resources  you  know  explorations  for  petroleum,  etcetera.  Then
precision agriculture, precision agriculture is highly related to the; you know to the GIS
and its applications and then civil engineering and construction. So, all these are related
to different GIS applications.
Then obviously, for military applications also you indicate GIS; specifically battlefield
management  as  well  as  satellite  imagery  representation.  So,  all  these  are  managed
through GIS applications.
And obviously, some scientific research you know also employees GIS; starting from
geography, geology, botany, then anthropology, sociology, economics, political science,
epidemiology, criminology and all these thing.
So, you can see GIS is a wide you know GIS can be used in wide range of domains and it
is nowadays becoming a important tool in the hand of you know agricultural as well as
national policy makers. So, let us see what are the other important thing in GIS?
(Refer Slide Time: 06:51)
So, let us see some examples of applied GIS you can see. In this slide, I have listed a
couple of them obviously, this list is not exhaustive list. So, you can see here for urban
planning management and policy making you can do zoning, subdivision, planning, then
land acquisition, then you know economic development, then code enforcement, and
then  housing  renovation  programs  and  emergency  response,  crime  analysis,  tax
assessments.
For environmental science, you can use monitoring environmental risk, then modeling
storm  water  runoff,  then  management  of  watershed,  floodplains,  wetland,  forest,
aquifers, then environmental impact analysis, hazardous or toxic. Toxicity analysis and
you know toxic facility siting, then groundwater modeling and contamination tracking.
And you know political  science like  you know, redistricting  and then  analyzing of
election results then predictive modeling. So, these are some examples of you know of
GIS.
Apart from that in civil engineering, you can use locating underground facilities, and
then  designing  you  know  alignment  for  highway  transit  and  then  coordination  of
infrastructural maintenance. In case of business, you can do some demographic analysis,
market penetration, share analysis, site selection you can do.
The  educational  administration  you  can  do,  attending  you  know  attendance  area
maintenance and then enrollment projections and some time in you know in advance
areas you can use GIS for school bus routing also.
 For real estate, obviously neighborhood land prices then traffic impact analysis and then
determination of highest and best use all these can be done through GIS. In case of health
care you can do epidemiological study and then needs analysis and service inventory. So,
you can see a lot of thing you can do using GIS. So, now you know about the application
of GIS let us move ahead and see you know how GIS works.(Refer Slide Time: 08:51)
Now, this slide basically shows GIS data has a spatial or geographical references. So,
this might be a reference that describe the feature on earth using some a latitude and
longitude, and national coordinate system, an address, a district, a wetland identifier, a
road name. So, basically they a sense is a GIS store, a GIS stores information about the
world is a collection of thematic layers that can be linked together by geography.
 So, you can see here in this we call it attribute table. So, in this attribute table, it is
basically linked with the actual map which is shown above this attribute table. Now, this
map or the study area is the map of the study area is divided into some numeric you
know into some you know, large number of polygons is we can see, this one polygon,
this one polygon. So, this polygon basically represents some you know mapping unit or
homogenized area based on certain characteristics.
 Not only we can map it, but also in the attribute table we can you know, we can tag this
individual polygons with some specific features and we can actually you know populate
or actually input their respective properties in the attribute table. Just like here you can
see, the polygon of class 3 basically you know represents as scrub with growth index of
17 and fire hazard a very high and soil type of clay.
So, obviously this polygon which has been identified some with some identifier can be
grouped into can be characterized by this particular properties. So, if you want to know
what is the particular property of that polygon if we make a query, it will automaticallyextract this information from the attribute table and make the further analysis or give us
the output.
So, this is how these information in the attribute table is geographically related or tagged
with any location, so that is why not only we can see and analyze and query from map,
but also we can extract whatever information we can you know whatever information we
required by you know analyzing this database. So, you now you probably have an idea
about how this GIS thing works.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:17)
So, in the GIS system architecture and components you can see, basically it starts with
data input so we basically input the data, which creates a geographic database. Once we
create the geographic database, the next step is to input some query for example, you
want to answer certain questions and I will show you one practical example later one. So,
if we input our query obviously, it will be directed to the geographic database. And this
geographic database will automatically do some transformation analysis and based on
this transformation analysis, it will give us the output display and reporting.
So, we can get directly report from the geography database or this geographic database
can produce some transform, you know geography database some came under grow
some transformation and show us some analysis and do some analysis and then further it
produces the output. So, ultimately the output we are getting in terms of maps as well as
in terms of some quantitative measured or different or specific queries.(Refer Slide Time: 12:21)
So, the GIS data model is basically can be shown as I have told you, it can be shown as a
you know is as a stacked feature as a stacking of individual data layer. So, you can see
these GIS data models can be produced as a stacking of you know as a you know, this
GIS model can we can be can be produced as a result of stacking of this individual
layers.
Starting from digital ortho-photo, we will be talking about digital ortho-photo later, and
then you can see about the streets, then you know hydrography, then parcel of lands, then
buildings, then zoning, then utilities as well as administrative boundaries. So, all these
layers are you know stacked over each other or laid over each other to produce this
ultimate representation of earth features.
So, data basically is organized by layers and coverage’s or themes these are basically
synonymous concept this layers coverage’s or themes with each layer representing some
common feature. For example, in the buildings obviously, this layer will be shown only
the building, we will show only the buildings which is present at that particular place
And layers are integrated using explicit location on the earth surface thus it geographic
location is the organized principal. So, these layer are basically will be stacked together
based on some geography connotation, so that is why this geographic location is the
organizing principle in case of GIS data model. So, let us see some example.(Refer Slide Time: 13:57)
So, you can see here we have three layers or three themes, these are roads and then
hydrology or water and then topography or land elevation. So, you can see here all of
them are represented in terms of longitude and latitude, these are the road, this is the
hydrology and this is the topographical features that means, the surface and awareness or
you know  or land  elevation  basically.  So, they  can  be related,  because  the precise
geographic coordinates are recorded for each of the theme.
So, you can for each of these layers or you know or theme basically we have got the
precise, you know geographic location or geographic coordinates or latitude longitude.
So, basically we can be integrate these layers together and layers of comprised of two
types of data, you can see here, one is called spatial data which describes the location.
So, basically  you see  GIS  is  basically  geographic  information  system.  So, the  first
objective of GIS to give a some spatial inference that means, we want to see what is the
spatial variability or in other words you want to see where the data exist or where a
particular feature exist. So these spatial data can helps us to describe the location or
where in terms of some geographic location.
Secondly attribute data, which is present in the attribute table can specify what, how
much and when. So, these all queries can be answered by using proper GIS analysis. So,
you can see here roads are been tagged with a longitude and latitude, then hydrology can
be tagged longitude and latitude, then topography is again will tagged with longitude andlatitude. And layers may be represented in two ways, first of all in vector format as
points and lines and secondly in raster format or image format as pixel.
So, there are two types of features you will in case of GIS will be talking about this later
on, one is call the vector format which is basically represented by line, points and
polygons whereas, another feature of GIS is basically in the raster format and these raster
is basically represented by grid of cells and we will be talking about that in a few
minutes.  So, all  geographic  data  has  four properties  for example,  projection,  scale,
accuracy and resolution; we will be talking about those terms later on.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:27)
So, let us go ahead and see what is the you know of what are the other features? For
example, here you can see spatial data basically shows your spatial data gives you the
information of where, a particular you know a particular feature is located or in other
words this gives us the spatial a specific location or the you know remember that these
spatial data is basically located or stored in terms of a specific file feature file type we
call it shape file.
And the shape file or geo database or similar geographic file. We will be seeing the
shape file in a you know shortly I will show you, some shape file and remember that
another type of data as we have talked about is attribute and descriptive data, which
basically  gives  you  the  information  about  what,  how  much  and  when.  And  these
specifics these specifies characteristics at that location natural or human created andstored in a database table, just like in you know and this database table is called the
attribute table.
So, this descriptive data is basically stored in attribute table and we have to input this
data  basically  from different  sources. And these attribute  data in the attribute  table
basically helps us to answer this question what, how much and when. So, GIS system
traditionally maintain spatial and attribute data separately. So, in a GIS software it can be
maintained separately both in a spatial file or shape file, another in a attribute data and
the GIS software has the capability to join them for display or analysis. So, this is the
beauty of GIS software.
It  is  not  the  simple  mapping,  it  is  not  that  simple  database  management,  it  is  a
combination of both of them to create an interactive solution for each and every problem,
which is related to geography. So, for example in ArcView, which is a software the
attributes of table you know, attributes of a specific thing in a table is used to link a
shape file that is a spatial structure with a database table containing attribute information
or in order to display the attribute data spatially on a map.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:45)
So, you can see this is a shape file. And the shape file format is a popular geo spatial
vector data format for geographic information system software. And the type of you
know these the you know you can see these are the political boundaries of India and thiscan be called this can be considered as a shape file. Remember that the shape file can be
represented by either points polygons and you know or lines, we will see that later on.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:13)
So, the two fundamental feature of data models we will see there are two types, one is
called vector data another is raster data. So, in vector is basically a series of x and y
coordinates and we basically you know, used for representing discrete data like you
know for you know for discrete data representing as points lines and polygons. And as I
have told you, the raster is basically represented by grids and cells and it basically shows
the continuous data such as elevation slope and surface.
 So, raster data described by cell grid one value per cells. We can see its shows, the clear
differences between these two data type, this is the vector data, which is shown by points
and this is by line and then polygon. And you can basically describe any vector data by
using three different features. And raster data is basically denoted by either this cells or
zone of cells or you know this grids of cells.(Refer Slide Time: 20:21)
So, this slide shows vector and raster representation of the spatial fields as you know see
here. Vector data is again can be represented in terms of some polygons whereas, raster
data can be represented in terms of some you know some gridded cells. Remember that
the raster data is you know raster data basically represents some continuous data fields,
like elevation.
For example, the image is basically a rasterize format. Any image is basically can be
converted in you know is basically a raster data format, where each individual pixel
represent a grid or you know a grid in that raster data.(Refer Slide Time: 21:05)
So, let us see the data representation in a GIS obviously, remember that in the real world
anything or any feature can be represented by a combination of a raster and vector data.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:21)
And so let us see how it go, you know how it happens. So, you see it is a gridded cell
basically you know these are you know number of rows is we can see and also the
number of columns and these are basically contains some cell, where there is no data and
cell size are almost similar. So, we can see points data which is a kind of vector feature,you can assign this points as grids just like this. And also polygons has a zone of cells
just like this and also line is a sequence of cells like this or sequence of grids like this.
So, you can see you can literally represents your vector data in terms of your you know
raster data by using either specific grids or a zone of cells or line as a sequence of cells.
So, this is how you can represent any feature of the earth surface, in terms of both you
know vector data as well as raster data.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:23)
So, this is again note you can see it is the gridded cell. The polygon cells are represented
by this green field you know grids whereas, this no data or the cells which does not
contain any data is basically represented by this black cells. So, again this is a cell
network which is basically line as a sequence, and as you can see you know these are
some examples to show how these you know vector data and raster data can represent
any feature over the earth surface.(Refer Slide Time: 22:57)
So, let us see some good examples you can see this you know this some images or we
call  it  dumb rasters, why we call  it  dumb rasters? Although, they look very good,
however,  they  does  not  produce  any  good  quantitative  or  you  know  or  any  good
information about you know about some specific features. If we ask the question, I like
how way you know if we ask the question when, how and all this things, now all these
cannot be answered by just interpreting this images; so this called dumb rasters.
And as you can these are the smart raster obviously, because all these are you know
represented by some specific attributes. For example, it is a smart raster of 5 feet grid
and you can see the values are given and counts are given and also some features are
given for each of the cell. So, whenever any images is associated with a in attribute table,
we call it as smart display of data.(Refer Slide Time: 24:01)
So, some important terms before we see some examples of GIS first of all is projection.
Projection is the method by which the card 3-D surface of the earth is represented by X
and Y coordinates on 2-D flat map or screen. And remember that although know we are
trying to represent any 3-D surface in terms of 2-D flat map of screen, they are you know
there has to be some distortion and so this distortion is inevitable.
Second is a scale. So, there is a ratio of distance on a map to the equivalent distance on
the ground. And in theory GIS scale independent, but in practice there is an implicit
range of scales for data output in any project. So, if you see any GIS map it always a will
associate with some scale.
Thirdly, you know accuracy. How well does the database info matches with the real
world.  So, it  can  be  measured  into  three  you know  aspects.  First  of all  positional
accuracy so that means, how to lose the features to their real world location. Secondly, is
a consistency, so do feature characterization in database match those in the real world?
So, the second consistency so the second is consistency base accuracy. So, is a road in
the  database,  a  road  in  the  real  world,  so  that  type  of  validation  can  be  done  by
consistency based accuracy measurement.
Thirdly is completeness, which is are all real world instances of feature present in the
database. So, or in other words are all roads are included. So, these type of answers you
can see while you are doing this you know accuracy analysis.And also resolution; resolution basically shows, the size of the smallest feature which is
able to be recognized. So, for raster data it is the pixel size obviously, as the size of the
pixel  goes  down,  the  resolution  is  increases.  Similarly,  just  like  in  case  of  in  any
photograph as the resolution increases, the size of the pixel size goes down or in other
words as the size of the pixel size goes down, their smallest feature can be identified
through these individual pixels. So, guys you know so I hope that you have gathered
some knowledge about this important terms.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:45)
And you can see here, you know let us see some one example of GIS. Here you can see
this is a; you know this is basically shows a raster image layer, which is the digital ortho-
photo  photograph  layer.  And  digital  ortho-photo  is  basically  combines  the  visual
properties of a photograph with the positional accuracy of feedback in computer readable
format.
So, this is the our base map and then people have used the you know there are two types
of vectors layer. This is the vector layer of street one street network, and this is another
vector layer showing the land parcel layers. So, it is represented by lines however this
land parcel vector layer is represented by polygons. So, let us see how these three can be
integrated to produce you know to produce the answer of a specific query.(Refer Slide Time: 27:41)
So, in this picture you can see, these three layers basically two vector layers and one
raster layer are overlaid based on the common geographic location. So, they have similar
geographic location; so they are overlaid to each other.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:57)
And ultimately you can see, after the we put some query. So, our query is to identify the
parcel, which you we within a half mile buffer of the park and central. So, if it is the park
and central and we are overlaying all these three layers to each other, we are stacking all
these three layers to each other. Obviously, then you can identify the areas which are theyou know identify the areas which are containing the parcel, you know a half mile buffer
of park and central.
So, you can see by using by this is the actual use of you know GIS and by using these
GIS we can query in our case the query was to identify the specific locations, which are
within half mile buffer park and central. And you can see by overlaying all these layers
together we can identify those areas.
So, I hope guys now you are getting some ideas about this GIS and obviously they you
know the you know a plenty of research is going on the GIS applications in soil science.
Obviously, we can use the GIS for identification of aspect of you know different filed
location not only that we can also do some geo statistical mapping using GIS software’s
we will see that later on.
And so all these better resource management to identify you know to identify the earth
surface features are in efficiently managed by this geographic information systems. So,
guys let us stop here and in the next lecture we will be starting from GPS. And then we
will see that how this GPS is helping us for identification or you know for positional
identification and how we are using this GPS nowadays and so on and so forth. So, guys
thank you let us meet in the next lecture of week 11.
Thank you.