Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 05
Weathering and Soil Formation (Contd.)
(Refer Slide Time: 00:15)
Hi, friends. Welcome to this lecture of Soil Science and Technology. Today, we will be
discussing about different types of parent materials and also we will be discussing about
what is soil profile and what are the important soil master horizons.
So, in the last class we stopped here while discussing the influence of parent material for
soil formation. And I told you that the parent material is very important for determining
the soil physical and chemical characteristics, not only that but also the nature of parent
materials shows; nature of parent material governs the rate of soil formation.
Now, types of parent materials while we are talking about the types of parent materials
remember that parent materials are classified based on their mode of placement in their
current location. So, as you know that all soil forms from rocks and rocks breaks down
into the parent materials. So, sometime parent materials develop into the soil at the place
of their origin and sometimes these parent materials translocate from one area to another
area with the help of different types of forces physical forces and transporting agents and
deposit in other places and therefore form soil in those places.So, parent material can develop soil either at the place of origin or in some new places.
So, depending on their location of origin or placement in their current location they are
named in different ways. For example, in this slide you can see that when the rocks and
minerals undergo weathering. So, they first forms parent materials and when these parent
materials develops soil at the place of origin they are called residual.
Now, when this parent materials transported through different transporting agents to
other  places  depending  on  the  transporting  agents  we  name  them  differently.  For
example, when the parent materials are transported through water and deposits in the
lake we call it lacustrine. When the transporting agent is streams or river, we call it
alluvial or fluvial. When the transporting agent is ocean, we call it marine and when the
transportation occurs due to the gravitational action, we call it colluvial parent material.
And when the transportation occurs due to the ice or glacier we call it, till or moraine and
when this ice melts and further this parent materials deposited by water they will call
outwash, lacustrine, alluvial and marine depending on various transporting agents, and
when that parent material is transported through air or wind and or deposited by wind we
call it either eolian .
So, as you can see based on different types of transporting agents we are naming the
parent  materials  differently.  And  they  are  basically  named  based  on  the  dominant
transporting agent.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:51)
So, as you can see here three important examples of parent materials. First of all you are
seeing  colluvial  parent  material  which  occurs.  Now  here  the  parent  materials  are
transported due to the action of gravity. Second is flood plains and third one is alluvial
plain both of them are formed due to the transporting action of rivers or streams. So,
based on the transporting agents as you can see the soil characteristics or parent material
also differs from one soil to another soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:25)
Here, some example of glacial till and glacial till occur due to the due to the action of
glacier and this loess which formed due to the wind action. So, based on the transporting
agents as you can see we are naming them differently.(Refer Slide Time: 05:44)
Final important aspect of factor for soil formation is time. So, you know that younger
soils tend to have properties of their parent material and as they age they tend to change
sometime to a different soil type. This diagram shows this in a very nice manner. Now,
as you can see this is this is a starting point of soil formation. So, obviously, there will be
fresh unweathered rock and as the time goes on to 100 to 1000 to 10000 to I mean
100000 and so on so forth. You can see the development of different horizons or layers
within the soil like O horizon or the organic horizon, A horizon or mineral horizon, C
horizon or unconsolidated horizon and R which is basically the unweathered rock.
And, as the soil formation process further as you can see the development of more
horizons in the soil, and further as the soil develops you will see accumulation of clays
and oxides development of different types of soil structure and so on so forth. So, these
justifies that the younger soils tend to have properties which are which resemble to their
parent material and as they age they tend to change and sometime to a different soil type.(Refer Slide Time: 07:35)
So, let us see the summary of soil forming factors. As you can see this slide shows how
this five soil forming factors are intimately interconnected to each other for the formation
of soil. For example: here you are seeing that the vegetation is intimately related to the
soil because they supply organic matter and ground cover for the soil formation. In turn
soil gives them water and nutrients. So, vegetation is an important factor as you know
and these parent material gives minerals to the soil as the result of different types of
physical chemical weathering and soil also deposited into sediments to form further
parent materials.
Topography governs different types of soil formation, animal also effects soil formation
due to the pedoturbation process. We have discussed the pedoturbation process in the last
lecture and in turn soil gives the animals habitats. Climate that is regional both regional
micro climate  provides  the water heat and wind required for soil formation  or soil
chemical weathering. Vegetation  is also linked with the animals  because vegetation
supply food for the animals and animals also help in seed dispersal or herbivore. So, this
is another interconnection.
 So you can see the all the factors the topography and parent materials are also intimately
you know related to each other because of weathering and colluviation. And you can see
also  the  topographic  factors  or  the  mountain  effects  or  slope  effects  we  call  them
orographic effects are responsible for different types of climates which are also youknow which also influences the soil formation. So, you can see there is an intimate
relations or inter connections of this five soil formation factors for soil formation.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:23)
 So let us see what is soil profile? Now, soil is a 3-dimensional body. So, five soil
forming factors cause different state of layers if you go and cut down a soil vertically
you will see different soil layers you can visually differentiate them. So, the how they
occur basically? They occur because of actions from different five soil forming factors.
So, each soil is characterized by a given sequence of this horizon and obviously, vertical
section of this sequence is termed as soil profile. So, as you can see here the total as you
can see here this total vertical section of a soil is called soil profile. An in a particular soil
profile you will see some specific soil horizons or layers.
For examples; O horizons, A horizon, E horizon, B horizon, C horizon and at the bottom
unweathered parent material. So, O horizons basically shows loose and partly decayed
organic matters. So, remember that O horizon always occur at the top and it is dark in
color and it basically composed of decaying organic matter fresh and decaying organic
matter. Just beneath the O horizon you will see A horizon which is basically a mineral
matter mixed with some humus or in other words mineral matters mixed with some
organic matter. So, it is darker in nature.
See in some soil just below the A horizon you will see a light color horizon; we call it E
horizon or eluvial horizon. So, E stands for eluvial. Eluvial horizon occurs due to theprocess  of  eluviations.  Eluviation  is  basically  movement  of  clay  minerals  or  other
compounds from upper layers to the bottom layers of the soil. So, this is the process of
eluviation and as a result of movement of clay from upper layers to the deeper layers
these resulting horizon is called light colored zone of leaching and we call it E horizon.
Just below the E horizon you will see a relatively darker horizon we call it B horizon
which basically shows accumulation of clay from above. So, the all the eluviated clay
from the above horizon they will deposit in the low horizon they will form B horizon.
Just below the B horizon you will see C horizon which is basically composed or partially
altered parent materials or small parent materials small fractions of parent materials and
finally, at the bottom you will see unweathered parent material.
So, these basically shows the different soil horizons which are present within a soil
profile.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:58)
So, let us see what are the master horizon. Obviously, there are six master horizons and
this  six master horizons  are commonly  recognized  and designated  using the capital
letters like O horizon, A horizon, E, B, C and R, R is basically the parent bedrock. So,
this six are the basically the master horizon. Subhorizons may occur within a master
horizon and these are designated by lower letters following the capital master horizon
letter; for example, Bt, Ap or Oi we will discuss them later on. As you can see in the
picture also if you know all this sub horizons are given for example, Oi which basicallystands for slightly decomposed organic horizon, Oe stands for moderately decomposed
organic horizon and Oa stands for highly decomposed organic horizon.
So, like that all the master horizon can be sub divided into sub horizons. And this sub
horizons  are  basically  indicated  by  lower  case  letters  following  the  capital  master
horizon letter.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:14)
So, let us discuss them one by one. So, O horizon is basically the organic horizon which
is  found above  the  mineral  soil  and  it  basically  occurs  in  organic  soil  profile  and
commonly referred as the forest floor. So, the thickness of the O horizon basically differs
from one soil to another soil. Obviously, in case of forest soil the thickness of the O
horizon will be more as compared to the soil which develops in the desert region and this
O horizon is darker in color and it occurs just above the A horizon.(Refer Slide Time: 15:54)
So, often this O horizon has three subdivisions Oi is fibric. So, it basically in the fibric
horizon or fibric material means you can see recognizable plant and animal parts. The
second important is Oe horizon we call it hemic materials which is basically composed
of finely fragmented residues intermediately decomposed and finally, Oa horizon or
sapric materials which consists of highly decomposed smooth amorphous residues.
So, based on the phase of decomposition or I would say the stages of decomposition we
can differentiate o master horizon into three sub horizons that is fibric, hemic and sapric.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:54)
Now, let us see what is A horizon? A horizon is basically the top most mineral horizon.
In a horizon you will see there it generally contains enough partially decomposed organic
material. So, it is darker in color and soil color I mean it is darker in color then the lower
horizons and it is one of the most important master horizon.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:22)
E horizon: so zones of maximum leaching or eluviation of clay iron aluminum oxides.
Remember that, again this E horizon occurs due to the process of eluviation of clay iron
aluminum and it leaves as a result of a this eluviation of clay iron aluminum it leaves a
concentration of resistance minerals such as quartz and sands and silt. And, it usually
found underneath the A horizon and is the forest soil directly under the O horizon.
And, it is generally lighter in color than both the A horizon above it and the horizon
below  because  all  the  clay  which  are  darker  in  color  have  been  already  moved
downwards. So, that is why it is also called bleach horizon. So, as you can see in this soil
there is a clear bleached E horizon which is lighter in color and this is called E horizon or
eluvial horizon.(Refer Slide Time: 18:32)
So, the next important master horizon is B horizon and B horizon form below an O, A or
E horizons. So, materials have been accumulated in the B horizons materials have been
accumulated typically by washing in the form of horizons above a process termed as a
illuviation.
Now, you all know about eluviations. Eluviation is movement of clay iron and aluminum
from upper horizon to the lower horizon. So, when the eluviated materials deposited at
the lower horizon or in the B horizon these process is called illuviation. So, remember
that the B horizon occurs mainly due to the process of illuviation. So, in the B horizon
you will see maximum accumulation of materials such as iron aluminum oxides and
silicate clays and as a result of illuviation of silicate clays there will be a sub horizon.
Specific sub horizon we call it Bt horizon, you will find it in the humid region. And,
remember that calcium carbonate or calcium sulphate may accumulate in the B horizon
giving rise to Bk and By horizon respectively in arid and semi arid region these are again
this Bk and By are again subhorizons.(Refer Slide Time: 19:59)
 C horizon: C horizon is basically the unconsolidated material underlying the solum.
Now, what is solum? We generally consider A horizon plus B horizon combinedly as
solum or in other words solum is the basically combination of A horizon and B horizon.
So, C horizon is unconsolidated material which generally occurs at the bottom of the
solum and this C horizon may or may not be same as the parent material from which they
the solum formed. And finally, C horizon material that retains some of the structural
features  of the parent rocks or geologic  deposits  from which it forms is termed as
saprolite.
So, as you can see in the picture there is a clear demarcation of C horizon which is
basically the unconsolidated parent materials.(Refer Slide Time: 21:10)
So, we have covered both O, A, E, B and C horizon. And let us see the final one that is R
horizon which is basically the consolidated rock from which the soil forms. And you will
see very little evidence of weathering in this unconsolidated rock and generally we
termed this horizon at R horizon as you can see in this picture.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:33)
So, what is the sub division within the master horizons? Obviously, the often distinctive
layers exists within a given master horizons and these are indicated by a numeric no
numeral  following  by  the  letter  designation.  For  example,  we  know  three  differentcombination of structure and color can be seen in the B horizon then the profile may
include a sequence of B 1, B 2 and B 3. So, you are seeing we are including numerical
digits just after the letter designation of the master horizon to show this sub division or
sub no or sub horizons.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:19)
And,  there  is  another  important  horizon  we  call  transition  horizons.  So,  transition
horizons or transition layers occurs between the master horizons and may be dominated
by properties of one horizon, but also have characteristics of another. As we write I mean
you know we generally denote them as AE, EB and BE and so on so forth. So, E slash B
when distinct parts of the horizons have properties of E while other parts have properties
of B.
Now, when we call AE horizon for example, that basically denotes that this soil or these
horizon has characteristics mostly similar to A horizon and some properties are similar to
E horizon. Similarly, while we are talking about BE horizons; that means, this horizon
are this horizon is having is showing the properties mostly of B horizon and some
properties  from E horizon. So, this  is  the  physical interpretation  of these transition
horizons.(Refer Slide Time: 23:48)
So, since the capital letter designates the nature of master horizons in only a very general
way specific horizon characteristics may be indicated by a lower case letter following the
master horizon designation. For example, Oi that is O horizon with slightly decomposed
organic matter, we have already seen this.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:14)
So, in this slide or in this table you will see some common sub horizon distinction within
the master horizons. For example, if you use lower case symbol  a sorry, if we use lower
case symbol a that will you know that will denote highly decomposed organic matter. Ifwe use lower case symbol b that will denote buried soil horizons, if we use c that will see
that  will  denote  concretion  of  nodules,  if  you  use  e;  that  means,  intermediately
decomposed organic matter, if you use f that will show frozen soil, if you use i that is
slightly decomposed organic matter. If you use j that is showing basically jarosite or
yellow sulfate mineral present into the soil, if we use k that will see that will denote the
accumulation of the carbonates. If you will use m that will indicate the cementation or
induration inside the soil, z basically denotes the accumulation of soluble salts, y denotes
accumulation of gypsum, x denotes fragipan which is the layer with high bulk density
and brittleness, v shows plinthite which is high iron red color material.
So, as you can see also n shows accumulation of sodium, o denotes accumulation of iron
aluminum  oxide,  p  denotes  plowing  or  other  disturbances.  Similarly  q  denotes
accumulation of silica, r denotes weather weathered or soft bed rock, s shows illuvial
organic matter and iron aluminum oxide and sc shows presence of sulfides.
So, as you can see all these symbols when you use along with the along with the letter
symbol of master horizon they show different or I mean specific soil property. And, for
describing any soil a soil scientist or a scientist has you know need to have one needs to
have complete understanding of all these important process which are responsible for
soil formation. And by visually seeing any soil profile you can understand; what are the
important soil processes which occurred for the formation of that particular soil.
Remember one thing that all soil will not show the similar sequence of soil horizons, one
soil will show some horizons and another soil will show another set of horizons, some
horizons may not be present in all the soils specifically E horizon which is only present
in specific soils. And, most of the time these horizons differentiation are done in the field
by the experienced soil scientists by using some qualitative diagnostic features, their
color, their structure, their texture as well as some small visual characteristics and in
other words every soil profile gives basically the snapshot of the processes through
which that particular soil forms.
By this we have concluded the soil forming factors as well as soil profile. If you have
any question regarding or any if you need any clarification feel free to email, and I will
be more than happy to answer your queries. And, from the next lecture will be starting a
new topic. And I hope that you have learned something new in these lectures.Thank you very much.