Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 06
Soil Taxonomy and Classification
Hello friends, welcome to this new session of Soil Science and Technology and in this
section we will be starting a new topic that is Soil Classification and Taxonomy. And let
us start this new topic and in this session we will be covering these following concepts.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:39)
First of all we will be covering, why classification is needed and. Secondly, we will be
discussing, what are the different developments of classification systems and then we
will you know discussing different classes and will be finally, giving the description of
individual classes.(Refer Slide Time: 01:06)
So, always it comes to our mind that, why we need a soil classification and taxonomy.
Well,  you  know  that  classification  always  allows  scientists  to  accurately  identify
individual soil wherever they are. And secondly, taxonomy provides basic understanding
about the components of different soils which is necessary for effective decision making
about conversation and sustainable use. 
So, to get a holistic idea about the soil physico-chemical process you need to have a
complete idea about its classification and in which group it belongs, what are their
characteristics and how it differs from other soil groups. So, that is why we need soil
classifications and taxonomy just like any other organism in the world.(Refer Slide Time: 02:10)
So, what are the purposes of soil classification? There are 5 major purposes of soil
classifications. First of all to organize our knowledge, secondly to remember properties
of the objects, thirdly  to bring out and understand relations  among individuals  and
classes of the populations, to learn new relationship among the groups and establish
groups of the objects in a manner useful for practical and applied purposes. So, what I
have told you in the previous slide, it reiterates  the same; that means, you have to
organize your knowledge of soil with the help of this soil classification system and it will
help you to identify and remember the properties of soil. 
And it will help you to understand: what is the relationship among these individual soils
and  what  is  the  classes  of  the  population.  And  it  will  help  you  to  identify  new
relationships among the groups and finally, it will establish groups of the objects in a
manner. So, it will give you some measurable; it will give you idea of a soil in terms of a
soil some measurable properties that is most important.(Refer Slide Time: 03:43)
So, let us see the historical development of soil classification. So, earlier system of soil
classification, there are couple of types; I mean 5 different types are mentioned here.
First of all you know economic classifications, then physical classification, chemical
classification,  geological  classification  and  physiographic  classification.  And  this
economic classification mainly you know, classified the soil based on tax purposes and
other revenue purposes. At this physical classification, basically classified the soil based
on soil  texture  and structure  which have  direct  link to  the soil  productivity.  So, it
basically you know classified the soil based on soil texture which has direct relationship
with soil fertility.
The chemical classification was based on the fact that soil can be divided into groups
based on their chemical characteristics such as acid soils, sodic soils. So, the acidic soils
are those soils which have pH of value of less than 7 whereas, sodic soils are those soils
which are having a high concentration of sodium ions and both of them are problematic
soil we will discuss them in detail later on. So, the chemical classification based on
chemically dividing the soil into certain groups.
Now, geological classification as I have already discussed in my previous lectures you
know of soil formation that based on the location of the parent material, we divided the
soil into you know sedentary soil and transported soil. So, geological classification was
based on the location of parent materials mainly whereas, physiographic classificationwas  based  on  different  you  know  physical  land  forms  where  soil  occurs.  So,
physiographic some of the examples  of the physio you know physiographic classes
where you know mountain soils and so on so forth, plainland soil and so on so forth.
So, all this classification was you know all this each of this classification was based upon
certain criteria. Now problem with certain criteria is, it is not holistic. So, based on the
chemical characteristics you cannot divide all the soil of the world. So, you need to
develop  some  kind  of  holistic  classification  system  which  can  you  know  take  into
account all the soil properties. So, that is why people soil scientist started to think started
to think about what are what could be the most appropriate way to classify the soil.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:40)
So, as far as the soil classification is concerned; the first classification modern in modern
classification is given by a Russian scientist named Dokuchaev, year 1870 and he is
considered as the father of soil pedology and he was the one who first considered soil as
the natural body. Before that soil was considered as a weathered mantle of rocks. So, he
is the first one who established the notion that soil can be considered as a natural body.
Now, as you know that soil is highly heterogeneous into the field and some soil contains
some profile in some soils those profile may not be present in other soils. So, to compare
the soils or to describe the soil, we need to have certain kind of you know certain kind of
measurable entity. So, Dokuchaev first said that soil should be you know soil should beconsidered as a natural body. So, he divided the soil into basic 3 categories; one is called
normal, another is called transitional, another is called abnormal.
Now, normal soil sorry; so, the normal soil now we know this normal soil as Zonal  soils.
So, earlier he given the name normal soil. So, normal soil basically formed due to the
influence  of  climate  and  vegetation.  And transitional  soils  now  they  are  known  as
Intrazonal soils, they are more developed than Azonal. So, before that we more discussed
azonal soil. So, abnormal third category was abnormal soil. Now we now we termed this
abnormal soil as azonal soils now, azonal soils are very poorly developed soils. So, you
cannot see any well defined horizonation in those soils. So, this soil is called abnormal
soil. So, transitional soils are more developed than azonal soils and formation of this as
you  know  transitional  soils  are  controlled  by local  factors  like  parent  material  and
topography;  as  you know these are important  factors  of soil formation  as  we have
already discussed Jenny’s soil formation equation or formula.
So, Dokuchaev first divided these; so, you know Dokuchaev first divided soil into 3
categories and you see that the classification which is proposed by Dokuchaev was based
on climate and vegetation. So, based on so, that is why it is called genetic system of soil
classification and again this approach was based on principle of soil genesis. So, role on
vegetation on climate was very much important and that is why this system is given by
Dokuchaev was known as genetic system of soil classification.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:57)
So, before we go to the next classification system, its needs to you know we need we
need to discuss some of important terms. So, one of this term is called Pedon. Now as I
was already told you that soil is a natural body and in the landscape one soil differs from
other soil in a you know in a because soil is very much heterogeneous. So, we need some
basic unit of soil classification or we need some smallest sampling unit based on that we
can differentiate one soil at a particular point to other soil at a you know to another soil
from other point. So, then this term pedon came.
So, pedon is basically basic unit of soil classification and it is a smallest sampling unit
that displays the full range of properties of which are characteristics of a particular soil
and; obviously, one pedon can be describe by this imaginary three dimensional you
know three dimensional structure. And as you can see all this individual horizon are
present here which you have already discussed in the last class. So, remember that pedon
is a three-dimensional entity and it is the small sampling unit that displays the full range
of properties, characteristic of a particular soil and generally a pedon occupies from you
know generally varies from 1 to 10 square meter of land area.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:06)
So, now let us discuss another important term called Polypedon. So, a soil unit in a
polypedon is basically a soil unit in the landscape which is usually consists of a group of
various similar pedons. So, pedon is singular term where as whether there are several
pedons occurs you know in a very close proximity collectively we call them polypedon.Now  remember  that  polypedon  is  also  known  as  soil  individual.  So,  polypedon  is
sufficient size to be recognize as a landscape component. So, as you can see here a poly
you know this is a landscape and from this landscape we can take out individual section
which  is  basically  a  polypedon  or  soil  individual  which  is  basically  a  you  know
collection of individual pedons. And, from that we can we can magnify or we can
segregate individual pedons; it is a three dimensional body. So, a polypedon or soil
individual is a same kind of thing. However, a polypedon is basically the you know
collection of similar pedons.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:27)
So,  Dokuchaev  gave  the  genetic  system  and  classification  which  was  the  first
classification system, but there were a couple of problem. First of all, it was in Russian
language and people were skeptic about this type of genetic classification.
So, it was first this scientist called Marbut in United States; so USDA, United State
Department of Agriculture who gave who adopted the you know the proposed system of
Dokuchaev and he gave a system called Morphogenetic  system. And this system is based
on both soil morphology and soil genesis. So, that is why it is called morphogenetic
system and he introduced first to who introduce the concept of great soil groups and he
gave  the  classification  based  on  their  own  intrinsic  property  as  I  told  you  it  is  a
morphogenetic  system.  Now  morphology  is  basically  showing  their  own  intrinsic
property. So, these were considered as important aspects for classifying the soil.And remember that the high highest category was divided into two classes he gave the
name  pedalfers  and  pedocals.  Now  pedalfers  are  basically  aluminum  and  iron
accumulation. Those soils which are highly leached soil due to high weathering and you
will see aluminum and iron accumulation is there. So, he divided he gave the name
pedalfers  for  those  soils.  Another  class  he gave  which  is  called  pedocals  which  is
basically you know soils of arid and semi arid region and they show you know the
calcium carbonate accumulation. So, this is called Marbut’s Morphogenetic system, but
this system was based on assumption of soil genesis which could not find place for most
of the soil. So, that is that was the major drawback for Marbut’s morphogenetic  system.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:48)
So, Marbut’s morphogenetics system was later device by Baldwin, Kilogens, Horbs three
scientists later. So, they also modified this genetic system and morphogenetic system.
So, they emphasized the Marbut’s system and returned back to the zonality concept.
Now zonality concept you remember given by the by Dokuchaev in the genetic and soil
classification. So, Baldwin and the associate move back to this zonality concept and they
emphasized on soil as three dimensional body and they introduce the concept of soil
family between great soil group and soil series. We will we will discuss this game later
on and the concept of great soil group was further revised. So, this soil family soil series
and we know great soil group, we will discuss this later on when we will discuss we will
be discussing the soil classification and soil taxonomy.Now, but still this system was also not completely based on soil major able property. So,
all this system starting from Dockuchaev’s genetic system, then Marbut’s morphogenetic
system and then Baldwin and associates’ genetic system all these system they did not
highly rely on measurable soil properties. So, that was the major drawback of all these
systems.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:22)
And  so,  the  Baldwin  and  other  associates,  they  are  classified  the  soil  into  three
categories.  One is zonal or normal soil and normal soil it was the name  given by
Dockuchaev, then intrazonal soils and azonal soils. Now, zonal soils basically the soils
were you can see the in the dominance of climate for soil genesis. So, it is an important
and soil in the you know equilibrium with the climate and vegetation. So, these soils are
called zonal soils or normal soils. Now, azonal soils are too young dry and sandy to have
develop into zonal soils. 
So, these are basically similar to the earlier abnormal soils given by Dockuchaev and
finally, intrazonal soils which are you know we which intermediate between zonal soils
and azonal soils. So, these soils shows the impact of local conditions like topography and
parent material and you know. In these soils salts wetness and limestone bedrocks all
these overwhelms the soil genesis. So, these are three major classes given by Baldwin
and the associates.(Refer Slide Time: 19:59)
And let me show you a couple of examples of these soils. So, as you can see here these
are some examples of zonal soils or normal soils. So, these are examples of Podzol
which develops in the cool climate and in coniferous forest and this is Sierozem which is
desert region soil or desert soils. This is lateritic soil which occurs in red and you know
these are basically red tropical soils and this is called Brunizems which are Tallgrass
prairie soils. 
So, all these soils represent the zonal soils are normal soils which shows the which
shows the influenced of climate for their soil genesis. For example, Podzols shows the
importance of their cool climate and laterite shows the importance of warm and humid
climate and these desert soils or Sierozems shows the impact of this hot and arid climate
and these Brunizems they show the impacts of vegetation. So, all these are showing the
impact of soil you know climate and vegetation.(Refer Slide Time: 21:25)
Now,  let  us  see  some  examples  of  intrazonal  soil.  These  are  some  intrazonal  soil
examples are Rendzinas which are shallow to limestone bedrocks. You can see these are
two examples here and Gley soils are wet soils. Gleying is the property of wet soil and
finally, peat soil which is an organic soil. 
So, these intrazonal soils are dominated by the local categories you can see here the
Rendzinas are dominated by limestone which is the local property and the Gley soils are
dominated by wetness which is another local property and peat soil is dominated by high
organic matter which is also a local property. So, these are the examples of intrazonal
soils.(Refer Slide Time: 22:14)
Finally, let us see the azonal soils or abnormal soils. So, these are too young soils to be
developed into a true zonal soils. For examples, as we can see dry sandy soil as we can
see here and shallow to bedrock soils and alluvial soil. All these are young parent
material as you can see. So, you all these soils you will not see this are shallow to
bedrock soils and this is dry sandy soils. 
So, these soils will not see a proper you know soil horizonation or in other words soil
horizons are not easily visible. So, there is no properly developed master horizons so,
that is why they are called young soils or poorly developed soils. So, these are examples
of azonal soils.(Refer Slide Time: 23:12)
So, what are the major limitations of the genetic system? So, the major limitations were
the two highest categories were defined in genetic terms not on soil properties. And the
great  soil  concept  was  qualitative,  again  this  not  quantitative.  In  definition  more
emphasis was given to properties of virgin soil which got modified by the use and the
nomenclature revolved for the many languages and it was very much difficult to name
the intergrades. 
So, these are some inherent problems or drawback of genetic and that is why there was a
pressing need for development of a more scientific and more you know comprehensive
system of soil classification.(Refer Slide Time: 24:04)
And this  was given in the year 1975 by United State  Development  Department  of
Agriculture in collaboration with National Co-operative Soil Survey under the leadership
of G.D. Smith and this is called soil taxonomy. And this is the most widely used soil
classification system nowadays, which is followed in almost 50 countries. So, this soil
taxonomy again given by United States Department of Agriculture and this called a
comprehensive system of soil classification. Because it has got several properties; first of
all it is system based on the measured or observed soil property.
Earlier the properties were qualitative in nature; however, now this soil taxonomy is
based on measurable soil property. It is based on the surface and sub surface of the
diagnostic horizons and it considers the moisture and temperature regime of the soil. It
considers color, texture, structure; it consider you know it considers organic matters clay,
iron, aluminum oxide, silicate, clays, salts, pH base saturation soil depth. So, it is a
holistic system which considers all the important soil properties for distributing soil into
some homogeneous groups.(Refer Slide Time: 25:28)
So,  if  you  see  a  soil  taxonomy  it  is  a  kind  of  it  is  a  hierarchical  system  of  soil
classification and we will see there are 6 different levels; at the bottom we call it soil
series. At the bottom we call it soil series followed by soil family, followed by sub
group, followed by great group, then suborder and order. So, the lowest category is soil
series and highest category is soil order and as you can see there are 12 soil orders which
you can see in soil we will discuss them later on one by one.
So, similarly just like any organism can be you know classified based on their kingdom,
phylum, class, order, family, genus and species. Any soil can be classified based on these
classes, based on these levels. And, as you can see there are 19,000 series and 18,000
family, 1,400 subgroups, 250 great group suborder and 63 suborder and 12 orders.
So,  any  soil  can  be  differentiated  into  or  any  soil  can  be  grouped  into  using  this
hierarchical system of soil taxonomy. So, let us wrap up here and from in the next
session we will be discussing different properties which this soil taxonomy considers for
classifying the soils. What are the epipedons, what are the endopedons  and what is the
soil moisture regime, what is the soil temperature regimes and then what are different
soil orders and what are their properties. So, we will be discussing them in the next
section.
Thank you.