Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 60
Pedotransfer Functions and Uncertainty of DSM
Welcome friends, to this last lecture of Soil Science and Technology and in this lecture
we will be consider will be covering 2 important topics one is Pedotransfer Function and
Uncertainty associated with digital soil mapping. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:40)
And, in the pedotransfer functions, remember that this pedotransfer function or PTF is a
predictive  function  of  certain  soil  properties  from  other  more  available,  easily  or
routinely  or  cheaply  measured  soil  properties.  For  example,  the  ROSETTA  model
estimates the soil water retention curve from soil texture. And, you know, multiple
regression equations are most commonly followed to develop the PTFs, however, several
advanced  techniques;  example  regression  tree,  artificial  neural  network,  nearest
neighbourhood, etcetera have been also used.
So, in a nutshell this pedotransfer function is basically a mathematical relationship where
we try to predict a certain soil property. For example, most of the time we predict
different types of soil hydraulic properties; sometime we predict soil organic carbon and
other properties from more available, easily, routinely, cheaply measured property. Forexample we try to measure the organic carbon based on the soil clay and texture analysis
and  also  the  other  properties  which  are  easily  measured  then  we fit  a  relationship
regression relationship then it is called the pedotransfer function.
And so, you know,  for  this  fitting  regression  relationship  we can  use either  linear
regression techniques we have discussed about the simple linear regression, multiple
linear regression and then we can also use some advanced method like artificial neural
network, nearest neighbourhood method etcetera.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:12)
So, another important term is class pedotransfer functions and continuous pedotransfer
functions. Remember within pedotransfer functions subdivision is made between class
pedotransfer  functions  and  continuous  pedotransfer  function.  Class  pedotransfer
functions are based on assumption that similar soil exhibit similar hydraulic properties
and the pedotransfer functions are developed for a particular soil group such as soil
texture.
And continuous pedotransfer function provides continuous varying estimate of hydraulic
properties  using  actually  measured  percentage  of  particle  size  distribution,  organic
carbon content and bulk density across different soil property across soil group.
So, again this class PTFs based on we generally assume that similar soil will exhibit
similar  hydraulic  properties  and  then  we  develop  the  pedotransfer  functions  for  aparticular soil groups such as soil texture. For example, we assume that, you know,
clayey soil will produce clayey soil will exhibit similar hydraulic properties then we fix a
pedotransfer function or produce a pedotransfer function for that clayey group. So, this is
called class PTFs.
In case of continuous PTF we disregard this broad classes we actually, you know, we
take, you know, this PTFs we create the PTF provides continuously varying estimates of
hydraulic  properties  using actually  measured  percentage  of particle  size  distribution
organic content. So, we cover we consider all the values across different soil group and
then we create a universal model. 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:47)
Now, class PTFs and continuous PTFs are also for, you know, it is also you need to
remember that for developing the class PTFs different groups of soils are defined. Like
soil texture, is a most widely used grouping criteria for developing the class PTFs. And
this  Franzmeier  in  1991,  shows  that  grouping  soil  by  genetic  horizons  and  parent
material is preferable to growing to grouping by texture in determining the gravimetric
water content.
We will be discussing, mostly focus on the soil hydraulic property. So, in this case you
can see that this scientist showed that the grouping by soil by genetic horizons and parent
material is preferable to grouping by texture in determining gravimetric water content at
minus 33 to minus 1500 kilo Pascal. And Pachepsky et al. in 1996 also grouped soilsusing genetic classification and Wosten et al. grouped soil based on an assessment of the
functional behavior of different horizons. For example, a grouping by mineralogy and
genesis of soil before developing PTF also suggested by Puckett et al.
So, you see that different scientist have proposed different methods for producing this
class PTFs and they have differentiated, you know, the soil into different classes based
on either genetic horizons or parent materials and, you know, genetic classification and
functional behavior of different horizons and by mineralogy apart from the soil texture
broad classes. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:27)
Now, this scientist Teitje and Tapkenhenrichs classified PTFs, you know, based on the
point, parametric and semi-physical estimation method. Point estimation method follows
a direct approach by estimating water content at pre-determined pressure heads and
estimating hydraulic conductivity at saturation. Although the point estimation methods
are simple in approach, but have disadvantage of large number of regression equation
required for full characterization of water retention curve.
So, again this point estimation methods follow a direct approach by estimating water
contents  and predetermined  pressure  heads  and estimating  hydraulic  conductivity  at
saturation.(Refer Slide Time: 06:15)
So, another method is parametric method. So, parametric method estimate the parameter
of water retention or conductivity functions. So, in this approach the parameters of water
retention or conductivity function are first optimized from measured water retention or
hydraulic conductivity data. And among available water retention functions the model
proposed  by  van  Genuchten  was  mostly  used  by  several  researchers  to  develop
parametric PTFs. So, this is about the parametric PTFs. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:49)
And, another one is the semi-physical approach. Now, semi-physical methods use the
shape similarity concept between cumulative particle size distributions with soil water
retention characteristics and these models first translate particle size distribution into an
equivalent pore-size distribution model which in turn related to distribution of water
contents and associated pressure heads.
And in this approach, the measured water retention curve is described with analytical
functions. Based on this, a pore-size distribution is derived, which in turn, is used to
predict hydraulic conductivity function assuming water flow through cylindrical soil
pores. So, this is about the semi-physical approach.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:31)
Now, predictor variables in PTFs, this is very important. You may ask ok, what are the
predictor important predictor variables in PTFs? Typically PTFs are developed with
basic soil properties at input variables which you can easily quantify; for example, sand,
silt, clay, organic carbon contents, etcetera. Sometime topographic features as derived
from digital elevation model like slope, curvature, topographic wetness index, etcetera
and also vegetation index like Normalized Difference Vegetation Index or NDVI are also
considered as predictor variables in PTFs. 
So, apart from this  sand, silt,  clay,  organic  carbon content,  we also use  this  slope
characteristics as what we extract from digital elevation model I have already told you in
the overview of digital soil mapping that this, you know, this DEM can be used todeduce several topographic as well as, you know, several types of topographic features
and this topographic features like slope, curvature, topographical wetness index we can
generate from DEM. And we also can use them for as predictor in this pedotransfer
function and also vegetation index. This normalized difference vegetation index we can
get it from remote sensing data. 
And,  you  know,  also  we  can  get  soil  spectral  signatures  and  derived  index  from
measured spectral data. We have already discussed about the soil spectral signatures in
our previous week of lectures where we when we discussed about diffuse reflectance
spectroscopy and in the diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, I showed you how we use the
individual reflectance values as a predictor for predicting a soil particular soil property
and this type of function is also known as spectro transfer function. So, the in the spectro
transfer function we basically try to predict a soil property based on numerous, you
know, predictors where for example, here you can see m 1 x 1, m 2 x 2 plus m 3 x 3 up
to m n x n and here x 1, x 2, x 3 and x n are considered as individual reflectance values.
In our case, in case of Diffused Reflectance Spectroscopy or DRS in case of visible to
near infrared, DRS this x 1 to x n will vary from 350 nanometer to 2500 nanometer for
individual wavelengths we will get the reflectance values and we will fit them into this
regression model and ultimately we will be trying to predict a particular soil property say
soil organic carbon and these function we call it spectrotransfer function.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:40)
So, let us see some example of pedotransfer function. here you can see the continuous
pedotransfer function developed by this Wosten et al in 2001 from this HYPRES data
database where theta s is a model parameter and then alpha n, l and k are that are, you
know, are the transformed model parameters in the Mualem van Genuchten equations, C
is the percentage of clay, S is the percentage of silt. And then, you know, percentage of
silt  that  is  percentage  between  2  micrometer  to  50  micrometer,  organic  matter  is
percentage of organic matter, D is the bulk density and topsoil and subsoil are qualitative
variables having the values of 1 and 0; that means, they have coded them topsoil and
subsoil and ln is a natural logarithm. 
So, you can see they are predicting these theta s by using this formula. So, and they are
getting an R square values of 0.6 0.76. And also they have modeled this alpha asterisk
alpha by using this model, so, this is another pedotransfer model, this is another pedo,
two different pedotransfer model and here they are getting an R square values of 0.20.
And you can see in this pedotransfer model they have incorporated all different variables
which they mentioned here as predictors and ultimately they have generated a particular
model and this called the actual pedotransfer model or pedotransfer function.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:12)
Another pedotransfer function example here you can see Fernandez-Ugalde and Troth in
2017. So, they have created  different  pedotransfer model for quantifying  their, you
know, soil organic carbon you can see in different condition without when they are didnot  considered  with  a  bulk  density  they  have  created  a  pedotransfer  function;  by
considering the bulk density they have created another pedotransfer function and then
Grassland non permanent arable land they have created this pedotransfer function, with
bulk density they have created this pedotransfer function.
So, for different a land used land cover types they have created two pedotransfer function
without bulk without considering the bulk density and with considering the bulk density.
So, these are two pedotransfer functions and for permanent arable land they have created
one  pedotransfer  function  without  considering  the  bulk  density.  And  these  are  the
number of samples and you can see quality of the fit is basically calculated based on the
R square values or coefficient of determination values. Here, you know, it varies from
0.62 0.94, 0.63, 0.77 to 0.86.
So, these are some examples of pedotransfer functions for predicting organic carbon in
different land cover by considering bulk density or without considering the bulk density
of the soil. So, we have covered this pedotransfer function. The final topic we will
discuss is accuracy and uncertainty of digital soil mapping.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:46)
So, we have already cover the accuracy of digital soil mapping in our previous lectures
where we, you know, when we discussed the validation of different types of models and
we  discussed  about  RMSE,  we  discussed  about  Lin’s  concordance  correlation
coefficient, then bias and all this things. So, let us talk about the uncertainty of digital soil map. One of the best, you know, one of
the major advantage of digital soil mapping is digital soil mapping not only produce the
digital soil map of spatial variable and their spatial variability map, they also produce
side by side the associated uncertainty map. So, apart from accuracy the uncertainty of
digital soil map is also very important which indicates the reliability of the product.
Uncertainty  of  an  estimate  generally  indicates  the  confidence  interval  at  a  certain
significance level and it is quantified by standard error of mean.
So, in the kriging procedure, estimates are given by mean prediction along with its
variance which is also known as the kriging variance. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:54)
So, it is to be uncertain. So, it is to be noted here that in the kriging procedure kriging
variance is targeted to be minimum while estimating soil attributes at unknown location.
Therefore, kriging estimates are always associated with kriging variance and most time
we are neglecting it. So, an estimate may be highly accurate, but maybe less uncertain
which means that the estimated value is very close to observed value, but the confidence
interval of the estimate is very large.
So, this is the practical implication of a particular situation. Again, when an estimate
maybe highly accurate, but it is less uncertain which means that the estimated value is
very close to observed value, but the confidence interval of the estimate is very large. (Refer Slide Time: 15:42)
For example, let us see one example. Sand content of, you know, sand content estimate
for a particular grid point of a digital soil map, let us see it is 70 percent with the
variance  of estimate of 15 percent. Thus the 95 percent confidence interval of this
estimate will be 70 plus minus 1.96 plus standard deviation of 15 because, here we are
seeing  15 percent.  So, basically  here  variance  or sigma  square  is  15. So,  standard
deviation will be root 15. So, basically we are getting an interval, 95 percent confidence
interval, you know, the standard normal variance value at 95 percent confidence interval
1.96 multiplied by this sigma, so, ultimately 70 plus minus 7.6.
So, it indicates that out of 100 times 95 times the estimate will be in between the range of
62.4 to 77.6 and 5 times it may be outside the above range. Therefore, if the range is
quite high or the interval is large the estimate is highly uncertain. Again, if the range is
quite high or the interval is large as you have seen our as we have discussed in our last
slide the estimate is highly uncertain. Therefore, one should be careful before presenting
the digital soil map products and it is always advisable to produce estimate map along
with a standard deviation map or variance map. So, that, you know, the client maybe
aware or should be aware of the related uncertainty of the products of DSM. (Refer Slide Time: 17:36)
So, let us see some examples of, you know, uncertainty levels using different methods of
digital soil mapping. So, it is a soil pH prediction and prediction limits using a universal
kriging model. So, we are using a universal kriging model to produce the prediction of,
you know, prediction of particular, you know, soil property here soil organic carbon and
we are also having the 90 percent lower prediction limit and 90 percent upper prediction
limit and this is basically it is a difference between the 90 percent upper prediction limit
and lower prediction limit. So, it is a prediction limit range which is the difference
between these two ranges.
So, not only we are getting the prediction value, but also we are getting the prediction
limit range also. So, this is an example where we used the universal kriging model.(Refer Slide Time: 18:35)
Another  example;  so,  soil  pH  prediction  and  prediction  limit  using  bootstrapping
method. Now, bootstrapping is a well known re-sampling technique, there is essence or
draws a prefix number of times with replacement from the original training samples to
construct a new set of samples that approximates the original sample.
So, for example, if there are, you know, ten samples 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and we are
drawing a bootstrap sample consisting of four samples. So, we can take 100 bootstrap
sample which consists of each and each bootstraps sample may consist of 4 samples. So,
when  we  draw  the  samples  without  replacement,  it  is  very  important  resampling
technique that is essence draw prefix number with replacement sorry, with replacement
from the original training sample then we call it bootstrapping.
For example, if there are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and we are taking three sample as a
bootstrap sample. So, in the first we can take 1, 5, 6. Randomly in the second we can
take 1, 1, 5 again. So, you are seeing we are doing with replacement sampling. So, that is
called bootstrapping. So, we can take number of bootstrap samples and we can estimate
the  original  sample,  approximate  the  original  sample  based  on  this  bootstrapping
samples.  So,  bootstrapping  uses  the  original  samples  as  a  proxy  to  estimate  the
distribution of the actual population. So, hence bootstrapping is said to model inference
of a population from sample data. (Refer Slide Time: 20:36)
So, let us see one example that bootstrapping is used to create the digital soil map. You
can see here the digital soil map is created. Actually these are digital soil map I am sorry
these are the digital soil map of soil pH and this soil pH map is created you can see the
ranges from 2 to 14. This soil pH map is created using the bootstrapping and again this is
a original prediction and this has 90 percent lower confidence limit and 90 percent upper
confidence limit and this is the prediction limit range. So, this is an example of, you
know, producing the estimate as well as the uncertainty using bootstrapping method.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:18)
This is another example of producing the digital soil map of pH and they are related and
they are; and their associated prediction limit by Cubist based regression kriging where
in the regression kriging we have use the cubist model as a deterministic model and
kriging with residuals. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:42)
So, guys I have finished all this uncertainty and let us wrap up this digital soil mapping
and associated things I am this will be this is our last slide. And thank you for being with
me for this in this journey of this course and we have covered several aspects of soil and
I must mention in this slide you can see I must mention the special acknowledgement to
my students without whom this course would not be possible. 
They have constantly helped me to create the materials and they are also taking care of
the other things and Miss Swetha and Miss Swagata they are my PhD students and they
helped me for creating different slides and also, you know, creating the assignments and
creating the assignments.
So, I hope that this course was helpful for you, you have learned something new and you
have we have we tried to cover all the basic aspects of soil. Obviously, we could not
cover all the aspects of soil because of time limitation, but I tried to give the basic
overview of the important aspects of soil and you have learned those things. Obviously, I
would also encourage you to go ahead and discuss and consult different books you know
several books are available and I have shown you couple of reference books also whichmight be very much helpful if you want to gather a more detail information about soil
science.
And I hope that you have enjoyed this course and if you have any queries regarding the
aspects of soil which I have covered or any other aspects regarding the soil please feel
free to e-mail me and I will be more than happy to answer your queries. And thank you
very much for taking this course and I hope all the best to your future endeavors.
Thank you guys.