Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chackraborty
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 07
Soil Taxonomy and Classification (Contd.)
Welcome friends to this new session of a Soil Science and Technology. And in this
session we will continue the Soil Taxonomy and Classification. And I will you know we
will discuss different aspects of soil taxonomy what are the important factors it considers
for classifying the soils. And then we will be discussing what are the important surface
soil features, sub surface soil features and then what is soil moisture regime and what is
soil temperature regime and so on so forth. So, let us start from where we left in the last
lecture.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:09)
So, in the last lecture, we discuss about different you know hierarchy of the soil you
know taxonomy. So, as I have told you that soil taxonomy is basically combination of six
different levels starting from series family, subgroup, great group, suborder and order.
And we can classify any soil using this hierarchical system.
So, this you know this is the major or stark difference from other or previously described
genetic and morphogenetic system that you can describe or you can classify any soil
based on measurable soil properties. Just like you can classify some people a group ofpeople into several classes based on their hair colour based on their height. So, these are
measurable  soil  properties.  Similarly,  soil  taxonomy  uses  some  measurable  soil
properties to classify soils. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:25)
So, what are the major features of soil taxonomy? Well, soil classes were defined in
terms of present soil you know present soil properties. And all such properties was
considered were considered which affect soil genesis or the outcome soil genesis. So, in
this system it is not neglecting soil genesis, it is also considering soil genesis, but in
terms of some measurable soil properties. And the nomenclature were made using Greek
and Latin words. And a new category called subgroup was then added to define the
central concept of the great groups. And remember that this system is much easier to
remember than other than earlier genetic and morphogenetic systems. (Refer Slide Time: 03:13)
So, before discussing the orders let us first discuss the important diagnostic horizons.
Remember that soils are described in terms of some visible and measurable properties,
and also based on the presence or absence of certain features in their profile. So, based
on certain characteristics their sub their surface horizons or subsurface horizons are
differentiated. And we will discuss them one by one. 
So, diagnostic horizons are basically of two types; one is called surface horizon, another
is sub surface horizon. Another name of surface horizon is called epipedon; and the other
name of subsurface horizon is endopedon. So, there are 8 epipedons, and 20 endopedons,
each  of  them  differing  in  their  own  characteristics.  And  based  on  whether  those
epipedons or endopedons are present in a particular type of soil, we classify them using
the soil taxonomy, so that is the use of these diagnostic horizons. So, let us see them one
by one.(Refer Slide Time: 04:49)
So, as you can see here I have listed here diagnostics surface horizons or epipedons. You
can see there are 8 different diagnostic surface horizons mollic, umbric, ochric, folistic,
histic, melanic, plaggen, and anthropic, among these, these mollic umbric and ochric are
highlight at them in red because they are found in more frequency than others. So, let us
discuss them one by one to know their individual properties. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:29)
So, let us start with the mollic epipedon. So, this is the picture of a mollic epipedon the
most diagnostic feature of this mollic epipedon is dark coloured and is a thick layer. So,you will see that there is a dark coloured thick surface layer; obviously, that is a mollic
epipedon. So, it must contains more than 1 percent of organic matter. And it should be
dark in colour. And its structure will discuss structure in the next classes structure should
be neither massive nor hard.
And it should have a base saturation greater than 50 percent that means base saturation
means it should have the dominance of basic cations like sodium, potassium, calcium
and magnesium should be more than 50 percent or percent, base saturation should be
more than 50 percent. The other way to represent percent base saturation is the it is the
percentage of basic cations among all the cations which are present in the soil. So, when
the percent of base saturation goes beyond 50 that is an important feature of mollic
epipedon. And this mollic epipedon remains moist for more than 3 months of a year. So,
this is an example of a mollic epipedon. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:05)
Let us see what is the next. The next one is called umbric epipedon. Now, umbric
epipedon is also similar to mollic but with less than 50 percent of base situation. It is also
looks like mollic, it is a dark colour thick. And it is being moist for more than 9 months
per year, so that is the difference between mollic and umbric. (Refer Slide Time: 07:27)
Third one is ochric; now, remember that this ochric epipedon is light in colour as you can
see it is you know light in colour. And it contains less than 1 percent of organic matter;
obviously, when there is in high organic matter there will be dark in color. So, it contains
less than 1 percent of organic matter it is hard or very hard when dry and it do not qualify
for any other horizon. So, this is why it is called ochric epipedon. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:59)
Folistic epipedon, now folistic epipedon is basically layer with high organic matter as
saturated with water for less than 30 days as you can see. So, it contains high amount oforganic matter. And it has low bulk density of less than 0.1 gram per cc or mega gram
per meter cube or organic carbon of 8 to 16 percent depending on the clay content. So,
this is folistic epipedon.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:29)
 Another is histic epipedon. As the name suggest histic comes from tissue so, it is
organic in nature. So, it contains more than 20 to 30 percent. Remember that it has a high
content of organic matter. So, it contains 20 to 30 percent greater than 20 to 30 percent of
organic matter depending on the clay and greater than 30 days water saturated. So, it
remains saturated for more than 30 days period. And it is less than 30 centimeter thick if
drained and 45 centimeter thick if not drained. So, these are the characteristics of historic
epipedon again it is dark in colour it contains huge amount of organic matter. (Refer Slide Time: 09:17)
The next one is called melanic epipedon. And melanic epipedon is again a thick black
horizon with high organic carbon which is greater than 6 percent. And it is generally
found in andic soil originally associated with andic properties that means, in volcanic
region or volcanic soil so, we will see that. So, this is called melanic epipedon. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:41)
The next one is called plaggen epipedon. The plaggen epipedon is a man made horizon
which is more than 50 centimeter thick and it contains greater than 0.6 percent of organicmatter. And it remains moist for 3 months. As you can see here it is a plaggen epipedon,
and obviously, this plaggen epipedon is you know it is made due to human interventions.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:13)
Now, the next one is called anthropic epipedon. Now, anthropic epipedon is also similar
in colour of that mollic or umbric so, it is dark in colour. And remember that this
anthropic  epipedon  is  developed  by human or altered  or transported  materials  with
artefacts and human litters. So, again it is kind of anthropogenic in nature and that is why
it is called anthropic, the name itself suggests due to the human interventions. So, this
surface horizon basically froms due to human alteration or transportation of materials
with artefacts and human litters. So, this is called anthropic epipedon. And remember
that this anthropic epipedon is less than 25 centimeter in thickness. So, we have covered
the anthropic epipedon.(Refer Slide Time: 11:17)
Let us see what how we can segregate this histic mollic and umbric and ochric. So, as
you see here in this graph, let us see the parent material is the starting point of soil
formation we already know that. And in the y-axis, we are putting the organic matter
accumulation. So, as the soil will develop from the parent material, after certain period of
time when the vegetation is established and after a certain period of time you can see
here t max is given 3000 years.
So, you will see the organic matter accumulation will continuously increase and it will
reach a plateau. And at this time we will be calling this is a mollic or umbric as you
know both of them are fine organic matter. However, histic epipedon which contains
more than 20 to 30 percent of organic matter will be showing more organic matter
accumulation. And ochric which is basically we know light colour epipedon, will show
less amount of organic matter, so that is how I mean this mollic and umbric stand in
between histic and ochric epipedon. So, these graphs give you in basic idea about how
we can segregate this ochric when histic from mollic and umbric. And all of these are
considered as important surface soil horizons based on which soil taxonomy differentiate
or classify different soils. (Refer Slide Time: 12:59)
Now, let us see what the diagnostic subsurface horizons are. We have covered surface
horizons  or  epipedons.  Now,  let  us  see  the  subsurface  horizons.  These  subsurface
horizons the other name of the subsurface horizon is endopedons. And remember that
these  endopedons  are  developed  based  on  the  formation,  translocation  and
transformation of clays, organic matter and oxides. So, when clay, organic matter and
oxide, translocate from one part of the soil to another part and when it transform from
one you know one form to other form, then they create this diagnostic subsurface horizon
or endopedons. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:51)
So, there are 20 endopedons; I have given here names. So, starting from agric, then albic,
then anhydritic, then argillic, calcic, cambic, duripan, fragipan, glossic, gypsic, kandic,
nitric, oxic, petrocalcic, petrogypsic, placic, salic, sombric, spodic, sulfuric, all these are
important  subsurface  horizons  or  endopedons.  Now,  remember  that  a  considerable
amount of subsurface horizon occurs due to illuviation or deposit of eluviated materials
from upper horizon to lower horizons which I have already covered in our soil formation
lecture. So, I have highlighted and red texted these albic, argillic, kandic, oxic and
spodic, because they occur in the nature in higher frequency. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:03)
So, let us discuss them one by one. So, let us first see what is agric horizon? Now, agric
horizon is basically the horizon which forms due to you know which forms under the
plough layer as dark lamellae. So, obviously, this agric horizon occurs due to the plough
action and it occurs below the plough layer as you can see. So, it is an important
subsurface horizon or edopedon which occurs due to human action.(Refer Slide Time: 15:39)
Second is albic horizon; now, the albic horizon is basically an eluvial horizon. Now, I
have already told you what is eluviations? Eluviation is movement of clay and other
materials from upper part of the soil profile to relatively lower part of the soil profile. So,
this is called eluviations and this eluviation this albic horizon should eluvial horizon and
it is greater than 1 centimeter theme thickness and formed by light colour sand and silt.
So, as we can see this is an example of this subsurface albic horizon and here we are
putting in the x axis C E C and in the y axis we are putting the depth of centimeter. So,
obviously,  at  the  top  there  will  be  ochric  epipedon  followed  by  albic  horizon,  so
obviously,  below  the  ochric  horizon  there  is  an  albic  horizon  followed  by  kandic
horizons.  So,  again  all  we  know  albic  horizon  is  an  important  eluvial  horizon  or
subsurface horizon. (Refer Slide Time: 17:03)
Now, next one is called anhydratic horizon. This horizon basically is greater than 15
centimeter in thickness and with 5 percent or more calcium sulphate anhydrite. The other
name of calcium sulphate, it is anhydrite. So, this horizon basically contains more than 5
percent of calcium sulphate. And it shows different colour hue, chroma and values. Its
hue is 5 y which is a domical spectral colour. Chroma is 1 or 2 which is purity of the
colour, and value is 7 or 8 which is the degree of darkness or lightness. So, this is an
example of anhydritic horizons. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:47)
The next one is call argillic horizon, and this is very important one. Argillic horizon is
basically you can see in B horizon. Now, it is clay enriched remember that it is enriched
in clay. So, clay enriched B horizon with clay skins or clay films. And clay content
varies with the clay of the layer above. And obviously, it is greater than 15 centimeter
thick and at least 1 by 10th of upper horizon depending on the texture. So, in this picture,
obviously, the lowermost part is argillic horizon which shows higher accumulation of
clay which has been eluviated from upper horizons. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:37)
So, illuviation of clay into argillic horizon, it again can be differentiated into three sub
into this argillic horizon can be further differentiated into three subsurface horizons. One
is called natric horizon; another is glossic horizon; another is kandic horizon.
Now, this  natric  horizon  is  basically  composed  of illuvial  clay, but  with a sodium
enrichment. When there will be illuviation of clay and simultaneously there will be
degradation, we will call it glossic endopedons. And finally, when there will be argillic
horizon, but with oxide clays then will term it as kandic horizon. So, these in other
words,  these  natric  horizon,  glossic  horizon  and  kandic  horizon  occurs  from  the
illuviation of the clay or this is basically these three subsurface horizons or endopedons
or modifications of argillic horizon. (Refer Slide Time: 20:05)
Now,  next  is  calcic  horizon;  calcic  horizon  basically  shows  illuviation  of  calcium
carbonate as the name suggest. It is more than 15 centimeter in thickness and it is
basically  cemented.  And  it  contains  15  percent  or  more  calcium  carbonate.  And  it
contains 5 percent or more calcium carbonate than that of underlying layer. As you can
see the name you know of this in this soil profile, this layer is basically the calcic horizon
and it is white in colour. And this is very important subsurface horizon. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:51)
So, cambic horizon; cambic horizon is basically a colour or structural B horizon formed
due to physical movement or chemical weathering. And it is generally greater than 15
centimeter in thickness. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:03)
The next is called duripan; duripan is again a subsurface horizon which is cemented by
silica and it is air dry peds or air dry soil which basically do not slake in water, but in hot
potassium hydroxide. So, you will see that this is duripan and these are highly cemented
by silica. And these are very dry and they do not slake in water, but they can be you
know they can be slaked in the contact of a potassium hydroxide. (Refer Slide Time: 21:55)
Another one is called fragipan. Now, fragipan is again greater than 15 centimeter in
thickness and it is brittle when moist and hard when dry. And air dry fragment generally
slake in water. So, this is an example, this is basically an example of fragipan.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:11)
The next one is glossic horizon. As I have already told you it a modification of the
glossic horizon as we have seen in the previous thing. It is a degraded argillic horizon.
So, similarly this glossic horizon is a remnant of argillic or kandic horizon from whichclay and free iron oxide were removed. So, again it is a modification of argillic horizon
and generally it is greater than 5 centimeter in thickness. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:49)
The next one is called gypsic horizon, obviously, it is greater than 15 centimeter in
thickness and shows the accumulation of gypsum. And this horizon basically contains
higher gypsum content, 5 percent more gypsum content than that of the under lying soil
horizons. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:09)
Now, kandic horizon remember that the kandic horizon is mainly composed our low
activity clays or in other words this kandic horizon is a modification of argillic horizon.
So,  it  is  basically  argillic  horizon  with  or  without  clay  skins.  And  it  is  basically
dominated by low activity clays. And it has a cation exchange capacity of less than 16,
and effective cation exchange capacity of less than 12 centimole proton per kg of clay. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:49)
So, it can be found basically red and lateritic soil and it is dominated by low activity
clays. Natric horizon; natric horizon is an argillic horizon which shows the dominance of
sodium with some prismatic and columnar structures, we will discussed structure later
on. And it contains exchangeable sodium percentage greater than 15. So, this is an
important property. And it contains more exchangeable sodium and magnesium than that
of calcium. So, as you can see this is you know this is a natric horizon which is showing
accumulation of sodium and these are having columnar structure.(Refer Slide Time: 24:27)
 Oxic horizon; oxic horizon is basically greater than 30 centimeter in thickness, and high
content of low charge minerals. And it has got CEC and ECEC less than 16 and 12
centimole proton per kg of clay, respectively. And it contains no argillic horizon. And it
contains less than 10 percent weatherable mineral in fine sand. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:57)
Next one is petrocalcic horizon; it is basically a hard greater than 10 centimeter thick
calcic horizon. And due to the presence of this subsurface horizon root cannot root of theplants cannot penetrate into the soil. So, this is bad or this is harmful for proper growth
of the plant. So, this is called petrocalcic horizons.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:19)
 Another is petrogypsic as the name suggests again it is strongly cemented greater than 5
millimeter thick gypsum horizon. And it is similar to petrocalcic horizons instead that is
it is dominated by gypsum. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:33)
Placic horizon, it is again a very hard pan and it is very hard pan and cemented by iron
and manganese. So, placic horizon is basically dominated by iron and manganese.(Refer Slide Time: 25:47)
Salic  horizon  is  the  name  suggested  it  is  a  salt  enriched  horizon  which  is  having
thickness of greater than 15 centimeter. And it has electrical conductivity of saturation
extract greater than 30 dS per meter 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:03)
So, sombric horizon it is an illuvial humus horizon with colour and base saturation of
umbric horizon. If you remember the umbric horizon it is dark in colour, but base
saturation is low. So, similarly the sombric horizon is an illuvial humus horizon with
colour and base saturation of umbric epipedon.(Refer Slide Time: 26:23)
 Finally, spodic horizon which is an illuvial horizon of free sesquioxide and organic
matter sesquioxide and is basically combination of iron oxides and aluminium oxides.
And this spodic horizon basically shows you know accumulation of iron oxides and
aluminium oxides and organic matter. And it contains greater than 85 percent spodic
material. And it is generally greater than 2.5 centimeter in thickness.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:53)
Sulfuric horizon shows accumulation of sulfur minerals due to the sea water induration.
In India, in Kerala region, we will find this type of sulfuric horizon in Kari or Pokkali
soils and the p H of the soils is very low which is less than 3.5.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:09)
So, in a nut shell, you can see in this picture different surface and subsurface horizons.
Here you can see surface ochric epipedon, and subsurface albic horizon, spodic horizon,
and below that there are some you know parent material and glacial outwash. So, in this
session, you got an idea about what are the important surface diagnostic horizons and
subsurface diagnostic horizons. So, in the next session, we will be discussing about soil
moisture regime, soil temperature regime and 12 different soil orders.
Thank you very much.