Soil Science and Technology
Prof. Somsubhra Chakraborty
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 09
Soil Orders, Soil Colour and Texture
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:17)
Welcome friends, in this lecture of Soil Science and Technology. And, today we will be
finishing, will try to finish the soil classification. So, we will start from the slide where
we left in the last lecture. So, in the last lecture, we were talking about different you
know vertisols and what are the important characteristics of vertisols.
So, we discussed that vertisols basically forms wide cracks during the dry season and
you know they swell during the wet season. So, these properties called swelling and
shrinkage property and these are very important property as per as the vertisol properties
are concerned. Now, another important feature is called slickenslide and let us see what
is slickenslide.(Refer Slide Time: 01:12)
Now, as I have told you during the dry season in the vertisol they develop these larger
cracks and in this larger cracks the surface soil particles they generally move due to
different types of wind actions or different types of animal actions and then the sill this
cracks.
Now, during the during the rainy season or during the wet season when water moves
down to this cracks and when they move down to the cracks and  fill this cracks these
cracks swell and as a result of swelling there will be soil volume increase. So, since the
soil volumes increases this excessive soil tries to go in this way and it produces the
pressure from both the sides and tries to protrude out.
And, as a result of that there will be some features oblique features these are these are
present in oblique angles and we call it slicken slide. And, these excessive due to the
ceiling action of water in the vertisol, the excessive volume due to the excess volume of
the soil the excess soil material tries to move out in two opposite directions. And as a
result of that in the BSS horizons there will be some shiny characteristics and this shiny
features which are present in oblique angles are called slicken slides and as a result of
this type of clay movement and the ceiling action there will be some ephemeral lakes
which are form at the surface we call it gilgai relief.So, swelling and shrinkage property, slicken slide this gilgai micro relief are important
features of vertisols and you will see this features when you visit this particular type of
soils specifically the black cotton soil of Maharashtra.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:00)
Obviously, you can see the slickenslide features  these are shiny features present in
vertisols.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:09)
Now, let us see what is oxisols. Oxisols are deeply weathered soils of humid tropics with
you  know  with  brick  red  color  and  basically  they  are  dominated  by  kaolinite  andsesquioxide  you  know  the  sesquioxide  basically  is  the  combination  of  iron  and
aluminium oxides and basically we do not see this type of soils very much in India.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:32)
The another important soil is called ultisols. So, now, it is basically highly weathered soil
which are base poor and they generally occur in humid tropical climate where higher
temperature  rainfall  is  there  and  obviously,  as  I  have  told  you  it  shows  basically
advanced stages of weathering and it occurs in southern India and north eastern regions
of India.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:57)
Alfisols: alfisols is the another important soil order which is widely distributed in India
and alfisols  contains  argillic horizon which you know you can see there is a clear
evidence of illuviation and eluviation. And, as you can see in this in this soil there is a
clear eluvial horizon and clear illuvial horizon where illuviation of clay; that means,
movement and deposition of clay at bottom portion of the profile you know is quite
evident and these soils are more weathered than inceptisols, but less than the ultisols and
as I have already told you there widely distributed in Indian condition.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:50)
So, what is the next one? The next one is called spodosols. The spodosols we know cool
humid climate they generally form in cool humid climate with silicious parent materials.
They show basically an illuvial horizon of sesquioxide and humus formed under a wood
ash colored eluvial E horizon. Now, you can see clearly evident that is an eluvial E
horizon wood ash colored and because they are characterize by the spodic horizon and
this spodic horizon is showing  all the iron and aluminium oxide a move downwards
living there only the silicious materials.
So, that is why they are forming this wood ash color horizon or eluvial horizon and they
are generally not reported in India.(Refer Slide Time: 06:38)
Mollisols: mollisols are characterized by the presence of mollic epipedon. They are dark
coloured  and  they  are  formed  they  are  generally  formed  in  grassland  and  forest
vegetation area. And, India you will see that this type of soils are basically present in
Terai region of Uttarakhand and some other states.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:58)
Now, since we are covered the orders let us see what are the suborders. Now, soil within
each order are grouped into suborders on the basis of soil properties that reflect major
environment controls on current weather forming processes. So, you will see whetherthere are specific you know so, specific weather impact or not that can be found from the
suborders name.
Now,  many  suborders  are  indicative  of  the  moisture  regime  or  less  frequently  the
temperature regime under which the soils are formed.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:41)
Let us see some examples. For example, you can see here I have given here lists the table
which  shows  different  formative  element  and  different  connotations  of  formatting
element. For example, if we use alb that basically shows presence of an albic horizon
which you know it is a bleached eluvial horizon which I have already told you. For
example,  if you if you take fibr which shows which is derived from the fiber and
basically it shows the least decomposed stage of organic matter.
So, let us take you know ud which comes from humid and it shows the influence of
humid climate. So, so on so forth you can see based on different formative elements, it is
quite  clear  what  are  the  different  environmental  conditions  which  are prevalent  for
forming that particular soil type.
Now, I have shown here one example  let  us  take in example  of inceptisols.  Now,
remember  that in case of inceptisols  whenever we are talking about inceptisols  the
formative element is ept. So, when we will see something like ept that they basicallyshows inceptisols. So, these ept is basically representing the major soil order and before
the ept you can see these formative elements a q u, c r y g e l, u d, u s t, and x e r.
Now, a q u is basically showing wet condition, cry c r y basically showing very cold
condition gel you know gellic parent material; that means, in the permafrost condition.
So, it is permafrost you know it is showing in permafrost characteristics, u d e is humid
climate which is shown you know humid influence I mean humid climate influence, u s t
is semiarid. So, these formative elements are coming from the influence of different
types of soil moisture regimes.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:07)
So, let us you now since we have covered the suborder let us see what is great groups.
Now, the great groups are subdivision of suborders and more than 400 great groups are
already recognized so far and they are defined largely by the presence and absence of
diagnostic horizons and the arrangement of those horizons. For example, you can see
here mollisols. So, mollisols here is an order. So, the suborder is aquolls. So, o l basically
the formative element of mollisol an aquol a q u is basically showing the formative
element. So, it is basically totally it is suborder, the great group is argiaquolls.
So, you can see from the name that it is a great group showing the presence of argilic
horizon. Now, this argilic horizon is very important as I have already told you it is an
important endopedon. So, these great group as the name suggests a showing the presence
of a specific horizon, in this case it is an argellic horizon. So, as the name suggest theyare  defined  largely  by  the  presence  and  absence  of  diagnostic  horizon  and  the
arrangement of those horizons.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:42)
So, you know this table shows the different formative elements and which can they are
connotation. For example, is you can see a c r is showing extremely weathering and then
a l showing high aluminum and low iron. So, you can see these are you know s u l f is
showing the presence of sulfuric horizon. You know the p l a g g showing the plaggen
horizon. So, based on the presence or absence of a particular subsurface or diagnostic
horizon they are naming different types of great groups.(Refer Slide Time: 12:24)
So, let us see an example of great group names for selected suborder in the mollisols and
ultisols orders. So, if you see in case of mollisols let us consider mollisols. So, first of all
this is aquolls, aquolls is a suborder an argillic a when there is a presence of argiaquolls
it is a great group example, udolls it is a suborder then argiudolls, ustolls which is
basically  implying  the  dry  condition  argiustolls,  xerolls  Mediterranean  climate
argixerolls. So, it is an example of you know great group which is present in mollisols.
Similarly you will find in case of ultisols also.
So, this basically shows so, let us concise. So, the highest category is order from the
order we are getting the sub order which are basically showing the influence of specific
weathering condition or soil moisture regime and below the suborder there is a great
group which is showing the presence and absence of a particular type of horizon.(Refer Slide Time: 13:47)
So, we have finished this great group let us see subgroup. So, subgroup are subdivision
of great groups and more than 2600 subgroups are recognize. So, for at the central
concept of a great group makes up one subgroup termed typic. For example, as you can
see here the in our case we call a subgroup called typic argiaquolls.
Now, typic argiaquolls is basically or showing typifying the argiaquolls great group. So,
this  central  concept  of a great group makes  up one subgroup. So, in that  case we
generally use this typic, sometime we use inter grades and extra grades when there is a
mixed characteristics. So, here I have given one more example call typic hapludolls and
this subgroup basically typifies the hapludolls great group
So, this shows why know what is the meaning of subgroup and how we can segregate
when the we are getting a big name you know into different subgroup great group and
you know suborder and individual orders.(Refer Slide Time: 15:15)
The next category is families. So, within a subgroup soil falls into particular family so, at
a particular depth and they have similar physical and chemical properties affecting the
growth of the plants and you know there are you know about 8000 families have been
identified and the criteria used include broad classes of particle size, mineralogy, cation
exchange capacity of the clay, temperature so, let us see in the next slide.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:42)
I mean when you when we are defining the soil family based on particle size classes you
can see there are different classes like ashy, fragment, you know sandy skeletal, sandy,loamy,  clayey,  fine-silty  and  fine-loamy.  When  mineralogy  class,  based  on  the
mineralogy class also mixed and then micaceous then siliceous based on the cation
exchange capacity also. That means, how much cation a particular soil can exchange
from it is surrounding medium they have you know it can be divided into superactive,
active, semiactive and subactive based on the percentage of cation exchange capacity.
So, you can see based on particle size mineralogy cation exchange capacity and soil
temperature regime classes we can differentiate different types of soil families. So, soil
family basically contains they consider all these measurable soil properties.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:52)
Now, finally, the soil series; the soil series category is the most specific unit of the
classification system and remember that it is a sub division of the family and each series
is defined by a specific range of soil property. For example, let us take an example of
kokomo soil series. Now, how in this total soil you know in this total soils classification
system how we can define kokomo soil series.
So, let us soil let us start with the soil and obviously, it comes within the mollisols. So,
from mollisols is a major order, from there we are going to suborder that is aquolls, then
great group that is argiaquolls, after that subgroup that is typic argiaquolls and finally,
fine, mixed, superactive, mesic typic, argiaquolls and finally, we are getting the name of
kokomo.So, the kokomo series define by this total family name and it is specifically define by
some measureable properties. For example, fine, mixed, superactive, mesic these are
characteristics as I have already told you these are characteristics of the family name and
then typic is basically you know typifying these argiaquolls great group. So, it is a
subgroup typic argiaquolls and then argiaquolls is the great group which is showing the
presence of argillic horizon, aquolls is the suborder which is showing the presence of
aquic moisture regime and o l l basically showing the presence of soil order that is
mollisols.
So, that is how we can define each and every soil of the world into some systematic
nature, into some systematic nature you know in this into systematic way using this
individual criteria or individual categories. Six different categories again soil series is the
most specific and then soil family, then subgroup, great group, order and finally, soil
orders. 
So, we are finish the soil classification system when I hope that you have got a basic
overview of soil classification and what are the basic features of soil taxonomy and what
are the how we can define or why how we can name a particular type of soil. So, we
have finished this soil classification.
So, let us start in new topic that is soil color and soil texture.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:46)
So, soil color is basically indirectly tells us about different types of soil properties. Is it
tells us about the soil moisture, it tells us about the you know percentage organic carbon
and so on so forth and soil color is a very important soil property and it helps us to
identify several soil you know. So, it helps us to I mean to make inference on soil quality
sometimes. So, how you generally measure soil color in the field?
Now, generally soil color measurement in the field is done based on a chart color chart
called munsell soil color chart and this munsell soil color chart helps in precise and
repeatable interpretation of soil color. And, these munsell soil color chart basically you
know realize on three important criteria of color one is called hue, another is called
value, another is chroma. Now, in the next slide we will see what are they, I mean what
these terms actually represent.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:10)
So, in the munsell soil color chart is basically book. So, if you open the book you will
see several pages with different chips of colors. So, this color chips basically indicates
the soil color and based on the based on the proper matching of our soil with this color
chips basically name that particular soil.
So, if you open up a munsell soil color chart a particular page you will see this type of
notations, you can see here 2.5 YR. So, this is called hue. Hue basically shows redness or
yellowness of a soil or in other words is based on the dominant spectral color. So, huebasically shows the redness and yellowness of a soil and basically represent dominant
spectral color.
So here 2.5 YR is a specific hue which is shows somewhat integrate between yellow
redness, yellowish on redness and you will also find another criteria called value another
variable called value and; obviously, value will be increasing from top, increasing from
we know as you can see in this munsell soil color chart value will be increasing from
bottom towards the top. So, you can see 2.5 and then 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.
So, basically  value  shows  the  degree  of lightness  and brightness. So, lower values
basically indicates darkness and higher values basically indicates brightness of a soil and
the third criteria is called chroma which is showing the intensity or brightness or in other
words the purity of the color. So, the chroma increases from 1 to 8 and it increases from
this side to this side, so, left to right. So, as you can see you are increasing the chroma
the purity of the color is somewhat decreasing.
So, these basically shows using this three different categories or three different variables
we can define a particular soil color. For example, if we define as I have shown you if
we name any soil color as 2.5 YR 4 by 4 that define basically says that this soil has a hue
of 2.5 YR with a value of 4 and a chroma of 4.
So, basically when we takes out a particular chip, you know particular soil particular you
know  some  soil  we  generally  measure,  we  generally  compare  the  soil  color  with
individual chip. And from this individual chip we identify what is the actual hue, what is
the value and what is the chroma and based on that we named as individual soil color.
So, I hope that now it is clear you know how we name different soil color. So, let us see
what the basic implication of soil color are.(Refer Slide Time: 25:22)
Now, different factors influence soil color. For example, based on the percentage of
organic matter content soil color would be different, water content plays an important
role in soil color. So, that is why whenever you are measuring the soil color it is almost
important to write down the wetness condition and also presence and oxidation states of
iron and manganese oxides a very important from the soil color point of view is.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:49)
So, as you can see more organic matter you showing darker soil color or low value here
and also in the right most picture in this picture we can see more water you know the leftpicture is showing more organic matter, showing the darker soil and low value and the
right most picture is showing the more water which is creating darker soil color of low
value. So, it is very important you know the soil colors shows a snapshot of soil organic
matter as well as soil moisture percentage.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:29)
Here you can see based on different types of oxidation reduction stage. So, obviously,
here these are oxidized zone and these are reduced as  you can see from the color
difference.  So, red and brown are basically showing iron in oxidized form or high
chroma and grey and blue zones just like these are showing the iron in reduced form a
low chroma. So, based on this oxidation reduction of iron also the color varies and their
value and their chroma also varies.(Refer Slide Time: 27:10)
So, you can see there are two different types of soil one is gleyed soil and mollic
epipedon. Now, gleyed soil basically showing the moisture water logged soils. So, these
are showing different colors and mollic epipedon are very dark in color and you know
obviously, the presence of high organic matter you know where has a great impact on
their color. So, in case of warm and reddish soil, tropical dark grey and browns and all
these  soils  are  showing  different  types  of  soil  color  based  on  different  climatic
conditions.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:45)
And, what are the importance of soil color; obviously, the soil color are used as an you
know diagnostic criterion for classifying soil and obviously, they are important aesthetic
components of the landscape because you know most of the you know red soils or you
know most of the soils which are dominated by iron and aluminum oxides are showing
red color.
So, it is very important to examine the soil color before we go for you know other soil
physical property measurement. And, again soil color shows you know a snapshot of
different properties and it helps us to interpret different soil properties specifically the
presence of organic matter or moisture. And, there is nowadays scientist of develop
several image based you know cheaper image base in you know instruments which are
helpful for quantitative estimation of soil color.
Because, using the munsell soil color chart it is kind of qualitative and it is subjective
because it depends on the perspective of the investigator who is giving the name. But,
now soil scientist at have developed several chip image based soil sensors which can
quantitatively measure different soil colors. And using this quantitative measurement of
soil color they can predict different soil properties specifically soil organic matter.
So, let us wrap up here and from the next lecture will be starting soil texture and then
will be covering soil structure.
Thank you very much.