Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Raheman  
Department of Agricultural and Food  Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 7 
Measurement of Soil Strength, Cohesion  and Angle of Internal Friction  
Hello everyone. This is Professor H. Rah eman from Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Department , IIT Kharagpur . I welcome you all to this lecture on Measurement of Soil 
Strength, Cohesion and Angle of Internal Friction.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:45)  
 
So, the concept which will be covered is what is  soil strength, cone penetrometer, how it is 
related to soil strength  and cohesion as well as angle of internal friction.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:00)  
 
Now, we define soil strength as its ability to assist , to resist deformation o r failure. H ow well 
it can  withstand the external forces which are acting . It could be due to compression , due to 
shear,  due to adhesion,  due to frictional strength.  So, cone  index is used as an indication for 
measuring or indicating the soil strength.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:35)  
 
So, what is a cone -penetrometer ? Basically, a cone shaped  probe is force d into the soil and 
we define it as the force per unit base area, which is required to penetrate a cone shaped  
probe into the soil at a steady rate . The rate is around 30 millimeter pe r second. So, the strength that is the force per unit area that means, the force is expressed in kilo Newton and 
area is meter square that kilo Newton per meter square will be the unit of cone index .  
Though it says cone index but it has a unit of pressure  and this is measured with the help of a 
cone penetrometer. So, there are basically two types of cone penetrometer one is static cone 
penetro meter , the other one is impact type cone penetrometer. And whether it is static or 
impact type , the cone penetromet er will have a cone base at the bottom then there is a rod and 
there  is a proving ring with a pushing handle or a stopcock.  
So, in case of a static penetrometer , the one which is shown in this figure, this has to be 
forced into the soil either by human be ing or by handling pressure. So, that what is the 
resistance which is offered by the soil that will be recorded either manually with the help of 
this proving ring  or it can directly put sensors that can record it for each unit of depth .  
Maybe at an interv al of one centimeter , even 0.5 centimeter is also possible . But usually a 
manual run static cone penetrometer , it has some graduations provided on the side and the 
rod. So, at an interval of one inches and the cone area is around , base area is  around  3.23 
square centimeter and the cone angle is 30 degree.  
(Refer Slide Time: 0 3:47) 
  
So, if it  is a impact type penetrometer then a pointed device is with a certain mass that has to 
be dropped from a certain height and then you measure what is the correspondi ng depth of 
penetration. So, there are two types of impact type cone penetrometer , one is the point ed 
device is to be dropped from a certain height .  
The other one is the point ed device is to be kept vertically in the soil then a mass of known 
weight  which  has to be dropped onto this and the number of drops required to cause an unit 
of penetration that is recorded. So, if it is a static  penetrometer then there are certain 
standards which are given by American Society for Agricultur e and  Biological Engineers , 
what should be the best area,  what should be the base diameter and the rod diameter.  
So, if it is for soft soil, then the base area should be around 323 millimeter square and base 
diameter is around 20.27 millimeter and the rod diameter is 15.88 millime ter. If it is a hard 
soil, then the best area is 130 and millimeter square and best diameter is 12.13 millimeter and 
the rod diameter is 9.53 millimeter . These are the standards given by American Society of 
Agriculture and Biological Engineers.  (Refer Sl ide Time: 05:40)  
 
So, when it is p ressed  into the soil either manually or by a hydraulic power , which is shown 
in this figure on the right corner. So, we will get a plot like this that is the cone index , in fact , 
is the resistance which will be recorded t hen  
 
So, that is indicated as cone index. So, any plot cone index versus depth, so the nature of the 
curve  and this is sample of the curve I have indicated . Then question arises, how to measure 
these resistance ? We can put a load cell so, that you can di rectly take the output from the load 
cell then, once you calculate then the load cell has to be calibrated and after calibration, we 
can find out what is the corresponding cone  index.  
Now, this has to be pushed into the soil up to a depth of minimum 150 m illimeter , nowadays 
it can go up to whatever depth we require up to that we can go  So you will get a plot like this, 
if you get a plot like this, then how to find out the average con e index. So, average cone  index 
will be the area bounded by this curve.  
So, we draw a horizontal line , then what is the area , which is included. So, that can be 
calculated with the help of a graph sheet , then you can divide with depth. So, that will give 
you, what is the average cone index. So, based on cone index  value , we cla ssify soil into 
three types one is soft soil, medium soil and firm soil.  
Soft soil is around 450 to plus or minus 50 kilo Pascal and medium soil is  1000 plus 100 kilo 
Pascal plus or minus then firm soil  is 1800 kilo Pascal plus or minus 100 kilo Pascal. S o, based on this cone index, we try to classify the soil when we use two types of penetrometer 
like static cone  penetrometer or the impact type cone  penetro meter , we use two different 
models for expressing the con e index .  
One model is using the energy required  to cause penetration which is nothing but the your 
impact type how much force mass is dropped to a certain height , so that will give you how 
much energy is re quired to cause penetration, but in case of a static con e penetrometer we 
measure force then  we divide by area.  
So, there are two basically two models which are used,  one is using  energy required to cause 
penetration or the other one is force required to cause penetration or force per unit area 
required to cause penetration . Cone penetrometer re adings are affected by moisture content 
and it is affected by the b ulk density.  
So, you have to mention , what is the moisture content at which we  carry out this test, then in 
addition if you want to find out the average cone  index , in a plot , there you ha ve to indicate , 
we have to measure the cone  index value at different places , then you have to express the 
average with the standard deviation you have to mention and with the coefficient of  variance.  
So, on the right corner you can see how the cone shaped  probe . This one , cone shaped probe, 
this is fixed onto a hydraulic cylinder , there  is a double acting hydraulic cylinder and the 
hydraulic  power is taken from the tractor.  (Refer Slide Time: 09:54)  
 
Now come s shear strength , resistance to deformation b y continuous shear  displacement of 
soil particles subjected to shear  stress . Why you are interested in this because , they wheel, 
when it starts running that will create some shear  displacement at the interface , interface of 
soil and w heel.  So, that  is why you are interested in measuring the shear strength.  
So, shear  resistance occurs due to structural resistance , due to frictional resistance , due to 
cohesion and adhesion  and shear strength  particularly is governed by two factors . One is your 
internal frict ion the other one is cohesion . So, usually, we follow the Coulomb’s equation 
which  says that  
 
So, if you multiply the contact area, then it becomes ,  
 
In this equation, the maximum thrust which is developed is a function of cohesion , is a 
function of an gle of internal friction , is a function of the contract area , is a function of the 
weight which is coming on the wheel . Now, if it is a sandy soil , cohesion less sandy soil that 
means, c has no role. So, now, thrust maximum , which is developed is a functio n of cohesion  
is a function of angle of internal friction , is a function of contract area , is a function of weight 
coming in the contact area.  
Now, if it is a cohesion  less sandy  soil that means, c is 0 and ∅ has some value. So, there the 
maximum thrust will be dependent on W itself , where the area has no role. Now, if it is a clay soil that means, ∅ 0. So, obviously, the maximum thrust  which is developed is dependent on 
the contact area. So, these are the tw o extreme conditions which I represented .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:56)  
 
Now, how to measure the  shear  strength of soil . You can measure it directly in the laboratory 
or you can measure it in the field . In laboratory , what you have to do is you have to colle ct 
the soil sample , then you have to make cylindrical specimens by using direct shear test  or 
triaxial compression shear test  or unconfined compressi on test or vane shear  test, we can 
measure the shear  strength of soil .  
But since all will be mostly in the  field, so, that is  why we will be concentrating on what are 
the apparatus  available which can be utilized to measure shear strength  in the field. So, there 
are two apparatus  available one is shear annulus  the other one is direct  shear  test. So, direct 
shear test is the equipment  which is available for direct shear test  and the equipment that is 
available for the direct shear tests in the laboratory they are different.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:56)  
 
Now, this is the shear  annulus , basically this annul ar ring  with fins at the bottom. This has to 
be rotated. T his has to pressed  in the soil then it has to be rotated. So, that how much torque 
is required to cause failure of the soil  that has to be measured ? So, if the annular  ring has an 
outer diameter  r0 and an  inner diameter ri, the fin has a width  of b, and the height of fin is  h.  
So, the total diameter is indicated here as D , then you have to find that expression, how much 
torque is required to cause shear . Now, if I take the cross section where , the soil is  going to be 
disturbed, so this is the cross section  that the soil is going to be disturbed. Now, if I take a 
small angular radi us is a correspond to dθ at radius r. So, r dθ will be this length and for an 
incremental length of dr, so, the area of this sma ll element will be  
 
Now, if 
  is a shear stress which is applied. Then the shear  stress into dA will give you th e 
shear force. So, 
  
This shear force is acting at a distance r, now the moment which is acting at the center will 
be,  
 
So, if  T is the torque,  so,  
 
  This is a torque which is ac ting in the smaller element now. I f you want to find out the total 
torque , which is acting because of the rotation of the annulus ring . Then we have to integrate 
this expression   
 
 
 
So, this is how we arrived at this equation. So, this has to be rotated at a steady rate . It is not 
that once you rotate then leave for some time, so, that is not allowed .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:15) 
 
Next is in -situ direct shear apparatus. Now, it  is a rectangular plate with having fins at the 
bottom this has to be pressed  into the soil and then it has to be moved forward. So, what we 
measure here is what is the weight which we apply and what is the corresponding area on 
which this weight is applie d. Then we measure the tangential force f and the corresponding 
shear stress  which is caused , so that area if you measure  then we can find out , we can 
correlate this shear stress with displacement or shear stress with normal stress.  
So,  
 And shear stres s 
 
So, if you try to plot shear stress  versus a normal stress, then you will get a kind of curve  
which will be shown  in the next slide.  
Now, if there are two conditions which are given , which are shown here , one is in the soft 
soil the other one is the hard soil.  In the soft soil  you can see the soil is not displaced , there 
will be pockets in between, whereas in case of a hard soil the entire  soil mass is shear ed, that 
is the difference.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:08)  
 
Now, when we try to apply t he tangential force, then what we measure also is the strain .. So, 
if you plot stress versus strain that will be getting a nature of the curve either A type or B 
type, which is shown in this figure or C type . A type means, for a very hard soil , compacted 
soil, you will  get a clear cut point , where we  will get the peaks shear stress and after that the 
soil fail s and it will start coming down. Now, this is the case for compacted dry soil .  
Now for loose soil, we  will get the stress versus strain curve would b e like this . It will be 
initially rising at a faster rate, then slowly slowly it will slow down and it becomes , it will 
reach to a peak. So, these are the two extreme curves A and B, so  in between when the soil is 
neither to o compact or not to o lose, then you may get an get a curve like this, where the 
nature of the stress and strain curve  will be, it will first increase the n reach to a peak . But that peak is not as prominent as you get in case of a hard soil or the dry soil. But you will  
definitely get a p eak, then after that the failure starts and it goes down , the shear stress  goes 
down. So, these are the three typical curves which are experienced in the field.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:44)  
 
Now, when you try to plot to the shear stress  versus normal stres s, then what we observed is 
that we  will get a straight line. So, if you best fit the line, then shear stress  versus , this side is 
shear stress, this side  is normal tress. So, you  will get point like this, if you best fit  this line 
and extend  it to touch t he y axis, the intercept will give you the value of c and the slope will 
be the value of ∅. So, c is nothing but your cohesion and ∅ is the angle of internal friction.  
Now c as the name indicates , is a cohesion . It has the unit , which is same as that of stress. So, 
basically c can be divided , can be defined as the shear  stress when the normal  stress is 0. That 
means cohesion is the force that hold s the particles together in the  material  irrespective of the 
normal pressure exerted and  the particles. ∅ which is called the internal friction  angle, the 
force that resists motion between the partic le while it undergoes deformation.  
So, these are some of the ways by which you can measure shear  strength of soil and from the 
shear strength,  you can find out what is the value of c, and then we find out what is the value 
of ∅ in the field.  (Refer Slid e Time: 23:20)  
 
So, the reference books we can take as ‘Soil Dynamics in Tillage  and traction’ and then 
‘Terra mechanics and off -road vehicle engineering ’, then ‘Off-road Vehicles Engineering 
Principles ,’ these are some of the books which can be looked int o to further enhance your 
understanding.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:43)  
 
So, in brief, what we have done is , we tr ied to explain what is the strength of soil , how do we 
measure the strength of soil , then we tr ied to find out shear strength of soil  and what  are how 
to find out cohesion  and an angle of internal friction from this shear strength . That  is all thank 
you. 