Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  08 
Measurement  and Characterization  of Terrain  Response  
Hi everyone . This is Professor  H. Raheman from  Agricultural  and Food Engineering  
Department , IIT Kharagpur . I welcome  you to this NPTEL  online  course  on Traction  
Engineering . This is the lecture  8, where  I will try to cover  Measurement  and 
Characterization  of Terrain  Response . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:54)  
 
The concep ts which  will be covered  are terrain  characterization , plate  sinkage  test, sinkage  
modulus  of cohesion,  then sinkage  modulus  of internal  friction . So we will try to find out 
how to utilize  this terrain  characterization , which  will help you in evaluating  the performance  
of a vehicle .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:20)  
 
Measurement  of both normal  pressure -sinkage and shear  stress -displacement  relationship  is 
of prime  importance . Why we call it as of prime  importance  because  the load is acting  on the 
wheel  and the wheel will cause  certain  soil compaction , and thereby , rolling  resistance  or the 
motion  resistance  is developed .  
Now when  a torque  is applied  to the wheel , a shearing  force  will be initiated  or a shearing  
force  will be developed  at the tire or the wheel -soil interface . So we need  to know  what  is the 
pressure , which is applied  through  the wheel . So, that there  is sinkage  in the soil, sinkage  of 
the wheel  in the soil, or we need  to know  what  is the stress  it is developed  because  of the 
torque  which  is supplie d to the wheel  and the corresponding  shear displacement . 
So these  are the two parameters , which  are to be studied  and the most  used technique  to study  
these  two tests are your Beva meter  technique . It comprises  of two sets of tests,  one is your 
plate  penetr ation  test, the other  one is shear  test.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  2:48)  
 
So let us now see, what  is this plate  penetration  test and what  is the shear  stress , shear test? 
Plate penetration  test, if you look at this figure , there  are plates  of different  sizes  that are to be 
forced  into the soil and then we try to measure  how much  is the pressure , which  is required  to 
force  this plate  into the soil. Now question  arises  what  sizes of plate  are to be inserted  into the 
soil? So size of the plate  should  simulate  the contact  area of tire.  
So, and the aspect  ratio can be maintained . Aspect  ratio means  the height  to width  ratio 
should  be more  than 5 to 7. And the minimum  width  can take as 5 centimeter , but 
nevertheless , it should  be, should  not be less than 10 centimet er; that is the minimum  width  of 
the plate  we have  to take. Now different  sizes  of plate , they are to be inserted  into the soil 
with the help of a hydraulic  cylinder  and how much  is the force , which  is required  to push  
that soil, that plate  into the soil that force are to be recorded , continuously  and what  is the 
corresponding  sinkage ? So in this figure  there  are two plates  indicated  b1 and b2, and the 
pressure  which  is recorded  that is indicated  for different  depths  in this graph , D versus  Z for 
two differ ent plates .  
The other  test is your shear  test. Shear  test means  in lecture  7 we tried to discuss  about  the 
shear  annulus . So basically  this is a shear  annulus  plate  which  has to be rotated  for different  
normal  loads and what  is the corresponding  torque , which is required  to cause  failure  to the 
soil that is to be recorded .  So there  should  be a torque  meter , there  is a hydraulic  loading  cylinder  and how much  torque  
is required  to cause  rotation  of this plate  that has to be measured , either  you can put a torque 
meter  or you can put a sensors  to measure  that. Now knowing  the torque  and the outer  
diameter  the expressions  which  we give in case of lecture  5, so you can find out what  is the 
torque  required  to cause  shear  failure .  
That means  if you plot torque  versus theta you can see after some  time the nature  of the curve 
will be almost  static  or it will try to go down . So this has to be done  for 2, 3 different  plates , 
minimum  3 plates . If you take 2 plates  I will discuss  what  are the limitations , if you take 2 
plate , so you have  to take minimum  3 plates . So this is all about  the beva meter  technique , let 
us now see what  is the pressure -sinkage  test? How we can handle  those  data which  is, which  
are obtained  from  this pressure  sinkage  test.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  6:04)  
 
Now, the pressure -sinkage  data if you plot it can take different  shapes , which  are shown  in 
the right  hand  corner . If n is less than 1, then the tendency  it is going  down , if n is 1 it is a 
straight  line at an angle  of 45 degree , if n is greater  than, sorry , if n is less than 1 this is going  
down , if n is greater  than 1 it is going  up and if n is 1 it is almost  a straight  line.  
So the relationship  can be described  by an equation , which  is given  by Bakker’s that is 
 
So k is the modulus  of sinkage  and z is the sinkage  and n is the exponent  of sinkage . So now, 
when  you try to find out what  is k? So, what  we observed  is  
 
Where kc is the sinkage modulus  of cohesion  and k phi is the sinkage modulus  of internal  
friction  and b is the width  of the plate . That means  in a plate  b is the smaller  dimension , so 
this is b.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  7:43)  
 
Now, for two plates if you try to collect  data, then we try to relate ; for plate  1, we will get a 
relationship  
  
And for plate  2 
 
So this if you look at, if I take log on both the sides  then  
 
Now  log P1-log z, if you try to plot you will get a straight  line plot like this which  is shown  
here for a plate  b1, for a plate  b2, where  b2 is dimension  is greater  than b1. Now, after getting  
these  plots , the next thing  is how to find out this kc, k phi and n. Now, slope  of these  two 
plots  will give you the exponent  of sinkage.  But question  is whether  the two plots  which  you 
get for the two plates , are they parallel ?  
If they are not parallel  then what  value  of slope  you are going  to take? So, if they are parallel , 
it is very simple . Any one slope  you can take as the exponent  of sinkage , but if it is not 
parallel , if these  two lines  are not parallel , then what  you have  to do is you have  to take the 
slope  of individual  lines , then take the average  of the slope  and then find out what  is the 
average  slope  that represents  the exponent  of sinkage .  
Now after finding  out the exponent  of sinkage,  then question  is how to find out kc and k phi. 
So, in this plots  what  you can see there  is an intercept , if you look at this equation  or this 
equation , the intercept  is nothing  but your log k. So I have  indicated  for plate  b1, the intercept  
as a1 and for b2, the intercept  as a2. Now at z is equal  to 1. So, what  will happen ? So this 
component  will be 0, this component  will be 0.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:18 )  
 
 
 
 
But the limitation  of this kind of expression , which  you derived  is, it is only applicable  when  
the sinkage  is 1, z is equal  to 1, then only you can derive  this. But all the time you may not 
get sinkage  as 1. So in that case how to find out kc and k phi.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:37 )  
 
So that’s why, in the beginning  I said at least you have  to take 3 plates  and the plate -sinkage  
test has to be carried  out for 3 sizes  of plates , whether  it is a rectangular  plate , whether  it is a 
circular  plate , does not matter , but if you are taking  a circular  plate , then the radius  should  be 
equal  to the width  of the rectangular  plate . So now if you are taking  3 plates  then you will be 
getting  three  k values ,  
.  
So in that case, for three  plates  you will get three  k values . Now if you try to plot these  k 
values  versus  1 upon  b, so then you will land up with, t hese are the points  which  you get and 
then you best fit a line passing  through  these  points  and extend  it to touch  the y axis. So now 
the intercept  will give you directly  k phi, and the slope  will give you kc. So this is a little 
simpler  and free from  error  in the sense , for any depth  you can find out the kc and k phi value  
by using  three  plates .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:06 )  
 
So, now this has been  proposed  by Bakker’s, so let us now see, what  is the limitation  of this 
Bakker's pressure -sinkage  equation ? P is equal  to kz to the power  n. The value  of kc and k 
phi, they are dependent  on n. If we vary n that dimension , the unit will change , and this is 
applicable  to soil, which  is to be homogeneous . If it is a non-homogenous  soil then 
applicability  of this equation  is not known .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:47)  
 
So another  scientist , named  Reece, he tried to modify  that equation . So he developed  an 
equation    
Where n, kc dash and k phi dash they are all dimensionless  and gamma  is the wet density  of 
the terrain  and b is the width  of the plate  and z is the sinkage . Now he tried to prove  the 
principl e parameters  which  are used, the principl e features  of this equation  here he tried to 
verify .  
And what  he has done  is, he has carried  out different  plate -sinkage  tests by taking  plates of 
different  sizes , starting  from  1 inch to 4 inch and with the aspect  ratio of 4.5, then what  he has 
done  is, initially  he tried in a clayey soil. So if it is a clayey soil means , the equation s simply  
implies  that k phi is 0, so that means  p versus  z by b, if we will plot, irrespective  of which  
size of plate  you take, the curve  will be similar . Similar  means , they will merge  into one  
curve , so which  is indicated  in this figure .  
Now he has taken  a sandy  soil, where  c is equal  to 0. So if that is so that means  the pressure  
required  to cause  penetration  depends  on the size of the plate . When you increase  the plate  
size then pressure  will increase . So, this pressure  versus  z by b ratio, when  it is plotted  you 
can see for different  sizes  of plates , these solid  lines , these  are the plots  which  you obtained .  
So that means  whatever  equations  he has developed  that is fitting  to the experimental  
findings . Now what  he has done  is in dry sand, he calculated , he measu red and verified  these  
are the solid  lines  are the plots  for the dry sand, and in that dry sand he tried to add certain  
water . So by adding  water  what  happens , the c value  is not changed  rather , some  cohesive  
force  will come  into picture  and the pressure  which will be required  that will be increased .  
And that is what  he has obtained . You can see 13 millimeter  plate  and 13 millimeter  plate , 
when  water  is added . So there  is a difference , so this is the pressure  versus  z by b plot, when  
moisture  is added . So that is reflected  in this equation . Similarly  for 25 millimeter , you can 
see, when  it is a dry sand you are getting  this line, when  moisture  is added , you are getting  a 
line this.  
So the features  which  are observed  experimentally , those  features  are reflected very nicely  in 
the equations , which  are developed  by Reece . But again  this equation  is suffering  from , the 
limitation  is that it has to be applied  in a homogeneous  soil. And for non-homogeneous  soil 
the pressure -sinkage  relationship  of terrain  using  a smaller  size plate  may not be extrapolated  
for a larger  size plate . So these  are the limitations .  
So we discuss  about  the two equations  which  are available  for finding  out the pressure -
sinkage  relationship ; one is Bekker's equation , the other  one is Reec e equation  and those  are 
applicable  to homogeneous  soil. Now if the soil is non-homogeneous  like organic  muskag e, 
so in that case what  will happen  to this pressure -sinkage  relationship ? So let us now see that.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:03 )  
 
So organic  muska ge means  there  will be vegetative  cover  on the top surface  and on the 
bottom  surface  there  will be  peat,  a saturated  peat.  So if, that is the soil condition , then the 
pressure -sinkage  test with a plate  of radius  10 centimeter , shows  this kind of curve.  Initially , 
there  will be resistance  which  will be offered  by the vegetative  cover , then after the 
vegetative  cover  is about  to fail, then what  will happen ? 
The lower  saturated  peat or clay that does not offer  that much  of resistance , so it will start 
decreas ing. Okay. So here the relationship  is indicated  by 
 
For z is the sinkage , kp is the stiffness  parameter  for the peat and mm is the strength  
parameter  for the surface  mat and Dh is the hydraulic  diameter  of the contact  area. So, which  
is equal  to 4A/L, where  A is the area and L is the perimeter  of the contact  patch .  
So utilizing  this equation  we can find out the pressure -sinkage  relationship  for organic  
terrain . What we have  considered  here is, the organ ic terrain  has two layers , as I said, the one 
is the surface  mat or the vegetative  cover , this is idealized  as a membrane  like structure , 
which  means  that it can only sustain  a force  of tension  directed  along  the tangent  to the 
surface  and it cannot  offer  any resistance  to bending .  
And the peat is assumed  to be a medium  that offers  a resistance  proportional  to its 
deformation  in the vertical  direction . So we discuss ed, the two equations  which  are used for 
finding  out the pressure -sinkage  relationship  for homogeneous  soil. Then the other  
relationship  is for the muskage  or the vegetative  cover  with peat below .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:28 )  
 
 Now one thing  I like to say here is the plot in case of k versus  1/b, here the k value  is the, 1 
by k is equal  to. This is for finding  out kc and k phi and that means  the cohesive  modulus  of 
sinkage  and the frictional  modulus  of sinkage  and exponent  of sinkage . So this is all about  the 
Terrain  response .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  22:24 )  
 
So in brief  I can conclude  that attempts  are made  to describe  the bevameter  technique , which  
is used for measuring  modulus  of sinkage  and exponent  of sinkage  and these  are required  for 
evaluation  of off-road vehicle  and terrain  characterization .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  22:42 )  
 
So you can refer the books  like ‘Terra mechanics  and Off-Road Vehicle  Engineering ,’ then 
‘Off-Road  Vehicle  Engineering  Principles’ for further  clarification . Thank  you. 