Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Raheman  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian Institute of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture 06  
Mechanics of Wheel and its Tractive Performance  
Hi everyone . This is Professor H. Raheman  from Department of Agr icultural and Food 
Engineering, IIT , Kharagpur . I welcome you all to this Traction  Engineering course . Today is 
lecture 6. I will  try to cover the mechanics of wheel  and its tractive  performance . 
(Refer Slide Time:  0:54) 
 
 
So as you know , the concepts wh ich I am  going to cover the towed wheel,  self-propelled 
wheel , driving wheel , then mechanics of traction . As you know mechanics of traction  is 
nothing but intera ction between soil and the traction  devices and the transfer of forces between vehicle  and supp orting surface. So, based on that we divided the wheels  into four 
types - driving wheel,  towed wheel, braked wheel, self -propelled wheel.  And this figure  we 
have already discussed in lecture 1 and 2, now I will  try to give you in details , how the forces 
are acting.  
(Refer Slide Time:  01:34) 
 
So, when a vehicle is moving, it is applying  a load to the wheel at the axle a nd at the same 
time the soil will try to apply the reaction force to the wheel at the interface , interface means 
the soil -wheel interface. So  load, from the vehicle will act on  the axle , the reaction from the 
soil will be acting at the soil will interface.   
Now when you consider a towed  wheel, the simplest thing is there is no torque , torque is 
equal to 0 and it is unpowered . Since, torque is n ot there, so it is unpowered , so no axle 
torque. So, there  will be soil reaction, weight  will be coming on the wheel,  weight  is denoted 
as W. So, W is acting then correspondent W there will be soil reaction  at the periphery , at the 
interaction , interface, sorry, at the interface.  
So, resultant  of this soil reactions at the interface is denoted as R N. So, the R N will have two 
components, one is the horizontal component , the other one is the vertical component, which 
I have s hown in this figure , RNh  is the h orizontal component and RNv  is the vertical 
component . And R is acting at a distance , so that the vehicle is in equilibrium , the tyre is in 
equilibrium.  And since no external moment is acting and neglecting the friction, what we can do is if you 
solve thi s then  
 
and the force which is required to tow the wh eel forward that is denoted as T F. So  
 
So, towing  force is nothing but the summation of horizontal forces acting opposite to the 
direction of motion .  
And weight is summation of the vertical forces, the magnitude is same, but the reactions are 
there  in the opposite direction that means RNv  is opposite to W and RNh  is opposite to TF. 
Now if you  take if the point at which the soil reaction is acting is at a distance e. So, then if I 
take moment some of the moments will be equal to 0.  
So,  
 
 
 
 which is denoted here as towing  force by W. So this is nothing but ratio of towing force  to 
weight coming on the  wheel.  Now, the moment we apply a little torque , so, that will be 
shearing  force acting on the int erface.  
In this condit ion, there is no shearing force. I n a towed wheel there is no sh earing force, but 
in a power wheel or a self -propelled wheel, there will be torque acting.  
(Refer Slide Time:  05:31)  
Now, if you look at this figure, you can see, there  is a torque acting , weight acting  on the 
wheel and because of the torque that we will  be shearing action , so a tangential force will 
develop on the interface and the resultant of that tangential force is denoted as RT. So, at the 
interface there will be t wo kinds of forces acting , one is R T, the other one is R N. RN is the 
soil reaction, which is radial soil reaction.  
Now, if I resolve  these forces, which I have done it in the right corner, so RN has a horizontal 
component RNh  and it will have a vertical co mponent RNv . Similar ly, the tangential force 
which is developed because of the shearing action  of the wheel with  the soil. So, it will have 
two components which have denoted as RT h, the other one is RTv. So, if you look at the 
forces, which I have  drawn he re, then there you can see RTh and RNh , they are opposite to 
each other.  
So now, W is acting vertical ly downward now, if you resolve  these forces what you can get is  
 and  
. 
So, this RTh is the thrust  which is developed that will be sufficient to overco me the rolling 
resistance . It will not develop an y pull  and this condition we have taken us zero condition 
which you have already defined , zero slip.  
Zero sl ip refers to the condition at which the thrust is developed because of the application of 
torque and the thrust which is developed that will be equal to just overcoming the rolling 
resistance that means the wheel will start moving just start s moving . 
(Refer Slide Time:  07:56)  
Now, we will  move to the power ed wheel or  the driving wheel . Here two thin gs, we will  be 
seeing , one, there will be torque which is denoted as T and there  will be a pull applied P . So, 
torque is indicat ed here , torque , and there is a pul l here. Now, because of the torque there  will 
be again shearing forces acting at the interfac e and the resultant of that shearing force  is RT 
and the soil reaction RN coming from the wheel to the ground and W is acting downward.  
Now resultant of RT and RN is indicated as F. So, now, if I resolve th is soil reaction RN into 
two components , one is y our R Nh is the horizontal component and the other one is the 
vertical component RNv . Similarly , for the tangential force, which is acting because of the 
shearing action RT can be resolved into two components , one is the vertical component       
RTv, the ot her one is the horizontal component RTh.  Similar to the self-propelled  wheel , you 
can see RTh and RNh , they are opposite to each other. And in addition to that, if you look , P 
is also acting in the same direction as that of RNh . So, resultant of RT and RN,  which I have  
indicated as F, and where the RN will act ? Because there is no , here the torque is acting, s o if 
you consider that then to balance this torque  the RN should act at a point , so that if I extend 
this line that will give you , that it is not pass ing through the centre .  
In case of a towed  wheel, since torque was zero, it was passing through centre of the wheel, 
but in case of a driving wheel, since torque is acting you have to oppose that torque , so torque  
will be equal to RN into this distance , centre distance , the line of action  is the centre.  So, 
suppose that is denoted as l . So, RN should act at a certain point , so that moment  R will try to 
balance this torque . Now, resultant of RN and RT denoted as F.  So, F is again resolved into two componen ts, one is your vertical component W, the other o ne 
is the horizontal component pull. So, now, if you look at this diagram then simply you can 
write as  
 
 
That means, this is the weight and this is the pull, this is the rolling resistance , and this is th e 
thrust . So 
 
If I divide W on both the sides , weight  of the wheel , then it becomes  
 
P by W , RR by W and thrust  by W . This P by W is nothing but coefficient of traction  COT, 
RR by W coefficient of rolling resistance and thrust by W is the coefficient of  gross traction.   
   
This is what we have discussed before and now, I proved this thr ough the application of 
forces.  (Refer Slide Time:  12:14 ) 
 
 
Now, let us see what are the different performance parameters now, how it is varying with 
slip. As you discuss that performance parameters are your coefficient  of traction , coefficient  
of gross  traction,  tractive efficiency , then power delivery efficiency , these are the 
performance parameters. So, now we will  see how the coefficient of rolling resis tance is 
varying  it wheel  slip. 
The left corner figure if you look at this has been plotted th is CRR has been plotted for wheel  
slip for different soils , starting from concrete surface is the hardest surface , then at dry loam, 
then clay loam or the marshy  land, then the mud,  these are the four soil conditions, which is 
indirectly representing the strength of soil . Concrete means very hard and mud is the softer  
soil. So, how it is varying with  these soil conditions are indicated he re. So, in case of a concre te soil you can see it will with increase in wheel  slip, the coefficient of 
rolling resistance is almost constant is not varying. In case of a dry loam, it is not exactly 
constant , but it is being varying very  slightly and clay loam  also. But in case of mud or slime, 
you can see coefficient of rolling resistance is increasing with increas e in slip. 
That means, in a soft soil there we will  be sinkage  of wheel , there will be accumulation of 
wheel  in the front. So, because of that the , we require more power to  overcome those 
obstructions that is  why the rolling resistance increases , hence coefficient of  rolling increases . 
So, what we conclude from here is coefficient of  rolling resi stance is a function of slip, is a 
function of soil condition.  
Now, if we look a t the coefficient of traction , COT, which is nothing but the ratio of pull  is to 
weight, and how it is varying with wheel  slip, this has been plotted for four different soil 
conditions , just like co efficient of rolling resistance,  in case of a concrete , in case of dry 
loam,  in case of loamy sand,  we have added one more than clay loam, then we have mud.  
So again, we are getting maximum C OT, in case of a concrete surface and in case of mud we 
are getting the minimum COT.  So, what happens while you are gettin g more COT  in case of 
concrete because rolling resistance is less. So, rolling resistance less means the thrust which 
is developed , thrust minus  rolling resistance will  give you pull. So, rolling resistance is less 
so pull is more , even if the t hrust is sa me pull is more in case of a concrete surface .  
Whereas, in case of mu d because of the higher rolling resistance so thrust minus rolling 
resistance will reduce the  pull, hence COT  is reduced this is one thing.  So, what we conclude 
from this figure is COT  is also like CRR is dependent on factors like soil conditions , factors 
like wheel slip.  Initially , when we increase wheel  slip for all the soil conditions , we can see 
the rate of rise was very fast , then after some slip, it starts almost remaining constant,  but that 
rate of rise was very high in case of a dry soil like concrete surface . (Refer Slide Time:  16:27 ) 
 
Now, tractive efficiency . Tractive efficiency is defined as the drawbar  power to axial power. 
So, I have  given the expression for that  
 
That me ans tractive efficiency is the ratio of two powers , one in the drawbar power , the other 
one is the axial power that ratio and it also depends on the slip.  
Now, if you look at the plot , initially you can see it starts at a very faster rate up to this point  
and then afterwards initially it rises very faster rate , then after that is rises reduce , reaches  to a 
peak, then it goes down.  So, what happens , initially if I have to rise it s harply  because there is 
distortion in the tire trade , afterwards when you fur ther increase the slip there will be sliding 
of the trades. So, tractive  efficiency or the output power is reduced .  
If we further increase the slip, the entire w heel is going to slide , thereby , there will be lesser 
interaction between soil and wheel  and t he power which is developed is reduced. So, that’s 
why, tractive  efficiency reaches to a peak at a very lower value of slip, maybe around 10  per 
cent.  Now tractive efficiency can be defined by two parameters. One is I can write then 
tractive  efficiency is   
 
So, this  
 is called the pull ratio and 
  is called the velocity ratio , velocity ratio is nothing but 
the travel reduction or the slip , 
   is slip. So, that means theoretical velocity , how much it is converted to actu al velocity and thrust , how much is converted to pull. So, this is the 
product of these two .  
But if you look at this then the losses of power is a function of , losses of power means output 
power is a function of pull ratio,  is a function of velocity ratio . Now, velocity ratio , the 
inability of theoretical velocity to be converted to actual velocity. So, as a result what will 
happen there will be slippage,  the movement between the soil , movement between soil and 
soil, movement between wheel  inside the wheel .  
So, because of that there will be losses. Now, if I try to plot this in a different way, because 
this effect of pull  ratio and velocity ratio which makes this tractive inefficiency and indirectly 
we can say, which makes this tractive  inefficiency is not  reflected in this figure . So, that is  
why we will try to put it in a different way , so tha t these losses can be reflected.   
(Refer Slide Time:  20:09 ) 
 
Now plotted traction performance ratio that means NTR versus GTR , Va versus , Va by Vt 
ratio, these are plotted against net traction ratio. So, this curve if you  look at velocity ratio is 
this curve going down, then pull ratio , this one , so let us first and tractive efficiency is this 
curve. So, the tractive efficiency curve is always below these two ratio c urves. And when you 
look at the velocity ratio it started nearly equal to one in a self-propelled  condition , it is t hat 
condition have taken  as 0, so velocity ratio is nearly one.  
Then when we increase the net traction ratio, what happens the velocity rati o will go down 
that means, it will decrease , when you increase  pull obviously there will be more slip  hence,  
Va by Vt  will reduce. Now, if you are looking at the  pull to thrust ratio or the NTR to GT R ratio, it is nearly zero . The NTR never reaches too cl ose to GTR. So, there is a differ ence, 
why there is a difference?  Because the difference will give you the rolling resistance.  
So, that is  why NTR  never reaches GTR and the ratio cannot be equal to 1, the differences 
roughly are on a concrete surface it i s roughly around 0.15 like that.  So, as you increase the 
net traction  ratio the  pull ratio increases and it never reaches to 1, as I said because of the 
rolling resistance. So, that means, both the values , both the ratios are less er than 1.  
So when you mu ltiply this , then it is further reduce that is the reason why tractive efficiency 
is always lesser than the ratio of NT R by GT R value or the ratio of V a by Vt value. Usually, 
this kind of plot is plotted in the right side figure I have indicated , traction  performance ratio 
versus slip, but I have plotted in a different way , so that you can verify or you can see the 
effect of Va by Vt and NTR by  GTR ratio effect on different performance of the wheel.  
Now this the conventional way , the right side figure is th e conventional way by which the 
performance parameters are usually plotted. Now, what is the difference ? If you look at 
difference , there is no difference , in fact, the only the x -axis we are taking slip, in the 
previous figure  we are taking net traction  ratio. Now, nature of the curve  we can see it is 
same , tractive efficienc y is increasing , reaching to a peak at slip value of around 10  percent .  
Then it remains almost constant , sorry, it goes down , this one. Now, when I plot the  pull 
versus the coefficien t of traction , you can see , initially it rises then reaches to a peak. So, the 
slip at which you are getting maximum  pull and slip at which you are  gettin g maximum 
tractive efficiency , they are not same.  If I draw a vertical line here then , if I d raw a ver tical 
line here corresponding to maximum tractive efficiency this is the corresponding slip.  
Now, if I draw a vertical line here this is the maximum pull. Now the slip at which you are  
getting maximum tractive  efficiency, the slip at which you are  getting  maximum pull, they 
are different. So, now choice is ours , whether you  want more tractive efficiency or even more 
pull. If you want to make a compromise between these two so that neither  pull is lost much 
nor tractive efficiency lost much . Then you have to  find out a design value  somewhere here , 
so that not much of a pull is lost or not much of tractive  efficiency is lost.  
So, you have to make a compromise.  And this design value again depends on different soil 
conditions, what I have  plotted here is only f or one soil condition that is on a hard surface. 
So, depending on the soil condition, you have to decide whether the slip is to be maintained 
at 10  per cent, 20 per cent or 30  per cent.  But usually we never recommend for 30  per cent, w e say that the slips  should be between 10 
to 20  per cent for all conditions  so that the maximum compromise is possible with tractive 
efficiency and coefficient of traction . So, these are the two ways by which we can represent 
the performance parameters . 
(Refer Slide Time:  26:20) 
 
So, let me conclude then . We discuss related to mechanics of different types of wheels, then 
how these performance parameters are varying  with slip, with the net traction  ratio and how 
to represen t in a different way , the tractive efficiency that we have discussed in this class.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:43 )  
 So, you can refer to some of these books for further increasing your knowledge related to this 
mechanics. Thank you . 