Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  01 
Concept  of Traction  and Traction  Devices  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:34) 
 
Hi everyone,  this is Professor  H Raheman  from  Department  of Agricultural  and Food  
Engineering,  IIT Kharagpur . I welcome  you all to this NPTEL  online  certification  course  on 
Traction  Engineering.  This is the first class  where  I will try to cover  the concept  of traction  
and the traction  devices . 
(Refer Slide  Time:  00:52) 
 So, these  are the concepts  which  will be covered  like definition  of traction,  role of traction,  
how it is produced,  how to improve  traction  and what  are the different  traction  devices  used 
for developing  traction.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 01:09) 
 
These are the key points  like traction,  traction  devices , moment , rolling  resistance  and thrust . 
These are the key points.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:22) 
 
Now,  if you look at the power  sources  which  are commonly  used in farms  are your tractor  
and power tillers . So, what  I have  shown  here is, how the power  is transmitted  and how much  power  is available  at the drawbar  and at the PTO.  So, if you look at this, in a tractor , about  83 
per cent of the power  which  is developed  in the gross  flywheel  is avail able at the PTO . 
Now, if you want  to find out the power  which  is available  at the drawbar , then again  there  
will be reduction  of say in a two wheeled  tractor  there  will be 0.87 times  the power  which  is 
available  at the PTO  in concrete  surface  and in firm soil still less 0.72 times  and in tilled  soil 
it is 0.67 times  and in soft soil it is 0.55 times . 
And for mechanical  front wheel assist  tractor,  this is little better  you can see, this is 0.77 and 
in tilled  soil, this is 0.73,  so there  is an increase  in power availabili ty. In soft soil, it is 0.65.  In 
a four-wheel  drive  tractor  still it is better  than the mechanical  front wheel assist  tractor . So, 
there  is an increase  from  0.73 to 0.75 in tilled  soil and in soft soil there  is an increase  of 0.05. 
So, if it is a track , track is giving  the best performance , if you look at this. So, now it is the 
soil condition , it is the traction element  which  will decide  or which  will control  the drawbar  
power  availability.  So, traction  elements , soil conditions,  these  are the important  parameters  
which are to be taken  into consideration . Now, what  is traction ? 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  03:41) 
 
So, before  going  to traction , we can see here, what are the different  power  outlets  which  are 
available  in a tractor ? One is PTO  or the power  take off, the other  one is hydraulic  outlet , the 
third  one is drawbar.  Out of these  three , the drawbar  is most  commonly  used,  but it is the 
least efficient  among  these  three.  And research ers have  indicated  that 20 to 55 per cent of the engine  power  is lost at the interaction  between  traction device  and soil. But our implements  
which  we have  developed  mostly  are of drawbar  driven  type.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  04:35) 
 
So, let us discuss  about  what  is traction . Traction  word  is derived  from  the Latin  word  
“trahere” meaning  to draw  or pull, is basically  a tractive  force  which  is developed  because  of 
the interaction  between  traction  device  which  could  be wheel , which  could  be track  and soil 
to develop  a course  which  will help in moving  the vehicle  as well as the implement . So, this 
figure  shows  a wheel which  is subjected  to normal  load W in addition  to its own weight,  then 
it has to be powered , so axle torque  is denoted  as T, then when  it is powered , it will try to 
rotate.  
So, when  the wheel  will try to rotate,  it will come  in contact  with the soil thereby it will 
develop  some  shearing forces . The shearing  forces  will help in developing  the thrust  force.  
So, the thrust  force  that will be utilized  to move  the wheel  forward.  So, because  of this 
weight , because  of the shearing  force , there  will be a soil reaction  which  is denoted  as G, and 
the initial  movement  of the wheel  will be opposed  by the frictional  forces , so that is indicated  
as motion  resistance . So, the thrust  force  which  is developed , that will take care of this 
motion  resistance.  So, thrust  minus  motion  resistance  will be equal  to the pull developed.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  06:22) 
 
So, now,  we will see in this slide,  what  is happening . A wheel  is provided  with a torque . It is 
trying  to spin about  its own axis, but it is not moving  forward . The reason  is, the wheel  is not 
in contact  with the soil. Unless , it is oppose d, it will not move  forward.  So, it is only moving  
about  its, it is rotating  about  its own axis. Now,  the moment  I make  it to happen  that it is in 
contact with the soil surface , then it starts  developin g it starts moving  forward . 
Why it is so? Because  when  it is in contact  with the soil, there  will be interaction , interaction  
between  wheel  and soil and thereby  the shearing  action  takes  place  and the force which  is 
developed  that will try to push  the wheel  forward.  So, I have  indicated , what  are the forces  
acting . But there  is no pull here, only the wheel  is power ed and it is moving  forward.  
So, W is the weight , this is the torque  which  is applied  and soil reaction  is G and rolling  
resistance  is R. And the thrust develop ed, it will be sufficient  to overcome  the rolling  
resistance , thereby  it starts  moving.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  07:45) 
 
 
Now,  I will show  you a second  slide  when  pull is applied  to this whee l, everything  is same  
only thing  is, pull is applied.  But, if you look at this figure,  wheel  is moving,  but it is moving  
at a lesser  speed . The speed  at which  it was moving  when  pull was 0 and the speed  at which  it 
is moving  when  pull is applied , they are not same . There is a difference . The speed  at which  
it is moving  with a pull is lesser  than the speed  at which  it is moving , the wheel  is moving  
without  a pull. 
So, why it is happening,  because  when  you apply  pull that will oppose  the movement  of the 
wheel  forward.  So, thereby  wheel  will try to move  forward  but the pull and the rolling  
resistance  will try to pull it from  backward.  So, that is why there  is a difference . So, slip will be developed.  So, if you look at the forces  which  are acting  on the wheel  W, torque  T, sorry , 
torque , input  torque , then pull is P and R is the rolling  resistance  and G is the soil reaction . 
If we look at the figure  here and the look at the previous  slide,  where  pull is not applied , you 
can see the direction  of soil reaction . G is vertical  when  pull is not applied  and when  pull is 
applied  the G is not remaining  vertical  it is at an angle.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  09:25 ) 
 
 
So, from  these  two slides , one will identify  what  are the different  parameters  which  are going  
to affect  the tractive force.  The first thing  is your soil parameter s, Second  is your wheel  
parameter s, Third is your operating  parameters , Under soil parameters , it will be moisture  
content,  strength  of soil and type of soil. Under  wheel  parameters , it will be the size of tire and the load coming  in the tire and the 
inflation  pressure  and finally, the type of tire. It could  be bias ply, it could  be radial  ply, it 
could  be a bias belted.  So, type of tire has influence  on wheel  parameters , influence  on 
tractive  performance . Then operating  parameters , as I just now, we have  shown those  two 
slides  where  wheel  slip is important.  
So, wheel  slip is going  to affect  the tractive performance  or the tractive  force.  Now,  the basic  
equations  which  is being  used for estimating  the maximum  tractive  force  is given  as 
 
 So, let me explain  the different  components  of this one. Fmax is your maximum  thrust  which  
is developed , A is the contact  area, c is the cohesion  of soil, W is the weight  that means  
normal  load which  is acting  on the wheel  and ∅ is the angle of internal  friction. c and ∅ that 
contributes  to the soil parameters , A depends  on the load and depends  on the type of tire, it 
depends  on the inflation  pressure , it depends  on the soil condition , and W is the normal  load.  
Now,  if you try to find out, if you try to express in terms  of stress,  so  
 
So, 
 is nothing  but your shear  stress . And 
 is nothing  but your normal  stress.  So, in 
other words,  I can say, shear  stress  is a function  of cohesion  of the soil, normal  stress  acting  
on the soil and the angle  of internal  friction  ∅. 
Now,  in case of a clayey soil where  c has some  value  but ∅ is 0, angle  of internal  resistance  is 
0. So, in that case, ‘W’ has no role for developing  the maximum  tractive  force . The second  
component  in a clayey  soil will be contributing  very less almost  negligible  you can say it is 0. 
So,  
 
 So, for a given  soil condition  c is fixed.  
So, now it is dependent  on ‘A’, the maximum  tractive  force  which  is developed  is dependent  
on the contact  area. And as you know , contact  area is a function  of inflation  pressure , it is a 
function  of load coming  on the wheel,  it is a function  of type of tyre, is a function  of soil strength.  So, now,  these  are the parameters  which will contribute  to the contact  area.  So, more  
the contact  area, more  will be the thrust  force  or the tractive  force  developed . 
Now,  if you look at the other  condition  where  the soil is sandy , that means,  it has a ∅ value  
but c value  is 0, the cohesion  is 0. That means,  the first component  has negligible  effect  on 
tractive  force  develop ed, that is maximum  tractive  force develop ed. So, Fmax will be again  
dependent  on 
 . So, now Fmax is dependent  on 
 . 
So, for a given  soil, ∅ is fixed . We cannot  change  ∅, only by addition  of certain  moisture , we 
can increase  a little bit but, it is a function  of W only. For a given  soil, sandy  soil, maximum  
thrust  force  is a function  of weight  coming  on the wheel . Higher  the weight , more  will be the 
maximum  thrust. So, unlike  the previous  case in a clay soil, where  it is dependent  on so many  
factors , inflation  pressure , it depends  on the type of soil that means  the strength  of soil, it 
depends  on the type of tyre. So, in this case, it is only dependent  on what  is the load it can 
carry , more  the load more  will be the thrust  force.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:30 ) 
  
Now, let us see what are the different traction devices which are u sed for deve loping tractive 
force or for movement of the vehicle in farms . It could be pneumatic wheel;  it could be solid 
wheel . Solid wheel could be your cage wheels which is shown in this figure. Then it could be 
simply a towed wheel , which is a bullock cart wheel o r it cou ld be a track. Out of these three , 
the most commonly used one is your pneumatic wheel.  
The reason is being, it is flexible, it gives a suspension system while riding over the surface 
irregularities and it develops more traction as compa red to the s olid whee ls like the cage 
wheels. Now, if you use cage wheels , the problem will be the transportation, it will try to 
damage the roads on which it has to move from the workshop for the workshop or shade to 
the field. And obviously, a towed whee ls which are  fitted to  the bullock cart , these are not 
powered wheels. Simply , it is a supporting wheel, it is again a solid wheel.  
So, this is basically used for transportation of different materials. So, but these are not the 
wheels which are used for de veloping tra ctive force . These are only a towed wheels which 
are used for carrying different materials from one place to another. Then the track, there is a 
belt which is wound around two wheels, so the contact area is more. There are arrangements , 
where r ollers are p rovided to k eep the stiffness of the belt tight, so that the contact area, so 
that the pressure distribution below the contact area is more or less uniform.  
As we know that higher the contact area, higher will be the tractive force , but this is  
associated with certain other difficulties like steering. And researchers are trying to develop a 
steering mechanism when the power sources like tractors and power t illers  are fitted with tracks . They want to raise it or they want to reduce the contact ar ea so that it can take a  easy 
turn. 
Now, if you look at the equation, which I just now discuss ed,  
 
 So, whether it is a sandy soil, whether it is a clay soil or is a loamy soi l, A has a role, W has 
a role. So, the tra cks which a re provided with  bigger size t racto r, they will develop definitely 
higher tractive force. Because A is more, W is more , so, the tractive force which is developed 
with the track will be definitely higher than the tractive force which is developed  in case of 
wheels.  
So, these a re some of the traction elements and out of which only the pneumatic wheels 
which are very common and these are provided with the low hp tractors the commonly used 
tractors like 45 hp, 55 hp, these are very common.  (Refer Sl ide Time: 19: 23) 
 
Now, let us conclude , what we have done so far is, we try to develop the concept of traction 
and how the tractive force is developed and what are the different parameters which affect the 
tractive force and what are the different tra ction elements wh ich can be used to convert the 
engine power to the drawbar power.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:51)  
 
So, the reference you can take Wong, J.Y, Terramechanics and off -road vehicle engineering, 
theory of ground veh icles again by Wong, J.Y, then off -road vehicle eng ineering principles 
Goering, C.E. and tractors and their power units by four authors Barger, Liljedehl, Carleton 
and Me Kibben. Thank you.   