Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  02 
Classification  of wheels,  Forces  and moments  acting  on wheel  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:34) 
 
Hi, everyone . This is Professor  H Raheman , I welcome  you to the Lecture  2 of Traction  
Engineering  course,  where  I will try to cover  the classification  of wheels , forces  and moments  
acting  on the wheel.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  00:46) 
 The concept s which  will be covered  will be difference  between  the rigid  wheel  and flexible  
wheel.  Forces  which  are acting  on braked,  towed,  self-propelled  and powered  wheels.  Then  
forces  and moments  acting  on a wheel.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:03) 
 
When you talk about  wheels , wheels  could  be a rigid  wheel , wheels  could  be pneumatic  
wheel,  again  pneumatic  wheel  can be divided  into two types : rigid  mode  of operation  and 
flexible  mode  of operation . When I said rigid  mode  of operation  that means  the ground  
pressure  is not sufficient , the ground  is not sufficie ntly strong, ground  does not have  
sufficient  strength  to support  the wheel . So as a result , wheel  will sink and it will behave  like 
a rigid  wheel . 
When the ground  has sufficient  strength,  it will try to deflect  the wheel,  so it will be in a 
flexible  mode  of operation.  So, sometimes  the pneumatic  wheels  behave  like a rigid  wheel  
just like your cage wheel.  Initially , so what  happened  now,  the steel wheels  are fitted  with 
tractors,  but the limitations  are, it cannot  run on the paved  road, the ride is an extrem ely tough  
in the sense  there  will be a good  amount  of vibrations  and there  will be high soil compaction.  
So, in 1934 the first tractor  which  came  with a pneumatic  tyre that is WC Allischalmars  who 
tested  this tractor  fitted  with the rubber  tires at Nebras ka tractor  testing  laboratory  in the UK. 
In early  1930s , companies  began  to offer  pneumatic  tyres on farm  tractor.  Nowadays,  almost  
all tractors  are provided  with pneumatic  wheels  or the rubber  tires. Then the other  traction  
element  which  is used is your tracks. Tracks  could  be again  rubber  track ; it could  be metallic  
tracks. So, now coming  to the wheel . (Refer  Slide  Time:  03:15) 
 
The wheel  can be classified  as powered  wheel,  it can be classified  as towed  wheel,  it can be 
classified  as braked  wheel  or it can be classified  as self-propelled  wheel . So, these  
classifications  are based  on power  and torque  characteristics  of the tyre versus  slip. Now,  
what  is a powered  wheel ? When a wheel  is provided  with a torque  that means  initiate  with a 
torque  then it is powe red. 
But now, if you look at the torque  and pull characteristic  of a rubber  wheel.  I have  indicated  
here, this is the torque , this is the pull and torque  is touching  the x axis at this point  where  
pull is touching  the x axis at this point , origin is this point. Now, first we look at this point  
where  the pull is 0 but still some  torque  is acting.  And that condition  is called  self-propelled  
condition.  What  do you mean  by the self-propelled  condition ? 
Self-propelled  condition  means  the thrust which  is develope d because  of the interaction , 
because  of the supply  of input  power  or input  torque  that is sufficient  to develop  a tractive  
force  which  will overcome  the rolling  resistance . There is no pull, so pull is 0 which  is 
indicated  ‘H’ as 0. Now,  this point  refers  to self-propelled  condition.  The best example  of 
self-propelled  condition  or self-propelled  wheel  is your cars, the bus, tyres of the buses,  
trucks , etcetera . 
So, these  are the best example  of self-propelled  condition.  Now,  in self-propelled  condition , 
T is greater  than 0 that means  Torque  has certain  value , it has a weight  W then this is the 
tractive  force  which  is developed  and G is the soil reaction . Look at the orientation  of soil 
reaction.  So, it is toward s the contact  patch  and it is vertical.  Now,  the other  condition  which  I have  indicate d is this point  where  torque  is equal  to 0. 
When torque  is equal  to 0 means,  that condition  refers  to towed  wheel.  Towed  wheel  means,  
there  is no torque , only weight  is acting  and the soil react ion. Look at the orien tation  of soil 
reaction . This is no more  vertical  like this; this is incline d and it is passing  through  the 
centerline  of the wheel . And this towing  force  is the force  required  to roll the wheel.  
So, here, there  is no torque . T is equal  to 0. So, this condition is represented  by the point  here. 
And the difference  between  this point  to this point , so this is the towing  force  that means,  this 
much  force  is required  to roll the wheel  forward.  I am talking  about  these  forces  on a 
horizontal  plane . If the plane is inclined,  then a weight  component  will come  into picture . 
Now, the third  wheel  about which  we will be talking  about  is your brake d wheel.  
If you look at this figure , brake d wheel , the torque  applied  is just opposite  to the direction  of 
motion.  Just like in case of self-propelled  wheel,  the torque  is applied  in a clockwise  direction  
and the wheel  is moving  forward . But here, the torque  is applied  in the opposite  direction.  
And where  it is applied ? And look at the soil reaction , it is still incline d, inclined more  than 
the soil reaction  which  is obtained  in case of towed  wheel.  
And there  is a thrust,  there  is a pull H. Pull is there . So, torque  is less than 0. So, this is called  
brake d wheel . The best example  of brake d wheel  is your ground  wheel  of a seed-drill. The 
best example  of towed  wheel  is the wheels  which  are provided  in a bullock  cart. Now,  the 
fourth  wheel  is your powered  wheel . In case of powered  wheel , torque  is applied  so torque  is 
greater  than 0. 
There  will be weight , and pull is applied  and the soil reaction  will be inclined  in the opposite  
direction  to that which  you can see in case of a brake d wheel  or in case of a towed  wheel.  So, 
because  of the torque  application,  there  will be interaction  of this wheel  with soil and the 
force  which  is deve loped  that is tractive  force  that will take care of this pull H and the rolling  
resistance . 
So, if you look at these  four wheels,  what  are the forces  which  are acting  on these  wheels  and 
how the ground  reaction  is behaving,  how it is orienting  towards  the left side or toward s the 
right  side that is very clear  from  this figure.  So, that is why, I have  indicated  that any wheels  
coming  towards  this side will be called  as driving  wheel.  Any wheels  coming  towards  the left 
side from  this line will be braked  wheel . And the border lines  will be your self-propelled  
wheel.  And in this side, this will be towed  wheel . (Refer  Slide  Time:  09:51 ) 
 
Now,  based  on construction,  the pneumatic  wheels  can be called  as a bias tyre or bias belted  
tyre or radial  tire. Commonly , the bias belted  are being  used by the tractor  manufacturers  
either  bias tyre or bias belted  tyre and nowadays  radial  tires are coming  into picture,  the only 
advantage  in case of radial  tyre is, it will have  more  sidewall  deflection , so contact  area is 
more . That is the main advantage  over belted  or bias belted tyre. 
Then, the difference  between  bias tyre and the bias belted  tyre is: in case of bias tyre, there  is 
no belt provided  below  the carcass  whereas  in case of a bias belted  tyre there  is a belt 
provided  which will provid e more  stiffness  or which  will give more  stiffness  to the tyre, so 
deflection  of tyre is reduced.  Whereas  in case of a radial  tyre, there  will be a belt. So, these  
are the basic  differences  and we will cover  in detail  ‘the tyre constructi on’ in my subsequent  
classes,  where  I am going  to take the little bit about  tyre construction.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  11:20 ) 
 
Now,  the next important  thing  is what  are the forces  of moments  acting  and how do we 
represent  it, that is important.  So, to describ e the forces  and moments  acting  on a wheel , we 
have  to take the help of a axis system  which  has been  recommended  by Society  of 
Automotive  Engineers . Where, there  will be three  forces , three  moments  and this will be 
indicated  in this figure  which  you can see on the right  side. 
Then, first we have  to define  the x axis. The x axis is nothing  but the intersection  of the wheel  
plane  with the ground  plane . Then, y axis is perpendicular  to the ground  plane , perpendicular  
to the x axis. And the z axis is, the y axis is your ground  plane  itself  and the z axis is 
perpendicular  to the ground  plane . The positive  directions  are, for the x axis the positive  
direction  is indicated  here that means  moving  forward . And z axis, the positive  direction  is 
downward  and y axis, the positive  direction  is towards  the right  side, so that the entire axis 
systems  become  orthogonal  and right -hand  type.  
The next thing  is what  are the moments  acting . There are moments  about  x axis, there  are 
moments  about  y axis, there  are moment s about  z axis. So, the moment  about  the x axis is 
called  the overturning  moment . The moment  about  y axis is called  the rolling  resistance  
moment . And the moment  about  z axis is called  aligning  torque.  So, when  the wheel  is 
moving  in any soil, so there  will be soil reaction  coming  from  the ground  to the wheel.  
So, when  you resolve  the soil reaction  into longitudinal  direction , that becomes  your x axis. 
When we resolve  that reaction  force  which  is coming  from  the ground  to the wheel  in the x 
direction , that becomes  your longitudinal  force,  we call it longi tudinal  force . And when  it is resolved  in the y axis, that is called  lateral  force , when  it is resolved  in z axis, about  z axis 
that is called  normal  force.  
So, these  are the three  forces  which  are coming  from  the ground reaction  which  is acting  on 
the whee l. Now,  in addition  to these  three  forces  and three  moments , there  are two angles  
indicated  here. One is slip angle  alpha , the other  one is camber angle , positive  camber  angle  
gamma.  This slip angle  is nothing  but the angle between  the direction  of travel  of the wheel  
and the intersection  of wheel  plane  with ground  plane.  
So, this angle  is called  slip angle . And camber angle  is the angle  which  the wheel  plane  is 
making  with the x-z plane.  So, these  two angles  are impo rtant because  they will be 
responsible  for devel oping  the cornering  forces  and the steering  as well as the cornering  
forces . When we will try to cover , there , we will discuss  what  is its effect  and how it is to be 
controlled.  
So, in summary , you can say there will be three  forces  acting , three  moments  actin g and this 
is the axis system  which  has been  prescribed  by Society  of Automotive  Engineers  to mention  
or to define  different  performance  parameters . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:11 ) 
 
So, we can conclude  that in this lecture , we tried to discuss  about  the classifi cation  of wheels  
based  on pull, based  on torque . And then we tried to define  the moments  and the forces  which  
are acting  and the two important  angles  which  are associated  with the wheel.  Thank  you.  