Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  09 
Characterization  of Shear  Stress  and Shear  Strength  in Different  Soil Conditions  
Hi everyone . This is Professor  H. Raheman from  Agricultural  and Food Engineering  
Department , IIT Kharagpur . I welcome  you all to this NPTEL  online  course  on Traction  
Engineering . And this is the lecture  number  9, where  I will try to cover  Characterization  of 
Shear Stress and Shear  Strength in different  Soil Conditions .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:59)  
 
As the shear  stress  is important  in deciding  the tractive  force which  is developed , so that’s 
why you are going  to take up this lecture , where  the concept  to be covered  are measurement  
of shear strength , how we are going  to measure  the shear  strength  of soil. Then shear  stress -
shear strain  relationship  for different  soils, then how to find out deformation  modulus  K?  (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:26)  
 
So, to start with how to measure  shear strength  of soil. You can measure  in the laboratory  or 
you can measure  in the field directly , so the apparatus  which  is used for measuring  shear 
strength , both in the laboratory  as well as in the field, is called  direct shear  apparatus . And 
this direct  shear  apparatu s, which  is used in the laboratory  is shown  in this figure , where  you 
can see the soil, whose  strength  or shear strength  is to be determine d. That has to be keep , 
kept in a box, so basically  this is the, inside  this there  is a box, shearing  box, which  comp rises 
of two halves  and they are of square  cross  section , 6 centimeter  by 6 centimeter  and the depth  
is also 6 centimeter . And the soil to be tested  is to be kept inside  this box and then the box is 
kept inside  a container  and the container , one end of the container  is attached  to the motor  for 
giving  the tangential  force. The other  end is connected  to a proving  ring, so that will measure  
the tangential  force which  is applied . So basically  the shear  box is shown  in this on the right  
side figure , it comprise s of two halves , two equal  halves , in fact, and then the soil to be put. 
Initially , you have  to put, keep  these  two halves  intact, so you have  to put some  pins, so that 
the box is not displaced , then on the bottom  of the box, there  will be a corrugated  or serrated  
plates . So this plate  is provided , so that there  will be no slip of soil during  tangential  force 
application . Then similarly  there  will be a serrated  plate  at the top, so then this lower  portion  
of this shear box is resting  on a container , where  the container  is almost  fixed  and is rolling  
over this or sliding  over these  rollers , which  are provided  at the bottom . So we apply  a 
tangential  force after removing  the pins, which  are initially  given  to a, which  are initially  put 
in that shear box, then we try to apply  a force  through  the help of a motor .  So by rotating  the, by switching  on the motor , the motor  will try to give a force  to this lower  
box and this is transmitted  to the upper  one and the resistance  is measured  with the help of a 
dial gauge , which  is mounted  on the right  corner . So the displacement  also can be measured  
by putting  a dial gauge . So for measuring  the displacement , we have  to put a dial gauge  at the 
left corner , this one.  
And for measuring  the force , which  is applied  tangential  force that we have  to provide  a 
proving  ring with the dial gauge , so this dial gauge  and the right  corner  like here, so this dial 
gauge  and, this proving  ring is, they are to be calibrated  initially  before  putting  into the 
system . So now we apply  a constant  strain  and what  we measure  is the tangential  force. So 
tangential  force if you denote  it by F divided  by the area which  is sheared . So, that will give 
you shear  stress .  
So, now we have  to find out what  is the area which  is sheared.  So the shearing  takes  place  
gradually , at a constant  rate,. So here this shearing  is taking  place  along  this dotted  line. So, 
this has to be conducted  at several  normal  weights  that means  you have  to have  some  
arrangement , like here we have  indicator , that is a load loading  yoke is there . So, when  you 
put weight  on the left hand  side there , with the help of lever age it is going  to apply  a load on 
the top of this shear box, with the help of a roller  or a ball. So, that the load is more  or less 
uniformly  distributed  over the entire surface .  
So, the shear  stress es are to be measured  for different  loading  conditions . It can vary the 
weight  and then find out shear  stress  versus  normal  stress  curve . And we can also plot shear  
stress  versus  the shear  displacement . So then what  we will do with this data which  we 
obtained  from  this test that we are going  to discuss .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  6:54)  
 
So the data will be utilized  for finding  out the shear  stress . Shear displacement  data will be 
utilized  for finding  out what  is the maximum  stress  which  is occurring  or which  is causing  the 
failure  of the soil. So this test setup  which  we discuss , it has a disadvantage , disadvantage  in 
the sense , many  disadvantages .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  7:24)  
 
The first disadvantages  among  the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 is, the stress  condition s across  the soil sample  
are very complex . So, distribution  of normal  and shear  stress  over the potential  surface  are 
not uniform.  There is little control  over drainage  of soil, second  disadvantage . And the third  disadvantage  is, the plane  of shear  failure  is predefined , that means  we are forcing  the soil to 
fail in a particular  plane , here the plane  is horizontal .  
Then area under  shear  that is going  to reduce  with time, so it is not constant , but in our 
calculation  when  we take the shear  stress  divided  by area that we are taking  as constant , so 
that is another  difficulty . Then effective  lateral  resistance , because  the soil is confined  to a 
box, so there  may be a side wall effect , while  measuring  the shear  force. So these  are some  of 
the disadvantages . But if you want  to find out shear strength  in the control  condition , then in 
the laboratory , this is the best method  by which  you can find out.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  8:47)  
 
Now the shear  stress,  why you are interested  because  the shear  stress  which  is developed  at 
the bottom , that is at the interface  of the wheel  and soil, that is going  to create  the tractive  
effort . So shear  stress  at different  displacement  has to be measured  or has to be identified  or 
we have  to find out the relationship  betw een shear  stress  and shear displacement .  
So that we can find out how much  will be the thrust , which  will be developed  at different  
displacement  values . So there  are different  ways  which  we talked  about  this to find out the 
shear  stress , one is your beva meter technique , where  you carry  out plate  sinkage  test and 
shear  annulus  test to find out the shear  strength  of soil.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  9:42)  
 
Now we will see what  are the data which  you obtained  from  shear  stress  - shear displacement  
relationship , which we obtained  by using  a shear ring of different  outside  diameter . At the left 
side figure  if you look at, this test has been  conducted  using  a shear annulus  with an outer  
diameter  of 22.2 centimeter  and this is carried  out in sandy  soil and the normal  pressure  
which  you applied  is starting  from  26.9 kPa to 68.2 kPa.  
Now if you look at the curve , so initially  the shear  stress  is rising  at a very faster  rate, then 
after that if we increase  in shear displacement  it is almost  nearly  constant , we can say. So, 
this is the trend  which  is observed  for all those  four or five normal  pressures  which  you 
carried  out. Now when  we try to carry  out the same  test with a different  shear  annulus  
apparatus , different  means  the outside  diameter  has been  incre ased to 29.8 centimeter . And 
the normal  pressure  which  you varied  is from  20.3 kPa to 43.2 kPa. We see the same  nature  
of curve  that means  initially  it is increasing  at a faster  rate, then it is slowing  down . So what  
we conclude  from  here is, whether  you use a smaller  annulus  or whether  you use a bigger  
annulus  that is not going  to affect  the shear  strength  measurement .  
But one thing  is sure that the shear  strength  or the shear  stress  is dependent  on shear 
displacement  and normal  pressure . So, from  these  curves  if you try to find out the maximum  
shear  stress  values . So,  maximum  shear  stress  means , I will just draw  a line like this, 
horizontal  line, so that will give you maximum  shear  stress , that means  beyond  that the soil 
will start to lose that means  fail.  So, if I take those  maximum  values  and try to plot with respect  to normal  pressure . What you 
can observe  is, the curve  which  you get in the right  side, so these  are the points  which  are 
representing  the maximum  shear  stress  and correspon ding a particular  normal  pressure . Now 
if you best fit this line and extend  it to touch  y-axis you will find out at the y-axis the 
intercept  is, it has some  intercept , and it has some  slope .  
So now if you look at the Coulomb's  equation ,  
 
So now if you fit this equation  to this line, then the intercept  is nothing  but your cohesion  and 
the slope  is nothing  but your angle  of internal  friction . So this is how we find out shear 
strength  at different  normal  pressure  and from  there , we try to find out the values  of c and φ 
for a given  soil.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:30)  
 
Now from  the experimental  data, what  you observed  is there  are three  basic  characteristics  of 
shear  strength  and displacement  curves. T hree basic  curves  we can see. One is your for loose 
sand, saturated  clay and disturbed  soil, one nature  is it. Then for organic  terrain  we get 
another  nature  and for compaction , silt and loam  we get another  nature  of the curve . This is 
the variation  of shear  stress -shear displac ement .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  14:06 )  
 
So now we will go into details  of this one, how the shear  stress  and shear  strain relationship  is 
observed  in case of loose  sand, saturated  clay and in most  of the disturbed  soils. So, the 
nature  of the curve  is like this, the x axis is your displacement  and the y axis is your shear  
stress . Now if you look at this, initially , this is rising  at a very faster  rate, then after some  time 
it is almost  stable .  
So now if you best fit that one, the curve will be exponential , like this. So, this exponential  
curve  can be given  by an equation  which  is given  here,  
 
Where  τ is a shear  stress  at a displacement  j and τmax is the maximum  shear  stress  and j is the 
shear displacement  and K is the shear  deformation  modulus . And this K, in fact, represents  
the major  of the magnitude  of shear displacement  which  is required  to develop  the maximum  
shear  stress .  
The value  of K is going  to determine  as the shape  of the shear curve . Now how to find out 
this value  of K? Now if you look at this graph  on the left side, what  you can see is, I have  
drawn  two tangents  to the original  curve , one is a tangent  at the 0 point , at the origin , the 
other  one is a tangent  to the maximum  shear stress  that means  it is basically  a horizontal  line 
and they will intersect  at a point .  So distance  of that point  from  the vertical  axis is taken  as K, which  is shear  deformation  
modulus . Now if you look at the equation , then tau max can be represente d by  
 
that means   
 
so  
 
The value  of K may be represented  by the distance  between  the vertical  axis as I told and 
between  the vertical  axis and the intersection  point .  
And the slope  of the shear  curve  at the origin  can be found  out by taking  this dτ/dj. If you 
differentiate  at j is equal  to 0, displacement  is equal  to 0, then, from  that equation  we found  
that  
 
Now, at j is equal  to 0, this is simply  comes  down  to τmax/K.  
If you cannot  do this exercise , then the other  way of finding  out K is, you have  to take the one 
third  of the shear  displacement  where , shear  displacement  which  is 95 percent  of the 
maximum  shear  stress , which  is 95 percent . Suppose  the shear  displacement  is maximum  
here, this is the maximum  shear displacement . So 95 percent  of 15, so somewhere  here, now 
one third  of that one, see this displacement  value  will give you directly  the value  of K.  
The unit of K is in millimeter . But, in actual  practice  though  I have  drawn  a very nice curve  
and fitted  an equation , but in actual  practice  the shear  curves  are not that smooth , so in order  
to get an optimum  value  that will minimize  the errors  in representing  this curve  that can be 
utilized , that can be obtained  by this equation ,  
 So by this you can get an optimum  value  of K which  will minimize  the error  in explaining  the 
behavior  of the shear  stress -shear  displacement  curve .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:08 )  
 
 
Next is another  cell condition , before  that we can, some  experimental  values  are available  for 
K. So, those  values  can be taken  as for firm sandy  soil, K value  is 1 centimeter , for loose  sand 
it is 2.5 centimeter  and for clay with maximum  compaction , it is 0.6 centimeter . So 
researchers  they have  also reported  the value  of K to be a function  of normal  pressure . So 
these  are some  of the information  which  are available  for K.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:45)   
 
Next thing  is, we will try to find out what  is the shear  stress  shear displacement  in case of 
organic  terrain . Organic  terrain  means the top cover  is your vegetative  cover  is there  on the 
top and on the bottom  there  is, there  will be saturated  peat or saturated  clay. So if that is the 
condition  of soil then the shear  stress -shear displacement  curve will look like this, which  is 
show n in the left side of the figure , left side of the slide .  
So, it is initially  rising  to a maximum  value , in fact, it can get a hump  here, then it is going  
down . So, now if I best fit this one, so the best fit curve  is given  by this dotted  line and the 
equation  to that is given  as  
 
Here Kw is the shear  displacement , where  the maximum  shear  stress  occurs .  
And the value  on the field data, based  on the value  of field data, Kw values  they vary from  
14.4 centimeter  to 16.4 centimeter  for various  type of organic  terrains , which  are tested . So, 
this curve  has been  drawn  for a normal  pressure  of 11.2 kPa, so the moment  you change  the 
normal  pressure  you will get another  curve, but the nature  of the curve will remain  nearly  
same , that means  initially  it will rise, rise to a peak  and then slowly  it will go down .  
So the peak  is raised , so long as the vegetative  cover  on the top soil is offering  resistance , the 
shear  stress  is increasing . The moment , the vegetative  cover  fails, then there  is no more  
resistance , the bottom  peat is not going  to offer  same  resistance , so that is why the shear  
stress  value  goes down .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  21:43 )  
 
So next relationship  is what  is observed  for compact  sand and silt and loam.  Whether  it is a 
compact  sand, whether  it is a silt soil, whether  it is a loamy  soil, for all these  three  conditions  
you will get or you will experience  a curve  like this, which  is shown  in the left side of the 
slide, the curve  is like this. Initially , it rises at a very faster  rate, then it reaches  to a peak , 
after that it goes down  and then remains  almost  static.  
So, this kind of curve  can be best fitted  as  
 
Here two things , two values  are there , one is Kr and Kw. So, what  is Kr? Kr is the ratio of 
residual  stress  to the maximum  shear  stress . If you look at the figure , the residual  stress  
corresponds  to this one.  
That means  after the curve  has become  almost  constant , so that stress  is called  the residual  
stress  and the maximum  stress  is corresponding  to this peak  value , that is your maximum  
stress. So, ratio of this τr residual  stress  to maximum  stress  tau max is denoted  as Kr and Kw is 
the shear  displacement  where  the maximum  shear  stress  occurs  that means  this value , Kw. So, 
if you know  Kr and Kw then at any value  of j that is shear  displacem ent, we can find out what  
is the corresponding  shear  stress  if you know  the maximum  shear  stress  value . And the nature  
of the curve  which  I indicated  is for a normal  pressure  of 11.1 kPa, and if you change  the 
normal  pressure  then peak will rise but the nature  will remain  same .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  24:09 )  
 
So, in this lecture  I tried to give  the method  which  is followed  for measuring  shear  stress  in 
the laboratory  and then the nature  of the curves  which  are generally  observed , nature  of the 
curve  means  nature  of shear  stress -shear displacement , which  are observed  in nature  that are 
discussed . Then that will help you in characterizing  the shear  stress -shear displacement  
relationship  and these  relationship s can be utilized  to find out the shear  stress.  
If you are interested  in deciding  or in determining  the shear  stress  values , which  will be 
utilized  later on for measuring  the strength  of soil, for measuring  the strength  of soil, as well 
as for developing  the tractive  effort .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  25:07)  
 
So the reference  you can take as ‘Theory  of Ground  Vehicles’ by J. Y. Wong . 