Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Department  of Agricultur e and Food  Engineering   
India n Institute  of Technology , Kharag pur 
Lecture  05  
Tutorial  - 1 
(Refer  Slide  Time : 0:30)  
 
 
Hi everyone,  this is Professor  H Raheman from  Agricultural  and Food Engineering  
Department , IIT Kharagpur . I welcome  you all to this lecture  5, which  will be related  to the 
tutorial . Whatever  concepts,  we have  covered  in lecture  1 to lecture  4 that I will try to further  
clarify  with the help of using  these  problem s. So, the concepts  which we have  covered  so far 
is, slip, rolling  radius , how to measure  rolling  radius,  how to measure  motion  resistance  ratio, then what  is net traction  ratio,  gross  traction  ratio, then tractive  efficiency  and power  delivery  
efficiency . All these parameters  I am going  to give you using  these  questions.  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 1:27)   
 
  
 
 The first question  is, find the distance  covered  by a 500 by 65R22.5 tyre when  it makes  10 
revolutions  in 2 minutes  on the hard horizontal  surface  with tyre deflection  del by h as 20 per 
cent. So, if wheel slip is 15 per cent,  then find out the actual  distance  covered.  So, here the 
concept  what  you have  done  for measuring  the diameter  of the wheel  when  the specification  
of the wheel  is given , that will be utilized. Then, how to find out the rolling  radius  then,  how 
to measure , how to find out slip. These are the three  concepts  which  will be tested  here.   
But I said, 500 by 65R22.5  that means,  this is a radial  tyre and 500 is the section  width  which  
is your b. So, this is 500 millimeters . Now  65, the aspect  ratio is your 65. Aspect  ratio which  
is nothing  but h/b is 65 per cent. So, I can write  as 0.65. Now,  nominal  rim diameter  22.5 
inches  that means  22.5×2.54 that will give you in centimeter.  Now,  to find out the diameter  of 
the wheel  without  deflection,  dia of the wheel  without  deflection . This will be equal  to, the 
formula  is  
 
500 is millimeters  so, rather  so, write  in centimeter  so, 50 into 2.  
So, this will give you around  125.579  centimeter s. This is the diameter,  but in the question , it 
is given  that there  is a deflection  by 20 per cent. So, how to find out the static  loaded  radius , 
that is important.  So, 60 per cent, sorry 20 per cent. So, h was, how much?  So, if I write  here,  
 
So, 20 percent  of that, 0.2, so that becomes  your deflection . This is the h value.  Now,  δ would  
be  
 
So, this will be your δ. So, now static loaded  radius , this will be equal  to ‘r-δ’. If dia without  
deflection  is this, so  
 
So, r will be 125.579  by 2 minus  delta . δ is this value . So, you will get the static  loaded  
radius . Now,  in 10 revolution s, how much  distance  it is covering , that we have  to find out. 
So, distance  covered  in 10 revolutions ,  
 Now,  if you look at the slip definition , so, slip definition  says,  
 
The distance  which  you are getting  here, is the distance  without  load.  So, in 10 revolutions  
you are getting  this much, in one revolution , this divided  by 10 that you will get around  
35.367. So, distance  without  load will be around  35.367 . This is in centimeter , sorry, this is in 
meter .  
Now, slip is given  as 15 per cent. So, if I write  slip, slip is nothing  but  
 
So, better  we write  slip directly , slip is equal  to, slip is this much.  So, slip is 0.15 that is equal  
to this. Now,  this value  is known,  so, this value  is calculate d. So,  
 
So, that will give you 0.85 times  this thing . So, that will give you distance  traveled  with load 
per revolution . So, that will give you the total distance  covered . 
(Refe r Slide  Time : 8:42)   
 
A two-wheel  drive  tractor  which  is weighing  2400  kg with a weight  distribution  of 35 per 
cent and 65 per cent of the total weight  at the front  and the rear axle.  If rolling  resistance  of 
each of the wheel  is equal  to 4 per cent of the total weight  coming  on it. calculate  the force  required  to tow the tractor  on a horizontal  hard surface  that means,  we have  to find out the 
rolling  resistance.   
So, in a tractor  there  are four wheels  so, each one will contribute  some  rolling  resista nce. 
Assuming  that the two rear wheels  and the two front  wheels , they contribute  equal  rolling  
resistance.  So, first, you have  to calculate  the rolling  resistance  for the rear wheels  then you 
have  to calculate  rolling  resistance  with the front  wheel s and then summation  of these  will be 
total rolling resistance . So, if you are calculating  rolling  resistance  of one of the rear wheels , 
then what  you have  to do is, the weight  which  is coming  now 2400  kg is the total weight  out 
of 35 percent  is on the front  axle. So, 35,  
 
so, that will give you weight  coming  on, so, this is front  wheel  sorry,  weight  coming  on the 
front  wheel , each of the front  wheels .  
Similarly,  weight  coming  on the each of the rear whee ls 
 
Now,  coeffici ent of rolling  resistance  is equal  to 4 per cent of the total weight.  So, whatever  
value  you are getting  here multiply  4/100, that will give you rolling  resistance  of each of the 
wheels  of the rear axle. So, then you multiply  with 2, so that will give you total rolling  
resistance  for the rear axle, rear axle.  
Similarly,  find out total rolling  resistance  for front  axle. So, in that case,  whatever  value  you 
are getting  here  
 
The summation  of these  two value s will give you the total rolling  resistance  and that will be 
equal  to the force  required  to tow the tractor . So, that value  will be equal  to the force  required  
to tow the tractor.  So, here the concept  of finding  out rolling  resistance  is given .  
(Refer  Slide Time: 11:53)    
The next question  is, if the same  tracto r is used to pull a 3 bottom  m. b. plough  weighing  250 
kg, there  is a weight  transfer  that is, 2 per cent of the weight  is coming  from  the front  axle, 
and 10 percent  of the total weight  of the implemen t is coming  on the rear axle.  So, there  will 
be weight  transfer.  Suppose , this is a tractor , and implement  is attached  here.  So, because  of 
the, when  we engage  the implement , there  will be weight  transfer  to this, there  will weight  
transfer  to this. So, this weight  transfer  is 2 per cent of the weight  coming  in the front  axle.  
So, we have  already  calculated  the weight  coming  on the front  axle which  is nothing  but  
 
This is the weight  coming  on the front  axle so, 2 per cent of that. That will be transferred  to 
the rear axle.  
Now,  10 per cent the total weight  of the implements , so implement  weight  is given  as 250 kg 
so, 10 per cent of that will be transferred  to the rear axle.  So, this one from  the front  axle 
transfer , this one from  the implement  transferred . Now, weight  on the rear axle is already  
there  which  is nothing  but weight  on the rear axle is  
 
So, summation  of these  3 will give you the dynamic  weight  coming  on the rear axle.  
So, once  you know  the dynamic  weight , then rolling resistance  is given , that is 4 per cent of 
the weight  coming , 4 per cent of the weight  coming , of the weight  coming  on the wheel . So, 
you find out the rolling  resistance.  So, here I have  calculated  the dynamic  weight.  So, dynamic  weight  divided  by 2 assuming  that both the wheels  are experiencing  the same  rolling 
resistance .  
So, these  divided  by 2 will give you the weight , dynamic  weight  of each of the wheel  fitted  to 
the rear. Now  4 per cent of that will be with the rolling  resistance.  So, 4 per cent of the 
weight  which  is coming  here, so Wd single  at rear wheel , now 4 per cent of that with the 
rolling  resistance  and coefficient  of rolling  resistance  will be rolling  resistance  divided  by 
dynamic  weight . That way you find out coefficient of rolling resist ance. 
So here, the concept  is, how to find out coefficient  rolling  resistance . As I said, if it is a single  
wheel,  there  will be no weight  transfer . So, here the weight  transfer  plays  a bigger  role, so 
that the initial  weight  does not remain  constant , it change s. So, that is the concept  given  here.  
So, while  dividing  the rolling  resistance  with weight,  it should  be always  the dynamic  weight  
in case of a tractor , not in case of a single  wheel .  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 15:31 )  
 
Then, we will try the concept  of power delivery  efficiency  and tractive  efficiency  that will be 
described  in one more  question.  The thrust  slip characteristics  of each of the two rear wheels  
in a 2-wheel  drive  tractor  is given  by  
, 
where F is the thrust  in kilo Newton  and s is the slip in per cent.  Now,  if the PTO  power  of a 
tractor  is 30 kW , calculate  the tractive  efficiency  and power  delivery  efficiency  of the tractor  at a wheel  slip of 15 per cent for each rear wheel  and with the total motion  resistance  of the 
tractor  as 2.4 kN.  
Some more  information  has been  given  like efficiency  of transmission  between  engine  and 
PTO , between  engine  and rear axle is 88 per cent,  82 per cent, respectively.  So, first thing  
when  we are going to calculate  the tractive efficienc y is, in case of tractive  efficiency  we 
require  to find out the drawbar  power , drawbar  power  by axle power . So, to find out drawbar  
power , you need  to know  the thrust  value , then deducting  the rolling  resistance  we will find 
out pull. So, drawbar  power  is nothing  but  
 
axle powe r is nothing  but  
 
 Va is the actual  velocity ; Vt is the theoretical  veloci ty. So, I can write  this as  
 
So, now,  our aim will be to find out P, to find out T. So, to find to find out T, an equation  is 
given ,  
 
Now, better  I should  write  F here, because  thrust  is indicated  as F is equal  to 34 so, I am 
replacing  this T with thrust. Now,  slip is 10, 15 per cent given . Now, substitute  here slip as 15 
per cent directly , so you will get a value  of trust. Thrust value  is coming  as 20.17  kN. This is 
for one wheel.   
Now,  for two wheels , there  are two wheels  in the rear axle. So, you have  to multiply  with the 
2 to find out the total thrust . Now,  total rolling  resistance  is given  as 2.4 kN. So, thrust  minus  
rolling  resistance  will give you total pull. Now  pull divided  so, you got the thrust  value  from  
this and rolling resistance  value  is given.  So, you can find out pull. Now,  
 
that will give you directly  the tractive  efficiency , one part is over.   So, here you do not have  to calculate  this Va and Vt because  very simply , I have  converted 
into slip value  and the slip value  is given.  So, immediately  you can calculate.  You do not 
have  to calculate  the theoretical  velocity , actual  velocity . Some must  be wondering , nothing  
is given , how do I calculate . So, you do not have  to worry  becau se this can be converted  to 
slip. So, that is why,  it becomes  simpler.   
Now,  coming  to the second  component  which  is the power  delivery  efficiency,  so, we know  
that power  delivery  efficiency  is nothing  but drawbar  power  by engine  power . This is the 
ratio of two powers.  Now,  how much  of the engine  power  is converted  to drawbar  power  that 
is the aim of giving  this performance  parameter  power  delivery  efficiency.  Now,  in this case, 
drawbar  power  is P×Va, so, we do not have  Va value  so, what  we will do,  
 
So, drawbar  power  by axle power  is nothing  but your tractive  efficiency  which  I have already  
calculated.  So, I can write  this as tractive  efficiency  into axle power  by engine  power.  So, 
tractive  efficiency you have  calculated , axle power  is not given , PTO  power  is given.  So, 
PTO  power  to engine  power  is given  as 0.88 and then axle power  to engine  power  is given  as 
0.82.  
So, axle power  I can write , the engine  power  is nothing  but so, I can write  this as axle power  
divided  by engine  power  is nothing  but your PTO  power  divided  by transmis sion efficiency  
which  is given  as 0.88. So, that will give you engine  power .  
Now,  engine  power  to axle power  is given  as 0.82.  So, this ratio now becomes  0.82. So, this 
is a product  of tractive  efficiency  which  you have  calculated . Now axle power  by engine  
power  I have converted  into PTO  power  by 0.88.  So, that becomes  0.82, now,   
 
If you want to express  in percentage  multipl y 100 that will give you directly  the percentage.   
So, let me explain  this one again , this is drawbar  power , power  delivery  efficiency  is nothing  
but drawbar  power  by engine  power  and drawbar  power  I have  divided  axle power and then 
multiplied  with axle power  so, that the ratio remains  same.  Now , drawbar  power  by axle 
power  is nothing  but your tractive  efficiency  which  you have  already  calculated  and the axle power  to engine  power  directly  it is given  as 0.82.  You do not have  to use, convert  to PTO  
power  directly  the power  is given  ratio is 0.82.  
So, tractive  efficiency  into 0.82 directly  if you multiply  that will give you the power  delivery  
efficiency , then multiply  100 so, that will give you in percentage.  So, this gives you, this 
problem  gives  you the where  have  you utilize  the concept,  how to calculate  tractive  
efficiency,  how to calculate  power  delivery  efficiency.  So, all the concepts  which  you 
covered  from  lecture  1 to 4 have been  they have  been  used in these  probl ems. Four problems  
which  are solved , I hope  that will give you more  use of these  performance parameters , more  
use of these concepts  that will clarify  little more . So, that in future  you may not able, you 
may not be in a position  so that you will not confus e in future .  
So, in brief , we can say, I have  given  four problems  out of these  four problems , each one is 
related  to two, three  concepts  and all these  concepts  I have  given . Yyou can try so that will 
help you in better  understanding  the performance  param eters.  
(Refer  Slide  Time : 24:47)   
 
So, you can solve  some  of the problems  which  are available  in some  of the books  which  has 
given , which  are given  here.  So, that will further  increase  your ability  to solve  the problems . 
These  are the books  that you can follow. Thank  you. 