Traction  Engineering  
Prof essor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Department  of Agricultur e and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology , Kharagpur  
Lecture  – 03 
Tyre  Constructions  and its Specification  
Hi everyone.  This is Professor  H. Raheman  from  Agricultural  and Food Engineering  
Department,  IIT Kharagpur.  I welcome  you all to this NPTEL  online  course.  Today  is 
Lecture  3 and where  I will try to cover  tyre construction  and its specification.  The first thing  
which  will come  to our mind is why required  to use a tyre?   
(Refer Slide  Time:  00:58)  
 
So, I will cover  in details  about  the tyre construction,  types  of tyres,  tyre terminology,  
specification s of tyre.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  01:09)  
 
Now,  the key points  are the carcass,  beads,  crown  angle,  aspect  ratio,  tyre specifica tion and 
finally  the overall  tyre diameter.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:25)  
 
We use wheel  in a ground  vehicle  to fulfill  certain  objectives.  Objectives  are to support  the 
weight  of the vehicle,  to cushion  the vehicle  when  riding  over surface  irregularities , then third  
one is to provide  sufficient  traction  for driving  as well as braking , then the last one is to 
provide  adequate  steering  control  and directional  stability.  So, these  functions  are efficiently  
done  and affectively  done  by pneumatic  tyre. So, if you look at the right  hand  corner , the 
tractors  are therefore  generally  provided  with wheels , pneumatic  tyres.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  02:19)  
 
So, what  is a pneumatic  tyre?  It is an annular  toroidal  shaped  inflatable  envelope  made  up of 
an elastic  material.  So, there are different  types  of tyres  like bias ply tyre, radial  tyre, bias 
belted  tyre. But all these  tyres , they have  some  common  components  like tread  which  is tyre 
tread , then carcass,  then beads,  sidewall  and the last one is optional;  optional  in the sense the 
belt is provided  or it may not be provided.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  03:04)  
 
So, I will discuss  in detail  about  first the bias ply tyre, then I will switch  on to the radial  ply 
tyre and then in the last, I will discuss  about  bias belted  tyre. So, in this figure , as I said 
whether  it is a bias ply tyre, radial  ply tyre or bias belted  tyre all are carrying  certain  common  components  like tread , then carcass , then beads  and sidewall.  So, what  is a tread,  how it is 
going  to help us? The tread  is the toughest  portion  of the tyre which  transmit s your tractive 
force  and steering  forces  etcetera  while  in contact  with the soil. 
Then comes  your carcass , this is the most  important  structural  element  of a tyre, it comprises  
of layers  of cords  of high modulus  of elasti city materials  and they are anchored  around  beads  
which  are made  up of very high strength  material  steel wires.  These  cords  are encased  with 
matrix  of low modulus  rubber  compo unds,  natural  synthetic  or metallic  composition  and they 
run in different  directi ons; different  direction  in the sense in case of a bias ply tyre. 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  04:43)  
 
I will show  in detail . They run from  one bead  to other  bead  in diagonally;  diagonal  in the 
sense , it is making  an angle  with the circumference , central lines  of the tyre circumference.  
So, central  line of the tyre circumference  means , if I, this is the one central  line and these  
lines  are cords.  So, they are making  an angle.  So that angle  is called  crown  angle.  So, this 
angle  is called  crown  angle.  The crown  angle  decide s two things.  What will be the type of 
cornering  behavior , what  will be the type of riding  quality.  If crown  angle  is low then 
cornering  properties  are better,  but the riding  quality  is very rough.  If the crown  angle  is more  
then riding ... Cords  are made up of natural,  synthetic,  and metallic  composition  and they are 
anchored  around  the beads.  So, the two adjacent  layers  of cords , they run in opposite  
direction  that means  they overlap  in a diamond  shape.   
One cord is in this direction,  other  cord in this direction  like that. So, basically  there  is a 
diamond  shape . Here, in other  words , we call it as crisscrossing  because  of that what  happens  during  operation , when  there  is a load there  will be deflection  of tyre and its diamond  shaped  
portion  is gettin g deflected,  elongated.  So, that creates  a kind of action where  there  will be 
wiping  between  tread  and the road,  so resulting  in good  amount  of rolling  resistance.   
So, the beads,  carcass,  tread  and the carcass,  bead  at the side of that, there  will be a sidewall . 
So, this is the constructional  features  of a bias ply tyre. Now,  coming  to the constructional  
features  of radial  tyre how it is different  from  bias ply tyre?  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  07:49)  
 
So now, you look at the radial  ply tyre. Here  the cords  are, carcass  is there,  cords  are there  
then in addition  to this there  will be a belt and on the top of the belt there  will be tyre tread.  
So, the cords  here, which  run from  one bead  to other  bead  they are at crown  angle  of 90 
degree.  So, that is the advantage;  advantage  means  it gives  a better  ride, riding  ability  then 
this several  layers  of cords  are of high modulus  of elasticity , usually  steel or higher  strength  
material  fitted  under  the tread.  So, this is, I am talking about the belt.  
Now  the cords  which  are run from  one bead  to another  bead  they are of little lesser  high 
modulus  of elasticity  as compared  to the cords  which  are present  in the belt. The cords  in the 
belt lay at a crown  angle  which  is lesser  than the crown  angle  of the cords  which  are provided  
in the carcass.  So, crown  angle  of the carcass  is around  90 degrees,  whereas  crown  angle  of 
the cords  which  are present  in the belt, this is around  20 degrees .  
So, because  of that, because  of this belt, the tread  is stiffened.  So, when  there  is flexing  of 
tyre during  operation , the tread  remains  relatively  stiff so the sidewall  becomes  deflected  and there  is a probability  or a chance  that there  could  be damage  to the tyre when  it is operated  in 
a severe  conditions  like stones  are there  or stumps  are there , so those  are the severe  
conditions  that may affect  the tyre; affect  in the sense  it may damage  the tyre.  
Then  the advantage  over bias ply tyre is, there  is a gain in fuel efficiency,  there  is a gain in 
wheel  slippage;  gain in wheel  slippage  means  reduction  in wheel  slippage  to the tune of 6 to 
14 per cent. Then comes  our bias belted  tyre.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  10:34)  
 
In case of a bias belted  tyre, in addition  to the cords  which  are provided  in the carcass  of a 
bias tyre, there  will be a belt made  up of higher modulus  of elasticity  and this is provided  in 
between  the tread  and the carcass.  So, that means  it is partly  bias ply tyre and partly  radial  
tyre. So, it gives  stiffness  to the tread.  So, the wiping  action is reduced , so the rolling  
resistance  is reduce d as compared  bias ply tyre and the wear  of the tread  is also reduced  
because  of the stiffness and the rest of the things t hat means , the carcass  where  the beads  are 
provided  and the carcass  the layers  of course , they run at a crown  angle  which  is around  40 
degrees . So, all those  other  components  remain  same  as that of bias ply tyre, but only an 
addition  of belt has been  provided  so that it gives  extra  rigidity  to the tyre tread.  So, thereby  
what  happens  now, there  will be a reduction  in tread  wear  and there  will be reduction  in 
rolling  resistance  as compared  to conventional  bias ply tyres.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:56)   
Now,  after knowing  in details  about  the constructional  features , the next thing  is, what  are the 
differen t terminology  associated  with a tyre whether  it is a bias ply tyre whether  it is a belted  
tyre whether  it is a bias belted  tyre. These terminologies  remain  same;  same  in the sense  it 
has section  width,  it has section  height,  it has overall  diameter.  So, all those  things  we are 
going  to discus s in detail.  
And in figure , you can see, where  I have  indicated  the different  sections  like section  width,  
section  height,  flange  height  then rim diameter  then overall  tyre diameter.  So, in the bottom  
of the figure  if you look at there  is some  deflection;  a deflection  is shown  here.  So, during  
operation , what  happens , because  of the weight , the tyre gets deflected  and the deflected  
height  is lesser  than the section  height , a deflection  depends  on many  factors  like what is the 
material  of the tyre. What is the type of tyre like whether  it is a bias ply tyre or whether  it is a 
radial  ply tyre or whether  it is a bias belted  tyre. And it also depends  on what  is the inflation  
pressure,  it also depends  on what  is the soil condition.  So, deflection  of the tyre will reduce  
the rolling  radius  that means  it will reduce  the tyre radius  and thereby  the rolling  radius  is 
reduced.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:33)  
 
Now,  what  is the section  width?  It is the width  of the new tyre including  24 hour inflation  
growth  and normal  sidewalls, but not protective  side ribs, bars or decorations . And section  
height , it is the distance  between  top of the flange  to the top of the tyre tread.  So, one of the 
important  aspect  of a tyre is aspect  ratio.  What  is that?  It is the ratio of section  height to the 
section  width  and it is measured  in percentage . 
Then, as I told, static  loaded  radius , it is the dimension  measured  from  section  center  line to 
the ground  when  the tyre is under  load. That means , if I draw  a tyre here, this is when  it is not 
loaded. Now , when  I load it there  will be a deflection.  So, this is your reduction  in radius  of 
the tyre. So, static  loaded  radius  means  from  this point  to this point.  So, this is static  loaded  
radius.  Now,  overall  diameter , it is defined  as the rim diameter  plus twice  the section  height  
of a new tyre including  24 hour inflation  growth.   
Now , rolling  circumference  is the distance  travelled  in one revolution  of the tyre under  
maximum  load and inflation  pressure  for that particular  tyre on a level  paved  surface , that is 
it is on a hard surface.  So, this is little bit of different  dimensions  or different  sections  which  
are discussed.  Next,  I will try to find out how the tyre is specified.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  16:06)  
 
There  are two terminologies  I have used:  one is nominal  rim diameter  the other  one is rim 
diameter.  The difference  is, if you multiply  6 per cent of the; if you add 6 per cent of the 
nominal  rim diameter  to the original  rim diameter  that becomes  your rim diameter  that means  
1.06 times  nominal  rim diame ter will become  the rim diameter.  Now,  if you know  the rim 
diame ter, if you look at this figure . 
If you know  the rim diameter  which  is indicated  from  this point  to this point  then I add the 
section  height  here h on both the sides  then it becomes  the overal l diameter.  If you do not 
want  to do like this, then you add rim diameter  plus twice  the aspect  ratio,  a product  of aspect  
ratio and section  width  because  the tyre is usually  specified  by certain  numerical s like…  (Refer  Slide  Time:  17:11)  
 
If you look at this slide , you can see this tyre. If it is a bias ply tyre, it is specified  by a 
number  like 13.6 28 or 16.9 28. So, what  does it mean  exactly?  13.6 refers  to tyre section  
width  and 28 refers  to nominal  rim diameter  and in the bracket  12 means  ply rating . So, now 
13.6, the unit is in inches  and 28, the unit is also in inches.  So, if you want  to find out the 
diameter  then you need  to know  the section  height.   
So, section  height  is not given  that means  the aspect  ratio is to be used here.  So, usually  the 
aspect ratio is taken  as 0.75, if it is not specified.  So, if it is specified , if you look at the right  
side figure  of the tyre 13.6 28, very clearly  written  13.6-28. So, there  was no mention  about  
the aspect  ratio.  So, here we assume  the aspect  ratio as 0.75. So, now 13.6, so first I have  to 
find out the rim diameter , so  
 
I take 0.75.  
So, this you will get in inches , the diameter  will be obtained  in inches.  Now,  you can convert  
into centime ter or millimeter  or meter  whatever.  Now,  if you look at the tyre specification,  
radial  tyre, it is mentioned  like 18.4 46. So, 18.4 R46.  So, the difference  between  bias ply tyre 
and radial  tyre is, in bias ply tyre there  is no alphabets  whereas  in radial  tyre standard  system  
you can see 18.4 there  is an alphabet  R46.   So, 18.4 is again  the tyre section  width  which  is in inches  and R represents  that the tyre is 
radial  and 46 represents  nominal  rim diameter  where  you can follow  the same  rule whatever  I 
menti oned here  
 
So, that will give you diameter  of the radial  ply tyre. But in a matrix  system , the radial  ply 
tyre is specified  as you can see the numbers  480/80,  R 46, 155, A8. So, there are good  
amount  of numbers.  
So, the first number  480 represents  the tyre section  width  in millimeter,  80 is the aspect  ratio 
which  is no this is not millimeter  this is in percentage , then R is the radial  tyre, then 46 is the 
nominal  rim diameter  which is in inches  and the number  155 that represents  load index  that 
means  it is a load index  number  which  represents , which  represents  maximum  load the tyre 
can carry  at the rated  inflation  pressure.   
And A8, this is a symbol  for speed  which  indicat es the maximum  speed  for which  the load 
rating  is applicable . A8 usually  refers  to 40 kilometer  per hour.  So, this is how we can specify  
a tyre. So, the only difference  from  the outside  you can know  is whether  it is a radial  tyre, 
whether  it is a bias ply tyre. If R is there  then immediately  you can say that this is a radial  
tyre. If R is absent  in that specification,  then immediately  you can say that this is a bias ply 
tyre.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:52)  
 Ply rating , this is very  important  parameter  which  indicates  the index  of tyre strength.  It does 
not represent  the number  of layers  of cords  which  are present  in the carcass.  Before  World  
War 2, when  the cords  are made  up of cotton  bodies , during  that time, number  of ply rating  
means  if it is a 12 ply rating  that means  there  will be 12 cords  passing  in the carcass,  but 
nowadays  it is not the number  of ply it is the strength  that indicates , a 8 ply can carry the 
strength  of 12 ply rating . So, that is the difference .  
Then, the second  one is load rating.  Previo usly what  happen s, the tyres  were rated  by actual  
number  of plies  used in the tyre to carry  the vertical  load,  but nowadays , an 8 ply rated  tyre 
may have  only 6 actual  plies,  but it can carry  8 ply load rating.  So, originally  the ply rating  of 
radial  tyre and bias ply tyres  for loads  and inflation  pressure  they are equivalent.  
Whether  it is a radial  tyre or bias ply tyre, their load carrying  ability  and the inflation  pressure  
they are equivalent . But, now the tyre and rim association , they have  increased  the radial  load 
by 7 per cent over the equivalent  size bias tyre and they have  also indicated  another  
component  that is a star rating  to take care of the variation  in inflation  pressure.  So, what  is 
start rating?  The tyre and rim association  they created  a star rating  system  for radial  tyres  to 
denote  the rated  inflation  pressure  for maximum  rated  load.   
If a single  star is there  that means  the maximum  inflation  pressure  it can carry  is 18 psi. If 
two stars are there  then it will be 24 psi, if three  stars are there then it will be 30 psi that each 
addition  of star increase  the maximum  inflation  pressure  by an amount  of 6 psi.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:30)  
 So, in brief  what  I can say, in this lecture , I tried to cover  the details  of constructional  features  
of the tyre, how they are specified  and how to calculate  the overall  diameter  of the tyre.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  24:49)  
 
So, these  are the books  which  can be referred  to give more  input  to your understanding.  
Thank  you. 