Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  19  
Tractive  Performance  Prediction  Models  – Brixius  
Hi everyone,  this is Professor  H. Raheman  from  Agricultural  and Food Engineering  
Department,  IIT Kharagpur.  I welcome  you all to this NPTEL  course  on Traction  
Engineering.  This is lecture  19, where  I will try to cover  tractive performance  prediction  
models  developed  by Brixius .  
As I said, the theoretical  derivati ons which  you did for calculating  the tractive performance  of 
pneumatic  wheel s, we need  to know  the stress  distribution,  we need  to know  the shear  
displacement,  we need  to know  the relationship  between  shear  stress  and shear  displacement  
and the distributi on of normal  pressure . So, these  are all theoretically , it seems  very sound,  
but actually  it is very difficult  to get all those  information s. Hence,  some  equations  have  been  
developed .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  1:37) 
 
So, a set of equations  I discussed  in my lecture  18. Now , I will discuss  the most  recently  and 
commonly  used equations  which  have  been  developed  by Brixius.  There  are plenty  of 
equations  available,  but these  are the two Wismer  and Luth  and Brixius  equations.  These are 
most  commonly  used one that is why I tried to discuss  in detail  about  those  two equations . 
So, in this lecture,  I will try to cover  about  Brixius  equations  where  I will cover  the concepts  of mobility  number , concepts  of motion  resistance  ratio,  torque  ratio and effect  of tyre soil 
variables  on tractive performance .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  2:23) 
 
So Brixius , we have  already  discussed  about  Wismer  and Luth  equation  that is why Brixius  
wanted  to modify  that equation . So, what  he did is, he tried to take data obtained  from  121 
tyre soil combin ations. Look at the numbers  121 tyre soil combinations  in 2500  field tests. 
So, there  is a huge  amount  of data. Based on those  data,  he tried to develop  some  equations . 
So, he tried to identify  what  are the parameters  which  are affecting  the tractive  perfo rmance  
and then he tried to develop  some  equations  with respect  to your COT, torque  ratio, with 
respect  to motion  resistance  ratio.  
And from  there , he derived  the coefficient  of traction  and tractive  efficiency . So, he identified  
11 parameters,  and he grouped  them  into soil, wheel  and system  parameters . Under  soil 
parameters,  he took cone  index  and under  tyre, he took tractor  section  width, overall tyre 
diameter,  tyre rolling  radius,  tyre section  height , tyre deflection , delta . And here, I have  
indicated  the symbols  CI, b, d, r, h and delta  and the dimensions . Now , the system  parameters  
are your vertical  load which  is coming  in the wheel,  then the motion  resistance , towing  force , 
wheel  pull, wheel  torque  and wheel  slip.  
So, these  are the parameters  he identified , 11 parameters.  He then applied  dimensional  
analysis  technique  that is Buckingham  pi theorem . So, that means  11 minus  2, that should  be 
9 dimensionl ess ratio variables.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  4:29) 
 
Out of these  9 dimensionless  ratio variables,  he identified  as wheel  numeric , CIbd/W, width 
to diameter  ratio (b/d), that means  section  width  to wheel  diameter , deflection  ratio (δ/h), 
rolling  radius  to diameter  ratio (r/d), section  height  ratio (h/d),  that means  section  height  by 
overall diameter,  slip, torque  or gross  traction  ratio (Q/rW), motion  resistance  ratio (M/W)  
and pull ratio as P/W. So, these  are the 9 dimensions  ratio variables  he identified .  
Out of these  9 dimensionless  ratio variables , he found  two ratios,  which  can be derived  from  
other  ratios  for example,  PW can be derived  if you know  Q/rW and if you know  M/W. So, 
the difference  of these  two will give you P/W. Similarly,  h/d, section  height  ratio that can be 
derived  if you know  the rolling  radius  r and if you know  the overall  diameter  and δ/h ratio. 
So, these  are the two parameters  P/W and h/d they are derived  from  the two other  
dimensionless  ratio variables  which  you identified.   
The other  thing  is the rolling  radius  to diameter  ratio is nearly  constant  for agricultural  
tractor.  Hence,  he said it can be neglected  and that is what  the Wismer  and Luth  did. So, r/d 
ratio is nearly  equivalent  to 0.475 for whatever  combination  of tyre soil he has tried. So, that 
means,  the rolling  radius  ratio is nearly  constant . Hence,  he neglected  that one. So, out of 9 
then you take minus  3. 1, 2 is the dimension  ratios which are  derived  from  others . The r/d 
also he took as constant . So, remaining  are 6 dimensionless  ratio variables .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  7:02) 
 
So, he defined  one terminology  Bn, which  is called  mobility  number . So, Bn is mobility  
number . This is equal  to wheel  numeric  CI bd/W then he has added  two things  del/h ratio and 
b/d ratio. So,  
 
So, that together  is called  mobility  number . Whereas , Wismer  and Luth , he defined  wheel  
numeric , only he has taken  CIbd/W. These two components  he has not considered  he has 
taken  as a constant . So, this is the advantage  we can say. So, we will see what  is the 
advantage  we are getting  later on.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  8:02)  
 
Then the equation  which  he developed  is torque  or gross  traction  ratio. This is written  as 
Q/rW, Q is the torque  and r are the rolling  radius , W is the dynamic  weight . So, in other  
words  you can write  F/W that means  tractive  force divided  by the dynamic  load 
 
Let us now see, what  is the signific ance of these  terms  which  are included  in this equation . 
The first is 0.88,  what  does it show ?  
So, it shows  or limits  the maximum  torque  ratio to 0.92. 0.88 and 0.04 if you add  that 
becomes  0.92. That means  95 per cent, sorry  92 per cent of the torque  is converted  to useful  
power . And where  it is obtained ? This is obtained  with a large  mobility  number , at high slip value . These  are the two conditions  that means  where  will you get 0.92, where  when  there  
will be large  mobility  number  and when  there  will be high slip.  
Then  the second  important  component  is your mobility  number  e-0.1Bn. This mobility  number  
here controls  the maximum  thrust  which  is developed  and it is developed  at a higher  slip. The 
torque  ratio increases  with increase  in mobility  number . Torque  ratio increases  with increase  
in mobility  number.  Now,  the second  important  term is this e-7.5s. The constant  7.5 is called  
the gripping  or surface  factor , it controls  the rate of rise of torque  ratio curve  with slip and the 
factor  is smaller  for wet surface  and it is larger  for staked  wheels.  Now , he developed  another  
equation . Before  that, 0.04, what  does it reflects ? It reflects  the torque  ratio at zero slip 
irrespective  of what  soil condition . The torque  ratio is at zero slip is 0.04.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  10:55 ) 
 
So now,  let us see what  is the equation  which  is developed  for motion  resistance  ratio,  which  
is denoted  as ρ and this is equal  to M/W and  
 
So, let us now see how the motion  resistance  ratio is varying  and why there  is a rolling  
resistance ? First if you know  then only can justify  this nature  of the curve.  The motion  
resistance  ratio of a pneumatic  wheel  is because  of so many  facto rs.  
So, if you would  like to identify  those  factors,  the first is the tyre flexing  and scrubbing . Tyre, 
flexing  and scrubbing . The second  one is due to compaction  of soil, third  one is due to 
bulldozing,  then fourth  one is due to lateral  drag which  is caused because  of soil adherence  to 
the tyre. So, these  are the four reasons  for which  there  will be motion  resistance . In a hard 
soil, basically  it is the tyre flexing  and scrubbing  which  will create  the motion  resistance .  
So now,  after knowing  this, then next thing  is what  are the terms  which  are used in this 
equation  motion  resistance  ratio equation . The first term is 1/Bn and so what  does it indicate ? 
Bn is in the denominator  that means , higher  the value  of Bn lesser  will be the rolling  
resistance .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:24 )  
 
As Bn decreases , MRR  motion  resistance  ratio increases . So, Bn decreases  means  Bn could  be 
due to decrease  in soil streng th, due to decrease  in deflection  ratio, due to the increase  in 
width  to diameter  ratio. These  are the factors by which  you can decrease  the Bn value . Since  
Bn value  in the denominator  so, that is why 1/Bn will give you higher  rolling  resistance  ratio.  
Now,  the second  term is 0.5s/(Bn0.5). If you look at this one, motion  resistance  ratio increases  
with slip due to increase  in tyre sinkage  and soil shearing . So, more  the slip more  will be the 
rolling  resistance.   
Now,  the third  component  is your 0.04 this value  represents  the motion  resistance  ratio on a 
hard surface  and it represents  the minimum  value  on any surface . This is basically  due to tyre 
flexing  and scrubbing.  Now , once  we know  the equations  which  are developed  for torque  
ratio,  which  is nothing  but the coefficient  of gross  traction  then we knew  the equation  which  
is developed  for motion  resistance  ratio and the nature  of the motion  resistance  ratio curve .  
We can see with increase  in mobility  number  we are getting  lesser  and lesser  motion  
resistance  ratio that means,  with increase  in CI with increase  in δ/h ratio,  we are gettin g more  
mobility  number  and then you are getting  lesser motion  resistance  ratio.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  15:23 ) 
 
Then  he derived  coefficient  of traction or net traction ratio which  is  
 
And then he tried to plot NTR  versus  wheel  slip for different  Bn values  starting  from  5 to 80. 
So, Bn value  increase  means,  your coefficient  of traction  increases  for the same  slip. If you 
look at 0.3 or 0.2 wherever  you look at, all the cases  we will find that the COT  value  
increases  with increas e in Bn value  that is wheel  numeric  value .  
Why  it is so? Bn value  increased  means  the soil is hard. So, there  is lesser  rolling  resistance , 
hence  the power  which  is supplied  to the tractor  wheel  or to the single  wheel  that will 
consume  less power  to overcome  the rolling  resistance , hence  more  power  is available  as 
useful  power .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  16:44 ) 
 
 
Next thing  is tractive  efficiency.  Once  you derive  motion  resistance , coefficient  of traction,  
then we tried to find out what  is the expression  for tractive  efficiency . The expression  
remains  same  that means  output  power  by input  power . And it is a function  of slip So,  
 
So, we have  divided  W to find out this is COT  and the other  one is your torque ratio.  Now,  
the nature  of the curve  we can see from  here. The variation  of TE with wheel  slip is shown  in 
this figure . When this wheel  slip is less than 5 per cent, what  happens ? A large  portion  of the 
power  is required  to overcome  rolling  resistance .  If wheel  slip is more  than 20 per cent, beyond  this again  it is going  down . Tractiv e efficiency , 
if you look at the curve,  it is rising  to a peak  very sharply  then it is going  down . So, if you are 
beyond  20 per cent or 25 per cent then there  is again  a decrease  in tractive  efficiency . And 
that decrease  in tractive  efficienc y is because  of increasing  proportion  of increasing  percent  
of input  power  which  is lost due to slippage . If the slip is less than 5 per cent there  is loss, 
most  of the power  is used for overcoming  the rolling  resistance . If it is more  than 20 per cent, 
if the slip is more  than 20 per cent, most  of the power  is lost because  of the wheel  slip. So, we 
have  to operate  in between  these  two so that you can get maximum  tractive  efficiency.  Now,  
if you try to plot tractive  efficiency  versus  slip and pull versus  slip that will give you a better  
picture . In the sense , the nature  of the curves  are different . In case of tractive  efficiency  
curve , it reache s to a peak  within  10 per cent if you look at when  the wheel  is hard sorry  the 
mobility  number  is high from  20 to 80 then you are getting  a maximum  value  within  10 per 
cent.  
Now , if the mobility  number  is 10 then we are getting  maximum  value  around  15 per cent. 
The mobility  number  is 5 then we are getting  a maximum  value  around  25 per cent slip. 
Whereas , at this slip values  if you draw  vertical  lines , so at this slip values  this COT  curve  
that is coefficient  of traction  curve s or the pull to weight  ratio curve  is not giving  the 
maximum  value . So, maximum  value  you can see, you are getting  somewhere  here, in case of 
wheel  numeric  mobility  number  5. In case of mobility  number  10 you are getting  maximum  
here, in case of 20 you are getting  here sorry, in case of 10 you are getting  here somewhere .  
So, that means  the slip at which  you are getting  maximum  tractive  efficiency  and the slip at 
which  you are getting  maximum  pull they are not matching . So, if you want  more  pull or if 
you want  more  tractive  efficiency  that we have  to first find out or you have  to make  a 
compromise,  so that we will get more  pull at the same  time more  tractive  efficiency  we 
cannot  say maximum,  but we can say we can get more  pull or more  tractive  efficiency .  
So, that is why a design  curve  has been  drawn  here which  is shown  by the green line. So, 
depending  on our soil condition,  we have  to find out which  slip should  be followed  in the 
field so that you will get both maximum  tractive  efficiency  and more  pull.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  20:48 ) 
 
So, if you look at this curve,  so, you are nearl y when  the soil is hard that means  the mobility  
number  is 80 you can see we are reaching  to a peak  here, and when  the mobility  number  is 40 
we are reaching  to a peak  here, when  the mobility  number  is 20 we are reaching  the peak  
here.  
So, this design  curve s are basically  for higher  tractive  efficiency.  But the pull which  are 
getting  is at 20, this is the pull which  are getting  at 40, this is the pull you are getting , at 80, 
this is the pull which  we are getting , which  is less than the maximum  pull. So, now this 
suggests  that there  should  be a design  curve  taking  into account  which  thing  we like more  
tractive  efficiency  or we like more  pull.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:54 ) 
 So, these  are the sets of equations  to which  you discuss  one is for Wismer  and Luth,  the other 
one is for Brixius  and let us see now the applicability  of Brixius  equation . The applicability  
of Brixius  equation  is for a cone  index  starting  from  100 to 5000.  The very high value  100 to 
5000  and the b/d ratio is 0.18 to 0.9 there  is the range . δ/h ratio is from  0.08 to 0.32 and r/d 
ratio is almost  constant  0.475. And if you would  like to compare  Wismer  and Luth  then there  
is no indication  for cone  index  value , what  is its applicability ?  
Only  the limited  value  is b/d ratio is only 0.3. If we exceed  this value,  what  will happen , he 
has not mentioned , neither  nobody  has tried to find and verify  this. And δ/h ratio, if you look 
at, it is 0.2 and r/d ratio for agriculture  tyre it is nearly  0.475. But the advantage  which  
Brixius  has done  is the maximum  value  has increased  to 0.92 times.  Whereas,  the tractive  
effort  which  is developed  by Wismar  and Luth  is 0.75. There is a difference . And in Brixius  
equation  he has considered  both deflection  as well as b/d ratio which  Wismer  and Luth 
equation  has not considered.   
The third  thing  is in case of rolling  resistance  ratio for which  Wismer  and Luth  equations , 
there  is no difference , you cannot  differentiate  the rolling  resistance  of a towed  wheel  or 
rolling  distance  of a powered  wheel , because slip factor  was not there.  Whereas  in case of 
Brixius  equations , he has considered  slip factor . So, that is why Brixius  equations  is much  
better.  These  equations  are much  better  and it has more  applicability  as compared  to Wismer  
and Luth’s equation . So, one more  thing  I like to add here is these  two equations,  these  two 
scientists  Brixius  as well as Wismer  and Luth  both have  developed  equations  for bias ply 
tyre.  
Applicability  of these  equations  which  are discussed  for radial  ply tyres is not known.  Rather  
Brixius  has indicated  that he can change  the coefficient  values  so that it can be applied  to 
radial  tyre. Some of the suggestions  what  he has given  is you can change  the value  of 
constant  7.5.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  25:01 ) 
 
 
The equations , let me go back  to the equation  there  it will be better  to show  what  changes  he 
has suggested  if we are interested  to find out or apply  this equation  to radial  tyre. The first 
suggestion  he has given  is this 7.5. He suggested  that instead  of 7.5 we can try with 8.5 to 
10.5 and the constant  0.04, he said it should  be 0.035  or 0.03 that is the range . These  are 
some  of the suggestions  and in the motion  resistance  ratio he also suggested  a change  in the 
terms  of instead  of 1/Bn, he suggested  it should  be 0.9/Bn. These  are some  of the suggestions  
given  by Brixius  to apply  these  equations  to radial  tyres.  
So, nevertheless  Brixius  equations  are better  in the sense , it takes  into account  the slip, it 
takes  into account  the δ/h ratio, it takes  into account  the b/d ratio. So, these  are some  of the 
advantages  of Brixius  equation . So, that is why now,  ASABE  has recommended  these  in the standard , ASABE  standard , we find these  are the equations  which  are available  for predicting  
the tractive  performance  of tyres, pneumatic  tyres.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  27:03 ) 
 
 
So, in summary  I can say I tried to discuss  the equations  which  are developed  and for 
developing  what  are the dimensionless  ratios, dimensionless  ratio variable s which  are 
consider ed those  are also discuss ed. Then , we discuss ed finally,  the applicability  of these  
equations  and then compared  Brixius’s equation  with Luth’s equation . And what  are the 
modifications,  which  can be incorporated  in the developed  equation , so that the equations  can 
be applied  to radial  ply tyres , That is all. Thank  you. 
 