Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Lecture  16  
Tractive  Effort  and Slip of a Track  
Hi everyone,  this is Professor  H. Raheman  from  Agricultur al and Food Engineering  
Department , IIT Kharagpur.  I welcome  you to this NPTEL  online  certification  course  on 
Traction  Engineering.  This is lecture  16, where  I will try to cover  tractive  effort  and slip for a 
track .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:47) 
 
 
The concepts  covered  will be again  slip as well as tractive  effort.  As you know , a track  has a 
bigger  contact  area. I f you look at the figure,  which  is shown  in this slide,  it has a bigger  contact  area. So, the maximum  tractive  force  which  is developed , is denoted  by F max which  
is equal  to shear  stress , maximum  shear  stress  into area.   
Now,  when  I say tractive  effort  developed  that means,  it is a component  of shear  stress , shear  
force  which  is developed  by the contact  patch  and shear  force  is nothing  but the shear  stress  
which  is developed . And if you know this relationship  between  shear  stress  and shear  
displacement  then knowing  the displacement , you can find out, what  is the shear  stress  which  
is developed  and knowing  the contact  area and shear  stress , you  can calculate , what  is the 
shear  force  which  is developed  in the contact  patch .  
And the equation  which  is given  here, the maximum  thrust  which  is or tractive  effort  which  is 
developed , which  will be equal  to contact  area A into shear  stress  tau max. So, in other  
words,  I can write as A×c + W tanϕ. So, here A is the contact  area, c is the cohesion  and W is 
the weight  acting  on the track  and ϕ is the angle  of internal  friction . So, if we look at this 
equation  when  a track  is operated  in sandy  soil, pure sandy  soil, there is no cohesion . So, area 
has no role, it is the W which  plays  or it is the weight  which  plays  the most  of the things  that 
means  it controls  the maximum  thrust  which  is developed .  
Now , if it is a clay soil, then area comes  into picture  and W has no role, but the equation  
cannot  be applied  for all conditions . It is only giving  you maximum  thrust,  if you are or 
anybody  is interested  to find, what  is the thrust  developed  along  the contact  patch,  then we 
have  to know  what  is the shear  displacement  under  the track  at the interface  between  soil and 
track . So, to predict  the relationship  between  thrust  to tractive  slip, or track  slip, we have  to 
examine  the development  of shear  displacement  beneath  the track .  
So, it is very simple  in the sense  because  shear  stress is a function  of shear  displacement . So, 
you have  to find out what  is the shear  displacement  at the contact  patch.  If you look at the 
figure,  there  you can see I have  indicated  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5 points . One is just at the beginning . 
Because  this track  is moving  in a direction  which  is given  by this arrow  and this is the 
power ed wheel  which  is driving  and these  are the rollers  for being  tension . At point  1, point  
2, point  3, point  4 and point  5. Point  5 is the endpoint , point  1 is the beginning  of shearin g.  
Now , the shear  displacement  which  is developed  at point  1 and the shear  displacement  which  
is developed  in subsequent  points  they are not same . Why  it is so? Why there  is a variation  in 
the shear  displacement ? Because  the link which  is shearing  at point 1 is just coming  in 
contact  with the soil whereas  the link which  is present , link means  link in the track  which  is present  at point  2 or present  at point  3 or present  at point  4, they are shearing  the soil for a 
considerable  period  of time.   
That is why shear  displacement  is more  as you move  towards  the rear end of the track  that 
means  is the first point  is the beginning  point,  last point  5 is the rear end, front  end, rear end. 
So, as you move  towards  the rear end, your shear  displacement  is increasing  which is 
indicated  in this figure . And it reaches  a maximum  value , because  after that there  is no 
contact , again  the track  will be, the links  will be not in touch  with the soil. So, when  the 
moment  it leaves  the soil, it comes  to this position , there  is no shear displacement  developed  
by this link.  
So, the maximum  which  is developed  is at this point  at the rear end and the minimum  which  
is developed  is at the front  end. Now , how to find out the shear  displacement ? So, again  we 
know , what  is the slip velocity ? What is the slip velocity  which  is present ?  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  6:09) 
 
The slip, we can be defined  as  
 
ω is the angular  speed  of the sprocket  and r is the radius  of the sprocket  which  is driving . So, 
ωr will give you virtually  the theoretical  speed  which  is denoted  as Vt. So, I can write  as  
 So, V is the actual  velocity  and the difference  between  theoretical  speed  and slip speed  is 
denoted  as Vj. So, i can written  as Vj/Vt; where  i is the slip of the track  and ω is the angular  
speed , V is the actual  velocity  of the track , Vt is the theoretical  speed  of the track  and Vj is 
the speed  of slip of the track . Then suppose  I am interested  in finding  out shear  displacement  
at a point  which  is at a distance  x from  the front  end of the contact  area.  
So, before  that let us know  what  is the slip velocity  Vj? Vj, when  it is acting  opposite  to the 
directio n of motion,  that means  the track  is slipping, when  it is acting  along  the direction  of 
motion,  then the track  is skidd ing. So, I have  indicated  here Vj direction  indicated  here the 
track  movement . So, these  are in opposite  direction,  so, the track  slips.  Now,  Vj does not vary 
along  the track  length,  since  link cannot  stretch,  so, the track  cannot  stretch . So, that is why 
we assume  that Vj is not varying , it is constant .  
So, slip velocity  is constant  below  the track  and Vj is opposite  to the direction  of travel.  Now,  
if you are interested  in finding  out shear  displacement  at distance  x from  the front  end of the 
contact  area. So, this is the point  say A now,  which  is at a distance  x. Then,  
x = Vj×t 
Vj the slip velocity , t is the time the contact  time. So, now,  t will be equal  to, if t will be equal  
to, if Vt the theoretical  speed , then  
 
Now,  if you substitute  this expression  in this equation,  then j that is shear  displacement  will 
be equal  to, 
 
So, that is equal  to Vj/Vt we have  already  expressed  that this is equal  to the slip. So, instead  
of Vj/Vt, I have  written  i. So, j = i×x which  indicates  that shear  displacement  is a function  of 
slip, shear  displacement  is a functio n of distance  or the point  under  consideration,  what  is the 
distance  of this point  from  the front  end. So, if you look at this equation  again  then what  you 
can observe  is that, this shear  displacement  is linearly  varying  with i. It is varying  from  front  
to the rear end of the contact  area linearly  and with increase  in slip, its value  is increasing  and 
that is what  is reflected  in this figure  a 10 percent  slip, 30 percent  slip, 50 percent  slip, 70 
percent  slip, 100 percent  slip. So, how this displacement  is varying ? So, j is on the y axis. So, this figure  shows  that shear  displacement  is a function  of slip is a function  of distance . Now , 
suppose  I increase  this distance  to this point,  so, this is the point  B. So, now,  this will be the 
displacement . If I draw  a vertical  line, this will be the shear  displacement .  
So, the next question  is what  we will do with shear  displacement ? Once  you calculate  shear  
displacement  what  next?  So, next is to find out what  is the relationship  between  shear  stress  
and shear  displa cement  which  is existing .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  11:12 ) 
 
 
 So, in nature  what  we have  observed ? There  are 3 categories  of relationship  available , one is 
for loose  sand, saturated  clay and most  of the disturbed  soils and the other  one is for organic  
terrai n and the third  one is for a compact  sand, silt and loam . So, you can take either  of these  
equations  which  can be utilize d to find out, what  is the relationship  between  shear  stress  and 
shear  displacement . So, once  you finalize  this, then we have  to find out, what  is the shear , 
thrust  force  developed ? 
Suppose , for example,  we try to find out, we tried to take the relationship  that is the in loose  
and a saturated  clay where , relationship ,  
 
 
 
So, here σ we have  considered  as the normal  stress  which  is acting  on the track  and that is 
uniform  along  the track , it is not changing . So, if that is the case then thrust  force  will be 
equal  to, how do you find out thrust  force?  Once  you know  the relationship  for tau.  
So, we tried to plot tau versus  the displacement  at 10 per cent slip, this will be the curve  and 
at 50 percent , this will be the curve.  So, like that you will get a series of curves , by varying  
the slip. Now , if you want  to find out thrust  force  then you have  to find out the area under  this 
curve . So, area under  this curve  means  you have  to multiply  shear  stress  with the area. So, 
what  I have  done  is,  
 
Now,  if I integrated  by putting  the relationship  between  τ and τmax then this is the relationship  
which you are taking . So, this has to be integrated  now. So, what  finally  you will be getting  
is, if we integrate . So, you will get an expression  for thrust  force  for a loose  soil. For a loose  
soil what  will be the thrust  force ? Now,  the final expression  for this will be  
 
I can write  as W since  we have  assumed  p = W/bL , assuming  that the pressure  is constant  
beneath the  track .  So, W is the weight , b is the width  of the track , L is the length  of the track . So, W/bL  will 
give you what  is the contact  pressure . So, instead  of p, I can write  W/bL . So,  
 
 
Now,  if I take L common  out then it will be  
 
This will be the final expression  for thrust . Now , if the rolling  resistance,  then you can find 
out what  would be the pull developed ?  
So, pull will be equal  to thrust  minus  rolling  resistance . So, if you want to  find out the 
tractive  efficiency  then pull by weight  will give you the tractive  efficiency . Pull by weight  
into 1 minus  s. So,  
 
COT  is P/W by and CRR  is RR/W, motion resistance  by weight.   
Now,  if you look at this equation,  it is the length  that controls  the thrust  force.  If you have  
same  contact  area one is having  higher  length  lesser  width, the other  one is having  wider  
width  lesser  length  than it is the length  of the track  which  controls  the thrust  force , more  the 
length  more  will be the thrust  force  develo ped.  
So, in design  you have  to keep  this in mind . Whenever  you got some  area try to keep  more  
length . So, that you will get more  thrust  force  developed  and since  the length  is more  and 
contract  area will be same  for both the cases . So, rolling  resistance  will be nearly  same  only 
the thrust  force  will be more  so, that is why the ultimat e pull will be higher  in case of lengthy  
track . Next  is, we are talking  about  the distribution , here very nicely  we have  assume d that 
the pressure  is uniform . So, we have  taken  W/bL . If pressure  is not uniform , what  are the 
other  possibilities?  So, let us now discuss,  discuss  those  possibilities .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:48 )  
So, there  are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 kinds  of pressure  distribution s. One is uniform  pressure  distribution  
where  I have  indicated  p = W/bL and if that is the case then this is the thrust  force  developed.  
Now,  in the other  case,  there  will be sinusoidal  kind of things , now you are getting  some  
peaks  at regular  intervals,  if n is the number  of peaks,  then p can be the pressure  or the 
normal  stress  distribution  can be written  as  
 
Thrust  force  will be equal  to this one.  
 
So, it all depends  on what  is the pressure  distribution.   
Now,  similarly,  when  the pressure  distribution  is minimum  0 at the front  end of the track , 
maximum  at the rear end of the track , then  
 
If pressure  distribution  is maximum  at the front -end, minimum  at the rear end then  
 
Similarly,  if the pressure  distribution  is gradually  changing , reaching  to a peak , starting  from  
the front  end and at the rear end, it is again  coming  to 0 then   
So, on the right  side I have  given  for all these  5 conditions,  what  will be the expression  for 
tractive  force . These  are all derived  based  on that integratio n where  the pressure  distribution  
is to be substituted  by this and then you have  to integrate  it and finally,  the expression  is 
given  here. So, what  do you conclude  from  here is thrust  which  is developed  under  a track  
depends  on what  is the pressure  distri bution  and it depends  on what  is the shear  stress -shear  
displacement  relationship . If you can find out this relationship  for different  conditions,  then 
we can find out what  is the thrust  developed  by integrating  along  the contact  area and then if 
you know  the shear  stress  we will try to find out the shear  force  by multiplying  with the area.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:31 ) 
 
  
So, this is how we will try to find out the tractive  effort  for a track . So, only thing  is one has 
to know  what  is the pressure  distribu tion and what  is the shear  stress  shear  displacement  
relationship  then one can find out what  is the thrust  which  will be developed . 