Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Raheman  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 10 
Tutorial 2 - Measurement of Shear Strength, Modulus of Sinkage and Cone Index  
Hi everyone , this is Professor H Ra heman from Agriculture and Food Engine ering 
Department , IIT Kharagpur . I welcome you  to this NPTEL  course on Traction  Engineering . 
This is lecture 10 , where  I will try to take a tutorial which will  be related to measure  of, 
Measurement of Shear Strength , Modulus of Sinkage  and Cone Index , which we discussed in 
my previous classes .  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:55)  
  
So, measurement of shear strength then  measurement of modulus of  sinkage . These are the 
two parameters , then in the  third we are going to  take the cone index value , how to measure 
cone index of a given  area. So, to start with , first, I will give you  a problem like a shear  
annulus with inner  diameter 50 centimeter , outer diameter 80 centimeter. T his was  used to 
measure shear strength of soil  and the t orque required to cause failure  of soil was recorded  as 
500 kg meter , now how to find out  the shear  strength of soil .  
As I said shear  annulus , so immediately  you can draw  the shear  annulus . So, now here we are 
interested in finding  out the shear strength of soil using  this shear  annulus . So, what we have 
to measure is the torque . So torque is given , so it is 500 kg meter  and outer radius is given 
which is r2 and inner radius is r1, inner  radius of  the annulus .  
So r2 is the outer radius  which is given as  80 by 2 , 40 centimeter  and r1 is the inner radius 
which is  equal to 50 by 2 that means 25  centimeter . And we know that torque  relationship 
which is given on the left  side,  
 
So r, is r1 you have  found out , r2 you have found out , then T  is known . So, τf is to be 
calculated , so now we  substitute th ese one and find out τf.  
This is question number 1, how to find  out shear  strength of soil using shear annulus  or in 
other words you can do like this . If shear strength of soil is known then  you can find out how 
much torque is  required to  cause the soil to fail , so the same equation  shear strength is  given then you can find out how much is  the torque  on the  same equation can be utilized so  shear 
strength is given , so you can find out  what is the value of T.  (Refer Slide Time:  3:53) 
 
 
The second question is the data obtained  for a plate  sinkage  tests using two plates in the field  
are as given below . So, you are asked to find out the values of  exponent of sinkage  n, kc 
cohesive  modulus of sinkage  and kφ frictional  modulus of sinkage . So, the data which are 
given is  sinkage for a plate size of 700 by 110  millimeter  and for a plate 2 it is given as 800 
by 100 millimeter  and sinkage  values are given and corr esponding  pressure values are given 
794, this is a  Newton per centimeter square , same is the case with for plate 2.  
Now how to proceed to find out these  values n , kc and kφ. So, if you remember the Bekker 's 
pressure  sinkage  relationship , where we have  taken that  
 This is the relationship given by pressure , given by Bekker . So if we try to plot the pressure 
versus  sinkage that means p versus z value  then you will get a kind of , a set of  curves  because 
there are two plates  so you will get a set of curves  which is shown  as in this slide .  
So this is the nature of the curve which  will be obtaining , one is, the plate 1 is this , plate 2  is 
this, so that means , this shows that n is , n has a value greater than 1. But what is the exact 
value ? To do that we have to take the help of  that Bekker 's pressure  sinkage  relationship 
where  
 
And,  
 
Now if you plot log P versus log z then it will be a straight line . So what we have done is we 
try to  find out the  log P and log z value then you try to  plot it and then see the nature of the  
curve.  
(Refer Slide Time:  6:25)  
 
For plate 2 , I first calculated , you can  do either way plate 1 or plate 2, does not matter . So 
log, sinkage  value  which is nothing but your  z value  and pressure value is p so log p and log z 
value , I have calculated  then I tr ied to plot it . So, this will be the your plate 2 and similarly 
for plate one I  have calculated , logp value , logz value , then I  plotted .  So what we observed here is two , these are all points which are observed  now I have best 
fitted those points with  a straight line relationship which is  given as y is equal to this much  
 
Now the plate 2 is given as   
 
So, these are two straight lines so but  the slopes are not uniform , they are not  same .  
So how to find out  n, if the slopes are not uniform then  as suggested by Bekker , you have to 
take the average value , so slope here is in  the f irst case slope is  0.736  plate 1, 6 and in the 
second class it is  0.3544 and take the average so whatever  comes that has to be divided by 2 
to find out the a slope , average slope  which is equal to your exponent of sink age, n.  
Now next thing is how to find  out kc and kφ. So each one of this curve they are  getting an 
intercept which is equal to  or we can denote it as a 2 this is a1. Now in my previous classes 
where I  have dealt with the pressure sinkage  test that I  have derived the expression for kc and 
kφ but these expressions are  valid  when z is equal to 1 . When sinkage is  equal to 1 then only 
these equations are  valid otherwise you cannot calculate .  
So if that is the case so z, take z is equal  to 1 so then with the help of this  equation that means 
the intercept and  the plate size which is given by b2 and b1 so taking those values we can  
calculate directly the kc and kφ values . If you want to get rid of this  limitation that z is equal 
to 1 then  what you have to do is you have to take  at least three  plates  of different dimensions , 
you can take square plate , you can take  circular plate , does not matter but width of the 
rectangular plate should be  equal to radius of the circular plate  and circular plates are better in 
the sense , the application of pres sure is  uniform . So, when you apply load , it is uniformly 
distributed , whereas in case of  a square plate at the corner points are  dead pockets actually . 
These points are dead pockets  so it is better to go for circular plate  so that pressure is more or 
less uniform .  
So you have to take three plates so  you will get three k values  because for three circular 
plates you  have three relationships and if you take  logarithm then you will find out three  
relationships from which you can find  out what are the values o f K and if you  try to plot the 
K versus 1/b and then you can find out a relationship .  This is on the y -axis you take K, on the  x axis you take 1/b then you will get some points like 
this then you try  to best fit that one and then the intercept w ill give you kφ and the slope will 
give you kc. So, this is how we calculated if you  apply this limitation z is equal to 1  then you 
can utilize the method which  we described o r if you  do not want to do  that if you are 
interested in finding  out for all o ther values of z then you  take at least three plates so that you  
can easily calculate kc and kφ.  (Refer Slide Time:  11:31)  
 
Then the next question is , a cone penetrometer with a base area of  a cone  3.23 square 
centimeter was  used to measure the stre ngth of soil in  a research field . So, the force required 
to push the cone  penetrometer at different depths were  noted down  and the values are given 
in a tabular  form  below . Then the question which is ask ed is how  to find out the average cone 
index  because the cone index is given for  different depth .  
And the force which is  experience has been given for different  depths  that’s why I ask you to 
calculate  - what is the average cone index for the  measured  data. So what  data are given , 
depth data  at 0, 0 means i f you take a cone  penetrometer with a pro be at the bottom , so zero 
lines refers to this which is just  flushing, when the soil surface is just  flushing the top surface 
of the cone so  that becomes a zero line . So, zero reading  starts from here . 
Now at every 25 millimeter interval , I have taken the  reading and th ese readings are given 
here, so what readings are given , force, then how to calculate pressure so force divided by the 
cone base area  so that will give you  pressure which is applied . So, what is the cone base  area, 
it is giving us  3.23 centimeter square , okay.N ow we have to find out first the pressure , so in 
the next slide  I will show you , what is  the pressure  corresponding to the force which is  
applied at different depth .  (Refer Slide Time:  13:38 )  
 
After knowing the force then we  have to calculate the pressure which is  applied which I have 
indicated as cone  index , so cone index at each depth I have  calculated and when I tr ied to plot 
it on a XY sheet,  graph sheet you can see , depth is taken  in the x  axis and on the y axis you 
have  taken the cone  index value then these are  the points which will refer to different  
observations which you took in the field .  
Now after getting this plot what next , how to find out the cone index for the entire d epth for 
which the penetrometer has been pushed into the soil . So, what you have to do is , we have to 
connect this , connect this then this is the area which is to be considered , so area of this curve 
is nothing but kilo Pascal into millimeter .  
Now if you divide by d epth so in your case depth is 200 millimeter so that will give you what 
is the average cone index for the entire depths of 200 millimeter . So depth and the area which 
is computed either you can manually compute or you can take a plan imeter or you can take 
the help of AutoCAD to find out this area , you take the image of this one , take the help  of 
AutoCAD and then find out what is the area .  
If you do not want to do this then take a simple graph sheet and then try to calculate the area 
which is if you know th e scale of x axis and y axis then you can find out how much area is 
bounded by this curve so that becomes your the numerator and then you divide by depth that 
becomes your denominator to find out what will be the cone index , average  cone index for 
the data  which you obtain ed.  This is referred to a particular place , now if you are interested to find out  the average cone 
index of the entire  plot which I have drawn now . I have only  given data for one point  so you 
have to take similar data for  different points , randomly you  can select  different points in the 
field and then  you will have a set of data .  
So for each point or each test points  you have to calculate the cone index  value and then take 
the average and find  out the standard deviation and  coefficient of  variance , so that will  give 
you the average cone index of that  particular plot . So I have only given the procedure  for 
finding out the cone index at a  particular point  up to a particular depth  so similar exercise has 
to be done for  several points in a fie ld so that it can  give you a better average .  
So while you mention the average  score index you have to mention the  standard deviation 
and the coefficient  of variance so that is a complete  specification of average  cone index in a  
field. I hope , I have clari fied how to calculate cone index , how to  calculate the  shear strength 
of soil  then how to find out the parameters related to plate sinkage  test that is exponent of 
sinkage , cohesive  modulus of sinkage  and frictional modulus  of sinkage . So this will help yo u 
in further  enhancing your concepts which are  covered in my lecture class .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:01 )  
  
So in brief I can say I can conclude  that the attempts are made to describe  the concepts of 
measuring  shear strength , measuring modulus of sinkage  and cone index , thank you . The 
reference can be Theory of Ground  Vehicles , Soil Dynamics Tillage  and Traction  by Gill and 
Vandenberg , that is all. 