Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  17  
Tractive  Effort  and Slip of a Pneumatic  Wheel  
Hi everyone,  this is professor  H. Raheman  from  Agricultural  and Food Engineering  
Department,  IIT Kharagpur , I welcome  you all to this NPTEL  online  certification  course  on 
Traction  Engineering.  This is lecture  17, where  I will try to cover  how to find out tractive  
effort  and slip of a pneumatic  wheel , when  I said it is a pneumatic  wheel.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:53) 
 
So, the obvious  questions  will come  to our mind  is, whether  it is operated  in rigid  mode  or 
whether  it is operated  in elastic  mode . So, now,  the concepts  which  will be covered  will be 
tractive  effort  and shear displacement . As you know  that tractive  effort  is related  to shear  
displacement  hence,  we will cover  these  two concepts  with respect  to pneumatic  wheel.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:25) 
 
Now,  if we look at these  two wheels,  both are pneumatic  wheels , but one is written  as rigid  
mode , the other  one is written  as elastic  mode . The difference  is when  the pressure  due to 
carcass  stiffness  and pressure  due to inflation  of air or the air inflation  pressure  when  the 
summation  is greater  than the pressure  which  the terrain  can support  at the lowest  point  of the 
tyre circumference  then the tyre will remain  like a rigid  wheel. I t will remain  round  like a 
rigid  wheel . So, that means,  this will behave  like a solid  towed  wheel  or solid  powered  wheel .  
Now , when  the wheel  is powered,  it becomes  powered  wheel.  So, now,  our discussion  will be 
confined  to powered  wheel  as we are interested  in finding  out tractive  effort.  Now,  the second  
option  is elastic  mode.  Again,  the inflation  pressure  and the pressure  due to carcass  stiffn ess, 
if it is less than the pressure  the terrain  can support , then the tyre will be flatten ed at the 
contact  point . So, this condition  is called  elastic  mode . So, these  are the two conditions  which  
are shown  in the right  corner  one is rigid,  where  the circumference  of the tyre is perfectly  
round.  Whereas,  in the second  case,  it is not round  rather  it is flattened  at certain  portion .  
So, if it is in rigid  mode,  how to find out the tractive  effort,  if it is in the elastic  mode,  how to 
find out the tractive  effort that we will discuss  separately.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  3:19) 
 
Now,  when  it is in rigid  mode as I said this will be equivalent  to a power ed rigid  wheel  and 
for power ed rigid  wheel  the main  thing  is tractive  effort  which  we have  already  derived . So, 
we will follow  the same  procedure . So, when  we talk about  tractive  effort  that means,  what  is 
the shear  stress  which  is developed ? And shear  stress  is a function  of shear  displacement , 
where  it is developed ? It is developed  at the contact  patch  where  the wheel is in contact  with 
the soil. So, this is the face where  the shear  stress  will be developed.   
Now,  to find out shear  stress,  we should  know  what  is the shear  displacement ? And to know  
the shear  displacement , we need  to know  what  is the slip velocity ? So, these  are all 
interlinked . So, what  is slip velocity ? Slip velocity  is the difference  between  the theoretical  
speed  Vt and the actual  speed  V. So, if you consider  a point  here as A, then at that point,  the 
theoretical  speed  will be Vt = ωr, if r is the rolling radius  ω is the angular  speed,  then Vt = ωr 
and the actual  velocity  is V.  
Now,  if you take a tangential  component  here at the point  A parallel  to Vt then V will be, the 
component  will be Vcosθ, because you have  considered  the point  A at an angle  theta. So,  
 
So, you have  to analyze  this slip velocity  how it is varying  or from  there,  we will find out 
what  is the corresponding  shear  displacement  and then try to correlate  the shear  stress  with 
shear  displacement.  Now,  for finding  out the shear displace ment  from  the slip velocity,  we 
know  that shear  displacement  will be equal  to x × Vj.  So, if I take this one  
 
I take Vt common  then it becomes , 
 
V/Vt is nothing  but slip i. So, indirectly  I can write  that 
 
Vt = ωr. So, 
 
 Now , this is at the point  A. Now , if you want to find out throughout  the contact  surface  or 
from  the contact  surface  from  A to the point  where  the wheel  is just entering  the soil, if you 
denote  it as B then this has to be integrated,  okay. T his has to be integrated  from  θ to θ0.  
So, by doing that we will finally  develop  equation  for shear  displacement , 
 
That means,  displacement  is a function  of the entry  angle  θ0 which  is denoted  here. Which is 
shown  in this figure  and θ0 is called  the entry  angle and θ the point  where  we are interested . 
Now , once  we know the  shear  displacement  next thing  is how to correlate  this shear  
displacement  with shear  stress ?  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  7:11)  
So, in nature what  we have  observed  is there  are three  different  categories  of relationship  
available  are found . One is related  to loose  soil, the other  one loose  soil or saturated  clay and 
in disturbed  soil and the other  one is in organic  terrain,  then the third  one is in compact  sand 
silt and loam. So, these  are the three relationships  which  we have  discussed  earlier  and the 
relationship  in these  three  conditions  like loose  sand, saturated  clay,  
 
Where, τ is shear stress and τmax is maximu m shear stress. The maximum  shear  stress  is 
described  as 
 
It is a function  of cohesion . It is a function  of angle  of internal  friction  of soil and the normal  
stress  which  is prevailing . So,  
 
Now,  in case of organic  terrain , 
 
So, this Kw is nothing  but the shear  displacement  where  the maximum  shear  stress  occurs  and 
the third  relationship  is,  
So, these  are the three relationship s available . So, now,  depen ding on our soil condition  we 
have  to select  one relation ship. Then once  you select  the relationship , next is how to find out 
shear  stress ? 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  9:05) 
 
So, shear  stress  which  will be developed  at the curved  portion  will be equal  to τ. I have 
indicat ed as τ(θ) here. Because , from  which  angle  we are going  to what  is the distribution  of 
shear  stress  that is important . So,  
 
Now,  again  I replaced  tau max. I have  taken  this for the loose  sand or the saturated  clay.  
So, c+σtanϕ. Again σ, ϕ, I have  taken  as σ(θ), knowing  we have  to know  the pressure  
distribution , whether  it is constant  or it is varying.  So, all those  factors  will come  into picture.  
Now,  I replaced  that displacement  with the equation , 
 
So, this will be the final expression  for shear  stress . But shear  stress  is not important  what  we 
are interested  is to find out the shear  force .  
So, in a solid  wheel  or rigid  wheel , shear  force  will be equal  to. So, these  are the shear  stress.  
Now , I find out this shear  force  here.  So, we have to multiply  the area. So, areas  we have  considered  a point  A so area of that elemental  area, dA will be equal  to if b is the width  of the 
wheel , dA = b ×rdθ. 
Now,  this has to be integrated . So, τ×dA will give you thrust  force . So, r×bτθdθ, this will give 
the shear  force . But we are not interested  about  the shear force,  we are interested  in finding  
out the thrust  which  is the horizontal  component  of shear  stress, shear  force  which  is 
developed  at the contact  patch .  
So, this is your F, this is your shear  force . So, horizontal  component  will be Fcosθ, sorry Fc = 
Fcosθ. So, this has to be multiplied  rbτθ.dθ. So, this has to be integrated  from  theta  to theta  0 
depending  on in which  area you are interested  to find out the thrust  force . So, this will be the 
expression  for finding  out thrust  in case of pneumatic  wheel  when  it is behaving  like a rigid  
wheel  that means,  it is moving  in a rigid  mode .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:23 ) 
  
 
Now the other mode is elastic mode.  So, let us see now,  what  happens  to the elastic  mode if 
part of the wheel  will be flatten ed and another  component  will, which  will be curved  one. 
That means,  we have  to consider  the shear  displacement  along  the flat portion , we have  to 
consider  the shear  displacement  and the curved  portion . So, I have  differentiated  or 
demar cated, you can say the flat portion  as AB and the curved  portion  as BC. Now,  to find 
out the shear  displacement  or shear  stress  on the flat portion , we need  to know  what  is the 
shear  displacement  in the flat portion?   
And similarly,  for finding  out the shear  stress  on the curved  portion , we have  to find out what 
is the shear  displace ment  in the curved  portion . So, if at B the total shear  displacement  is 
denoted  as jB and which  is denoted  a jB. And at a point  suppose  x, starting  from  point B. So, if we are interested  in finding  out what  is the displacement  at this point ? Then I have  denoted  
that as ∆j, ∆j.  
So, total displacement  up to point  x will be jB+∆ j. So, this jx is nothing  but the cumulative  
shear  displacement  at a distance  x from  the point  B. Now,  we will consider  two things  one is 
the curved  portion  the other one is the flat portion . Let us now see how do we develop  this 
shear  stress  in curved  or flat portion?  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:11 )  
 
 
Let us come  to the flat portion . So, basically,  we want  to find out the slip velocity . If the track  
is moving  at a velocity actual  velocity  V and Vt is the theoretical  speed  of the track . Then  Vt-
V will give you, the speed  of slip of the track  if which  is denoted  as Vj. If this direction  is opposite  to the direction  of forward  movement , then it is positive  and then it is called  slip. If 
it is opposite  to the theoretical  the actual  speed  or direction  of travel  then it take as skid .  
So, here the theoretical  speed  is nothing but ωr, where  ω is the angular  speed  of the sprocket 
or the driver  which  is drivin g the track  and r is the rolling  radius  of that driver.  Now,  shear  
displacement  which  is denoted  as jx at a point  located  at a distance  x from  the frontal  area of 
the contact  area, frontal  portion  of the contact  area. So, that becomes , if you know  the slip 
velocity  times  t, then that will give you what  is the shear displacement  during  that time. So, 
Vj× t and t = x/Vt.  
So, t is the duration  for which  the track  is in contact  with the soil, the link is in contact  with 
the soil. So, now 
 
 
 
So, it is basically  slip into the distance  from  the front  end of the track . Now,  if you are in. So, 
that means,  the flat portion  will behave  like a track  and the shear  displacement  will be 
calculated  or computed  as we have  followed  for computing  the shear  displacement  in case of 
a track .  
So, in a pneumatic  wheel,  we will consider  that shear  displacement  in this flat portion  would  
be equal  to i×x. Now , the total lengt h, if we denote  as L which  is the contact  length . So, if 
this is the contact  length  then total displacement  will be i×L. If you are interested  up to this 
point,  then the distance  you have  to know . So, at x, it is written  as ‘ix’ and we have  already  
known that the displacement  at point  B because  of the curved  portion , this is the 
displacement .  
So, the total displacement  will be again  summation  of jB+iL. Now,  next thing  is, only shear  
displacement  will not help you, we have  to find out what  is the shear  stress  which  is 
prevailing  under  the flat portion  as well as on the curved  portion ? (Refer  Slide  Time:  17:36 ) 
 
So, for the curved  portion, again  we have  to find out what  kind of soil is there ? If it is a loose  
soil, if it is a organic  terrain  or if it is a compact  sand then we have  three  different  kinds  of 
relationship  available . So, based  on that, we have  to find out the relationship  between  shear  
stress  and shear  displacement . So, in this case,  I have  taken  the loose  sand where , 
 
displacement  on the curved  portion  divided  by K, shear  deformation  modulus  K.  
Now,  if you know  the normal  distribution  then τmax I can write  as c+σtanϕ or, 
 
So, θ0 is entry  angle , this is your θ0 and θ is here. T hat means  corre sponding  to point  B, the 
angle  is θ from  the vertical  and corresponding  to point  C, the angle  is θ0. So, now the 
displacement  I have  replaced , jB I have  replaced  with 
 
So, this will be the expression  for shear  stress .  
Now , next thing  is what  is the shear  force  which  is acting ? So, shear  force  will be again  
acting  tangent  to the surface , the contact  surface , suppose  at point  p. Now , the shear  force  
will be equal  to whatever  shear  stress  we develop ed multiply  with the area. Area will be 
equal  to rb.dθ. So, this has to be integrated  from  θ to θ0, from  θ to θ0. So, that will give you the value  of shear  force  and the cos component  of that will be taken  to find out the tractive  
effort . So, tractive  effort  will be this rb×τ×θ×cosθ.dθ. This has to be integrated  from  θ to θ0.  
So, that will finally  give you what  is the tractive  effort . That means,  now you have  find out 
tractive  effort  at this point  because  of the curved  portion.  Again , for the flat portion , we have  
to find out the suitable  relationship  if it is a loose  sand then again  we take 
 
If you are interested  to find out shear  stress  up to the point  x from  the front  end of the flat 
portion , then I replace  τmax with c+σ(θ)tanϕ and 
 
So, I have  replaced  this jx with ix. Now,  since  we are interested  for the total length,  so, that 
means,  this will be equal  to 
 
 So, this will be equa l to this, instead  of x you can take l. Now , the thrust  force  develop ed will  
be, this has to be integrated  from  this point  to the endpoint  that means  from  point  B to the 
point  A. So, I have  multiplied  the area with the shear  force . So, that means  b×dx the area that 
has to be integrated  from  0 to l. So, this will give you thrust  force  for the flat portion .  
So, now,  the total thrust  force  will be the sum of the thrust  force  which  is developed  in the 
curved  portion , sum of the thrust , the thrust  force  which is develop ed at the flat portion.  So, 
this is the final expression . So, that means,  up to this point  we are considering . So, from  here 
to here, then from C to B and B to A. So, finally,  the total thrust force  will be rb×τ(θ)cosθ.dθ. 
This is to be integrated  from  theta  to θ0 plus b× into 0 to lτθdx. This is the final expression .  
So, what do we come  to know  that the important  thing  in case of a pneumatic  wheel  is what  is 
the mode  of operation ? Once  you decide  the mode  of operation  based  on what  is the pressure  
which  is exerted  on the ground  and the pressure  the ground  can sustain ? Then we decide , 
what  is the mode  of operation  whether  it is in rigid  mode or whether  it is in elastic  mode . So, 
once  it is decided,  then it becomes  easier  for us to find out the thrust  force  which  is 
developed . So, the procedure  is first, if it is a rigid mode  than first find out, because  the soil 
will behave  like a rigid  wheel  without  any deflection,  then we have  to follow  the same  
procedure  what  we followed  for rigid  wheel .  So, you have  to find out the shear  stress -shear  displacement  relationship . So, before  that we 
have  to find out the shear  displacement , taking  slip velocity  and from  there , once  you find out 
the shear  displacement  then we have  to select  a suitable  relationship  depending  on which  soil 
conditions  the wheel  is operated.  Now,  after getting  the suitable  relationship,  then we find out 
the shear  stress  which  is developed  and then the shear  stress  has to be multiplied  with the 
contact  area knowing  the width  and radius , we can find out the contact  area and this has to be 
integrated  for the portion  which is inside  the soil. So, that you can find out the thrust  force .  
If it is in elastic  mode , then there will be two sections. T wo sections  in the sense , we have  to 
find out for two sections,  one is the curved  section  the other  one is the flat section . And the 
curved  section  will follow  the same  way as you followed  for the rigid  wheel . And flat portion  
we will follow  the procedure  which  we followed  for finding  out the shear  displacement  in a 
track .  
Basically,  it is linearly  related , the shear  displacement  is linearly  related  to slip value  and the 
distance  from  the front  end of the track . So, once  it is decided  the next thing  is what  is the 
shear  stress  shear  displacement  relationship . Now,  taking  both shear  stress -shear  
displacement  relationships  we find out what  is the shear  stress . And then it has to be 
multiplied  the area to find out the shear  force . So, in the curved  portion , the shear  force  is 
acting  at an angle . So, the cos component  that means  horizontal  component  has to be found  
out and then this has to be added  with the flat portion  to finally  get the total tractive  force  
which  is developed  by a pneumatic  wheel  in elastic  mode .  
So, we need  to know  the relationship . The important  things  are we need  to know  the 
relationship  and the pressure  distributi on beneath  the curved  portion  or beneath  the flat 
portion , then only it will be in a position  to carry out this integration.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:53 )  
I hope  I have  clarified  and I have  made  an attempt  to clarify  all these  things  and you will be 
in a position  to derive  equations  for predicting  shear  displacement  and from  there  we can find 
out what  is the tractive  effort  of a pneumatic  wheel . Thank  you. 