Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Raheman  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 12 
Rolling resistance of a pneumatic wheel  
Hi everyone , this is Professor H  Raheman from Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Department from IIT Kharagpur , I welcome you all to this NPTEL  course  on Traction  
Engineering . Today I will try to cover Rolling  resistance of a pneumatic wheel . As you know 
that wheel and  track,  they are  the two traction  devices which are  commonly used in a tractor . 
So that  is why  we are considering wheel and in  subsequent class we  will consider how to  find 
out rolling  resistance of a tr ack.  
(Refer Slide Time:  1:06)  
 
 Now, here the concept will be how to find  out rolling resistance of pneumatic  wheel . So when 
you consider wheel , rolling  resistance it will be because of three  things , one is due to flexing 
of tyre, the other  one is due to soil compaction and the  rolling resistance  could be due to  
bulldozing . So either all three are present or any  one of them will be present so both will , that 
will contribute towards the rolling  resistance .  
So when the wheel runs on the hard  surface , the first component that is your tyre flexing  will 
be the main component for  rolling resistance . So, for this reason the inflation pressure  in 
wheels  for on -road vehicles are kept  relatively high. When the t yre runs on a soft soil or on 
yielding  surface the last two components  that is your soil compaction  and bulldozing these 
are the two  components that will contribute  towards the rolling resistance . And compaction 
resistance decreases as  inflation pressure decreases  why, because  when you decrease the  
inflation pressure , the contact area is  increased so ground pressure is  decreased hence 
compaction resistance  is decrease d.  
So therefore , for off -road condition the  inflation pressure should be as low as  possible  and 
coming to the bulldozing  resistance  this is basically caused by soil being  thrown up and 
carried along in front of  the wheels  which will form a bow wave . So it increases rapidly with 
increase in  width to diameter ratio  so wheels with lesser width diameter  should be used to 
prevent bulldozing . So this is the background of  rolling resistance of a pneumatic wheel.   
(Refer Slide Time:  3:23)  
 Then, in case of a pneumatic wheel , it behaves in  two different modes during  operation , the 
first mode is in rigid mode , the second mode is in elastic mode . Rigid mode means the rolling 
resistance,  the tyre will simply sink into the soil , it is not flattened .  
So, if the ground is sufficiently soft  and the sum of the inflation pressure pi  and the pressure 
which is produced by  the stiffness of the carcass pc is greater than the maximum pressure , the 
terrain can support at the lowest point  of the t yre circumference  then the t yre will remain like 
a round like a rigid wheel . So this  is referred to as rigid mode of  operation .  
That means p i inflation  pressure plus pressure which is exerted  by the carcass  due to carcass 
stiffness , if sum of these  two is greater than the pressure which  the terrain can support then it 
behaves  like in a rigid mode . If the terrain is f irm and the t yre inflation pressure is low . So 
what will happen , a portion of the  tyre will be flattened  which is indicated in this figure . If 
you look at the right corner , this one , the portion is flattened ; this condition is referred as 
elastic  mode of operation . So now we have to see first , whether the  wheel is in elastic mode 
or whether the  wheel is in a rigid mode .  
(Refer Slide Time:  5:15)  
 
So if the t yre behaves like it  is a rigid rim  then you have to use the same  Bekker's equation 
what we have utilized  in case of a rigid wheel and the normal  pressure at the lowest point of 
the tyre is given by  
 
Now if you substitute for  z0, just now we have de rived for rigid wheels so  then it becomes   
This pressure is now called critical  pressure because this is the pressure  which will be utilized 
to demarcate  whether the wheel is in rigid mode of  operation or to whether the wheel is in  
elastic mode of operation . Now that is denoted as p ground critical , ground pressure critical . 
If the sum  of the inflation pressure p i and the  pressure which is produced by the  stiffness of 
the carcass pc is greater  than ground pressure critical p gcr, then the tire will remain round like 
a rigid  wheel and the rolling resistance will be  equal to  just like the rolling resistance of a  
rigid towed  wheel.   
 
So the behavior will be similar to  the behavior  of a towed  rigid wheel  that means rolling  
resistance expression will be same . Now when sum of the pressu re p i and pc is lesser than 
ground critical pressure  then a portion of the  tyre circumference  will be flattened and the 
contact  pressure in the flat portion  will be  equal to p i plus pc.  
(Refer Slide Time:  7:41)  
 
So if contact pressure is p i+pc then the sinkage we can calculate ,  
 and R we can calculate ,  
 
just like in plates sinkage  test. Now if I substitute  this z0 so  
 
So for  z0, if I substitute for p, I have  taken p i+pc. Now the equation becomes  rolling resistance  
will be equal to  
 
That means rol ling resistance depends on  what is the inflation pressure , it depends what is the 
pressure stiffness  of carcass , the pressure due to  stiffness of carcass . Then it depends on  the 
section width of the  tyre and the  cohesive modulus of sinkage k c and the frictional  modulus 
of sinkage  kØ and exponent of sinkage  n. So, average  tyre which will be , average ground 
pressure of the  tyre that will be equal to , the problem associated with this p i+pc is, difficult to 
measure  pc because it varies with load , it varies  with the type of  tyre, it varies with  inflation 
pressure .  
So, what B ekker have  suggested is , instead of pi+pc, it can take ground pressure pg. This 
ground pressure value is available  from the tyre manufacturer ’s data So it will be easier for us 
to calculate . So if we are taking a ground pressure  then the equation will be ,  
 
And z0 also you can similarly do , instead of p i plus pc, I can write  
 
Now how to find out average ground  pressure  on a flat portion  the tyre, the average ground 
pressure of  the tyre will be equal to the load  carried by the  tyre divided by the  corresponding 
ground con tact area . If you  know the ground contact area or if you  can find out the ground contact area  knowing the load , we can find out what  will be the ground pressure . Load 
divided by area that will give you  the ground pressure and then utilizing  this equation you can 
find out the  rolling resistance .  (Refer Slide Time:  11:17 )  
 
 
  
Now if you look at , this is the potion  which is flattened, this is the portion which is remaining 
in curved shape.  So ent ire thing is entering into  the soil so that means there is a flat portion,  
there is a curved portion  and the width we have taken as  b. Section width of the tyre  we have  
taken as  b. Now the contact patch if you  denote it as lt. For a wider t yres like terra t yres lt 
may be lesser than  b because if the se are wider t yres. So section width is  greater than the 
contact patch . So, if that is the situation  then we have to take  lt instead of  b for all those 
equations which you have  derived for  sinkage or for rolling  resistance . So I have derived 
expression  for lt so 
 
If I take a s this is the deflection  δt, so and this is the radius . So this is your δt and this is your 
radius r  so now  expression for  lt. So lt will be  this distance . This is your lt, so  
 
So you have to take  either  b or l to lt depending on which  one is lesser . So, if lt is lesser then 
you have to take  the value of  lt instead of  b in z0 as well as while calculating the rolling  
resistance  along the flattened portion  the pressure wi ll be equal to  pi+pc which you have taken 
as ground pressure . And the W which is  applied , that is carried by the wheel . So that will be 
carried or supported by two  components . Now so W will be equal to W 1+Wcu that means a 
portion of  weight  will be supporte d by the flattened portion  and the rest will be supported  by 
the curved portion.  Now if I denote this flatted  portion as AB and the curved portion as BC  so 
flattened  portion W1 will be equal to  if b is the width  and if you know the  ground pressure so into your l1 so this is area into pressure that will  give you directly the  value of W 1. Now for 
finding out the  weight which is supported by the curved  portion, we have to proceed in a 
similar way as  you have done for the rigid wheel . That means , in the  contact  patch , the 
curved  contact patch  which is indicated as BC  the radial force acting will be d N. So it will 
have a component dW; it will have a component d R. dR is related to your rolling resistance 
and dW would be related to the vertical load  which is suppor ted. Now d W will be equal to , if 
I take a small element  subtending  angle dθ which I have  indicated in this . So that area 
whatever force is  acting so that is indicated as d W2 and  
 
Now x is equal to , ‘x’ I have indicat ed here, x will be equal to  rsinθ Now, 
 
 
Now we  substitute for this in here , so it becomes   
 
Now x square wil l be how much .  
 
Now if I simplify this one , so this will  become   
 
Now for shallow  sinkage  or for  this expression with respect to the  diameter is very very low  
so you can neglect this . So we can  approximate as  
 
Now x will be how much ,  
 
Now if I diffe rentiate this expression , so what I get is  
 
Now substitute for  dx,  will be equal to minus (2r/2x)×zdz. So 2-2 will be cancel out . Now substitute  for x, so it 
becomes  
 
So now you substitute for dx in this  expression  here. So it becomes   
 
Next is , if I assume that  t=z0+δt-z, then dt/dz = -1 or dt = -dz. So now I  substitute for -dz as dt 
so I can remove this  minus sign , so if this becomes   
 
So dW2 will be now finally I can write  as, if this is clear then I can directly  write as   
 
Now this is the expres sion. Now this term can be expanded by  binomially and only keeping 
the first  two terms and neglecting the other terms , so this can be finally written as   
 
 (Refer Slide Time:  21:13 )  
 
So, what we will be getting is  expression , so we  will be getting final ly   
So this will be the final expression for  the load which is carried by the curved  portion .  
So total weight  will be equal to W1+W cu. We have expression for Wcu. We have expression 
for W1  
 
 
 
So this is a  series of equations available .  
So what  you have to do is , first you have to assume a value of  δt which is the deflection part 
then calculate l1. So assume a δt, calculate  l1, then find out W 1 and Wcu. Then summation of 
this W1 and Wcu should satisfy this condition . If this condition is not satisfie d, then you have 
to change the value of δt till we get the convergence .  
So this is , this could be an iterative  procedure by which we can carry out and  find out what is 
W. Once you know W then  you can find out knowing the rolling  resistance divided by W th at 
will give  you coefficient  of rolling resistance .  
So this way you can find out the rolling  resistance , coefficient of rolling  resistance for a 
pneumatic wheel  when it  is in  rigid mode of operation or when it is in  elastic mode of 
operation .  
(Refer Slid e Time:  24:57 )   
 
So in this lecture I tr ied to derive the  equation for predicting rolling  resistance of a pneumatic 
wheel  both in  rigid mode as well as in flexible mode  of operation . In addition , equations are 
being derived for finding  out weight carrie d by the different  section of the wheel . Different 
section  means there will be a flat portion , there will be a curved  portion .  
So what will  be the weight which will be carried on  the fl at portion and what will be the  
weight which will be carried at the curved portion . You can refer to the book like Theory of  
Ground Vehicles for further enhancing  your knowledge . Thank you .  