Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  18  
Tractive  Performance  Prediction  Models  – Wismer  and Luth  
Hi everyone,  this is professor  H. Raheman  from  Agricultur al and Food Engineering 
Department , IIT Kharagpur.  I welcome  you to this NPTEL  course  on Traction  Engineering. 
This is lecture  18, where  I will try to cover  tractive  performance  prediction  models . Basically , 
what  is developed  by Wism er and Luth?  
(Refer Slide  Time:  0:52) 
 
The concept  which  will be covered  is wheel  numeric , motion  resistance  ratio,  torque  ratio and 
effects  of tyre soil variables  on tractive performance . So, we have  basically  derived  the 
theoretical  equations,  which  will be necessary  for developing  the tractive  effort. B ut if you 
look at those  equations,  those  equations  require , what  is the distribution  of normal  pressure ? 
What is the shear stress  distribution ? So, in practical  field, it becomes  really  difficult  to do 
that exercise . So, what  you have  to do is some  equations  or should  be, some  equations  should  
be available .  
So, that easily  if you know , this is the weight  which  is coming  and this is the soil condition  
then immediately  you can say, okay , this is the available  pull or this is the rolling  resistance . 
So, to do that, there  are scientists . They have  carried  out this kind of activities  and based  on 
different  field data related  to tractors,  soil tyre combinations  of different  sizes,  different  soils,  then based  on the single  wheel  testing  data, scientists  Wismer  and Luth , he has developed  
some  equations  related  to tractive performance  evaluation .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  2:29) 
 
So, basically  what  he has done  is he tried to identify  which  are the parameters  which  is going  
to affect  the performance  parameters . performance  parameters  means  your pull, rolling  
resistance , tractive  efficiency  etcetera . So, he tried to identify  this, in terms  of soil 
parameters , in terms  of wheel  parameters , in terms  of system  parameters . So, let us see what  
are those  parameters ? Under  soil, he identified  a parameter  called  cone  index . Basically , cone  
index  gives  the force  required  to push  a cone shape  probe  into the soil that means,  it will give 
indirectly  the strength  of soil.  
So, it is symbolized  as CI and its dimension  is FL-2, force  per unit area.  Next , he identified  
what  are the wheel  parameters ? Under  wheel  parameters , Wismer  and Luth , they selected  
tyre section  width, overall  tyre diameter  and tyre rolling  radius  and these  are denoted  as b, d 
and r and they the units  are length  units.   
Then  he tried to identify  what  are the system  parameters ? Under  system  parameters , he 
identified , these  are the parameters  like load,  how much  is the load acting  on the wheel , what  
is the force  required  to tow the whee l which is nothing  but your rolling  resistance  then, what  
is the pull which  is developed  then, what  is the gross  tractive  force  which  is basically  the 
summation  of pull and rolling  resistance  and while  developing  the gross  tractive  force,  what  
is the corre spond ing slip?   So, he has identified  9 parameters  and he applied  dimensional  analysis  technique  to find out 
the relations,  the dimensionless  your variables  to develop  that tractive  equation . So, if you are 
applying  Buckingham  π theorem  for dimension al analysis  technique,  then 9 minus  2 will be 7 
dimensionless  variables . So, what  are those  7 dimensionless  variables?  One is your towing  
force  upon  W, pull upon  W, tractive  force  upon  W. So, I have  indicated  here ρ as towing  
force  upon  W, μ coefficient  of traction,  which  is nothing  but p upon  W and μg is a ratio of 
thrust  upon  W, tractive  force  upon  W.  
They  are the functions  of cone  index , they are the function  of the tyre parameters , they are 
function  of wheel  slip. Now,  these  parameters  he tried to comb ine to find out 4 different  
dimensionl ess ratios . So, what  are those  parameters ? One is CIbd/W that means,  he has 
combined  the strength  of soil with the size of the tyre, b and d and then W, what  is the weight  
coming  in the, So, on the wheel.   
So, CIbd/W, that is called as wheel  numeric.  He has combined  these  parameters , parameters  
of soil, parameters  of wheel  and what  is the external  load which  is acting?  So, this is denoted  
as wheel  numeric . Then  he defined  another  parameter , dimensionless  parameter  b/d then r/d 
ratio then S, slip  is dimensionless . So, r/d, b/d. So, using  these  4 parameters  he tried to find 
out relationship  and he developed  2 equations , one for pull, the other  one is for rolling  
resistance . If you look at this one, CIbd, there  have  indicated  that tyre rolling  radius  r, r/d, r/d 
for most  of the tyre is around  0.475.  
That means,  it is basically  a constant  factor . This  is not varying  for the agricultural  tyre. The 
other  parameters  which  are varying  is b/d and the slip. Slip again  depends  on what  is the type 
of soil and what  tool is developed ? So, that depends  on, slip is dependent  on that. The only 
thing  which  is left is b/d ratio. So, Wismer  and Luth , they have  taken  b/d ratio as 0.3 for all 
combinati on of tyre, they have  tried in different  soils they have maintained  the b/d ratio is 0.3 
and for all agricultural  tyre, they have  taken  δ/h ratio. That means,  tyre deflection  to section  
height  ratio a 0.2. 
So, these  are the practical  limitations . In the sense , under  these  variables,  he tried to develop  
some  equations . Let us see what  are those equations  which  are developed  by Wismer  and 
Luth? And then we will discuss  what  are its limitations  later on.  (Refer  Slide  Time:  8:17) 
 
Now,  he has develop ed this equation , motion  resistance  ratio which  is nothing  but the ratio of 
towing  force  to weight  coming  on the wheel.  Weight  when  I said this dynamic  weight . In 
case of a tractor  when  it will try to pull an implement  that will be weight  transfer  from  the 
implement  side as well as from  the front  axle. So, the weight  transfer  is there . So, that means,  
if the starting  condition  weight  distribution  is 70:30 or 65:35 in the rear and the front  axle 
then the 65 percent  will be increased . So, if you take only 65 percent  that means  there  are 2 
wheels  on the rear axle.  
So, 65 percent  of the total weight  divided  by 2. That will give you the weight  coming  on each 
wheel.  Now,  during  pulling certain  implement , since  there  is some  weight  transfer . So, what  
will happen ? This 65 percent  divided  by 2 has to be increased . So, we should  know , what  is 
the dynamic  weight  which  is coming  on the wheel ? Then only we can find out what  is the 
motion  resistance  ratio? So, these  W which  I have  indicated , written  as dynamic  wheel  load.  
Now,  this is equal  to 1.2 divided  by Cn, Cn is your wheel  numeric , plus 0.04.  
So, Cn is CIbd/W and CI has to be measured  following  the procedu re, which  is given  in 
American  society  of agricultural  biological  engineers,  standard  313.2. And we have  to 
measure  the tyre section  width,  we have  to measure  the overall  diameter . So, then only you 
can find out the value  of motion  resistance  ratio. So, when I tried to plot it versus  different  
wheel  numeric s. So, wheel  numeric s are varied  from  say 5 to 70 then the nature  of the curve  
will be like this.  Initially  it is very high then afterwards  it drops  very rapidly  then it becomes  almost  constant  
after 35. Why  it is so, and what  does it reflect ? When  I said wheel  numeric  is 5. Wheel 
numeric  is 5 means  CIbd  for a given tyre size of the pneumatic  wheel  bd cannot  be changed , 
only change  is your CI that means  strength  of soil. So, when  the soil is soft, what  happens ? 
Strength  of soil is less so, the wheel  will try to sink. So, resistance  will increase . So, CIbd/W 
will reduce  because  CI is less in soft soil. So, CI will reduce . So, it will move  to, if you are 
taking  the centr e point  here then it will move  towards  this one or the strength  of soil is 
reduced . If the strength  of soil is increase , it will move  towards  this right  side.  
So, strength  of soil is reflected  by cone  index . So, that means,  if soft soil, we will get more  
rolling  resistance . If hard soil then will move  toward  the right  side, you will get the lesser  
rolling  resistance . Because  sinkage  is less, compa ction  is less so, rolling  resistance  is less. So, 
basically  on hard soil, it is a tyre deflection . So, that will give rise to rolling  resistance . But in 
case of soft soil, it is not the tyre deflection . It is the sinkage that will come  into picture . So, 
the nature  of the curve  is well justify  looking  at the strength  of the soil.  
But the only difficulty  is, it does not differentiate  between  a power ed wheel or a rigid  wheel  
or a towed  wheel , it will give the same  value . If it is a power ed wheel , is it is an unpowered  
wheel  or towed  wheel  for both the cases  it will give you same  value  of rolling  resistance  
which  is very difficult  to say. Why ? Because  when  there  is a slip certain  amount  of sinkage 
will be there . So, that part is not reflected . So, we will discus s in detail  what  is the other  
difficulties ? Let us now move  to the other  equation  which  has been  developed .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  13:16 ) 
  
The secon d equation  which  he developed  is related  to gross  traction  ratio. So, gross  traction  
ratio means  if the ratio of the tractive  force  which  is developed  at the contact  patch  divided  
by the dynamic  weight  coming  in the wheel . So, in other  words,  we can replac e F with Q/r. 
So, Q/r, Q is the torque  which  is acting  on the axle,  r is the rolling  radius . So, that way 
thrust×radius  will give you Q. So, we have  replaced  F that is tractive  force  with F×r, tractive  
force  into rolling  radius  as Q.  
And F we are replaced , we have  replaced  as Q/r. This rolling  radius  is found  out on a hard 
surface , hard smooth surface  at self-prope lled condition . We have  to run the wheel  and then 
taking  the number  of revolutions . we have  to divide  it by n×2π. Suppose  we make  4 
revolutions  then whatever  distance  it covers  D/(4×2π). So, that will give you what  is the 
rolling  radius.   
Now , Q/rW and W is the dynamic  weight  
 
Where Cn is the wheel  numeric , s is the slip. So, once  you know  the gross  traction  ratio,  if 
you deduct  the rolling  resistance  ratio,  then it becomes  
 
That means  this is your coefficient  of traction,  this is your motion  resistance  ratio MR, RR 
and this is μg, μ is coefficient  of traction  and ρ is the rolling  resistance .  So, when  I deduct  it then it becomes . This is the equation  for the pull which  is developed , 
pull by W ratio 0.75 into 1 minus  e to the power  0.3 CnS, this is gross  tractive  effort , minus  
1.2 by Cn plus 0.04. So, that will give you the coefficient  of traction . And slip, we define  as 1 
minus  Va upon  Vt, Va is your actual  speed  and Vt is the theoretical  speed.  Now,  when  you 
try to plot these  P by W that means,  net traction  ratio versus  wheel  slip starting  from  say 0.01 
to 100 percent. So, and this has been  plotted  for different  soil conditions  which  are reflected  
as wheel  numeric  are 10, 20, 30, 50 like that.  
So, what  we observed  is when  we decrease  the slip, the nature  of the curve , what  we say, we 
are getting  lesser slip whethe r it is at wheel  numeric  10 or whether  it is a numeric  20 or 
whether  is at wheel  numeric  30, if I draw  a line somewhere  at 10 percent . So, this is the pull 
which  is developed , COT.  Now , when  I incre ase the pull to, the slip to 20 percent  then you 
can see this is the case. So, that means  after certain  slip these  values  are almost  maintaining  a 
constant  value.   
But in case of this wheel  numeric  when  it is 10 it is still increasing  beyond  80 percent  you 
can say, is still increasing . So, what  does it 10 indicat es? That means  the soil is soft CI 10 and 
CI 15 means  soil is hard. So, in hard soil the pull which  is developed  or the COT  which  is 
developed  is much  higher  than the COT  which  is developed  in soft soil. That means,  if you 
look at this point,  if you look at this point,  there  is a difference  of nearly  0.45,  0.5 like that.  
Now,  20 percent  slip again  same  difference  if you look at this one, if you look at this one, so, 
there  is a difference  of 0.45. So, we conclude  from  here that the P by W or the coefficient  of 
traction  is more  in hard soil that means  in hard soil, the tractor  could  be able to develop  more  
pull. In soft soil the tractor  will be developing  less pull, why? Because  the power  is lost in 
overcoming  the rolling  resistance . So, the net pull availabl e will be less in soft soil whereas  in 
hard soil the rolling  resistance  is lesser  hence  your pull developed  will be more  and your 
coefficient  of traction  will be more.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  19:06 ) 
 
Now,  once  you know  the coefficient  of traction,  then rolling resistance  and gross  coefficient  
of traction  then the one most  important  component  which  is computed  while  calculating  or 
while  evaluating  the performance  of a tyre is your tractive efficiency . So, tractive  efficiency  
is basically  the output  by input . So, in case of a tractor  or in case of a single  wheel  output  is 
your drawbar  power  or output  is your tractive  power  and which  is the pull into forward  speed  
and the input  will be your axle power .  
So, if I take the ratio so 
 
So, P/ W which  is the coefficient  of traction  and the denominator  is a Q/rW, Q is the tractive  
force  divided  by W×(1-s). So, this is basical ly derived  from  fundamental  equations . So, once 
we know  those equations  which  have  been  developed  by Wismer  and Luth , next is we can 
put those  values  here to find out the tractive  efficiency.   
Now,  based  on the output  data from  Wismer  and Luth , it has been  plotted  how the pull to 
weight  ratio is varying  that COT  is varying  which  is indicated  by these  blue lines  and the 
tractive  efficiency is  varying  which  is indicated  by the dotted  green  lines  for different  wheel  
numeric,  CIbd/W starting  from  say 10 to 50. So, what  we observe  here is the slip at which  
you are getting  maximum  pull or COT  value  and the slip at which  you are getting  maximum  
tractive  efficiency .  If I draw  a line suppose  at wheel  numeric  of 50, this is the maximum  tractive  efficiency  you 
are getting . So, this corresponds  to your wheel  slip of say around  8 percent . Now,  the 
maximum  pull which  you are getting  is from  this point  only 30 percent . So, there  is a 
difference , the slip at which  we are getting  tractive  efficiency , maximum  tractive  efficiency,  
the slip at which  you are getting  maximum  pull. Now, if you look at 20. Suppose  this is 20 
lines,  so, maximum  we are getting , maximum  tractive  efficienc y is here which  is 
corresponding  to slip of say around  15 percent  and the pull which  we are getting at 20 is still 
increasing . So, maybe  around  this slip is here. 
We need  more  power  to be developed  at the same  time we need  more  efficiency . So, what  to 
do now? We have  to find or we have  to compromise , compromise  between  whether  we 
require  more  pull or whether  we require  more  tractive  efficiency . So, that is why a design  
tractive  efficiency  curve  is given . So, it is at the higher  wheel numeric  values  it is the slip, the 
corresponding  slip is 15 percent . At lower  numeric , wheel  numeric  values  the slip is more  
than 20-25 percent .  
So, you have  to find out a suitable slip value  to make  a compromise  between  these  design , 
between  the tractive  efficiency  and the COT . But nevertheless,  the equation  which  has 
developed  by Wismer  and Luth  are very simple  in the sense only 2-3 parameters  are required  
to compute  the perfo rmance  parameters  of a wheel.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  23:20 ) 
 
The limitations  if you look at tractive  efficiency  reaches  a maximum  at a relatively  low slip 
value  and then it decreases  with increase  in slip. So, maximum  tractive  efficiency  occurs  at lower  slip values  for the largest  Cn values  which  are associated  with higher  soil strengths . 
That means  when  CI is more , cone  index  is more , you  will get better  tractive  efficiency  or 
wheel  loading  is less than you will get better  tractive  efficiency . To get maximum  drawbar  
power  output , the vehicle  or the wheel  should  be loaded  to cause  slip which  is occurring  at 
maximum  tractive  efficiency .  
Otherwise,  you will not get maximum  output . So, you have  to load the wheel  in such a way 
that the slip should  be around  this. Suppo se in 50. So, we have  to load in such a way that the 
slip is around  5 percent  and get the maximum  tractive  efficiency  and if you require  more  pull 
then you have  to have  more  slip then only get maximum  pull. So that is why in  end I have  a P 
by W ratio that is COT  ratio, coefficient  of traction  is not close  to its maximum  value  at this 
slip.  
If this is the maximum  tractive  efficiency , the slip corresponded  maximum  tractive  
efficiency , at here only you are getting  0.3, whereas  at 30 percent  you are getting near to 
0.72. So, you have  to make  a compromise  between  maximum  COT  and maximum  tractive  
efficiency.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:17 ) 
  
 
Now , looking  at the limitations  of Wismer  and Luth  equatio n, the motion  resistance  ratio as I 
told in the beginning,  it does not contain  a slip term. So, that is why it will predict  the same  
value  of motion  resistance  for a towed  wheel  as well as a power ed wheel.  Applicability  of 
equation  which  is developed  by Wismer  and Luth  is only limited  to b/d ratio as 0.3, δ/h ratio 
as 0.2, and r/ d ratio as 0.475. So, these  are the limited  applicability . 
If you exceed  the b by d ratio,  if you exceed  δ/h ratio or because  r/d ratio is nearly  constant . 
So, these  are the 2 values  0.3 and 0.2. If we exceed  then applicability  of Wism er and Luth  is 
not known.   
And another  limitation  is if you look at the equation  given  by Wism er and Luth , maximum  
we can develop  75 percent  of the torque  which  is applied  to tractive  force  that is another  
limitation . So, with these  limitations,  since  these  equations  are very simple  and they can be easily  handle  so that is why it was getting  popularity  earlier . So, I took these  equations  and 
try to discuss . Thank  you. 