Traction Engineering  
Profes sor Hifjur Raheman  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 11 
Rolling resistance of a rigid towed wheel  
Hi everyone, this is Profes sor H Rah eman from Agricultural and Food Eng ineering 
Department , IIT Kharagpur . I welcome you all to this NPTEL course Traction Engineering . 
This is the lecture 11 where I will try to cover Rolling resistance of a rigid towed  wheel .  
(Refer Slide Time:  0:50)  
 
 
As you know , towed wheel  means , the concept that is Bekker 's theory of rolling resistance 
will be applied to find out the rolling resistance of a rigid towed  wheel . The towed wheel is 
nothing but where torque is not acting . Simply , it is used to support the weight or to carry the weight . Now the figure which I am showing here is the  towed wheel . Since torque is absent , 
so there is no shear stress acting at the soil and wheel interface , only the radial stresses are 
acting . So that is why I  have indicated radial stresses along the periphery .  
So dN is a radial force, it is not stress . Actually the radial force which is acting corresponding 
to an angle d theta that means we are considering a  soil element with angular interval of d 
theta , so this is the  arc of a circle , so that becomes the length will be r d theta and b is the 
width of the wheel . So, b into r theta will give you area of this element , this arc, area of this  
arc.  
Now to move this wheel forward , we require to  tow it, that means R which is indicated here 
is the rolling resistance and W is the vertical load which is acting and small r is the rolling 
radius . As there is no deflection , so rolling radius will be equal to D by 2 , diameter by 2 and b 
will be the width of the wheel.  Now as per Bekker ’s theory , the assumption is the terrain , the 
terrain or the  soil reaction present at all points on the contact patch is purely radial and is 
equal to the normal pressure beneath a horizontal plate at the same depth in a pressure 
sinkage test .  
That means we know that in the pressure sinkage test ,  
 
So, here z is the sinkage k is the modulus of sinkage and n is the exponent of sinkage . So, to 
calculate the value of R, what we have to do is , this R will be equivalent to the work done per 
unit length in pressing a plate of width b into the ground to a depth  z0.  
So, suppose the entry angle  θ0 is given as here , this line joining the  soil surface with the 
center line , then at any angle  theta we are considering a small element of circumference of 
the wheel which is subtending  an angle dθ. So this is subtending  an angle dθ, so dθ will be 
the ar c of that  area will be  
 
and the radial force which is acting d N,  
 
 
 So, that will be the radial force, then this radial force will have two components ; one is the 
vertical component which is denoted as dW,  the other one is the horizontal component dR. If 
you are going to integrate the total horizontal forces acting on this contact patch then we will 
find out what will be the rolling resistance .  (Refer Slide Time:  5:35)   
 
 
 Now looking at this figure , we are going to find out expression for total ro lling resistance . 
Now dR will be how much , here R, what you have considered is the compaction resistance as 
the motion resistance of rigid wheel  is due to the vertical work done in making a r ut of depth 
z0, so dN have re solved into dR and dW.  
  and  
  
 
So now this has to be integrated and p also we know that  
 
So now if I substitute for p , so it becomes  
 
This is the expression for d R.  
 
Okay, now if you look at this figure r is the rolling radius and  
 
 
Now if substitute this rsinθdθ in this equation , so this becomes  
 
 
This is the expression for rolling resistance , that means rolling resistance is a function of tyre 
width or the wheel width , is a function of exponent of s inkage  n, is a function of modulus of 
sinkage  k, is a func tion of z which is sinkage .  
The incremental vertical force dW, if you , the incremental vertical  force d W, so that will be 
equal to the vertical component of dN. So this is nothing but d N cosθ, so dN we have already 
derived as p×br dθ, so this will be your vertical component of dN. Now if we substitute again 
for  
   
so it becomes  
 
So, now we know that x which is corresponding to this point , so if I denote it as A and B, so 
and center as O, so AB is equal to x and x will be equal to rsinθ in the right angle  triangle 
OAB . I can write , as x is equal to rsinθ , now dx/dθ will be equal to rcosθdθ . Now I substitute 
this rcosθdθ here, so this equation becomes now  
 
Now x square is how much ?  
 
 
 Now r2-r2 will cancel out , so it becomes  
 
Now, for soil sinkage wh en the sinkage is low , z0 minus  z will be very -very low value , so you 
can neglect this .  
 
 
Now if I differentiate again this one , so 2xdx will be equal to -2rdz. Now I have to substitute 
for dx from here , so from here dx will be equal to -2rdz. This I ca n write as –r/x. For dx, I can 
write  
 
So now I have to substitute this one here in this equation . So, the assumption for the limit will 
be that is applicable to  soil sinkage , so I can write dW as finally , I can write as  
 
Now let t = (z0-z), so   
Or, 
 
 
So, now further if I simplify  
 
So now for  z, if I substitute  z we have taken here t = z 0-z, for z if I substitute  z = z0-t or this 
way, z = z0-t.  
Now I substitute in this equation ,  
 
So, this has to be integrated after expanding this term  (z0-t)n. Now if I expand it and only 
considering the first two terms and neglecting the rest of the terms , so what I get is   
 
This two term I  will take and the rest of the terms I will  neglect .  
Now if I substitute for , so it becomes ,  
 
So that will be the final ex pression . Now this has to be integrated from , so this has to be 
integrated from 0 to W that means 0 to this has to be integrated from 0 to  z0.  
(Refer Slide Time:  18:18)    
So the final expression for W will be  
 
This has to be integrated and final express ion will be  
 
This is the expression for W.  
So you have already defined for rolling resistance and  so coefficient of rolling resistance will 
be equal to R/W , so the expression will be  
 
Now R expression we know  
 
Now I substitute for  z0,  
 So this is the expression for  z0, this is the expression  for R , this is the expression for W and 
this is the expression for coefficient of rolling resistance . So now finally if I substitute for  z0 
in this equation ,  
 
Now if I want to express individually like what i s the effect on b, what is the effect o f k like 
that. So this becomes  
 
This is the expression for R.  
Now in this expression , it clearly indicates that rolling resistance is a function of wheel width, 
it is a function of modulus of sinkage , it is a funct ion of diameter , it is a function of weight 
and it is a function of exponent of sinkage . Now if you look at b and k they are all negatively 
related that means b, k and the diameter that means if diameter we are increasing it is going 
to reduce rolling resi stance , if you are increasing section width that means width of the wheel 
then it is al so going to reduce the rolling resistance . So let us now see how th ese are affecting 
the rolling resistance for different n values .  
(Refer Slide Time:  22:23)  
 
So when  we keep everything constant only vary b then   
When I keep everything constant only v ary k then  
 
When I keep everything constant only vary diameter then it becomes  
 
If I keep everything constant only vary W then  
 
So now if I vary n from half to 2, so, that itself will show you how b, k, D, and W they are 
going to influence the rolling resistance . So, what we conclude from here is , increasing b or 
increasing D because , soil you cannot change , k is related to  soil, so b and D if you only 
consider then  that is going to , both of these values are going to reduce the rolling resistance 
but increasing diameter will have a more effect , will have more effect in reducing the rolling 
resistance as compared to b.  
(Refer Slide Time:  23:48)   
 
Now there are certa in limitations . Bekker  has proposed while applying the Bekker ’s Theory 
to decide the rolling resistance or to determine the rolling resistance of a towed wheel,  the 
limitations are the equation for rolling resistance which has been derived we have only taken 
two terms of that binomial expansion , so as a result what happens , this equation works well only when the values of n is within 1.3 . If you increase the value of n beyond 1.3 th ere would 
be consid erable error .  
So if you want to reduce the error then you have to take more terms of that expansion , at least 
five terms  should be taken instead of two . Then the other limitation is , this equation is 
applicable to moderate sinkage that means when z 0 that is sinkage  is less than equal to D by 
6, one sixth  of the wheel diameter . Then the third limitation is the prediction of rolling 
resistance for smaller wheels that means lesser than 50 cm in diameter is not accurate . Then 
the last limitation is the predict ion of sinkage z0 in dry sandy  soil is not accurate because 
there  could be a significant amount of sinkage and slip as sociated .  (Refer Slide Time: 25:20)  
 
 
So in brief , we can say in this lecture attempts are made to derive the Bekker ’s equation for 
predicting rolling resistance of a towed  rigid wheel and we have al so discussed the limitations 
in applying the Bekker ’s theory for predicting rolling resistance . You can refer to  some of the 
books like Wong J Y Theory of Ground Vehicles and Soil Dynamics in Tillage and traction 
by William R Gill and Jay Vanden  Berg. Thank you . 