Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Raheman  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 25  
Tutorial 5 -Influence of Track Length on Performance of a  
Walking tractor and Selection of Suitable Size of Tyre  
for a Given Size of Tractor.  
Hi everyone, this is professor H. Raheman from Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Department, IIT Kharagpur. I welcome you all to this NPTEL course on traction engineering. 
This is a tutorial class where I will try to cover how the length of track is influencing the 
performance of a walking tractor? And then we will try to discuss about selection of a suitable 
tyre size for a given size of tractor.  
(Refer Slide Time:  1:03)  
 
So, first these are the parameters which will be utilised for deciding the influence of track length 
on its performance  and some of these parameters are also responsible for selecting the tyre. So, 
that is listed all these parameters, which will be utilised in those 2 problems which I am going 
to solve.  
(Refer Slide Time:  1:26)  
 
The problem is very short in the sense statement . I have given, a shorter track will slip more 
than a longer one, if they are to develop the same tractive effort . This is the statement. We have  
to justify this statement. So, in other words, what we are doing is, we are trying to say that if a 
track is having longer length, it will always develop better tractive performance. That means, 
it will develop more tractive effort. So, to prove that, you have to take one example : a tracked 
vehicle with uniform contact pressure whose weight is given and it has the option to be fitted 
with say tracks of different length, starting from 1.5 meter then we have changed to 2 meter 
and the contact area of each track because the vehicle will have 2 tracks , so, each track contract 
area is given . If the vehicle is to be operated over a terrain that has been characterized by an 
exponent of sinkage n whose value is 0.5 and coefficient modulus of sinkage 0.77 kN/mn+1. 
Then frictional modulus of sinkage is 51.91 kN/mn+2, then cohesion 5.17 kPa, angle of internal 
friction ϕ as 11 ° and shear deformation  modulus K is 5 centimeter.  
So, under these conditions, we have to select a suitable pair of tracks. That means, the track 
which is giving better tractive performance that will be selected. So, since the question is, the 
longer ones should be higher tractive effort, so, the equation which is related to tractive force 
for a loose sand and the weight, assuming the weight of the track is uniformly distributed over 
the ground. So, the question is F = Ac+Wtanϕ. So, this is maximum thrust. So, this is your 
maximum thrust developed. This bracket portion and this is the portion, which is, portion is 
due to the variation of slip and length.  
So,  
So, 
𝐹=(𝐴𝑐+𝑊𝑡𝑎𝑛 𝜑)[1−𝐾
𝑖𝑙(1−𝑒−𝑖𝑙
𝐾)] 
i is the slip, l is the length of the track. The rest of the things are same for both the soil. If we 
look at the first bracketed term, W is also same whether it is a small track or the bigger track. 
W is kept same and contact  area is also same.  
So, this is the governing equation based on which we have to find out what will be the, which 
one will be giving  the better tractive performance. So, what I have done is, have taken 2 -meter 
length as a track for one track , then I tried to find out at 20 per cent slip , what is the tractive 
force which is developed utilizing  this equation.  
Because all the values are given ‘A’ I have taken as 1.5  meter square and length of track I have 
taken us 2 meter and slip I have taken as 20 per cent. So, what we observed here is, we are 
getting a tractive force of 124.23 kilo Newton. Now, I changed the length to 1.5 meter and what 
we observed is a tractive ef fort which is lesser th en what is observed in case of 2  meter length. 
So, what I did is, I varied the percent, a slip percentage from 20 to 30 per cent then what I 
observed is, the tractive effort is  matching with the tractive effort which is developed in case 
of 2 meter track. But slip is different.  
So, again we tried at another slip value for a 2  meter track length . I changed the slip to 30 per 
cent. So, I got a value of tractive force as 132.45. Now, to get that tractive force, again I tried 
with a 1.5  meter length, that means I change l to 1.5 meter and what I observed is, when the 
slip is 0.45 that means 45 per cent,  then only we are developing a tractive effort, which is equal 
to the tractive effort developed by a 2  meter length track. So, from these 2 observations, what 
we can conclude is, it is the length of the track which is giving you more tractive effort for the 
same slip.  
Now, the statement which I said, a shorter  track has to slip more than the longer one. So, if we 
look at these, to get the same tractive effort, the 2  meter track length slips only 20 percent 
whereas, the 1.5 -meter track length, it slips 30 percent. So, the statement is proved. To further 
check this one, if you look at 2  meter length, at 30 percent slip you are getting 132.45 kilo 
Newtons tractive effort. To get the same tractive effort of 132.45 kilo Newton the shorte r track, 
that means 1.5 -meter length track has to slip by 45 percent to develop the same tractive effort.  So, the statement which is given like a shorter track which is more, is now justified from this 
example. So, basically it is the governing equation that has  to be remembered and then we need 
to know how to utilise this equation by the parameters like soil parameters and weight coming 
on the track and the contact area of the track and different slip values, then only you can 
calculate.  
So, the next thing is, a problem which will be dealing with the selection of tires. For  example, 
someone wants to have a tractor particular size say 55 hp. If the company people who fit the 
tyres and that is there you cannot change it because they will say this is the best one. But if you 
really want to analyze  which one is best one, then you have to do this exercise.  
(Refer Slide Time:  8:48)  
 
 
So, we have to select a tractor tyre for 55 hp tractor. So, what are, the information we required ? 
We required to know what is the total weight, what is the wheelbase, what is the static weight 
distribution. This is important, how much weight is coming in the rear axle and how much 
weight is coming in the front axle? That is important . 
So, just for convenience, I have indicated that yes, in the rear axle it is 65 percent and obviously 
in the front axle it is the rest 35 percent. Then the other important component is, what is the 
location of CG, how far it is from the rear axle, CG from the rear axle, distance of CG from the 
rear axle? Then question arises, what kind of implement you are going to select?  
So, we want that the tractor should give you maximum power. So, maximum power means, it 
is the tillage operations which will give you maximum power. Tillage operation again, the 
primary tillage operations related to deeper till age. for in our case, mouldboard plough is  the 
implement which is going to give you the maximum draft and it is a clay soil which will give 
you the maximum draft force.  
So, we want to know the details about the implement whether it is a 2-bottom  mouldboard 
plough or whether is the 3 bottom moul dboard plough. Once you select the plough, then what 
should be the number of bottoms , then what is the total weight of the implement that means 
mouldboard plough, then what depth you want to operate, what is the width, then at what speed 
you are going to operate? These are some of the information  which you require, then the most 
important thing is the center of  resistance, how far it is away from the center of the rear axle, 
and how much below the ground level?  
If this information  are available and the ang le of pull is available, then we will try to find out, 
what is the weight transfer or what is the dynamic weight coming at the rear axle and what is 
the dynamic weight coming on the front axle? So, before that, once you decided the implement 
and knowing differe nt information , the next step is how to calculate the draft? ASABE equation 
is the only equation which will give you draft computation. So, the ASABE draft equation is 
given as this  
𝐷𝑟𝑎𝑓𝑡  (𝐷)= 𝐹𝑖[𝐴+𝐵×𝑉+𝐶×𝑉2]𝑀𝑤𝑇𝑑 
Where, Mw is the width, T d is the depth and V is the forward speed, A, B, C are parameters 
which value are listed here.  For MB plough, have already decided from that ASABE standard what are the values of A, B 
and C. Value of A is 652, value of B is 0 and value of C is 5.1 and F 1, F2, F3 these are soil 
texture adjustment parameters, Fi 1 means F 1, means i could be 1, it could be 2, it could be 3. 
If it is 1 then the value is, Fi value is 1, if it is F 2 then the Fi is 0.7, if it is F 3 the Fi value is 0.45. 
So, basically it is the hardness of soil. In that way if I have to take , for clay soil, we have 
decided these are the parameters 1 F 1 value is 1, A value 652, B value is 0 and C value is 5.1. 
Then we try to find out what is the value at a forward speed of 4.5 km/h  and at a depth of 15 
centimeters . This is the draft value which is found out. Then what will be the pull? So, pull will 
be, if I draw a tractor here so, this is the ground , so, pull will be somewhere here, this is the 
line of pull and what I am saying is, the line of pull is making certain angle with the horizontal  
and the center of  resistance is say, distance away from the rear axle and the center of gravity is 
also at the distance from the rear axle. This is your central gravity W and you need to know the 
total weight.  
So, in our case we have taken ‘W’ as 2400 kg. So, this distance is to be known and it is given 
70 centimeter and this distance center of resistance  is 100 centimeter from the rear axle and 
this is the ground, this is 15  centimeter and 15 centimeters below the ground level. So, there 
will be a reaction at the front wheel, there  will be the reaction at the rear wheel. So, this pull (P), 
I can resolve into 2 components P x which is nothing but your draft which I have already 
calculated using the ASABE equation and the vertical component is your P y.  
So, that P  = D/cosα. So, that will give you a pull (P) and from P we calculate P y which is nothing 
but P ×sinα. So, that way we got 182.12 kg. So, we got the value of draft, we got the value of 
pull, we got the value of vertical component P y. The next thing is, you have to find out what is 
the dynamic weight coming in the front axle because we need to steer the vehicle comfortably 
during operation.  
So, for steering the vehicle comfortably, we need to have at least 20 percent of the total weight 
on the front axle. So, we have to now find out, what is the dynamic weight coming on the front 
axle and then verify whether this condition is satisfied or not ? So, for calculating the dynamic 
weight we have to take a moment about the center of the rear axle around the central axis of 
the rear axle. So, now, these are the 2 forces, then this is the total weight acting, this is the front 
wheel reaction.  (Refer Slide Time:  16:39)  
 
 
Since you are taking moment about this line, so, what we are getting is, P x ×(r+15). If you want 
to make it in meter, 0.15 meter. Then moment because of y it will be minus. So, moment  
because of P y will be Py×(1+0.7 ). Now, W, this is positive clockwise. So, moment du e to W is 
W×0.7-R1×2.1. So, if the Px value is nothing but the draft, P y value is this value. So, if W value 
is known, so, if you substitute this one from here , we can find out what is the value of R1.  
So, now, you will verify this condition, whatever value is coming whether it is giving us this 
condition satisfied or not. If not, that means, if not, we have to reject the case. That means, the 
tractor is not, the tyre which is fitted is not suitable, we have to put some more weight at the 
front. So, rolling resistance will increase. So, that means this tyre diameter is taking a role here. 
So, you have taken R plus 15 so, tyre diameter is taking a role. So, this exercise after you finish, 
what is the dynamic weight?  
The next thing is, the pull which is developed by the tractor . So far , we have not calculated. 
So, you have to now calculate how much is the pull that should be greater than or equal to the 
draft value which is required to pull the implement. So, for finding out the pull which is 
developed, we can take the help of Brixius equation. So, that means, you have to calculate the 
mobility number then at different slip values starting from 5 percent, 10 percent, 15 percent, 
we have to find out what is the pull which is developed. It cannot exceed beyond 20 percent or 
maximum range sh ould be a maximum range of slip should be within 20 percent. So, at 
different values of slips 5 percent, 10 percent, 15 percent and 20 percent , we have to find out 
what is the pull which is developed using Brixius equation. Brixius equation gives you tractive 
effort the torque ratio, so torque ratio minus rolling motion resistance ratio. So, that will give 
you the coefficient of traction and coeffi cient of traction if you multiply the dynamic weight 
so, that will give you the what is the pull which is devel oped.  
So, let me repeat again, for calculating pull there is no direct equation given by Brixius . We 
have to find out the torque ratio first, then find out the rolling resistance ratio or the motion 
resistance ratio and the difference of these 2 will give you the coefficient of traction or 
coefficient of net traction. So, which is nothing but P upon dyn amic weight of the dynamic 
weight coming on the wheel or axle. Now, you multiply it whatever value you are getting just 
multiply with the dynamic weight.  
So, dynamic weight of the front axle we have calculated just now, similar exercise you have to 
carry out at this line centerline of the front wheel that means, you need to know the tyre 
diameter which is provided at the front. So, we find out dynamic weigh t of the front axle, 
dynamic of the rear axle. Since it is a 2 -wheel tractor , so, this has to be multipl y with the 
dynamic weight on the rear axle. So, that will give you what is the pull which could be 
developed by a tractor and that should be greater tha n this draft requirement of the implement. 
So, that is the third condition which has to be satisfied . 
The first condition is  the steering ability, second condition is the draft should match, third 
condition is the slip should be within 20 percent. If these conditions are satisfied, then only we 
can say this tyre which is selected is good enough to carry out this till age operations. So, the 
possibilities there could be many tyres available in the market like 13.6 -28, 16.9 -28. So, it may happen that both the tyre will satisfy this condition, all these 3 conditions are satisfied by both 
the tyres for pulling a 2 -bottom mouldboard plough.  
So, what you have to do is, if you really want to know here the pulling ability of the tractor, 
then you can increase the number of b ottom of  mouldboard plough that is one possibility and 
then carry out the same exercise and see whether these 3 conditions are satisfied or not. If not 
one of them is not satisfied that means that tyre is not suitable. Suppose in the worst case that 
both the tyres  which I mentioned may satisfy the 3 conditions for increasing the number of 
bottoms of  mouldboard plough then comes the cost factor there as a fourth component.  
So, if both the tyres are suitable, then go for finding out which one is economical . Economical 
means, where I have to pay less to purchase the tyre. So, obviously, the smaller size will cost 
less. So, you have to select the smaller size tyre. So, these are the procedure which has to be 
followed for selecting a tyre. That means, initially you have to calculate for the maximum draft 
requiring implement, how much draft is required, then we finally find out what is the pull or 
draft which is deve loped by the t ractor using Brixius equation, then we find out what is the 
dynamic weight which is coming, I mean  dynamic weight is required before calculating the 
Brixius number.  
So, in the second step, the dynamic weight calculation for the front as well as the rear wheel 
are to be done. In the third case you have to find out the pull developed by the tractor under 
different slip conditions. Maximum we can go up to 20 percent. And once these are calculated 
that means the pull which is developed is within 20 percent and it is satisfying the draft 
requirement that the implement , and the second thing is what is the steering ability that means, 
the weight on the front axle should be mo re than the 20 percent of the total weight.  
So, these conditions are to be satisfied. If these conditions are satisfied for say x number of 
tyres. So, then question is, which tyre is giving you less cost that means, what is the purchase 
price of these tyres. The tyres have a lesser purchase price you can select. So, I hope this will 
give you some idea. So, only difficulty here is, the ASABE equation. Now, the ASABE 
equation says that draft values which are predicted is plus or minus 50 percent. So, since we 
do not have any go od predictive equations a vailable to estimate the draft, so, that is why you 
are relying on the ASABE equation.  
Otherwise, the procedure is simple. So, what we can do is a program can be developed by 
which by giving the information like the tractor specifications CG distance will base then statics weight distribution. If those informations are given then implement informations are 
given and the soil conditions are given then immediately it will calculate all these parameters 
which I mentioned like draft, pull, the draft deployed by the tract or, then whether the condition 
is satisfied, whether this draft which is of the pull is developed by the tractor is within 20 
percent or not.  
Then next is, what is the dynamic weight coming in the front axle, if that condition that is, it 
should be more than 20 percent all the time, 20 percent of the total weight. If these conditions 
are satisfied then immediately the program will say okay this is the output, output means this 
tyre is suitable that becomes easier task.  
(Refer Slide Time:  26:37)  
 
 
So, basically, I attempted to calculate the influence of the, discussed the influence of length on 
tractive performance of a track and there we found that a shorter  track has to slip more to 
develop the same tractive effort as compared to a longer track. So, the longer track will slip 
less. So, it is better to have a longer track to develop more draft or more tractive force and we 
also discussed what are the procedur e to be followed for selecting a tyre for a given tractor. 
Taking into consideration the max imum draft requiring tillage implement. That is all. You can 
have these papers and these books where it will be helpful for you by referring this. Thank you.  