Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Rah eman  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 27  
Pressure Sinkage Relationship in a Sandy Clay Loam Soil  
Hi everyone, this is professor H . Raheman from Agricultural and Food Engineering Department, 
IIT Kharagpur. I welcome you all to this NPTEL course on Traction Engineering. Today I will 
try to cover Pressure sinkage relationship. For this I will take , I will demonstrate a set 
experimental setup.  
(Refer Slid e Time: 00:54)  
 
Where I will try to clear the concepts like what is the setup which is used for measuring plates 
sinkage, and then we will try to find out what is the Cohesive modulus of sinkage, frictional 
modulus of sinkage, exponent of sinkage. And the se parameters are important related to and th ey 
are related to bearing strength of soil. So, that is why, we are interested in measuring these , these 
parameters.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:22)  
 
In a pressure sinkage test what we are measuring is , how much pre ssure we required to force a 
plate . Plate could be a rectangular plate, plate could be circular plate, and that should simulate 
the contact area of a tyre. Now, it is better to take a circular plate because when you apply a load, 
it becomes uniformly distr ibuted, if you take a rectangular plate, the corners are dead points. So, 
that is why pressure is not uniformly distributed.  
So, what we have done is , we have taken 3 different circular plates of diameters 25  centimeter , 
30 centimeter and 35 centimeter.  Now, th ese plates are put on the soil and then we tried to apply 
a force using a hydraulic cylinder and the force which is applied that is measured with a load cell 
and the force data and the corresponding sinkage data, which is this sinkage is measure using  a 
potentiometer , so, these data are recorded  in the computer.  
And now I will try to show those data and how they will be utilized to find out the modulus of 
sinkage, and exponent of sinkage.  So, pressure which can be calculated by dividing force with 
the corresponding area, area in this case will be area of plate 1, plate 2, plate 3 like that. So, there 
will be 3 different plates you have taken. So, P will be calculated, then P is related to Z, by an 
exponential relationship.  
So, that means P  = kZn, where k becomes your modulus of sinkage and n is the exponent of 
sinkage. Now, modulus of sinkage is again divided into 2 parts.  The first part is your cohesive modulus of sinkage which is k c and the second part is your frictional modul us of sinkage. This 
cohesive modulus of sinkage is dependent on the plates dimension and kϕ is independent of the 
plate dimension that means loading area the n represents the soil characteristics, whereas k 
represents both soil as well as the loading ar ea characteristics . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:54)  
 
 
It is a rectangular plate or a circular plate which simulates the contact area of a tyre and that has 
to be forced to enter into the soil. So, what you are going to measure is the force which is 
required to  press it and what is the corresponding sinkage. So, once you know the force, force divided by the area, area of the plate that will give you pressure. So, and the corresponding 
sinkage will try to measure, so, I will try today with the 3 plates of differe nt diameter.  
This is of 25 centimeter or the other one is 30 centimeter, the third one is 35 centimeter, the each 
has its own weight like the 25 centimeter plate has a weight of 431.95 gram, 30 centimeter plate 
has a weight of 620.51 gram and 35 centimeter  plate has a weight of 851.18 gram.  So, these are 
to be pressed into the soil and with the help of a hydraulic arrangement, so I will give you the 
details of the setup, then I will show you how a plate is pushed into the soil to find out the 
pressure and s inkage  parameters.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:13)  
  
  
I will now show you the setup which is used for measuring the pressure of a pressure required to 
place a plate into the soil. The setup comprises of a plate which is kept over the soil surface is the 
plate whi ch has a diameter of 30 centimeter . Then this has to be pressed using a shaft, this shaft 
is connected to the hydraulic cylinder, this the hydraulic cylinder. So, in between the shaft and 
the hydraulic cylinder, there is a load cell that is going to measure  how much f orce you are 
applying.  
So, the corresponding sinkage has to be measure d. So, we have an arrangement like 
potentiometer which is shown here , this potentiometer will be used to measure the sinkage that 
means when there is a sinkage there w ill be a cha nge in resistance and that has been already 
calibrated by which you can know how much depth it has the plate has entered. So now I will 
show you.   
So, this shaft is now in contact . There is a crossbar provided, so that will apply more or less a 
uniform pre ssure.  So, I have applied some force and the plate has now entered into the soil. Now 
I will remove the shaft. So, similar exercise I have to carry out for 3 different plates and the data 
which are record which are acquired using this load cell and the pote ntiometer that will be stored 
in a computer using a data acquisition system.  (Refer Slide Time: 07:11)  
 
Now, the data which you obtain related to plate 1 , that is diameter 25 centimeter, this is the 
sinkage values, these are the corresponding  force values  and then force are converted to pressure 
by dividing its area (πr2). So, these are the pressure data which you got. Now, you try to plot 
these pressure data against the sinkage data. So, sinkage we have taken on the x axis and 
pressu re you have t aken y axis.  
Now, what we observe here is , this is fitted to a power equation which can be given as pressure 
is equal to 769.4 kN/mn+2 and into x, x is your sinkage, sinkage raised to the power 0.798. So, 
here we g ot 2 val ues, one is k value, the other one is n value and we have denoted these as k1 
and n1 corresponding to plate one.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:22)  
 
So, similarly, we got data for third diameter 30 centimeter. So, these are the sinkage data, the se 
are the  force data which you got then we convert it into pressure data. So, this pressure data is 
plotted against the sinkage data and again we saw that this is best fitted to by a  power equation . 
Where pressure equal to 722.16 × sinkage0.8219, that means, the modulus of sinkage value, which 
is denoted as k2 and the exponent of sinkage value which is denoted as n2 they are found out 
from this equation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:11)  
 Again , we try with another diameter plate which is 35 cent imeter we got the sinkage data here, 
we got the force data and then force divided by the area of the plate , so, that will give you the 
pressure data. So, now, we try to plot pressure versus sinkage. So, what we observe here is , again 
a power equatio n which will be a best fitting the observed data points. So, the pressure is equal to 
684.89 × sinkage0.7661.  
So, we got modulus of sinkage value 684.89 kN/mn+2. And then exponent of sink age value, we 
got 0.766. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:09)  
 
So, now, all the 3 sets of values which we obtain for 3 different plates for the same soil 
condition, we try to plot in 1 graph. So, these are the results that you can see the blue line 
indicates the dat a related to 25 ce ntimeter, the orange line indicates the , orange dots are 
indicating the data related to 30 centimeter plate radius diameter plate and the gray ones 
representing the 35 centimeter diameter plate.  
So, what we observe here is , these 3 lines  they are not parallel they are having a slope , each slope 
is different. Now, question arises, for the same soil condition we have utilized 3 different plates 
and we are getting 3 different slopes which is possible, because since we are doing experimental 
measurements, so, the soil condition may not be that much uniform so, that is why you are 
getting 3 different slopes.   So, Bekker  has suggested because the equation which is given that p  =kZn, that has been 
proposed by B ekker . So, now, he has suggested that if you are getting different slopes, then the 
best way is to take the average which will be representing the average exponent of sinkage of 
that soil. So, we found out the slopes n1 , n2 and n3, then to the average of n1 plus n2 a nd n3 so, 
that bec omes the your,  the exponent of sinkage for the soil for which we carried out the test . 
Now, comes how to find out the frictional modulus of sinkage, the cohesive modulus of sinkage 
because we have got data related to modulus of sinkage.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:19)  
 
Now, we know that modulus of sinkage is related to this frictional modulus of sinkage, kϕ and kc 
by a straight line relationship that means k  = (kc/b)+kϕ. So, if you are plotting k versus 1 /b, then 
the slope will give you kc value and the intercept will give you kϕ value.  (Refer Slide Time: 12:45)  
 
 
So, the k value which we got for 3 different plates in terms of k1 , k2 and k3, we tried to plot 
against 1 /b. So, you got 3 points, then we try  to best fit these 3 observed points . So, what we 
observed is there is a straight line which can very well predict these values.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:11)  
 
So, the straight line is 36.724 ×1/b + 475.76 . That means , the intercept is 4 75.76 which is nothing 
but your frictional modulus of sinkage and the slope is nothing but kc which is equal to 36.724 
and we also calculated the average exponent of sinkage which is summation of these 3, and we 
took the average so that  we g ot around a value of 0.795. 
So, finally, what we have derived  is, kc is equal to 36.72 kN/m1.795 and kϕ is equal to 475.76 
kN/m2.795. This kc unit and unit of kϕ they ar e not same as we kno w that they are dependent on 
exponent of sinkage. So, that is why there is a variation. So, in one case, we are getting 1.795 
meter raised to 1.795. In the other case, we are getting meter raised to the power 2.795.  
Now, these are the values for a sandy clay loam soil which is around the moisture content is 
around 10 percent at dry bas is. So, the plate sinkage test , as I said in the beginning, which 
indirectly give you the response of the terrain, terrain means the soil how it is behavi ng when it 
is loaded  with a tyre. So, these parameters are required and this is one of the techniques which is 
used for measuring this response of the terrain.  
There are 2 methods basically, which is called the b evameter  technique and out of this bevamete r 
technique, the 2 methods are one is plate sinkage test the other one is shear annulus test. So, 
shear annulus test will give you the shear stress, which is causing the failure of the soil, 
maximum shear stress, which is causing the failure of the soil.  So, and the plate pen etration test is going in the , is going to give you the bearing strength of soil. 
So, we have utilized this plate penetration test and then we try to find out the exponent of 
sinkage and modulus of sinkage . Again, modulus of sinkage is nothing but your cohesive 
modulus of sinkage and frictional modulus of sinkage. So, these are the 3 values which you 
obtained by carrying out the plate sinkage test.  
So, the values which you got , that is valid for a sandy clay loam soil . The moment you ch ange 
the soil , then these values may change. So, it is a , these parameters are dependent on type of soil 
and also the moisture content that is important. So, whenever we try to mention these values , this 
we have to mention that okay . These are the values w hich you ob tained at moisture content of 
this that has to be mentioned. So, this is how we carry out the plate sinkage test, and I hope you 
will understand how to calculate kc, kϕ and n for a given soil condition.  