Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  20  
Tutorial  4: Tractive Performance  Estimation  
Using  Brixius  Model  
Hi, everyone,  this is Professor  H. Raheman  from Agricultural  and Food Engineering  
Department,  I welcome  you all to this NPTEL  course  on Traction  Engineering.  This is lecture  
20, where  I will try to do some  tutorials  related  to computation  of tractive performance  using  
Brixius  model.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 0:51) 
 
So, what  I will cover  here is, how to find out the dynamic  weight  on the front  and rear axle of 
a tractor.  Then  I will try to compute  the tractive performance  parameters  of a tractor  using  
prediction  equations.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:07) 
 
The first problem  is, a 50 hp 2WD tractor  with a total weight  of 2400  kg has the option  of 
fitting  either  13.6-28 or 16.9-28 tyres  on the rear axle.  So, you have  to select  a suitable  tyre 
size, if the tractor  is to be operate d most  of the time in horizontal  surface  areas  where  with an 
average  cone  index  of 200 kPa and with the static  weight  distribution  of 35 and 65 per cent 
on the front  and the rear axles , respectively.   
And the δ/h ratio is to be taken  as 0.2 and the aspect  ratio is to be taken  as 0.75 and there is 
no weight  transfer  during  its operation  in the field.  That means,  here the basic  aim is to find 
out what  is the equation  which  you are going  to utilize  for computing  this or for selecting  a 
suitable  tyre. So, it is the again  the coeffic ient of rolling resistance  that is the main  parameter  
and coefficient  of gross  traction . These are the two parameters  which  can be utilized  to select  
a suitable  tyre.  
So, as you know  Brixius  equations . First thing  is, you have  to come  up with the mobility  
number.  So, mobility  number , for calculating  mobile  number  we have  to find out what  is the 
tyre diameter.  So, tyre diameter,  there  are two tyre specifications  are given  one is 13.6-28 
tyre, the other  one is 16.9-28 tyre. So, if δ/h ratio is 0.2 and aspect  ratio is 0.75. So, diameter  I 
can easily  calculate  (1.06×28+2×0.75×13.6).  
Again , I multiply  with 0.254.  So, that will give you 1.27 meter . The same  procedure  I follow  
to find out for 16.9-28 tyres , 1.06×28+2×0.75×16.9×0.254  that will give us 1.397  meter . So, 
this is the diameter . Now,  the section  width  we have  to calculat e. Simply  multiply  13.6, so, 
here will be 13.6×0.254  and here it will be 16.9×0.254.  So, first to calculate , suppose  this tyre is Bn1 and this tyre is Bn2. So, mobility  number  for tyre 1 is denoted  as Bn1, mobility  number  
of tyre 2 is denoted  as Bn2. So, we calculate   
 
So, W will be equal  to, for single  wheel  you have  to calculate , since  the tractor  is operating  
on horizontal  surface.  So, weight  is given , distribution  is given . So, 2400×0.65. So, that will 
give you the weight  coming  in the rear axle and 2400 ×0.35 that will give you the weight  
coming  in the front axle.  So, half of that will be your W. So, by this way we calculate  
mobility  number  and then you can compare  the mobility  numbe r itself.  So, which one is 
higher  or which  one is lower . Then we calculate  the rolling  resistance  or motion  resistance  
ratio.  
So, that is nothing  but 
 
Now , in this case, since  slip is not given  so what  we will do is, you can assume  is the slip 
value  of 10 per cent and then come  to rolling  resistance  for wheel  1, rollin g resistance  for 
wheel  2, and then compare  which  one will give you lesser  wheel  resistance . So, the wheel  
which  is giving  lesser  resistance  that is better . Further , what  we can do is we can compute  the 
coefficient  of gross  traction  to ensure  that yes, we have more  tractive  effort.   
So, first thing  is mobil ity number , second  thing  is rolling  resistance , third  is optional . From  
rolling  resistance  itself  we can conclude  that this tyre is better  which  one is giving you a 
lesser  rolling  resistance  ratio. But you can always  calculate  the coefficient  of gross  traction  
from  there  also you can conclude  which  tractor  is giving  you more  coefficie nt gross  traction  
and the difference  from  there  you can calculate  to find out which  one will give you more  
power  or more  pull. So, from  there , you can make  a selection  which  tyre is better . Next 
problem  will be related  to dynamic  weight.   (Refer  Slide  Time: 6:55) 
 
 
A 2 wheeled  tractor  with a gross  weight  of 19 kN has a wheel  base of 2.1 meter  and is fitted  
with 6-16 tyre at the front,  13.6-28 bias ply tyre at the rear axle. And on a level  ground , the 
center  of gravity  is located  at a distance  of 75 cm from  the rear axle.  The tractor  will be used 
for ploughing  a farm  land with an average  cone  index  of 1000  kilo Pascal  using  a 2-bottom  
mould board  plough.  The total pull on the plough  in the vertical  plane  is 250 kg and it is at an 
angle 15° with the horizontal  when  operated  at a depth  of 15 cm.  
Then  the point  of resistanc e, cente r of resistance  is located  at 125 cm behind  the centerline  of 
the rear axle of the tractor  and 15 cm below  the wheel.  So, what  you have  to compute  is the 
coefficient  of traction,  tractive  efficiency  of the tractor  when  the slip is 20 per cent and δ/h 
ratio is 0.2. So, as usual  the first thing  is you have  to calculate  the diameter . You have  to calculate  the section  width. Then comes  your there  is some  weight  transfer.  So, first you have  
to draw  the tractor  this is R2 and this is your CG.  
So, weight  is acting  19 kN and line of pull say it is saying  15° with the horizontal . So, line of 
pull is somewhere  here and it is 15 cm below  the ground . If this is the ground  surface  suppose  
this is the line of pull and so, line of pull like I can resolve  at this point  into two components , 
vertical  component  or horizontal  component . Then  what  is given  is this is making  an angle  
15°. So, that means,  this component  will be Pcos15° and the vertical  component  is Psin15°.  
Now,  we have  to find out what  is the dynamic  weight because  of the pull. So, we have  to take 
moments  about  R1 so that you can find out what  is the dynamic  weight  at the rear wheel.  
Similarly,  we have  to take moment  about  R2 and then find out what  is the dynamic  weight  on 
the front  axle.  So, now if you take, suppose  these  are the points  A and B. Now , take moments  
about  B. So, Pcosα, Pcos15°×0.15, this distance  is from  the ground  is 15 cm. So, 0.15, this is 
positive  and then Psin15° this is also positive.  So, this is acting  downwards so  this is 
negative .  
So, -Psin15° and this is at a distance  from  the center  is given  as 125 cm from  the rear of the 
rear axle, center  of the rear axle. So, 1.25 meter  so, into 1.25 then W is again  positive.  So, W 
is 19, W you can take as 19 kN into this. This distance  is at a 75 cm that is 0.75. Then  R1 is 
negative , -R1×2.1. wheel  base is given  as 2.1 meter. So, if you solve  it, so, you will find out 
expressi on P is given  as 250 kg. So, you will find out R1 has some  value.   
So, similar  exercise  you have  to carry  out for by taking  moment  about  B. This is taking  
moment  about  A. Similarly,  by taking  moment  about  A, so we will get an equation . 
Equilibrium  of momen ts will be, if we are taking  this is again  positive  Pcos15°×0.15 then P 
sin is, -Psin15°×1.25. Now , W will be oh sorry  about  B, About B so, Pcos15° is okay , this is 
minus  okay.  Now , W will be minus , W this is about  B. So, W minus  W into distance  will be 
2.1 minus  0.75 and then R2+R2×2.1 this is the equation .  
Now,  from  here we can find while P is given.  So, knowing  a W is given  so, we can find out 
what  is R2 value . So, these  are the dynamic  weight . These R2 and R1, these  are the dynamic  
weight . Sorry R1, these  are the dynamic  weight  coming  in the front  and rear axles  
respectively . R1 in the front  axle, R2 in the rear axle.  So, then half of that, if you say that it is 
on a horizontal  surface  then half of that will act on each of the wheels . Next  thing  is we have to calculate  the coefficient  of traction . Once you decided  what  is the dynamic  weight, next 
thing  is calculate  the coefficient  of traction .  
For calculating  coefficient  of traction,  you have  to take the torque ratio given  by Brixius . 
Then coefficient  of rolling  resistance  given  Brixius  and again  we have  to calculate  the 
mobility  number . So, they are CIbd/W. Again, CI is given , b is given , d is given  and W will 
be coming  whatever  R2 value  we are getting here divided  by 2 and for front  wheel  it will be 
R1/2.  
In case of a front  wheel , we will only calculate  the coefficient  of rollin g resistance.  Because  
this is a two wheel drive  tractor. T he torque  or the tractive  effort  is only developed  at the rear 
whee ls. So, Psinα which  I have  given , h is 1.25 plus, I have  1.25+2.1. You are taking moment  
about  B, so plus 2.1. So, that will be so.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  15:04 ) 
 
Now,  after knowing  the dynamic  weight , next thing  is we have  to calculate  Bn. Bn for front 
wheel , Bn for rear wheel  and where  the δ/h value  is given  as 0.2. So, now,  for calculating  the 
rolling  resistance  ratio or motion  resistance  ratio for front  wheel , since  there  is no slip so 
directly  you can write  as [(1/Bn)+0.04]. So, whate ver value  you are getting  just multiply  with 
the 2. So, the total motion  resistance  of front  axle. That means  for both the wheels  in the 
front.  So, this expression  into 2.  
Similarly,  for calculating  the motion  resistance  ratio of rear wheel,  we have  to take a slip into 
consideration    
So, slip we can take as 12 per cent is given.  So, substituting  here, so this will BnR, BnR. So, 
now you will find out what  is the motion  resistance  of a single  wheel  provided  at the rear axle 
then you multiply  with 2. 2 on this side, 2 on this side. So, that will give you motion  
resistance  of 2 rear wheels.  Next , thing is what  is the power  which  is developed ? That means  
gross  traction  ratio.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:49 ) 
 
So, for calculating  gross  traction  ratio we will again  take the help of Brixius  equation  which  
is given  as Q/rW is equal  to, here W is your dynami c weight  and whatever  value  we are 
getting  as R2, R2, will be equal  to R2/2 will be equal  to Wd in one wheel . So,  
 
So, in this equation , Bn we have  calculated . Bn for the rear wheel and s is given  12 per cent, 
0.12. So, just putting  it you can find out one of the wheels, what  is the torque  ratio and if you 
multiply  with 2 that will give you a total tractive  force  developed  total gross  traction  in the 
rear wheels.   
So, you know  the gross  traction . You know  the rolling  resistance.  So, the net traction you can 
find out. Net traction  ratio will be, this is only for the rear wheels  not front  wheels.  Now,  for 
the total rolling  resistance  we have  to consider  both rolling  resistance  of 2 rear wheels  as well 
as rolling  resistance  of both 2 front  wheels.  So, we calculated  net traction  ratio, we calculate d motion  resistance  ratio. The next thing  is, we have  to find out tractive  efficiency.  So, for 
calculati ng tractive  efficiency,   
 
So, μg, I have already  calculated  this value.  So, this will be a total μg. μ is the net traction  
ratio. So, that will give you what  is the tractive  efficiency  of the tractor  while  carrying  out the 
ploughing  operation  in the given  condition.   
So, basically  you have to consider  in a 2-wheel  tractor  the power  which  is developed  is only 
from  the rear axle not from  the front  axle.  That means , the rear wheels  are responsible  for 
developing  power , tractive  power . And for calculating  the total rolling  resistance  you have  to 
take sum of the 4 wheels  not only 1 wheel  and the 2 wheels  and the rear axle that you have  to 
take into consideration .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  20:02 ) 
  
The next question  is related  to track.  A tracked  vehicle  with uniform  contact  pressure  weighs  
155.68 kN and it has the option  to be fitted  with tracks  of same  contact  area which  is 7.2 m2 
but different  dimensions . One set of tracks  with width to length  ratios  1:3, the other  1:4.5. 
The vehicle  is to be operated  over a terrain,  which  is characterized  by the expon ent of sinkage  
n as 0.5. Coefficient  modulus  of sinkage  0.77 kN/mn+1, kϕ friction al modulus  of sinkage  51.91  
kN/mn+2 and cohesion  as 5.17 kPa, angle  of internal  friction  11° and modulus  of sinkage  
shear  modulus  of sinkage , shear  deformation  modulus  as 5 cm.  
Under  these  conditions,  we have  to find out which  one is the suitabl e pair of tracks  which  has 
to be recomm ended.   
So, here what  we have  to do is a track ed vehicle  that means,  there  will be 2 track s and area 
sum of the areas  of the two tracks are 7.2 m2. That means,  each area will be 3.6 m2. But one 
track  is having  length  to width  ratio, if this is w this is L, width:length  ratio in one track  it is 
1:3. The other  track  it is 1:4.5. So, now,  we have to find out what  is the width.  So, area will 
be w×L. So, w will be equal  to L/3. So, L/3×L is equal  to 3.6 m2.  
So, now,  from  here we have  to find out what  is the value  of L? Similarly , here 4.5, (L/4.5)×L 
is equal  to 3.6 m2. So, this is better . If I write  L1, L1, w1, so L1 will be equal  to how much ? 
So, once  you know  L1, once  you know  L then you can find out what  is its width  w and w1. 
Now , I have  decided  the dimensions  of the track  for two different  conditions . The next step is 
what  is the sinkage  z0. So, if this refers  to vehicle  A, this refer to vehicle  B, 1:4.5 then vehicle  
A,   
Now,  p is nothing  but weight  divided  by w×L and in this case, this will be weight,  weight  
will be remaining  same  only the dimension  will change  that was area is also same.  So, that 
does not make  much  differe nce. So, pressure  will be same  for both the tracks.  So, p is given , 
kc value  is given , b will change, b means  this will be here w and in this case it will be w1. So, 
better  I should  write  w. So, that it becomes  
 
So, kc value is given  kϕ values  given , w we have  calculated  from  here. So, you can calculate  
z0. The next thing  is what  will be the rolling  resistance ?  
 
 
And z0 you can substitute  here raised  to the power  n plus 1 by n divided  by n plus 1. So, this 
way you can calculate  for rolling  resistance  of first track , rolling  resistance  second  track , 
which  is having  a length  and width  to length  ratio as 1:4.5. So, once  you calculate  rolling  
resistance  then you can compare  which  one is giving  you lesser rolling  resistance . Then 
comes  your, what  is the gross  tractive  effort  or thrust  which  is developed  that is important  
thrust  which  is developed  by the two track s even though  their area is same .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  25:40 )   
So, you can utilize  this equation  F is equal  to, this is the tractive.  So, this is the tractive  force  
which  has developed .  
 
W here is the weight  in each track . K is the shear  deformation  modulus  which  is given  as 5. 
So, length  of the track  we have  already  calculated.  So, yo can calculate  F for different  values 
of slip at 10 percent , 20 percent , 30 percent  can go up to 40 percent  and c value  is given , ϕ is 
given , A will be remaining  same for both the cases.   
So, this value  is giving  you the tractive  effort  developed  by a single  track . So, if you want  to 
find out the total tractive  force  then you multiply  with 2. So, twice  of this will give you the 
value  of a total tractive  force.  You know the rolling  resistance  of 2 different  types  of track s. 
We know  the total tractive  force . Again, also rolling  resistance  you have  taken  for one track , 
so you have  to multiply  with 2. So, we know  the tractive  force , you know  the rolling  
resistance  then you have  to compare  at different  slip value s or what  are the tractive  force  you 
are getting  for track 1. What are the tractive  force you are getting  for track 2 and then 
wherever  you are getting  higher  torque , higher  tractive  force that you have  to select .  
To confirm  that once again  you have  to check  the rolling  resistance  for both the track s. That 
means,  you have  to carry  out comparison  of tractive  force  for both the track s and the rolling  
resistance  for both the track s. Then from  there , wherever  you are getting higher  tractive  force  
and lesser rolling  resistance  that has to be selected , that has to be selected.  So, obviously,  will come  to an end in the sense , the track  which  is having  higher  length  will give you better  
tractive  force  and lesser  rolling  resistance  this will be the conclusion  from  this problem.   
So, I have  solved  3 problems,  which  are related  to one is related  to utilizing  the Brixius  
equations  for finding  out to suitable  tyre size. The other  one is related  to find out the dynamic  
weight  how to utilize  dynamic  weight  in Brixius  equation?  And the third  one is related  to 
track , how to calculate  rolling  resistance  and tractive  force  developed  by a track and then you 
can compare .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  29:01 ) 
 
So, using  the tractive performance  equati ons developed  by the Brixius  such as coefficient  of 
traction , motion  resistance  ratio and tractive  efficiency  of a tractor can be computed.  Thank  
you. 