Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Raheman  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 24  
Performance Evaluation of a Walking Tractor Fitted with Track  
Hi everybody, this is Professor H. Raheman and from Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Department, IIT Kharagpur. I welcome you all to this NPTEL course on traction engineering. 
This is lecture 24 where I will try to give a description about how to evaluate  the performance 
of a walking tractor when it is fitted with track? Wheels and tracks, these are the two common 
traction devices which are usually fitted with tractors.  
(Refer Slide Time:  1:03)  
 
When I say walking tractor, means this study is confined to the power tiller. Since, power tiller 
is operated by a human being who has to either walk behind or who has to sit on a frame to 
control or to guide the operation of the power tiller. So, that is why we call it walking tractor. 
Since the person has to walk behind the power tiller usually, in the power tiller a person has to 
or the operator has to walk behind so that is why we call it as a walking tractor. So, the concept 
which I take is the motion resistance, pull, tractive efficiency, slip, net traction ratio. These are 
the parameters which will be considered for evaluating the performance of a walking tractor 
when fitted with rubber tracks.  
(Refer Slide Time:  1:59)  
 
So, this is the power tiller which has been converted to be fitted with tracks. And the tracks 
details are given in the right figure where the lug height, lug angle etcetera are given and the 
pitch of the lug all those things are given and the tyre tread p attern and the lug patterns which 
are provided in the track, they are nearly same. So, now the track, walking tractor has been 
replaced with a track on both the sides and for mounting the track we require some 
modifications in the power tiller. That means we have to provide an idler in the front and this 
is the driver roller that is fitted to the axle of the power tiller. That means this is powered. The 
front one which is idler is not powered. And to keep tension on the track we provide some 
intermediate ro llers here and here so that during operation, the torque is perfectly horizontal on 
the surface on which it is going to work.  
(Refer Slide Time:  3:15)  
 
So, the details of walking tractor, what is this engine, what is mass? So, engine is, VST Shakti 
is the model 130 DI and this is a diesel engine, 4 stroke diesel engine and is the horizontal one 
and it develops 9.7 kW or 2400 RPM, its total mass after modification, that means after 
attaching the track comes down to 530 kg initially it was 430 kg with the pneumatic wheel. 
When you replace the pneumatic wheel, because of these arrangements, its weight has been 
increased to 530 kg. Then these are the dimension s of the track, width of the track is 0.15 meter, 
contact length is 0.78 meter and then diameter of the front idler, diameter of the rear drive 
wheel and diameter the road wheels all are mentioned like 0.34 meter, 0.55 meter and 0.11 
meter.  
(Refer Slide Time:  4:18)  
 
So, to measure different tractive parameters, we need to have some instrumentation, 
instrumentation for measuring what is the pull which the power tiller the walking tractor is 
going to develop and how much you pull it is required to tow this power tiller for that also it 
needs kind of loadcell. So, that is I have indicated here a loadcell which is attached to a frame 
which is mounted to the power tiller chassis and this is kept horizontal during operation so that 
whatever pull we are getting that is almost  nearly the horizontal component that is equal to 
your draft. Then the important component, other important component is the wheel actual 
wheel speed. For measuring actual wheel speed , you need to know what is theoretical speed. 
And then you need to know what is actual speed? So, for this what we have done is, for 
measuring theoretical speed, we have put on spikes here. You can see a lot of spikes are present 
and are fixed to a sprocket  which is attached to this rim and then we have a proximity sensor, 
which will try to sense these spikes so that it can give a signal to the in the output. Basically, a 
proximity strategy is nothing but it senses the presence of any metallic object like th ese spikes. 
So, once it senses then it gives a signal. So, that signal or the spike which you are getting and 
the output will be counted and the time duration if you know, then you can find out what is the 
speed of operation. Similar exercise or similar ar rangement has to be made for measuring the 
actual velocity. So, but in power tiller since there are one drive axle and there is no axle in the 
front, the front one is idler which is provided. So, what we have done is, we have put a separate 
wheel which is a towed wheel and this is mounted to the walking tractor chassis. So, that speed 
again has to be measured using his proximity. So, that will give you what is the actual velocity. 
So, actual velocity, theoretical velocity then that will give you what the co rresponding slip. So, 
we need to know slip, we need to know pull, then only calculate the drawbar power and we 
utilize  this loadcell for measuring the rolling resistance.  (Refer Slide Time:  7:09)  
 
That means, I will show you the setup. How did you measure the rolling resistance? So, we 
have measured pull by using a loadcell and you have to measure rolling resistance or the motion 
resistance by using the same loadcell, but the arrangement is a little  different. If you look at the 
top figure, the power tiller is used to pull a tractor that means, this is going to give you the 
drawbar pull performance for different conditions. Now, the lower one is a set of where the 
power tiller is kept behind and, in the front, there is a tractor. So, this kind of arrangement is 
meant for measuring motion resistance that means, how much force is required to tow this 
walking tractor that has to be measured. So, for which we put a tractor in the front and closer 
to the t ractor we put a loadcell. So, and with the help of wire we tried to connect the power 
tiller with the loadcell and the tractor in the loadcell. So, the power tiller is kept idle in neutral 
and then the tractor is going to pull it at a certain speed, speed could be 1 kilometer per hour or 
speed could be 2 kilometers per hour. Then we try to find out what is the output from the 
loadcell and that is recorded in a data acquisition system and that is recorded in and computed 
through a data acquisition system. So , by this we can find out how much is the force required 
to move this power tiller. So, that becomes your motion resistance.  
Now, if we look at the top figure, we are interested in finding out pull developed by the walking 
tractor for different conditions. Different conditions mean maybe a different slip value. So, 
how do you control slip here? Here, basically you are not contro lling slip, the power tiller is in 
the front, tractor is in the back side and the loadcell is in between that means it is closer to the 
power tiller so that the line of pull is almost horizontal and the loadcell one end of loadcell is 
connected to the trac tor and the other end is connected to the power tiller.  
So, when you try to find out what is the pull developed? So, you have to run the tractor at a 
speed which is lesser than the speed at which we want to operate the power tiller so that the 
tractor can exert some pull. So, by reducing the tractor speed, you can vary the pull and that 
pull has to be measured along with the wheel slip.  
So, that will give you how much drawbar power which is developed by the power tiller. So, 
this data related to pull and the slip. Slip means the actual velocity and the theoretical velocity, 
all these information  they are collected through a data acquisition system and stored in a 
computer. These are the basic instrumentation which is required to carry out this kind of study.  
(Refer Slide Time:  10:30)  
 
Next, the data which you obtained that we tried to plot. The first is motion resistance. So, 
motion resistance versus travelling distance, this has been plotted for three different soil 
conditions. That means, we varied the soil condition starting from 250  kPa to 1000 kPa. The 
average value I am talking about. So, that means, when this soil cone index is 250 kPa plus or 
minus 50 that we take as soft soil when the soil cone index is 500 ±50 kPa then we take as 
medium soil and when the soil condition is 1000 ±50 kPa, we take as hard soil. And for these 
three different soil conditions what we have measured is, the motion resistance and the values 
are 1012 in 250 kPa that means, soft soil; 775 Newton in medium soil and 620 Newton in hard 
soil. Soft soil gives maximum motion resistance as compared to hard soil, same is the case for 
motion resistance ratio. It is the maximum in case of soft soil and minimum in case of h ard 
soil. Why it is so? It is basically due to sinkage of track in the soil. Since the soil is soft, it may 
not sustain the weight of the track. So, that might be some kind of compaction and sinkage. So, 
that creates or that require more force to tow a walking tractor.  
So, when the soil is hard, the sinkage is less. So, we require less power to tow it, only less 
forced to tow it. So, that is motion resistance is less in case of hard soil. This is one of the 
parameters which you are interested and this was found that roll ing resistance variation or the 
motion resistance variation with slip is not that much, it is very minimal. So, that is why in all 
calculations, you have taken this as the motion resistance for different pulling conditions.  
(Refer Slide Time:  13:02)  
 
Now, coming to drawbar pull. The pull which is sent by the loadcell that we try to plot versus 
wheel slip. Again, for three different soil conditions we got three curves: the green one is for 
hard soil and red one is for medium soil that is 500 plus or min us 50 kilo Pascal and the blue 
one is for soft soil. So, nature of the curve is similar in all these three soil conditions. That 
means, it initially increases at a faster rate then slowly it reaches to a peak after that it remains 
almost constant. So, the pull which is developed in hard soil and the pull which is developed 
in soft soil, they are not same. There is a variation, variation in the sense there is a difference. 
So, at different slip values starting from 15, 20 and 25 per cent, I have given the pu ll values, 
the drawbar pull which is developed. So, if you look at this, the maximum drawbar pull is 
developed in 1000 ±50 kPa. That means, in hard soil, pull developed is much higher than the 
pull which is developed in soft soil whether it is 15 per cent slip, whether it is 20 per cent slip 
or whether it is 25 per cent slip. So, this is because of the rolling resistance, because  rolling 
resistance is more in case of soft soil.  
Even if the tractive effort developed by the power tiller is same, because of the higher rolling 
resistance, much power is lost due to that, then the net pull is reduced. That could be a reason. 
Now, if you look at the medium soil it is lying in between th ese two soil conditions one is the 
hard soil the other one is the soft soil. Now quantified, how much is the reduction. So, we can 
see here, pull developed by walking tractor was higher in hard soil condition and a decrease in 
the soil as the soil became s oft. So, peak tractive efficiency which is derived from this pull and 
coefficient of a rolling resistance, so, together we have to take to find out peak tractive 
efficiency. So, that values, it has been indicated like 51.15 per cent and what is the 
corresp onding slip. Similarly, in medium soil it is 63.3 per cent and what is the corresponding 
slip and in hard soil it is 70.7 per cent at around 10 per cent slip. So, for three different soil 
conditions it has been given.  
(Refer Slide Time:  16:06)  
 
 
And let us now see the nature of the curve. This is tractive efficiency which is nothing but  
pull by tractive effort which is nothing but  
𝑃𝑢𝑙𝑙(𝑃)
𝑃𝑢𝑙𝑙(𝑃)+𝑅×(1−𝑠) 
So, I have not written W here , because W remains same that is cancelling this one. So, only I 
have taken P plus, P by P plus RR rolling resistance motion resistance. So, the nature is tractive 
efficiency is reaching to a peak value after certain slip.  
So, if you draw a line here, this is the slip. Here it is getting this in this slip it is getting 
maximum. Then after that it is slowly going down and the rate of decrease is more in case of 
hard soil. So, the nature of the curve is same. Initially it rise s to a peak  at a faster rate then , it 
goes down. So, the initial reduction in tractive efficiency is because of the power which is lost 
due to overcome the rolling resistance. And after 20 per  cent slip, whatever reduction is there 
is because of the wheel slip and the track slip. So, the power is lost because of the higher slip. 
So, that is the reason we are getting a peak at the particular value or in a particular range of slip 
value.  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:48)  
 
So, the maximum tractive efficiency which is developed by the track was 51.15 or the slip of 
16.8 per cent and that is in case of a soft soil, here 16.8 somewhere here and for medium soil 
it is 0.63 so, at slip of 11.85 somewhere here and for hard soil we are getting a maximum value 
of 70.7 at the slip of 9.0. So, slip at medium, slip at hard soil they were close. So, that means 
within 10 to 11 per cent or 12 per cent we are getting the peak values, whereas in case of soft 
soil we are getting a peak value b eyond 15 per cent but nevertheless it is lesser than 20 per 
cent. Our maximum target is 20 per cent.  
(Refer Slide Time:  19:02)  
 
Let us see, now the plot, the different plot where we will see the effect of all the parameters, 
performance parameters that means in y axis we have traction ratio and slip ratio and on the x 
axis we have net traction ratio which is nothing but your coefficient of traction. That means the 
dotted lines are indicating the tractive efficiency for three different soil conditions: the green 
one is indicating 4000 kilo Pascal, the red one is indicati ng for 500 kilo Pascal average and the 
blue one is indicating for soft soil. And the lower three solid lines, the green one is 4000 kilo 
Pascal (this a slip value) and the red one is for 500 kilo Pascal (this is slip value) and the blue 
one solid line is i ndicating the slip value.  
So, tracks usually achieve peak tractive efficiency or higher NTR that means higher Net 
Traction Ratio. If you look at the peak value, it is somewhere here in hard soil and in case of 
medium soil it is somewhere here and in case of soft soil it is somewher e here. That means, the 
NTR value maximum we are getting is 0.3 in case of soft soil, in case of medium soil it is 
0.3637 like that and in case of hard soil, that is beyond 0.4. So, I have summarized the 
performance parameters like maximum tractive efficie ncy, slip at maximum tractive efficiency, 
what is the NTR at maximum tractive efficiency and the efficient NTR. This is one parameter 
which I have found out from this curve.  
So, if you look at the values, again maximum tractive efficiency values are given. So, it is 
maximum in case of hard soil and it is minimum in case of soft soil and the peak which you 
are getting in soft soil is at the higher slip that is 16.8 percent and the peak 0.707 which you 
are getting is at a track slip of 9.96 percent in case of hard soil. And the corresponding NTR 
you can see, it is more than 0.42 in hard soil, it is 0.366 in medium soil and 0.29 is roughly 
equal to 0.3. Now, I have defined the ter minology efficient NTR range. That means, if you look 
at the curve, we can see that you are not getting the peak at a particular point. you are getting 
a peak at a wider range of NTR. This is the range you can say for medium soil and for hard soil 
this is the range.  
So, that range I have taken as the efficient NTR range. That means, the track is able to develop 
maximum tractive efficiency for a wider range of pull values. So, when I said NTR, NTR is 
nothing but P by W. That means for the pull value of 24 per cent to 3 7 per cent, there we are 
getting the maximum tractive efficiency in case of a soft soil; in case of medium soil, it is 
varying from 27 per cent to 43 per cent and in case of hard soil the range is still larger in the 
sense 31 per cent to 47 per cent. That means the track will perform better for different pulling 
conditions, which is not the case in case of a pull type tractor.  
So, the three parameters if you look at coefficient of traction, then tractive efficiency and the 
other parameter is slip. And let me discuss a little bit about slip. If you look at slip, nature of the curve, we can see, traction ratio is varying with slip. So, it is reaching to a peak then it is 
going down, is reaching to a peak then going down. That means, the slip is increasing in case 
of soft soil to get the maximum peak of a tractive efficiency,  the slip is more in case of soft soil 
as compared to hard soil. So, that is the reason why the tractive efficiency is less. So, higher 
slip means most of the power is lost in overcoming the rolling resistance. So, that is why you 
are getting a lesser trac tive efficiency.  
(Refer Slide Time:  24:26)  
 
If you summarize this one, what we discussed, these are all field experimental data, so that is 
why from there we concluded like this rubber track experience the higher motion resistance in 
soft soil and the loss due to motion resistance decreased with inc reasing strength, soil strength. 
The pull which is developed by walking tractor was higher in hard soil condition and a decrease 
as the soil become soft. Peak tractive efficiency which is obtained as 0.51 at 16.8 per cent, 
0.633 at 11.85 per cent and 0.707  at 9.96 per cent track slip for three different soil conditions 
like 250 kilo Pascal, 500 kilo Pascal and 1000 kilo Pascal.  
The peak tractive efficiency, it was higher at higher NTR values and this higher peak tractive 
efficiency was prevailing for a wider range of NTR, that is the plus point in case of a track. 
Then the maximum tractive efficiency, which is obtained which I ha ve already discussed, I 
think, so, that is maximum is 51 per cent in case of soft soil and in case of hard soil it is 70 per 
cent and the slip is within the limit of 20 per cent, because in case of wheels we usually take 
wheel slip to be 20 per cent, withi n 20 percent. But what we are observing here is, in case of a 
track maximum is obtained at less than 20 per cent.  
(Refer Slide Time:  26:18)  
 
 
So, in this lecture what I have attempted is, I tried to discuss about the measurement techniques, 
how to measure the different performance parameters, tractive performance parameters like 
rolling resistance, pull and slip and then tried to discuss about t he data which is obtained, the 
data which are obtained related to a walking tractor fitted with tracks and then we tried to 
discuss what is the nature of the curve and how the tractive efficiency is varying and how we 
observe the important thing which was observed is the range of tractive efficiency maximum 
tractive efficiency values.  
So, that is more important. That is all, thank you.  
So, this study has been taken like this field experiment data was related to the experiments 
which he conducted at IIT Kharagpur and some of the papers we have published and based on 
this data we have discussed this thing that is all. Thank you.  
 