Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Rah eman  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 28  
Measurement of Theoretical Velocity, Actual Velocity and Slip for a Pneumatic Wheel  
Hello everyone, this is professor H Rah eman from Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Department, IIT , Kharagpur.  I welcome you all to this NPTEL course, Traction engineering. 
This is lecture 28 where I will try to cover how to measure theoretical velocity, actual velocity 
and a par ameter called slip for any pneumatic wheel.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:53)  
 
The concept which I will be going to cover is, the theoretical velocity, actual velocity and w heel 
slip. These parameters are important because the output from a tractor in terms of dr awbar 
depends on the wheel slip . More the wheel  slip, more will be the power which is lost. So, that , 
that way we are getting lesser power , the power which can be utilized will be reduced and if you 
cause the wheel to slip to a lesser value say 2 percent , 3 percent again , we are losing the power 
because of the rolling resistance.  
So, there is an optimum slip value . Maybe it is varying from 10 to 15 percent or 15 to 20 percent 
where we are getting maximum output from the wheel. So, that is why wheel slip is impor tant. 
When you try to mention or when you try to carry out certain tractive  performance  test, slip is one of the important parameter , features to be mentioned . This much power is developed by a 
tractor or this much power is developed by a single wheel  at this slip, without slip, it does not 
have any meaning.  So, this is the importance of slip. So, how to measure slip ? We have to have 
theoretical velocity, we have to have actual velocity , if you know these 2 velocities, then you can 
find out what will b e the  value of slip.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:33)  
 
 Now, I will show you a slide where a wheel is rotating without any pull that means pull is 0, it is 
just simply rolling over the soil surface. And now, it is not developing any pull or power because 
pull i s 0. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:58)  
 
 
Now, I will show you another slide where a wheel is rotating and we are applying certain pull . 
When you apply certain pull and then the wheel will interact with soil and it will develop some 
force which is a tractive  force, okay. So, pull when it is developed, it is developed because of the 
interaction between wheel and soil . If there is no interaction, there will be no pull develop.  So, when there will be interaction , there will be possibility of slip of a wheel.  That mea ns we will 
try to move forward but we are pulling it from pulling the wheel from backward.  So, thereby 
there will be interaction between pull and wheel, wheel and soil, and then finally the wheel is 
going to slip.  So now , I will demonstrate how to find out  these parameters like theoretical  speed, 
actual speed and knowing these two parameters, you can derive the value of slip.  
So, the setup how I have utilized to measure theoretical velocity and actual velocity that I am 
going to demonstrate now.  
(Refer Sli de Time:  04:20)  
 
  
 
It is i mportant  because at a particular slip , we are getting maximum productive efficiency that 
means the output power is maximum for a given input power. And same is the case with a 
coefficient of traction, the pull is also maximum  at a particula r slip. So , that is why we are 
interested in finding out what is the slip at which we carried out the tractive performance test. So , 
for measuring slip, we need to know the value of theoretical speed, we need to know the value of 
actual spee d.  
So, we measure  the actual speed using a proximity setup which is present here.  This is the 
proximity switch and this is the object when the object comes closer to this proximity switch, 
then the switch will sense its presence and will give a signal and  that signal we ar e going to record in a computer with the help of a data acquisition  system and these signals are to be 
recorded along with the time.  
So, if you know how many signals are coming for a given duration of time, then you can find out 
what is the speed.  So, this m etal object which is mounted to this arm, this is mounted on a roller 
and that roller is going to roll over this rail. So, that means, this will give you the actual speed . 
This is the setup which will be utilized for measuring theoreti cal speed we have tak en power 
from the axle using a chain and sprocket transmission and this plate is attached to a shaft .  
So, the RPM of the axle is equal to the RPM of this plate and then this plate , there are eight 
spikes provided and on the top of thi s there is a proximity  switch.  So, when the sp ikes or these 
spikes comes in contact closer to the proximity switch , a pulse will be generated that means, in 
each revolution, there will be eight spikes or eight times the spokes will come in closer to the 
proximity switch.  
So, if  you know the number of pulses and the time which are recorded in the computer through a 
data equation system, then you can find out how much is the speed of that axial speed.  So, which 
is nothing but your theoretical speed. So, if y ou know the RPM and the n we know the rolling 
radius, so ωr will give you the theoretical speed . 2πN will be the ωr and r is the rolling radius, 
then you can find out what will be the theoretical speed. So, per revolution there will be eight  
pulses and knowing the  time and the pulses, we can find out the RPM.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:11)   
For measurement of pull, we need to know the pulses which are coming related to actual velocity 
the pulses , which are coming related to the theoretical veloci ty. So, I can show you t he plot how 
the pulses are varying with time for theoretical velocity . This figure shows you and this is , this 
figure shows you are the pulses are varying for actual velocity . With the time  we are getting 
more pulses in actual veloc ity as compared to theoreti cal velocity. And this has been done for a 
pull of 44 kg. So, I will show you how to calculate the actual velocity. So, in case of actual 
velocity, we are getting 27 pulses and for a duration of 11 seconds. So, that means 27 minu s 1, 
we are neglecting 1.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:09)  
 Assuming that we have started at that 0. So, 27 minus 1 divided by 11. So, that will give you the 
number of pulses per unit time. So, if you know the radius of that wheel and which the spike is 
mounted,  then you can calculate th e actual velocity and the radius of that wheel on which the 
spike is mounted is 0.2825 , 4.4 centimeter . So, 2 × π × r × (27-1)/11. So, that will give you the 
actual velocity which comes around 0.6677 m/s.  
Similarly, for theore tical velocity, we measured number of pulses to be 17 in a duration of 10.6 
seconds.  So, 17 minus 1, 1 we have neglected assuming that you have started at the beginning we 
are getting a pulse. So, 17 minus 1 divided by 8 , we are d ividing 8 because there wil l be a 1 
revolution , in 1 revolution that will be 8 pulses. So, 17 minus 1 divided by 8 and the time 
duration is 10.6 second, so that will give your number of revolutions per second.  
So, 2πr will give you the distance travel led in 1 revolution. So, distan ce travel led in 1 revolution 
multiply by number of revolutions per second. So, that will give you the theoretical velocity 
which comes around 2.7465.  So, now, theoretical  speed is known, actual speed is known. So, to 
find out s lip, it is nothing but , (Vt - Va)/ Vt, theoretical velocity if you denote as V t, actual 
velocity if you denote as V a, so (Vt - Va)×100/ Vt.  
So, that will give you slip percent, so (0.7465 - 0.6677 )×100/0.7465 . So, that wa y it gives a slip 
of around 10. 55 percent. So, for a pull of 44 kg and for a loading condition that means, total 
weight coming on the wheel as 1400 kg and a soil condition where the cone index is 630 kilo 
Pascal, we are getting a slip of 10.55 percent.   
So, for measuring slip , the arrang ement which are made is quite accurate and we have calibrated 
it manually also by putting a check mark how many revolutions it is making and then finding out 
the time . So, number of revolution  by time we measure so that way we have already calibrated 
these  proximity switch output to the actual output. So, this will give you a mechanism by which 
you can acquire data related to slip which is a very important parameter while evaluating the 
tractive performance of a wheel, or a t yre, thank you.  
(Refer Slide Tim e: 11:34)   
For measuring theoretical velocity , we have utilized a proximity switch and there are 8 spikes 
which are fixed to a plate which is attached to a shaft, so when there is complete revolution of 
that shaft you will have 8 spikes because the proximi ty switch is going to sense those spikes and 
thereby it will give a signal and that signal is in the form of spikes.  
So, the output will be like this . There will be spikes at regular intervals and what we are 
measuring is the number of spikes and the time duration.  So, once you know the number of 
spikes and the time duration , from there you can find out what will be the theoretical velocity. 
For example, here we have got so many spikes now, I have indicated a spike with red  one and 
another spike with red one  here.  
So, the difference between these 2 is nothing but your , the time duration which is 11 , 10.6 
second.  Now, what are the number of spikes we count if you count it 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
13 14 15 16. So, 16 spikes , one spike I have not counted in the  beginning so 16 spikes plus 1, 17 
so 17 minus 1 that will give you 16 spikes, and in 1 revolution of the shaft, there will be 8 spikes.  
So, I have divided by 8, I have divided it by 8 . Now, the time for getting that 1 6 spikes will be 
11.6 minus 1, so 10. 6 seconds.  So, time we know, number of spikes we have counted, then we 
try to find out the theoretical speed by knowing the radius of that shaft, that wheel, this shaft is 
attached to the wheel. So, whatever is the rota tion of the wheel or RPM of the wheel , same RPM 
will be there for the shaft. So, in 1 revolution, it is covering 2 πr distance.  So, for these many revolutions 16 by 8 that means it is giving you 2 revolutions. So , 2 
revolutions into 2 πr divided by th e time that will give you, what is the  theoretical speed. So, the 
important thing here is , how many spikes and what is the time if you know and what is the radius 
of the wheel rolling radius, then we can find out very easily what will be the value of theor etical 
velocity. So, next thing is how to measure the actual velocity.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:30)  
 
In the setup, there is a proximity switch and there is only 1 spike. So , in each revolution, that will 
be only 1 spike for measuring the actual velocity and that spike is mounted over a roller whic h is, 
which will be rolling over a rail in the soil b in, which I have demonstrated in the video. Now, I 
will follow the same procedure, how many spikes what is the duration to get those spikes that 
means the time dif ference . 
If I know then I can find out w hat will be the value of number of revolutions, then when I know 
the radius of that wheel on which the spike is mounted, so 2πr will give you what is the distance 
it is covering in 1 revolution. So, number of revo lutions into 2 πr, divided by the time  that will 
give you what is the velocity and that velocity is taken as the actual velocity.  
So, I have measured at 2 places, one place is for theoretical velocity and the other places is for 
actual velocity, okay. So , now, actual velocity , if you count , I have started from 0.8 and have gone up to 11.8 seconds, and in between I am getting 27 spikes. So, 27 minus 1 by 11. So, that 
will give you know 27 minus 1, sorry 26 by 11 into 2 πr. 
So, this is why, this is 26, so 26 by 11 , this is number of revolutions pe r second, then I have 
multiplied the distance in 1 revolution, this many this much distance it has covered, so that way I 
am getting actual velocity as 0.6677 m/s. So, after getting these 2 parameters , 2 values, that is 
theoretical velocity an d actual velocity, the next thing is how to compute slip.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:51)  
 
So, I have measured pull, I have measured actual velocity and what is the theoretical velocity. 
So, these from this data when I  try to plot actual velocity versus pull, t hat mean pull is on the x 
axis and actual velocities in y axis, then what you can observe is in case of theoretical velocity, it 
is a constant value almost constant whereas, in case of actual velocity it is going down.  
So, when we increase the pull there will be more interaction between wheel and soil thereby 
there will be more slip. So, as a result, when there is more slip, the actual velocity is reduced 
from the theoretical velocity by a more amount.  
(Refer Slid e Time: 17:42)   
 
You can see here this di fference here and this difference here, they are not same as you increase 
pull towards higher side there will be more and more of slip. So, now, how to find out that slip, if 
I know the value of theoretical veloci ty, if I know the value of actual velocity, then theoretical 
velocity minus actual velocity by theoretical velocity into 100, that will give you what is the slip 
in percent. So, that way I have calculated slip.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:28)   
Now, the next sli de, pull versus slip. Pull is on the y axi s and on the x axis I have taken slip. So, 
what we are observing here is pull is increasing up to a certain extent, after that , it is almost 
reaching to a peak and remaining constant there. So, beyond that if you i ncrease slip , if you 
increase slip , it will c ome down that means, initially pull will increase as the slip is increasing 
and then it is reaching to a peak.  
And then after that , it is going down if you further increase slip that means, if you further 
incre ase pull, so we are getting a peak around 25 l ike that. In this patch you are getting a 
maximum slip. So, this is the procedure which has to be followed for finding out slip. And if you 
want to know how pull is varying with slip or how actual velocities va ry with pull, then we have 
to have data relate d to pull and actual velocity then we can plot it to know how the velocity 
actual velocity is varying and how the pull is varying with slip. Thank you.  