Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Rah eman  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 29  
Measurement of Contact Area of a Pneumatic Tyre on a Hard Surface  
Hi, this is professor H Rah eman from Agricultural and Food Engineering Department. I welcome 
you all to this NPTEL course on traction engineering. Today I will try to discuss how to measure 
the contact area of a pneumatic tyre.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46)  
 
 As I said contact area, so, first I will  try to identify what are the different parameters which are 
going to affect the contact area and the tyre deflection. So, if I try to find out the parameters 
which are affecting contact area, it will be the load which is coming in the wheel, it depends on  
the type of tyre, it depends on the inflation pressure, it depends on the soil condition. So, in our 
experiment, we are going to find out contact area on a hard surface. And we will take a bias ply 
tyre at a maximum load of 1000 kg.  
And what I will do is , I will vary the inflation pressure  and corresponding to that inflation 
pressure, I will try to measure what is the tyre deflection and what will be the contact area by 
taking the footprint of the tyre. So, as I said bias ply , radial ply , obviously radial pl y will give 
you more tyre deflection as compared to bias ply. So, that is known.  
So, only my aim is to find out how to measure the contact area. So that is why whether it is radial 
tyre, bias tyre does not matter, the procedure remains same. So that is why , I have restricted my 
study to only one kind of tyre, at one inflation at one load  and at 1 soil condition here the soil 
condition is hard soil.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:24)  
 
Today, I am going to explain how to measure the contact area of a tyre. Contact area of a tyre is 
important from the point of view that tractive effort is developed by a tyre. So , it is the contact 
area which is directly controlling how much force or the tractive force will be developed. So, contact area is a function of different othe r parameters like what is the inflation pressure, what is 
the strength of soil, what is the load which are applying and what is the type of tyre.  
So, in today's class, what I will do is I will restrict this study to a particular tyre, particular tyre 
means I have taken a 13.6 -28 bias ply tyre and I will try to measure the contact area on a hard 
surface. So, we try to apply a load and then we vary the pressure. So , since I told in the 
beginning that contact area is a function of load , is a function of type of t yre, it is a function of 
inflation pressure, is a function of soil condition.  
Now you have fixed the soil condition here the soil condition will be on a hard surface that 
means the soil condition is hard. Now, the other variables I will try to restrict the  load to the 
maximum load carrying ability of the tyre that is 1400 kg. And then what I will do is , I will try to 
vary the inflation pressure. So , I will get different contact areas. So, I will measure those contact 
areas by following a certain procedure.  
In addition to that, we will also measure the deflection of tyre because when you are going to 
calculate the tractive effort developed by a tyre, there we are utilizing Brixus equation, where we 
require the deflection. So, when deflection is more, obviously,  the contact area will be more. So , 
deflection will be more means either we , for a given soil condition, if we increase the load and 
keeping the inflation pressure constant, then deflection will increase.  
In other words, if we keep the load fix , vary the infl ation pressure , contact area will be changed . 
That means is the tyre deflection, which is a function of load as well as the inflation pressure for 
a given soil condition. So now , I will show you the procedure which will follow to find out or to 
measure the co ntact area.  (Refer Slide Time: 05:09)  
 
  
  
  
  
 
As I said that the contact area will be measured on a hard surface. So , I have put this blue plate 
this is a MS plate over which I will try to take the contact area. So, what I will do is , I will put  a 
sheet, white sheet, this white sheet is very interesting in the sense, I have to take the footprint so , 
I have taken a carbon sheet in between that means the lower sheet, the footprint will come. And 
to protect this carbon sheet from damage, we have to p ut a white sheet on the top.  
So, this is the sandwich of two drawing sheets.  With a carbon sheet, this has to be put below the 
contact, below the tyre footprint. So , what I will do is , I have to raise the tyre, so you can see 
here, the there is a gap between  the plate and the tyre low surface. So that gap will help us to put the sheet where I will take the footprint of the tyre. So , I will try to, I will now try to put the sheet 
then I will slowly release the tyre so that it will rest on the sheet.  
Then I will  repeat that exercise by rotating the wheel 2 to 3 times so that I can get a clear print of 
the tyre footprint . Now I have put the drawing sheet below the tyre and the sheet has to be 
clamped. Because good amount of weight is coming in the sheet that is wh y it will be disturbed. 
To prevent the sheet from disturbance , we have clamped this sheet which is put on the MS plate 
on both the sides, then I will slowly put the tyre over the sheet.  
This raising and lowering of wheel is done by a hydraulic arrangement . So, everything will be 
done very smoothly.  Now on both sides you have clamped, so the paper is almost flat . There is 
no crease in between. So next procedure will be I will try to lower this plate, this wheel over the 
sheet. Now when I lower the tyre, I sh ould see that the tyre does not rest over that sheet, because 
that will give you something some error results.  
So, what I will do is , I will try to see whether the tyre is just touching or resting. To verify that 
one, I have put a sheet of paper, you can see  the person can easily remove that paper that means 
the tyre had just touched, touched the sheet. The entire load is not transferred on to the sheet.  
When the tyre is just touching the drawing sheet which I put below the tyre I should know that 
that is the  0 condition.  
So, what I have done is I have measured the depth of that one with respect to the rail which is 
provided here  over this rail and one end of this rail is supported this depth gauge is there the 
other end is fixed. So now , if the tyre is going down when it is transmitting the load onto the 
drawing sheet, then there is a deflection.  So, I will initially take the zero condition.  
And then finally whatever reading comes, the difference will give you what is the tyre deflection. 
Now I will lower the tyre to touch or to transmit the entire load onto the drawing sheet. Now the 
tyre is almost resting on the drawing sheet, that means the entire weight is transferred. So , I will 
get a footprint to make that more clear . What I will do is , again raise that tyr e, rotate it, then do 
the same exercise that means again lower it so this way I will continue for 3 times  so that there 
will be a clea r cut print of the tyre footprint will come on the drawing sheet. Initially , the reading 
was, that means it was just touchi ng the driving sheet , the reading was 24 centimeter  now, the final reading is coming as 32 centimeter that means the tyre has deflected by 8 centimeter. This 
test was carried out at a pressure of 14 psi and a load of 1400 kg for a 13.6 bias ply tyre, now th e 
tyre is rotated to a different position.  
So, another  surface will come in contact with the drawing sheet.  Now, we have removed the 
clamp and then I will remove the, the upper sheet that is upper drawing sheet and the carbon 
sheet which is present. N ow we have removed the upper 2 seats that is drawing sheet and the 
carbon sheet and the lower sheet where the footprint has been taken, you can see very clearly 
some print has come on that sheet.  
Now I will remove that sheet and show you how what is the sh ape of that footprint which you 
obtained. Now, the footprint which I got, I have removed that sheet you can see very clearly the 
same. The very good shape which I have got, I will show you what will be the length of that 
contact area.  
So, this is 48 centime ter, 49 centimeter is the length of their contact and width will be 31 
centimeter . This not a square, this is nearly parabolic type of thing. So , 31 centimeter is the width 
and 48.5 centimeter is the length . I have drawn the outline of that footprint area. A nd I measured 
the length and width. So similar exercise I will carry out for different other pressures, as I said 
deflection has to be varied. So , I will try with a different inflation pressure.  
And the footprint which you got is this one, this is at a pres sure of 10 psi inflation pressure load 
remaining same . In this , I have also reduced the load so that we will get more deflection that 
means we will get less a deflection because we are reduced the load , inflation pressure we have 
decreased, so we will get ano ther set of data then we increase the inflation pressure, it was 10 psi 
now we have increased to 18 psi.  
So, we will get this is the footprint of the tyre. This is a 12 psi 1000 kg . This is the shape of the 
tyre, footprint of the tyre. So likewise, we have carried out different exercises for different 
pressures and load combinations to get a set of data. And then from there, we will try to find out 
how contact area is changing, changing with load and changing with inflation pressure.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:3 0) 
 
The tyre deflection which you measure that is converted into deflection percentage, how I 
converted it whatever deflection I got that had to divide it by the section height minus the flange 
height into 100. So that means that the numerator is the para meter which you measure that is the 
deflection and the denominator is the difference between the section height of the tyre and the 
flange height.  
The section height of the tyre is calculated from the tyre specification, the tyre specification 
which we us e is 13.6 -28 tyre.  So, the section height is aspect ratio into section width. So , 13.6 is 
the section width and aspect ratio is 0.75. So , we can multiply and find out what will be the 
section height. So , in the denominator, we have section height and flange  height that is the 
difference.  
So, numerator and denominator, then we multiply the ratio with 100 to find out deflection 
percent. So , what I have done is , for different inflation pressures starting from 10 to 22 psi, what 
is the deflection percentage which you obtain that I plotted . So clearly , it indicates that with the 
increase in pressure, the deflection percentage is reduced is obvious because when you are 
putting  when are increasing inflation pressure that means you are putting more air into the tyre.  
So, it is the air which is carrying, which is supporting the load that means load is not transmitted 
to the tyre carcass, so, that is why deflection is reduced. So, more the pressure more is the air into the tyre and air will carry the sufficient amount of l oad which you are putting and it will not 
allow the load to transfer it to the tyre carcass. So, that is why deflection is reduced.  
Now, coming to the contact area, the footprint which you obtain that were transferred to a 
SolidWorks and from the SolidWork s, we could be able to calculate the contact area . The other 
method simplest method is put it on a graph sheet and then use a Planimeter then you can find 
out contact area.  
So, we have done the first part that we have transferred the image into SolidWorks the n from the 
SolidWorks we calculate it, what is the contact area. Now, that contact area is again plotted 
against inflation pressure starting from 10 psi to 22 psi. So, what you observed is , a trend which 
is similar to the tyre deflection that means with inc rease in inflation pressure, the contact area is 
reduced is obvious. Since deflection is less.  
So, contact area will be less that means is the area which is r esisting , resisting  the load which 
should come onto the platform where we try to measure the contact area, it is not allowing that 
load to come onto the drawing sheet or the platform. Now, since load is not transmitted to the 
tyre carcass, so, obviously, there will be less a deflection and there will be less contact area.  
So, contact area  is imp ortant that is why I have demonstrated this procedure how to measure 
contact area and that you have taken on a hard surface you can carry out similar exercise on a 
soft surface, but in the soft surface, the contact area will be varying, varying from what w e 
observe on hard surface, because the resistance which is coming from the soil, it will not be 
there , in case of hard soil  whatever resistance we are getting, we will not get that resistance in 
soft soil.  
So, obviously, the contact area will change. So, i n our study, since we have limited our study to a 
particular condition that is the hard soil surface, then we are limited the study to a particular load 
which is the maximum load carrying ability of a tyre and then what we varied is and we are also 
limited  the tyre to a bias ply tyre.  
So, my aim was to just to show, how to measure the contact area so that you can have some idea 
and since contact area is the important parameter, which is deciding the maximum tractive effort 
or the tractive effort which is de veloped at different slip values. So that is why my aim was to show you how to calculate the contact area. So , I have demonstrated this one. I hope you have 
understood how to measure the contact area and you can utilize these values for calculating the 
tractive effort. Thank you.  