Traction  Engineering   
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department.   
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur   
Lecture  No. 32 
Traction  Aids  for Tractors   
Hi everyone.  This is professor  H Raheman  from  Agricultural  and Food  Engineer ing 
Department , IIT Kharagpur.  I welcome  you all to this NPTEL  online  course  on Traction 
Engineering.  This is lecture  32 where  I will try to discuss  about  what  are the different  traction  
aids available  for tractors.  When I said traction  aids, the first thing which  comes  to our mind  
is why do we require  traction aids?  So, we require  traction aids to improve  the mobility,  
mobility  of the tractor  as well as to improve  the tractive  ability  of the tractor.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  1:13) 
 
So, the soil conditions  are different.  So, what  I will do is, I will try to discuss  what  are the 
different  traction aids available  to improve  the tractive performance  of tractors  in different  
soil conditions.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:26) 
 
The soil conditions,  basically  we divide  into two types.  One is dryland  and the other  one is 
wetland.  So, dryland,  what  are the traction  aids available  and in wetland,  what  are the traction  
aids available  and also, I will try to briefly  about  what  are the real problem  in wetland  and 
how to overcome  those  problems.  So, some  of the traction  aids, which  are available  or which  
are used are chains,  track s, dual wheels,  and final ballasting.  And in wetland  it could  be cage 
wheels,  it could  be strakes. So, we will discuss  one by one.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  2:07) 
 
The figure  which  I am showing  is a chain  fitted  to a pneu matic  wheel . These  are primarily  
intended  for off highways  in conditions  like mud, snow,  and ice. And they are used in 
conjunction  with tyres. So, what  will happen,  the chains  will try to cut through  the slippery  surface.  That means , either  it could  be a layer  of mud or it could  be layer  of vegetation.  Then  
it obtains  a good  grip from  the farm  soil, which  is lying  underneath.   
So, thereby , the chain  is in a position  to create  proper  grip between  the wheel  and the hard 
surface  which  is lying  below  the slippery  surface . Thereby , its pulling  ability  is increased  to 
the tune of 15 percent . So, these  are primarily  meant  for forestry  equipment . But in 
agriculture  also you can apply  this kind of tractio n aids.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:22) 
 
And the next thing  is track s. In my lecture  28, 29 and 32, 31, I have  discussed  about  this track  
and how the track  is compared  with the wheels  and the performance  are given.  So, I am just 
summarizing  here.  So, the track s are provided  with the tractors  to basically  increase  the 
contact  area and thereby , the contact  length.  As a result,  the ground  pressure  is reduced,  hence  
rolling  resistance  is reduced  and the thrust  which  is developed  becomes  more  and thrust  is 
developed  at lesser  slip. When  the contract  pressure  is reduced,  there  will be lesser  soil 
compaction,  hence , lesser  rolling  resistance.   
But the only problem  is, these  are meant  for increasing  traction  ability  in dryland,  not in 
wetland.  These  are not suitable  for wetland.  And the other  problem  is, if the field is stony,  
there  is a possibility  that the track s will be damaged  because  these  are rubber  tracks . So, those  
will be damaged.  And the third  difficult  is steering.  When  you, you are fitting  this track  to a 
tractor, you have  to look at the steering  so that it can take easy turn at the end of the field.  
That means  that the headland . Otherwise , track s are better  for carrying  out any operations , 
field operations  for raising  crop in dryland.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  5:16) 
 
The next traction  aid is your dual wheels.  That means  wheels  are attached side by side. What  
is the advantage?  They  provide  increased  ground  contact  area and it decreases  the 
compressive  stress  which  is acting  in the soil. That means , there  will be less compaction.  So, 
less ground  pressure  due to more  contact  area will reduce  the depth  of rut, which  is formed  
and hence , the power  or the force  which  is required  to overcome  this or to ride this rut will be 
less. Hence, your motion  resistance  or the rolling  resistance  will be reduced.   
So, this kind of arrangement  will produce  40 percent  increase  in pull in almost  all soil 
conditions  as compared  to single  wheel.  And, we have  also discussed  about , if you are 
selecting  a dual wheel,  what  should  be the diamete r for a given  width , what should  be the 
diameter , we have  already  discussed  while  selecting  the tyre?  
But while  selecting  the tyre, only diameter  will not help you. So, you have  to take some  
precautionary  measurement  like, the two tyres should  be of same  size and the wear rate for 
both the tyres should  be same.  The state of tyres I am talking  about  should  be same,  and they 
should  be inflated  to same  inflation  pressure.  Then  only we can get the benefit  of more  pull. 
Otherwise , we may not get that benefit what I have  written  in the last line, there  is 40 percent  
increase  in pull.  
So, we can take smaller  diameter  and wider  tyres or bigger  diameter  lesser  width tyre. But the 
condition  is, this should  be inflated  to same  inflation  pressure.  This should , the state of tyres 
should  be same.  That means  the, if you are utilizing  used tyres, then both tyres should  be of 
same  conditio n. These  are some  of the things  which  should  be taken  into consideration  while  
utilizing  dual tyres in place  of single  tyre.  But the only disadvantage  that associate  with this one is, cost will be a little higher  because  
you are utilizing  4 tyres instead  of 2 tyres in the rear axle or in the front  axle, if it is a four-
wheel  drive  tractor.  So, otherwise , it is fine. That means  it is giving  you more  pulling  ability.  
So, you have  to now check  whether  the increase  in pull is acceptable  by the farmers  with the 
amount  of increase  in cost. So, that has to be taken  care of. Again,  these  are for dry land,  not 
for wetland.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  8:53) 
 
Now,  I will come  to specific  attachments,  or traction  aids, those  are used in wetland.  The 
most  commonly  used one is your cage wheel.  These are solid  wheel  which  have lugs. They 
are fixed  to the periphery  of this wheel,  and this wheel  is bolted  to the wheel  rims. The 
intention  is to reduce  compaction  of soil by spreading  the contact  load. And at the same  time,  
these  wheels  in weight  land also helps  in carrying  out the puddling  operations.   
And the cage wheel  extensions,  they are either  attached  along  with the pneumatic  wheel  or 
they can be attached  independently  by removing  the pneumatic  wheel.  Both  are possible  and 
the cage extensions  are slightly  smaller  than the, if when  they are attached  to the tractor  along  
with the pneumatic  wheel,  then the cage extens ions are slightly  made  smaller  than the wheels  
so that the tractor  can move  on the road without  damaging  the road.  Otherwise,  there  will be 
lots of vibrations.   
The difficulty  which  is associated  in using  cage wheels  are, the cage wheels,  they are not 
efficient  traction aids . Why?  Because  it has higher  rolling  resistance,  though  it is capable  of 
producing  more  thrust  by interacting  with the hardpan. But because  of the high rolling  resistance,  most  of the power  which  is developed,  that will be utilized  in overcoming  that. 
Hence,  these  are not very efficient  traction  aids.  
But because  in addition  to develop  pull, it is also helping  in carrying  out puddling. So, that is 
why people  are utilizing , the farmers  are utilizing  these  cage wheels.  So, this is basically  a 
traction  aid, but in addition  to traction aid, it is also carrying  out puddling operations  
smoothly.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:25 ) 
 
Next  traction  aids is your strakes,  both retractable  and non-retractable . Strak es means  there  
are strakes here,  here,  here,  here. These  are strakes. So, they are foldable.  So, that is why it is 
called  retractable.  If they are not foldable,  what  will happen,  because  this is mounted  to the 
rim, so, during  transportation,  that means  movement  from  the shade to the field again, the 
strakes will be striking  the road or soil surface,  which  will be damaging  the roads  and the 
strakes will be damaged.  So, that is why people  prefer  or the farmers  prefer  to go for foldable 
or retractable  strakes.  
The function  is, it produces  more  pull by digging  into the hardpan, which  is lying  below  the 
soft soil, soft soil which  is present  at the top in case of wetland.  And the researchers  have  
come  to a conclusion  that strak es on tyre are more  effective  than ballasting  in clay soil. I have  
not discu ssed about  ballasting,  and so I will now discuss  what  is ballasting  and how it is 
going  to help in improving  traction.   
So, we have  discussed  traction  aids in dry land.  We have  discussed  traction  aids in wetland.  
And one more  thing  is ballasting,  which  is used to control  the slip. When  slip is more,  we can add some  weight  to the tractor,  and thereby , you can reduce  the slip and hence  your pulling  
ability  will be increased . If steering  ability  is not there , that means  while  pulling  an 
implement,  there  is a weight  transfer  from  the front  of the tractor,  front  axle of the tractor  to 
the rear axle and from  the implement  to the rear axle.   
So, when  there  is a weight  transfer  from  the front  axle,  the minimum  weight  which  is 
required  for suitable  or efficient  steering  is 20 percent  of the total weight. If the weight  
transfer  is more,  then the tractor  will simply  float.  It is really  difficult  to steer.  So, there  you 
add weight.  So, addition  of weight  not only reduces  slip or not only helps  in improving  the 
thrust  by reducing  slip, it will also help in carrying  out efficient  steering.  So, these  are some  
of the traction  aids which  we discuss.  Then  in wetland,  there  is this typical  problem.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  14:28 ) 
 
The problem  is if you look at this graph,  these  are the soil conditions . How it is, that means  
strength  of soil which  is represented  by the cone  penetrometer  readings  are the cone  
penetrometer  resistance  which  is given  in kilo Pascal  for three  different  conditions.  When  the 
soil is dry, you are getting  a solid line. When  the soil is flooded,  and after 3 days of flooding,  
you will see the soil condition  is this.  
And after puddling, you can see the soil condition  is this. So, after puddling, basically  the top 
50 millimeter,  that means  5 centimeter  soil has no strength  at all. If you just put your leg, you 
will simply  sink into the soil. So, under  these  conditions,  we have  to run some  implements,  
some  machinery . So, here the requirement  is to reduce  the weight,  then only the equipment  
will float, do not sink.  The moment  you make  it heavy,  or if you add more  weight,  what  will 
happen?  The equipment  will sink into the soil and the force  requirement  will increase.   So, I have  given  in this figure  just to get an idea what  is happening  in the wetland  and how to 
design  the machinery  so that in wetland , so that there  will be no sinkage. No sinkage means  
lesser  sinkage and hence , lesser  power  will be require d to move  that machine  in soft soil. So, 
in order  to carry  out this kind of activities,  some  specific  machines  are develo ped like turtle  
tiller,  boat tractor.  So, I will just give you a figure.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  16:33 ) 
 
The left one is a boat tractor.  The right  one is a turtle  tiller.  The boat tractor  was developed  in 
China  and the turtle  tiller  was developed  in Philippine s. Here , there  is a floating  device  in 
case a boat tractor, the floating  device  is nothing  but the boat.  And the end of the boat,  you 
can see, there  is a tilling  implement.  And in addition  to that, there  is a propelling  unit. That 
means , instead  of pneumatic  wheel , this cage wheels  are provided  on both sides.  So, that will 
give you propelling  as well as it will do churning  of soil, in addition  to this tilling  implement.   
So, the basics , this is the float,  which  will look like a boat.  So, the drag that means  force 
require  to move  in the muddy  soil will be reduced.  So, that is the concept.  So, that means  in 
wetland , we have  to provide  flotation  in addition  to traction.  So, flotation  plus traction.  So, in 
a boat tractor  flotation  is provided  by the boat shape  chassis, and the traction  is provided  by 
the cage wheel.   
Now  looking  at the turtle  tiller,  the concept  is same . In the front , there  is a cage wheel,  two 
independent  cage wheels,  and this is the structure  which  is chassis,  you can say. So, that is a 
structure  which  will slide over the puddle  soil or in wet land. And then behind  there  is a 
leveller  so that it will level the soil surface.  So, this two cage wheels which  are mounted  in 
the front.  They  are powered,  powered  by taking  from  an IC engine.  So, the entire  structure  which  I marke d with red, that becomes  a float.  So, it will not allow  the machine  to sink 
further,  and the front  person  will be dealing  it.  
So, these  are some  of the devices  which  are available  exclusively  for wetland.  Because  these  
two machines  are not suitable  for dryland,  it will have  too, too much  amount  of rolling  
motion  resistance . Because  the soil is soft, the shape  is made  in such a way that it looks  like a 
snow  skews or it looks  like a boat so that the drag force,  so the force  requi red to pull this in 
soft soil is reduced.  So, I have  highlighted  the machines  which  are available.  Then  I have  
indicated  the floatation  requirement  in wetland . 
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:39 ) 
 
 
So, in brief,  in this lecture,  I have  tried to discuss  about  the different  types  of traction  aids 
which  available  in wetland,  in dryland  and then in in dryland  also how ballasting  is going  to help you in improving  traction  as well as steerin g. Literature  which  can be referred,  thank  
you. 