Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Rah eman   
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 30 
Measurement of Tracti ve Efficiency  
Hello everyone, this is Professor H Raheman from Agricultural and Food Eng ineering 
Department . I welcome you all to this NPTEL  course on Traction  Engineering . This is 
Lecture 30, where we will try to cover on measurement of Tractive  Efficiency . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:43)  
 
The concepts which I am going to cover is , what are the paramet ers which will be affecting 
tractive  efficiency like pull, actual velocity and thrust and how to measure tractive efficiency 
when you get data related to these three parameters. So, the set up which will be used will be a 
single wheel  tester and there  we will try to v ary pull, to vary the load , to vary the inflation 
pressure.  In fact, tractive efficiency is a function of load , is a function of pull, is a function of 
soil condition , is a function of inflation pressure.  
But for our purpose what I  will do is, I will keep the load and soil condition same only , and 
inflation pressure also I  will keep the same and I  will only vary the pull so that what is the 
corresponding sl ip you are going to measure and then knowing the pull values, actual 
velocity values , slip value and the torque how much you have supplied and the rolling radius 
of the wheel . We can utilize those values to find out tractive efficiency . (Refer Slide Time: 02:10)  
 
Now, I  will show you how to evaluate the performance of a tractor t yre. So, th e set of which 
is available here is a single wheel  tester, only one will be tested at different operating 
conditions . When I said operating conditions, that means you have to vary the load , you have 
to vary the inflation pressure you have to vary the soil co ndition . Soil condition means the 
moisture content as well as the strength of soil that is cone  index.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:38)  
  
 
So, to vary the load , what we have done is we have added some external weights , it has its 
own, the set up has its own weig ht and suppose you want to test at 1400 kg then the extra 
weight which is required , we have to put it on this platform so that the entire weight comes 
on the wheel. Now, to vary the inflation pressure, we can put more here or you can remove 
air by which you  can vary the inflation pressure of tire . 
Then the power has to be supplied , that is the important thing . Power has to be supplied to the 
axle of the wheel. So, we have taken basically from a n electric motor , three phase AC motor , 
so, 1450 RPM has to be c onverted into RPM which is corresponding to 2.5 or 3.5 km/h . 
So, we have made some transmission arrangement, where the gears are , this sprocket  chain 
and sprockets are provided which will give the positive drive , so there is absolutely no slip 
and then there is a gearbox.  So, finally, we want more torque and low speed. So, that is possible with the help of this gearbox and the chain and sprocket drive . Then in addition to 
that, we need to measure the theoretical speed as well as actual speed.  
So, for measuring actual speed, we have a proximity sensor here and there is a roller here 
with a metal bar . So, when the wheel moves forward, this is going to rotate and this bar 
which is provided here, when it comes in the closeness of this proximity switch , then there 
will be a signal sent to the output so that output will be stored in the computer.  
So, you will basically measure the number of pulses and the corresponding time . So, number 
of pulses divided by time that will give you actual velocity . Then the  most important thing is 
how much pull you are going to apply . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:36)  
 
 So, we have to apply pull. For applying pull, we have a brake drum dynamometer , and a wire 
is wound over this and the end of the wire has to be connected to this fr ame with the help of a 
loadcell, so that load cell will give you how much pull you are going to apply . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:53)  
 
  
So, we are connecting the wire which is wound around the back drum and then it is connected 
to the ring type load cell. So, now we  will apply load by using some external weight. So, this 
is a brake drum dynamometer . When I put some weight that means that will give tension to 
this wire. So, thereby it will try to exert pull on the total frame.  
So, this frame is attached to the frame of the wheel. So, indirectly we are pulling the wheel 
from behind. So, that is going to give you how much pull you are applied and then 
corresponding to that pull how much will be the slip that we are going to measure . (Refer Slide Time: 05:38)  
 
We have to apply a power to the axle of the wheel , to measure that power to the axle of the 
wheel , we need to know how much torque is coming. So, for measuring torque , we have 
installed a torque meter here and that will give you how much is the torque whic h is coming 
from this electric motor . Then knowing the transmission efficiency, we can find out how 
much torque is supplied to the wheel.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:02)  
  
And next is the theoretical speed , the theoretical arrangement  is again the proximity sw itch 
with eight spikes here which are provided . Each spike when it comes in closeness to the 
proximity  switch  then there will be a pulse generated and that pulses  will be counted and that 
pulses will be recorded in the computer directly.  
And knowing the t ime and the number of pulses we can find out how much is the theoretical 
speed of that wheel.  So, we have a transmission here system , so you  have maintained  same 
gear ratio, so that whatever is the RPM of the wheel, same RPM is provided to the shaft,  
where  this flat shaped plate is attached . So, there are eight spikes .  
So, that means , in one complete revolution, we  will get eight spikes . So, eight spikes means 
one revolution . If you know the time then you can find out what is the revolution per unit 
time. Now , I will show you what is the soil condition before starting the experiment on 
tractive performance of a t yre. (Refer Slide Time: 07:08)  
 
 
So, you can see the soil bin, it is very label ed and we have already measured the cone  index , 
the cone  index value , our cone  index value is coming around 630 kilo Pascal . So, we will 
start by switching on the power supply to the motor . Now, you have switch  in power to the 
motor . So, power is transmitted , the wheel is moving, pull is applied and we will measure t he 
actual speed, theoretical speed, pull and torque simultaneously . 
Now, you can see the pull is perfectly horizontal. Now , you can see the pull is perfectly 
horizontal that means the line of action is perfectly horizontal. And we have already 
measured the  different parameters like pull, actual speed, theoretical  speed , torque, and then 
you can see the soil bin condition . After the operation you can get a clear print of the single 
wheel, you can see the footprint , footprint of the t yre. So, if you  are interested in finding out how much is the sinkage  that also you can measure, 
because we know the level of the soil before and now how much it has inserted that means 
how much is the sinkage we can check the sink age by using a pointer . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:37)  
 
  
The data which  you are acquired through a data acquisition  system they are transferred to a 
computer and these are the direct plots . I can show you , plot of pull versus time , theoretical 
velocity that means number of pulses which are coming versus ti me, then what is the number 
of pulses coming for measuring actual velocity these three plots directly they are coming to 
the computer . 
And in addition to that, we have plots of pull versus time , this is pull  versus time. So, you can 
see how the pull is var ying. So, you have to take the average pull, so you  are getting a big 
pull here. So, and the minimum pull because this cyclic type of thing which is happening. So, 
either you have to take maximum pull all you have to take the other is pull, so it is better  to 
take maximum pull because since you have exerted maximum pull, so corresponding to that 
there will be certain amount of slippage.  
So, you are taking maximum pull here and then we measure d torque . So, this is how torque is 
varying . So, you can take the a verage torque or you can take the maximum torque. So, we 
have the data related to pull , we have the data related to torque , we have done data related to 
the actual velocity which is coming around 0.703 m/s and we have data related to theoretic al 
speed which is coming around 0.73 m/s. 
So, now with these values, next thing is how to find out the coefficient of traction, then we 
have to find out what is the tractive efficiency. So, for finding out coefficient of trac tion we 
need to kn ow the value of pull and the weight , weight total is coming on the wheel as 1400 
kg. So, once we find out what is the maximum pull, then pull divided by weight will give you 
coefficient of traction . Then to find out the tractive efficiency, we need to know  the coefficient of traction value then 
we need to know the torque value because it is the ratio of drawbar power to axle power. So, 
axle power we can calculate by knowing the torque and the RPM, so Tω will give you the 
axle power and for drawbar power w e know the pull we know the actual velocity, so 
(P×Va)/Tω. So, that will give you the tractive efficiency . 
When you will multiply with 100 so that will give you tractive efficiency in percentage . That 
means, we have measured coeffic ient of traction , we have measured slip, we have measured 
tractive efficiency, these are the parameters which are required to find out to the tractive  
performance of a wheel.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:38)  
 
 Now, I will take the cone penetrometer reading afte r operation of the tire . Now, he has  made 
it zero. So, this shows  the zero level . Now, he has pushed the cone penetrometer  into the soil. 
So, that will give you how much is the strength of soil after operation of the tire . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:05)  
 
 
We t ry to measure the sink age level after the operation of the tire. So, initially I will take the 
depth of the soil surface which is not disturbed with respect to this rail  and then again,  I will 
take the depth with respect of that route which has been formed with respect to that . So, first I 
am getting 21.5 , 21.5. (Refer Slide Time: 12:35)  
 
 
Now, I  will take the depth of that rod which is found at the center . What is the depth with 
respect to the rail ? So, it is 19.5 . They will also measure the cone index after the operation of 
the tyre. We measure d the cone index value before the operation of the tyre and again,  we 
will measure the cone  index value after the operation  of the tire. And the difference will give 
you what will be the compaction level aft er the operation of the t yre. (Refer Slide Time: 13:10)  
 
 
Now, I am going to show you how to measure the cone  index after the operation of the tire . 
So, we will follow the same procedure what we have followed in case of cone  index 
measurement before the  operation . That means , initially we  will see that the cone  base should 
be flushed with the soil surface . So, that becomes the zero condition.  
So, you can see there is no reading. Now, when I start this , we can see the cone index value is 
increasing as well  as the depth is also increasing.  (Refer Slide Time: 13:42)  
 
When I say tractive efficiency, it is basically how much power is obtained for a given input 
power that means it is the ratio of output power to input power. So, naturally efficiency will 
be alway s less than 100  percent . So, what is that input power ? What is that output power ? 
Output power usually  call it as drawbar  power , drawbar power is nothing but the product of 
pull into actual velocity , P × Va. 
And what is that input power ? How much power i s given to the axle ? So, that we have 
measured using a torque transducer . So, torque transducer will indicate how much torque we 
are supplying . Knowing the theoretical speed,  we can calculate what will be the value of 
input power or the ax le power. So, if I put this in a different way, dr awback power is equal to 
pull into velocity , actual velocity V a. 
And axle power has taken as thrust , thrust means the force which is developed because of the 
interaction of wheel with soil . When you are trying to give powe r to the axle of the wheel and 
the wheel will try to move forward , it will interact with soil . As a result , there will be thrust 
force which will be developed at the contact patch , contact patch of wheel and soil . And this 
is developed because of the interact ion. 
So, that thrust force is nothing but torque divided by the rolling radius of that wheel. So, if I 
want to calculate thrust, thrust is nothing but torque which you  are applying to the axle , 
which is applied to the axle divided by the rolling radius of t he wheel. So, for measuring the 
rolling radius of the wheel, we have to first find out how much distance the wheel is covering 
in one revolution.  So, if I measure that , then divided by 2π, that will give you rolling radius . This has to be 
carried out at ze ro slip. That means, we are not applying any pull. Simply we are rolling the 
wheel and then finding out how much distance it is covering in one revolution. Now, after 
knowing the distance covered in one revolution, so, this is nothing but 2πr. 
Now, I am dividing it to 2π, so that gives you radius of the wheel or the rolling radius , rolling 
radius of the wheel. Now  torque , I said we have utilized the torque transducer, so directly we 
will get the value of torque . So, torque divided by r will give you t hrust. Now, if I substitute 
those values in this equation , pull we have  measured utilizing a ring transducer, then thrust  
we have measured indirectly by utilizing a torque transducer and then dividing the torque 
data with rolling radius.  
So, we will get th e data of pull and thrust . Then the other parameter which is required is , 1-s, 
so this 1-s comes from here Va/Vt. We have calculated slip = (Vt – Va)/Vt. Now, for replacing 
Va/Vt, what I  have  done is , 1-Va/Vt = slip(s) . So, this implies , Va/Vt = 1-s. So, I  have  replaced 
Va/Vt by 1-s. So, either you can utilize directly this Va value or Vt value or you can utilize 
slip value both are possible.  
Now , once you know th e slip value , once you know the pull value , once you know the thrust 
value, then utilizing this equation, you can immediately find out what will be the tractive 
efficiency. So, the data which we acquired that is for  a 13.6-28 tyre which is subjected to a 
load of 1000 kg and a t inflation pressure of 14 psi.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:26)  
 Now, these are the data which I got , torque data , then pull data , Va actual velocity , Vt 
theoretical velocity and slip is computed from Va and Vt and thrust is obtained by knowing 
the radius of the wheel and torque , torque data you got , torque divided by the radius of the 
wheel that will give you the thrust value. Now, utilizing that equation, we tried to find out the 
tractive efficiency at each of these points.  
So, those data I have  plotted here on the right side . We can see slip , that is on the x axis and 
tractive efficiency data on the y axis. So, what I obtained here  is, the tractive efficiency is 
increasing at a very faster rate reaching to a peak, then with further increase in slip, the 
tractive efficiency is going down .  
That means , there is a particular value of slip or a range of slip, very narrow range we can say 
where we are getting the maximum tractive  efficiency which is in this case is around 45 
percent . So, what happens at th is point and what happens at this point, why the tractive 
efficiency is very low at this point, which is corresponding a  slip of say 3  percent  and here 
this 25  percent .  
So, on the lower side of slip, whatever pull is developed , that is being utilized for o vercoming 
the rolling resistance. So, that is not a  useful power , that is a power which is lost. So, rolling 
resistance , the power which is pull, which is developed minus rolling that is the power which 
is available to be utilized . I said power because I m ultiplied Va. 
So, that means, there is an optimum slip value where you are getting maximum . Beyond that 
if you increase , the tractive efficiency value decreases because the power is lost because of 
the wheel . The soil is no more offering any resistance , so that is  why we are not that , wheel  is 
not able to develop that much pull. So, whether it is a low slip, whether it is a higher slip, 
both are not suitable for developing maximum tractive  efficiency.  
So, tractive efficiency is such a parameter , it varies with s o many operating , it is varying with 
so many parameters like soil condition , then what is the load coming on the wheel , then what 
is the inflation pressure and then pull. If soil condition is hard , for the same pull will develop 
more tractive efficiency or more power . If load is more , wheel will develop more power .  
If inflation pressure is more , wheel will develop less power because inflation pressure , wheel 
will decide along with the load how much will be the contact area , contact area of the t yre. If 
contact area is more , wheel will develop more force or more tractive force . If contact area is 
less, wheel will develop less tractive force. So, if the load and inflation pressure  together will control what will be the contact area and accordingly the power which is developed wil l be 
decided .  
Then the fourth parameter is your pull. So, these are the parameters which will control how 
much power you  are going to develop , useful power.  So, we are therefore combining these all 
parameters and expressing tractive efficiency and this is  expressed for a given soil conditions 
for a given slip. So, if I say tractive efficiency 50  percent , it has no meaning you have to 
mention at what slip you are getting this 50  percent , that is important.  
So, basically, this is the parameter which will g ive you how much will be the useful power 
we are getting from a tractor or from a single wheel  for a given input power.  So, it is always 
preferable that one should mention at what soil condition at what moisture content you have 
carried out the test that i s important for a  tractive efficiency.  
You have to mention what is the soil type , what is the soil condition , means  strength of soil , 
cone  index value , then what is the moisture content , then you have to mention Okay , under 
these conditions, I have develope d a tractive efficiency of this for a given wheel.  