Traction Engineering  
Professor : Hifjur Raheman  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture 37: Lateral force developed by an unpowered tractor wheel  
 
  Hi everyone, this is Professor H. R aheman from Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Department, IIT Kharagpur. I welcome you all to this NPTEL  course on Traction  Engineering.  
Today is lecture 37, where I will try to cover the lateral force developed by an unpowered 
tractor wheel.  
 
  In my previous class in lecture 36, where I tried to discuss about the cornering force, where  I 
have given examples related to car tyres and truck tyres. The reason is , we do not have much 
literature related to cornering force  developed by the tractor  tyres. So, there are very little 
literature available and in IIT Kharagpur , we have conducted a study how  to measure the lateral 
force developed by an unpowered tractor wheel, so that I am going  to discuss today. So, 
basically,  I will try to find out what are the factors which are affecting the lateral force  
developed by an unpowered wheel.  
 
  Unpowered wheel means is the tractor front wheel. In a two-wheel  tractor the tractor front 
wheels are unpowered wheels. And then we will try to develop equations , how to estimate the 
coefficient of lateral force  from which we can find out what will be the lateral force developed 
for a given soil  condition. As you know that the lateral force developed when camber angle is 
0, depends on slip angle, it  depends on normal load, it depends on type of tyre. So, the 
experiments which you conducted , first we tried  to develop a set up where you can vary  these 
parameters.  
 
  Parameter means the slip angles, parameters mean  the normal load and the inflation pressure , 
is because we are talking about contact patch , the lateral force which is developed at the contact  
patch.  So, obviously,  the normal load and the inflation pressure both are responsible for 
developing  a contact for developing a contact area ok.  More the load, lesser the pressure, more 
will be the contact area, so likewise.  So, the set up which we developed I have given you 
different views in addition to that I hav e given you isometric view, there will be a wheel 6 -16 
8 ply rating wheels which are normally  provided in a 2-wheel  drive tractor.  And there is a 
provision to vary the slip angle.  
 
  So, you can see in the figure top view there is a plate given , ok, where the axle of the wheel  
can be rotated. If you change the positions , that will give you different slip angles. So, slip 
angles can be varied from 0 to 40 °. The one end of the axle , which is fitted , on which the wheel 
is fitted is supported on this  plate, the other end is supported , is supported on a transducer , extended octagonal ring  transducer which is a pivoted at one at one point, so that you can easily 
rotate the  wheel. The axle of the wheel is inserted into this extended octagonal ring transducer.  
 
  So, there is a b ush to which the axle can be inserted then whatever force side force is  coming 
that will be recorded. So, this is the kind of arrangement . I will show little bit how the forces 
are recorded. So, when you try to pull the wheel forward there will be forces acting.  So, I have 
resolved these forces.  The side force is the Pcos α + Fssinα, where Fsin α, where F is nothing, 
but the pulling or the rolling resistance we can say.  
 
  So, we are interested about the side force Pcos α and F sinα. So, summation of Pcos α+Fsinα, 
so that will be the total side  force which is acting on the wheel and that has to be measured by 
a Wheatstone bridge extended  octagonal ring transducer , where the Wheatstone bridge are , 
principles are , Wheatstone bridge principle is used to measure the forces. The axle is inserted 
in this bush  and one end is mounted on the frame, so that you can easily  change the position of 
the axle. So, thereby you can change the slip angle. Now once you know the arrangement then 
what are the parameters we try to vary.  
 
  So, this study has been conducted in a sandy clay loam soil where the properties are given 
here, are listed here like what is the coarse  sand percentage, fine sand percentage, silt, clay , 
then what is the b ulk density, a moisture content, cone index value, cohesion, frictional angle . 
C and ϕ values are given. So, we try to study the lateral force measurement in a sandy clay 
loam soil at a cone index value of 456  kPa which is nothing but your medium soil , soft to 
medium soil and then at  a moisture content of 13 percent.  And the parameters which we varied 
is normal load, then inflation pressure . Normal load we  vary from 1.6 kN to 2.6 kN, then 
inflation pressure we varied from 165 kPa to 207 kPa and the slip angle which we tried is from 
0° to 30°. 
 
  0° means , the wheel is vertical we are not changing . 5°, in steps of 5 °, we studied and the 
parameters we measure are the lateral force, rolling resistance, tyre deflection and tyre contact 
area. Now when you try to plot the lateral force versus slip angle for this condition  which I  just 
now told. So, you can see that lateral force is increasing at a faster rate than it is slowing down 
and thereafter  somewhere it is increasing , somewhere it is going down. So, lateral force is a 
function of slip angle , is a function of normal load , more the load more  the lateral force . And 
the relationship between lateral force and the slip angle is linear  up to a certain degree of slip 
angle beyond that the relationship is irregular. Why it has happened ? Because irregularity is 
because of the accumulation of soil , because the  soil on which we tried to test , it is a soft soil.  
 
  So, virtually the wheel is dragging some amount of soil in the front because of that , when 
there  is accumulation of soil the resistance will increase. So, the lateral force will increase. So, 
that is the reason why there is an increase or decrease in the lateral force at a higher slip  angle.  
So, this is the case when the inflation pressure is 165 kPa. Now increase the inflation pressure to 186 kPa and I tried the same experiments that means I varied the same variables like normal 
load and slip angle and what we observed is the same trend up to 10 ° the lateral force is 
increasing at a faster rate they are almost linear , the lateral force and slip angle they are related 
after that somewhere it is decreasing , somewhere it is increasing , the reason is same.  
 
  Now if you compare figure A with figure B the difference is the lateral force which is  
developed at an inflation pressure of 165 kPa and the lateral force which is  developed at 186 
kPa they are not same. The force which is developed with maximum load you can say 2.6 kN 
is roughly around , maximum force is around 2000 N whereas , in case of 186 kPa it is around 
1700  N. The reason is the contact area . Since the lateral force is developed at the contact patch , 
more the contact area more will be the lateral for ce and lesser the contact area lesser will be  
the lateral force developed.  The same exercise we tried with 207 kPa and what we observed 
same thing that lateral force  is increasing with increase in slip angle up to certain degree and 
beyond that there is either it is constant or decreasing or increasing.  
 
  So, from these three figures what we can conclude is lateral force is a function of normal load, 
is a function of inflation pressure  and slip angle for a given tyre and in a given soil condition 
that is to be taken otherwise no it is also dependent on ah soil condition.  So, once you identify 
then how to estimate this lateral force ? So, what we did is we tried to define a parameter called 
coefficient of lateral force.  What is it?  It is the ratio of lateral force to normal load.  So, when 
you try to plot the coefficient of lateral force for three different conditions, conditions  mean  
three different inflation pressure for three different , three  different normal loads . What we 
observed here is it is basically an exponential relationship  which is fitted for all these three 
conditions whether it is a inflation pressure  165 kPa, whether it is an inflation pressure of 186 
kPa or whether it  is an inflation pressure of 207 kPa. 
 
  In all these cases the curves are merged into one curve and that can be expressed by this 
equation . Cαf which is nothing but the coefficient of lateral force ok is equal to a×(1-e-Bα) where , 
α is the slip angle in degrees ok.  Now C αf is dimensionless because lateral force by normal 
load, it is a dimensionless.  So now it becomes easier for us to estimate the lateral force because 
if C αf is related to  α by a simple equation if you know α then you can estimate the coefficient 
of lateral force provided we know the values of a and B.  So, we try to find out now what are 
the values of a and B.  So, these values are listed in this table which I am going to show now.  
 
  For different inflation pressures , we try to find out the values of a, B and the relationship  the 
equations which we developed , what is it is R2, what is the standard error  of estimate.  So now 
what we observed here is with increase in inflation pressure , the coefficients are decreasing 
whereas B is increasing in the third digit we can see 1.174, 0.175, 0.176 and  the R2 value is 
very high and standard error estimate is also very low.  
   So that means if you know A value B value , simply put these values  in that equation and then  
find out what is the coefficient of lateral force.  But we then try to develop that instead of 
calculating individually if you can relate this  A and B with inflation pressure as we saw that 
this is varying . So, we try to correlate these values of A with inflation pressure and what we 
obtained is , they are linearly related  to the inflation pressure. A can be written as , A is related 
to the inflation pressure by an equation : -0.0028P+1.1725 .  
Similarly,  B can be related to inflation pressure : 4×10-0.5P+0.1668  that means  if you know the 
inflation pressure in this equation the pressure is in kPa. So, immediately we will find out . Once 
you know the pressure at which you are going to  operate then the A and B values can be 
calculated then these values  can be substituted in  that equation as C αf lateral force is equal to 
A×(1-e-Bα) and what is the slip angle if you know , immediately you can calculate what is the  
value of C αf. Now, we know what is the load acting on the wheel so C αf × load will give you 
the lateral  force which is developed at the contact patch. So, in brief what we have done is we 
try to find out what are the parameters which are  affecting then we try to study how these 
parameters are influencing the lateral force for  a tractor front tyre which is 6 -16, 8 ply rating 
tyre and we tried in a particular soil condition in a soft soil and then we try to find out how this 
lateral force can  be estimated.  
 
  So, the equation which we developed this has to be a verified whether it is applicable to the 
experimental values which are done later or not on the basis of experimental values which are 
used for developing the equation . To verify this model , we tried it  by conducting some more 
experiments and what we observed is very good result that means R2 is nearly 1 and then we 
can confirm that the equations which is developed , that is  exponential relationship which we 
developed between the coefficient of lateral force and the slip angle can be utilized for 
estimating the lateral force developed by a tractor tyre. So, in brief the lateral force which is 
developed by a tractor and powere d wheel is found to be a function of slip angle , is a function 
of normal load , is a function of inflation pressure for any particular soil condition and  we tried 
to study this lateral force by varying this parameter . Then we tried to develop  an equation and 
we found that an exponential relation be sufficient to estimate the coefficient of  lateral force 
for an unpowered tractor front wheel at a slip angle between 0 to 30°. So, this indirectly a study 
which we conducted at  IIT Kharagpur that has been discussed since no much literature related 
to tractor tyres are available that is why I pre sented it. So, this has been taken from one of the 
papers which  I published  in a journal of Terra mechanics in the year 2014. Thank you.  