Traction  Engineering  
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
Lecture  34 
Optimum  ballasting  of a front  wheel  assisted  tractor  
Hi everyone,  this is Professor  H. Raheman from  Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Department,  IIT Kharagpur.  I welcome  you all to this NPTEL  online  course  on Traction  
Engineer ing. This is lecture  34 where  I will try to cover  optimum  ballasting  for the front  
wheel  assisted  tractor . And I said front  wheel  assisted  tractor  means  it is four wheel  drive  
tractor  where  the tyre sizes  are not same  like normal  four wheel  drive  tractor .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  01:02) 
 
So, I will try to cover  the concept  is, what  is optimum  ballasting , how to obtain  optimum  
ballasting  in case of front  wheel  assisted  tractor .  (Refer  Slide  Time:  01:14) 
 
As I said front  wheel  assist ed tractor , from  the outside  it looks  like a two wheeled  tractor .That  
means , the front  wheels  are smaller  and the rear wheels  are bigger.  But they are powered  
wheels  unlike  your two wheeled  tractor  where  the only the rear wheels  are powered  wheels.  
So, now,  I want  to find out what  is the optimum  ballasting  conditions  in case of a front  wheel  
assist ed tractor ? Let W1 be the dynamic  weight  on the front  axle.  And W2 be the dynamic  
weight  on the rear axle.   
So, I will take the help of Gee-Clough  equations,  who has developed  a set of equations  for 
predicting  the performance  of a tractor  or performance  of a wheel , based  on data obtained  
from  170 field conditions.  So, that is a huge  number.  So, he has developed  a, basically  four 
equations  you can see. One is related  to (CT)max, the other  one is related  to CT, the third  one is 
related  to k(CT)max and the fourth  one is mobility  number . He has also developed  application  
for rolling  resistance  which  I have  not included  here,  because  we are not interest ed for the 
rolling  resistance.  
Now, if you look at the equation,  whether  (CT)max, CT, k(CT)max, they are all functions  of 
mobility  number  and the mobility  number  he defined  in a different  way  
 
CI is the cone  index , bd, b is the section  width  of the tyre, d is the diameter  of the tyre, W is 
the dynamic  weight  of the wheel,  
 is the tyre deflection  under  load on a hard surface  and h is 
the section  height . Now,  if we look at (CT) max, it is  
 
and CT can be related  to (CT)max when  exponential  relationship   
 
this k is the rate constan t, k(CT)max is given  as  
 
 (Refer  Slide  Time:  04:04) 
 
Now, with the help of this, I will try to derive  the equations  for optimum  ballasting  for a front  
wheel  assist ed tractor.  Now,  mobility  number  for the front  wheel , assuming  that weight  is 
equally  distributed  among  the front  axle among  the wheels  mounted  on the front  axle and 
similar  is the case in the rear axle.  So, mobility  number  M1 if I denote  it as the mobility  
number  related  to front  axle tyres then 
 
So, for a given  size of tyre and for a given  soil condition  the inflation  pressure  is varied  with 
loads  so that del by h remains  constant.  So, I can write  this as this, all these  factors  are almost  
constant  except  W. So, I can write  this as a constant  K1 divided  by W1. Here  I have  taken  W1 
by 2 because  W1 is the weight  which  is coming  in the front  axle.   Similarly,  for the rear tyres the mobility  number  I denoted  as M2  
 
Again, for a given  tyre size and given  soil conditions , I can take this as a constant  K2 divided  
by W2. So, the maximum  pull which  we can develop  will be equal  to (CT)max. We know,  
(CT)max is nothing  but pull upon  dynamic  weight.  So, now,  if I multiply  (CT)max with W 
dynamic  load then I can get P. So, from  here I can say P will be equal  to (CT)max into W.  
Now,  the total pull which  will be developed  by the tractor  will be summation  of the pull 
developed  by all the rear axle tyres and the front  axle tyres. So, what  I will do is, pull 
maximum , this will be 
 
where  (CT1)max refers  to the coefficient  of traction , maximum  coefficient  of traction  for the 
front  wheel  and (CT2)max refers  to coefficient  of traction  of the rear wheel .  
We have  got the expression  for (CT)max,  
  
 For (CT1)max – 
 
For (CT2)max – 
 
Then  
 
 Now, we have  to substitute  for M1, in previous  case we have  calculated  M1 is nothing  but K1 
by W1 and M2 is nothing  but K2 by W2. So, 
 
So, for maximum  efficiency  we are recommending  from  Dwyer  equation  ballasting  
recommendation   
 
So, W will be equal  to 1.79 Paxle by V for a given  tractor  and for a given  forward  speed  this 
part is a constant  now,  for a given  tractor  this is a constant  which  I can represent  as K3.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  11:10 ) 
 
Now,  pull maximum , I can write  as maximum  will be equal  to 0.796  K3. So 
 
 
 
 
 If K1 is equal  to K2, what  does it mean?  That means , the front  wheel  and the rear wheels  are 
same  and W1 will be equal  to how much , K3 by 2.  
So, once  you find out W1 when  the wheels  are not same  in size, then you find out W2 which  
is nothing  but K3 minus  W1. So, that will give you the required  weight  to be maintained  in the 
rear axle and W1 will give you the required  way to maintain  the front  axle to maximize  the 
output . Output  is nothing  but your pull. So, this is the way how to find out what  is the 
optimum  ballasting  condition  which  will give you the maximum  output.   
So, what  we can do here is we have  got the recommendation , recommendation  from  Dwyer  
and based  on that recommendation,  we are calculating  for the four-wheel  drive  tractor  or the 
front  wheel  assisted  tractor.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  16:36 ) 
 
 
So, in this class  I tried to discuss  how to find out the optimum  ballasting  required  for a front  
wheel  assisted  tractor  and how much  will be the weight  on the front  axle as well as the rear 
axle to get the optimum  ballasting  that has been  derived.  Thank  you. 