Traction Engineering  
Professor Hifjur Raheman  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture 39: Classification of steady state handling characteristics and handling 
diagram  
 
Hi everyone, this is Professor H.  Raheman  from Agricultural and Food Engineering 
Department. I welcome you all to this NPTEL course on Traction  Engineering. This is 
lecture 39 , where I will try to cover the classification of steady state handling characteristics 
and particularly the handling diagram. And the concepts which will be covered in this class 
is neutral steering, over steering, under steering and the handling diagram. This neutral 
steering,  over steering and under steering these are the classification of handling 
characteristics.  
 
So, in the previous class we defined a terminology called understeer coefficient Kus which 
is nothing, but  
ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘ =(ğ‘Šğ‘“
ğ¶ğ›¼ğ‘“âˆ’ğ‘Šğ‘Ÿ
ğ¶ğ›¼ğ‘Ÿ) 
So, that difference is indicated as understeer coefficient. When this bracketed term is equal 
to 0, that means, Kus is equal to 0 . The steer angle Î´f, which is required to negotiate a given 
curve is independent of the turning radius or the forward speed. That means, when delta 
that is the steer angle required to negotiate a given curve is independent of the forward 
speed . 
So, the relationship which that the fundamental equations , which we derived in the previous 
class ,  
ğ›¿ğ‘“= ğ¿
ğ‘…+ğ‘‰2
ğ‘”ğ‘…ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘  
So, when K us is equal to 0 so obviously, this component will be 0 and Î´f = L/R. So, that is 
reflected in this figure, neutral steering, the central curve.  So, for a neutral steer vehicle , 
when it is accelerated in a constant radius turn , the driver should maintain the same steering 
wheel , steering wheel position or in other words you can say , when it is accelerated with 
the steering wheel fixed , the turning radius remains the same ok. So, let me repeat this , in 
a neutral  steer vehicle , the turning radius is to be maintained constant then we have to 
maintain  the steering angle constan t ok. So, when a neutral steer vehicle,  which is originally moving along a straight line and it is 
subjected to a side force acting at the centre of gravity , so, equal slip angles will be 
developed at the front and the rear tires. As a result , the vehicle will follow a straight path 
at an angle to the original. So, I will show this thing at the end , how it is acting against the 
side force.  Now, I will go to the other classification which is the understeer.  
When the understeer coefficient K us is greater than 0 that means,  
ğ‘Šğ‘“
ğ¶ğ›¼ğ‘“âˆ’ğ‘Šğ‘Ÿ
ğ¶ğ›¼ğ‘Ÿ>0 
That means, this cornering stiffness  and the weight coming on the front wheel , that ratio is 
more than the ratio of weight coming on the rear wheel and the cornering stiffness of the 
rear wheel then K us will be equal to more than 0. So, this , under that condition the steer 
angle del f required to negotiate a given car increases with the square of the vehicle forward 
speed. So, that is indicated here in this . This is the situation. For an understeer vehicle , 
when it is accelerated in a constant radius turn , the driver must increase the steering angle. 
If you want to get the constant steering radius then at the turning radius , then the driver has 
to increase the steering angle or in other words when it is accelerated with the steering 
wheel fixed , the turning radius  increases , it does not remain constant.  
So, when a side force is acting at the centre of gravity of an understeer vehicle originally 
moving along a straight line , the front t yres should develop a slip angle which will be 
greater than the rear t yres, as a result a yaw motion will be developed and that will turn the 
vehicle away from the side force. Now, I will go to the third condition . Third condition is 
your oversteer. When the unde rsteer coefficient K us is less than 0 , that means, the front 
wheel is developing less slip angle then the steer angle Î´f which is required to negotiate a 
given curve decreases with an increase in forward speed. So, that is indicated by this line 
in this figure. For an oversteer vehicle when it is accelerated in a constant radius turn , the 
driver must decrease the steering angle , or in other words  when it is accelerated with 
steering wheel fixed , the turning radius will decrease.   
So, if you look at the figure , initial turning radius is R now if you follow this over steer 
condition then the whatever turning radius is coming so that will be less than the capital R. 
So, when a side force is acting at the centre of gravity of an over steer vehicle originally 
moving  along a straight line , the front t yres will develop a slip angle which is lesser than 
that of the rear t yres, as a result a yaw motion will be initiated and the vehicle will turn into 
the side force. So, I will show you what is the turning into the side force or what is the 
turning away from the side force. When a side force is acting a phase under neutral steer , 
it will move at an angle whereas, in case of under steer it will move away from the original 
condition and the over steer condition , it will move towards the side force ok. So, this is  
oversteer,  this is understeer , this is neutral steer.  So, this figure shows the directional response of neutral steer , oversteer and understeer 
vehicle to a side force at the centre of gravity. So, whether it is understeer or oversteer , 
they are create d, they will be creating directional instability after certain speed. So, let us 
see we will try to find out some characteristic speed. For an understeer vehicle , I have 
defined a speed called characteristic speed which is denoted as V char this has to be 
identified.  What is this? This is the speed at which the steer angle required to negotiate a 
turn will be equal to  
ğ›¿ğ‘“=2ğ¿
ğ‘… 
Where L is the tr ack width as wherever L is the wheel base and R is the turning radius and  
ğ‘‰ğ‘â„ğ‘ğ‘Ÿ=âˆšğ‘”ğ¿
ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘  
Kus is the understeer coefficient and that represents this point.  
Your forward speed is exceeding this one , then there will be directional instability. The 
similar to characteristic speed which is associated with understeer vehicle , we will also 
define a terminology called critical speed. This is associated with oversteer condition or 
oversteer vehicle which I denoted as V critical  (Vcrit) and that has to be identified because 
beyond this speed that will give you directional instability. So, it is the speed at which the 
steer angle required to negotiate a turn is 0. So, this is the condition.  
If you increase the speed that means, this is a plot of steer angle Î´f versus forward speed , I 
have just given an example. So, when the speed reached to this point , that means, steer 
angle is 0 , then there is a possibility that V critical will be arrived and  
ğ‘‰ğ‘ğ‘Ÿğ‘–ğ‘¡=âˆšğ‘”ğ¿
âˆ’ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘  
So, whether it is characteristic speed or whether it is critical speed , if we cross th ese limits 
then there will be directional instability , and the neutral steer is achieved at 0 when Kus is 
equal to 0 that means, Î´f = L/R . So, these are the three conditions which I have indicated 
for understeer , oversteer and neutral steering. Now, let us see the prime factors which are 
controlling , now if you look at the steady state handling characteristics of a vehicle these 
are the weight distribution of the vehicle and the cornering  stiffness of the t yres. 
So, that will control the Kus factor and whether Kus is 0, Kus is negative , or Kus is positive. 
So, that will decide whether the vehicle is in neutral steer whether the vehicle is in 
understeer condition or that the vehicle is in oversteer condition. So, there is another way of representing this handling behavior of vehicles with respect to operating conditions that 
is called handling diagram. So, this is a plot of ay/g vs (Ï‰z L/V)-Î´f. I will come to this factor 
what is this ay/g and what is this (Ï‰z L/V)-Î´f. In the previous class we have defined the 
steering angle requirement there is a n expression of steady state handling behavior.  
So, I have written as this one ,  
ğ›¿ğ‘“= ğ¿
ğ‘…+ğ‘‰2
ğ‘”ğ‘…ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘  
So, now, this I can write as  
ğ›¿ğ‘“= ğ¿
ğ‘…+ğ‘ğ‘¦
ğ‘”ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘  
Where ay is called the lateral acceleration which is nothing, but V2/R. And now if I 
rearrange this one so,  
ğ‘ğ‘¦
ğ‘”ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘ = âˆ’ğ¿
ğ‘…+ğ›¿ğ‘“ 
ğ‘ğ‘¦
ğ‘”ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘ = âˆ’(ğœ”ğ‘§ğ¿
ğ‘‰âˆ’ğ›¿ğ‘“) 
So, Ï‰z is called the yaw velocity and is represented by V/R. 
So, instead of V /R, I am writing Ï‰z. So, I have  divided by V. So, I am replacing basically 
R with V/Ï‰z. So, now, the equation becomes  Ï‰zL/V - Î´f. Now, if I plot ay/g versus Ï‰zL/V-
Î´f, then I will get a curve like this.  
So, what you inform , inform from this figure? When the slope is positive , if you look at 
this curve when the slope is positive that means, here , so, Kus will be negative because  
ğ‘‘(ğ‘ğ‘¦
ğ‘”)
ğ‘‘(ğœ”ğ‘§ğ¿
ğ‘‰âˆ’ğ›¿ğ‘“)=âˆ’1
ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘  
When the slope is negative that means, Kus is positive . When slope is negative like here , 
so, this refers to understeer coefficients when slope is negative. So, Kus is positive this 
indicates Kus is positive.  
So, when Kus is positive , means your front wheel is giving you more side force. So, that is 
why Wf/CÎ±f > Wr/CÎ±r. So, that is why Kus is positive so that means, this will refer to 
understeer condition. When the slope is positive that means, Kus is negative. So, the 
negative -negative becomes positive.  So, when slope is positive , Kus will be negative. So, negative means the front wheel is 
developing lesser force as compared to the rear wheel ok. So, and when the slope is infinite , 
so this is the condition , so, Kus will become 0 . So that means, this is the neutral steering. 
So, this is another way of representing the handling characteristics taking into consideration  
the lateral acceleration and the yaw velocity.  
But the problem here is the measurement involves Ï‰z, measurement involves Î´f, 
measurement involves R. So, there are 3 parameters to be measured , hence with a slight 
error may lead to some difficulty , otherwise this is another way of representing the handling 
characteristics. So, basically handling characteristics we have considered 3 conditions : one 
is neutral steer , the other one is over steer this third one is under steer. And all these 3 
components they are classified based on the Kus value , is the understeer coefficient which 
is going to give you or which is going to decide which one will , with the condition for 
taking a turn by the vehicle. Now Kus, if you look at , it depends on the weight coming in 
the tyre, it depends on the stiffness of the t yre at the front as well as at the rear.  
If the front t yre gives you more Wf /CÎ±f value then , obvious then the rear t yre then 
obviously, Kus will be positive that means, these  are understeer condition. Now , when front 
weight by the cornering stiffness is lesser than the rear weight and the cornering stiffness , 
they will lead to over steering conditions . Whether it is understeering or over steering both 
will lead to directional instability. So, we have defined 2 critical velocities :  one is V 
characteristic and the other one is V critical and we have also defined expression for V 
characteristics which is nothing,  but âˆšğ‘”ğ¿
ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘  and the other critical speed which we defined for 
oversteer vehicle is âˆšğ‘”ğ¿
âˆ’ğ¾ğ‘¢ğ‘ . So, this will decide whether the vehicle is going to have a 
directional instability or not.  
So, in brief , we have discuss ed about 3 conditions , steering conditions : which is neutral 
steering , understeering and oversteering and also discuss along with character istic speed 
and critical speed.  Then we have also discussed about the handling diagram which is 
another way of representing the handling behavior of a vehicle with operating conditions , 
where we have taken into consideration the lateral acceleration and the yaw velocity. We 
can refer to W ong's book on Theory of ground vehicles to give you som e more information.  
Thank you.  