Traction  Engineering   
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department.   
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur   
Lecture  No. 31 
Performance  comparison  of track  with  wheel   
Hi everyone,  this is H Raheman  from  Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  IIT, 
Kharagpur.  I welcome  you all to this NPTEL course  on Traction Engineering.  This is lecture  
31, where  I will try to discuss  about  performance  of track and its comparison  with wheel . 
Wheel and track , these are the two traction eleme nts which  are mostly  used with the tractors.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  1:00) 
 
So, so you have  to now compare  which  one will give you better  performance.  So, the 
performance  comparison  will be carried  out based  on tractive performance  parameters  like 
motion  resistance,  pull, net traction  ratio,  tractive  efficiency  and slip. So, these  are the 
parameters  based  on which  we will try to compare  the performance  of a track with wheel.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:30) 
 
So, to carry  out this kind of study,  what  we have  done  is, a power  tiller  is fitted  with a track , 
rubber  track  and the power  tiller  is fitted  with a normal  wheel  and their performance  will be 
compared  when  they are operated  under  the same  operating  conditions.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  1:47) 
 
So, this is the soil condition where  the soil is sandy  clay loam , sand, silt and clay percentage  
are 57.1, 19-19.9 and 23 percent . Then  particle  density  is 2.65 gram  per centi meter  cube  and 
then cohesion  is 11.76  kilo Pascal , adhesion  is 7.66 kilo Pascal  and the angle  of internal  
friction  that is around  22 degrees.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  2:19) 
 
These are the specifications  of the power  tiller.  One thing  of which  we try to maintain  is the 
mass  for both the conditions . Both the conditions  means , the wheel  as well as track s should  
be same,  so that we kept as 530 kg. Then  this is a single  cylinder  engine , 4 stroke  diesel  
engine.  Width  of the track  is 0.15 meter , contact  length  is 0.78 meter , diameter  of the idler 
wheel  is 0.34 meter , diameter  of the rear drive  wheel  is 0.55 meter and diameter  of the road 
wheel  is 0.11 meter.  Then  the lugs which  are present  in the track  is similar  to the lugs which  
are present  in the wheel.  And the wheel  size is 152.4  by 304.8  and there  is a 4 ply rating.  And 
the inflation  pressure  maintain  is 147 kilo Pascal.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  3:15) 
 These  are the instrumentation  which  are used to measure  these  performance  parameters.  The 
performance  parameters  include  your wheel  slip. For measuring  wheel  slip, you require  
theoretical  speed  as well as actual  speed  and both are measured  with the help of proximity  
sensor.  And, the proximity  sensor  is attached  to the rear axle. So, that will give you velocity  
of theoretical  velocity.  And another  proximity  was attached  to a towed wheel  which  is an 
extra  wheel.  So, that will give you the actual  velocity.  So, knowing  the actual  velocity  and 
theoretical  velocity,  we can calculate  slip.  
And the other  major  component  is the load,  the pull which  is applied,  and the pull which  is 
required  to tow the tractor.  So, those  are measured  with the help of a loadcell, which  is shown  
in this figure . So, a loadcell and proximity  sensor , the output  data are stored  in a computer  
through  data acquisition  system .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  4:25) 
 
So, these  are tested  in the field.  The procedure  which  is followed  are, for the travel  speed  of 
the load tractor , initially , it was adjusted  by gear and throttle  so that it matches  with that of the 
power  tiller. Here , the tractor  will be used as a pulling  equipment  we can say. And then the 
drawbar  pull was applied by adjusting  the speed  of the tractor.  So, power  tiller, initially  
speeds  are same  for both the tractor  as well as power  tiller.  
Later  on, we tried to change  the speed  of the tractor  because  the power  tiller,  whether  it is 
attached  to a track  or wheth er it is attached  to a wheel  that will be tested , so, that is why that 
to find out the pulling  ability,  we varied  the pull of the, we varied  the speed  of the tractor,  
which  is called  the load tractor.  Then  by throttling  down  the load tractor , the load is increased  
on the power  tiller and if you reduce  the throttli ng further,  speed  will further  reduce , that means  load will be increased.  If you increase  the speed  of the tractor,  then load will be 
decreased.   
So, that is the way we tested the power  tiller  when  it is fitted with track s or wheel . And each 
test, whether  it is fitted,  whether  the power  tiller  is fitted  with track  or whether  it is fitted  with 
wheel , this was carried  out on the length  of about  25 meter.  It was a long span and it was 
repeated  thrice  so that whatever  data we get, that will give you more  or less an average  
experimental  data with lesser  experimental  error.  The test was conducted  for different  pull 
values  up to 4 kilo Newton.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  6:25) 
 
These  are the outputs  related  to motion resistance.  The blue line was for wheel  and the red 
one is for track . These tests were  carried  out for three  different  soil conditions.  One is, 250 
kilo Pascal  cone  index  that is soft soil, which  is related  to 250 kilo Pascal . Then  there  is a 
medium  soil wher e the cone index  is 500 kilo Pascal . There  is a hard soil where  the cone 
index  is thousand  kilo Pascal . In all these  three  conditions , what you can observe  here is 
rolling  resistance  of a wheel  is more  than the rolling  resistance  of a track .  
The reason is track  has longer  contact  length,  it has longer  contact,  it has higher  contact  area.  
So, obviously , the contact  pressure  is less. So, compaction  is less. Hence , rolling resistance  is 
less. So, that could  be the reason  why the rolling  resistance  of a track  is lesser  than the rolling  
resistance  of a wheel.   
Now  if you look at the soil conditions,  the soil conditions  if you look at, then the harder  soil 
gives  you lesser  rolling  resistance.  That means  you are getting  only 530 Newton.  Whereas , in soft soil, it is giving  you 935 Newton.  Same  is the case with wheels , on hard soil is giving  
you 620 Newton  and soft soil is giving  you 1012 Newton.  The reason  is very simple.  A soft 
soil means  more  compaction,  so more  rut formation.  Hence , more  power  is required  or more  
forces  required  to overcome  that rut, to ride over that rut. So, that could  be the reason.   
So, when  you compare  a different  soil conditions,  that means  250 kilo Pascal , 500 kilo 
Pascal,  1000  kilo Pascal , you can see always  the track s are better  than wheel . That means  
track  will require  less power  to overcome  the rolling  resistance  and with increase  in strength  
of soil, the cone index  values  are decreased,  and the motion  resistance  values  are decreased,  
whether  it is a wheel,  whether  it is a track, for both the cases, rolling  resistance  values  are 
decreased.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  9:18) 
 
So, in summary,  what  we can say is, motion resistan ce of power  tiller  when  it is fitted with 
pneumatic  wheel,  it was found  8.2 percent , 14.8 percent , and 16.9 perce nt higher  than the 
comparable  power  tiller  when  fitted  with the rubber  track s. So, in three  soil conditions  for 
example , 1000  kilo Pascal , 500 kilo Pascal  and 250 kilo Pascal  average  cone index  value , 
both rubber  track s and wheels  encountered  higher  motion  resistance  in soft soil and the loss 
due to motion  resistance  decrease  as the soil strength  is increased.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  10:13 ) 
 
The next parameter  is your drawbar  pull. How  much  pull a track  or wheel  can develop  at 
different  values  of slip, starti ng from  let us say 3 percent  to 45 percent . Again,  these  are 
carried  out for three  different  soil conditions.  One is drawbar  pull, one is the soft soil, which  
is 250 kilo Pascal . The other  one is medium  soil, which  is 500 kilo Pascal . The third  one is 
hard soil, which  is 1000  kilo Pascal .  
So, if you look at these  curves, whether  it is a wheel,  whether  it is a track , both the tracks  and 
wheels  are giving  you similar  output.  Similar  output  in the sense , the nature  of output  is 
same . It is first increasing  at a faster  rate, and then it is slowing  down.  Same  is the case with 
track.  And same  trend  is followed  in different  soil conditions.  However,  if you look at the two 
graphs,  there  is a difference,  difference  in the pull which  is developed.  The track is 
develo ping much  more  power  or much  more  pull as compared  to your wheel.  And these 
differences  decrease  with increase  in soil strength.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  11:57 ) 
 
So, in brief,  the drawbar  pull which  is developed  by the power  tiller  when  it is fitted  with 
rubber track s, it was 62.4 percent , 75.9 percent  and 115.2  percent  greater  than the developed  
than that pull which  is developed  by the power  tiller when  fitted  with the standard  pneumatic  
wheels  in three  soil conditions.  So, much  gain was there  in case of soft soil, 250 kilo Pascal , 
we are getting  a gain of 115.2  percent , more  than a 100 percent.  Whereas , in hard soil, we are 
only getting  62.4 percent . So, softer  the soil, better  with the pulling  ability  for a track  as 
compared  to wheels.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  12:50) 
 
Next  is the coefficient  of traction  and tractive  efficiency  for both wheels  as well as track.  This 
has been  plotted  for different  soil conditions.  One is 250 kilo Pascal , 500 kilo Pascal,  1000  kilo Pascal.  In 250 kilo Pascal,  the COT  value  maximum  is reaching  initial,  it is increasing,  
then it is going  slowly.  The rate of increase  is reduced  and it is slowly  becoming  or nearly  
constant.  This orange  colour and this, these  are the two for COT  that means  pull divided  by 
weight.   
Whereas , these  two curve , the upper  two curve,  they are meant  for tractive  efficiency.  The 
top, top curve  is for track , tractive  efficiency  of track , whereas , the lower  one is the tractive  
efficiency  of wheel . Similar  trend  has been  observed  for 500 kilo Pascal  as well as 1000  kilo 
Pascal . That the maximum  tractive  efficiency  which  you got is 0.7, 0.71 like that in case of 
track.  And this is possible  in case of hard soil. Whereas  in case of wheel , it is only 0.62 like 
that. That means  62 percent  is the efficiency  in hard soil.  
(Refer Slide  Time: 14:35 ) 
 
So, in summary,  what  you can say, the maximum  tractive  efficiency  which  is developed  by 
track  was 51.15  percent , 63.3 percent  and 70.7 percent  at the slip values  of 16.8 percent , 
11.85  percent  and 9.96 percent  for average  CI that is cone  index  of 250 kilo Pascal , 500 kilo 
Pascal  and 1000  kilo Pascal,  respectively.  And as compared  to wheel , this was only 38.7 
percent , 55.7 percent  and 64.3 percent . And the corresponding  slips are 20.6 percent , 15.25  
percent  and 13.24  percent .  
That means , at lesser slip values,  we are getting  more  tractive  efficiency  in case of track . 
Whereas , in case of wheel,  the tractive  efficiency , obtained  in soft, medium  and hard soil, 
they are lower  than the tractive  efficiency  which  are obtained  with the tracks and the slip at 
which  the tractive efficiency  were  obtained  for wheels  is around  20.6 percent , 15.25  percent  
and 30.24  percent .  In all soil conditions,  the peak  tractive efficiency  developed  by track s was found  to be higher  
than that with wheels.  And the other  impo rtant thing  is the peak  tractive efficiency,  which  is 
achieved  by the track s was at higher  NTR values.  That means  higher  pull to weight ratio 
values  and it maintain  a higher  tractive efficiency  for a wider  range  of NTR values.  Whereas , 
wheels  achieved  the peak tractive efficiency  at lower  values  of NTR  and the tractive 
efficiency  drops  off at higher  NTR values .  
And peak  tractive efficiency  was observed  to be higher  in case of soil with higher  CI, whether  
it is fitted,  whether  the power  tiller  is fitted  with tracks or whether  it is fitted  with wheels.  So, 
we are getting  tractive  efficiency.  If you look at this figure,  we are getting  tractive  efficiency  
for a wider  range  of slip. That means  this maximum  from here to here if you, so 
corresponding  to that, the pull to weight ratio is quite  large  in the sense  from  0.2 to 0.34 like 
that. So, for a wider  range  of NTR,  you are getting  maximum  tractive  efficiency.  So, that is a 
plus point  in case of power  tiller  when  it is fitted  with track s.  
(Refer  Slide Time:  17:46 ) 
 
So, in this lecture,  attempts  are made  to compare  the motion  resistance,  the pull, the tractive  
efficiency  and at for slip values  you are getting  the maximum  tractive  efficiency  when  the 
power  tiller is fitted  with the track , track  or when it is fitted  with the wheel,  has have  been  
discussed  and their compared  for three  different  soil conditions.  So, from  there  we try, what  
we conclude  is, is the track,  which  is giving  you better  performance,  performance  in terms  of 
rolling  resistance,  in terms  of tractive  efficiency , in terms  of coefficient  of traction .  
The main  reason  is why the track s are behaving , are performing  better  than the wheels  is the 
contact  area. Higher  the contact  area for the same  load, the ground  pressure  is less, hence  less compaction  and some  less rolling  resistance.  Hence , the thrust  which  is developed  that will 
consume  only lesser  amount  of power  to overcome  the rolling  resistance.  Hence , more  power  
of the pull is available .  
Whereas , in case of wheel , the contact  area is lower  as compared  to tracks  and the ground  
pressure  is more,  hence, more  compaction,  hence  more  rolling  resistance.  And the tractive  
effort  or the thrust  which  is developed  by the wheels  are lesser  than the track s. Hence , net 
pull available  is lesser  than the net pull available  with tracks.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  19:36 ) 
 
This has been  discussed  on the basis  of some  experimental  data which  were  carried  out by 
these  three  last three  papers  which  can be taken  as reference.  Thank  you.  