Traction  Engineering   
Professor  Hifjur  Raheman  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department   
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur   
Lecture  No. 33 
Ballasting  of Wheeled  Tractors  to achieve  Maximum  Power  Output  in Frictional -
Cohesive  soils  
Hi everyone.  This is professor  H Raheman  from  Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  
Department , IIT Kharagpur.  I welcome  you all to this NPTEL  online  course  on Traction  
Engineering.  This is lecture  33 where  I will try to cover  ballasting  of wheel,  ballasting  of 
wheel d tractors  to achieve  maximum  power  output  in a frictional -cohesive  soils.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  0:58) 
 
As I said ballasting , so, the conce pt will be addition  of weight  on tractor  drive wheels  to 
achieve  maximum  power  output.  Ballasting  is basically  nothing  but addition  of weight.  You 
cannot  weight  to reduce  the slip. So, thereby , there  will be more  interaction  with the wheel  
and soil and that may lead to develop  more  tractive  force.  So, ballasting  can be done  in two 
ways.  Either  you add external  weights , cast iron blocks,  or you can add water  in into the tube 
of the rear tyres. So, both are possible.  Now,  question  comes  to our mind  is how much  weight  
should  be added  or how much  weight  should  be added  on the rear axle so that slip is reduced.   (Refer  Slide  Time:  1:59) 
 
So, there  are few research  researchers  who have  recommended  some , recommended  some  
findings,  like how much  should  be the weight  of the weight  on the axle and how much  should 
be the weight  on the axle so that you can get maximum  output.  So, one such researcher  is 
Reece  in 1970,  he recommended  that 
 , Pen means  engine  power.  Wt is the total tractor  
weight.  So, total tractor  weight  by engine  power  should  be equal  to
 , V is the actual  
speed.   
Now,  Brixius  and Zoz in the year 1976,  they recommended  that 
 . W is the dynamic  
weight  on the drive  wheels  and PX is the total axle power  which  is available.  So, this ratio 
should  be equal  to 
. V is the theoretical,  V is the actual  speed  in meter  per second . Power,  
total axle power  will be in kilo Watt and W is the dynamic  weight  in kilo New ton.  
Now  Dwyer  19, in the 1975,  he recommended  that 
 , that means  dynamic  weight  on the 
dry wheel  divided  by the axle power , total axle power  is equal  to 
 and this is 
recommended  for a wheel  slip of 10 percent  and the coefficient  of traction  is around  0.4. So, 
all these  recommendations  that will give you an idea,  how much  should  be the weight  on the rear wheels  if it is a two-wheeled  tractor  and so that you can get better  output  from  the 
tractor.   
So, to optimize  the output  of a wheel ed tractor,  which  is performing  a draft  operation  in any 
soil condition,  there  has to be a proper  matching  of tractor  power,  weight , speed,  and the draft  
force  or you can say the wheel  slip. There  should  be a proper  matching  between  this four. So, 
for a given  tractor  size, this means  that the tractor  weights , speed  and the draft; draft  force  
which  is exerted  by the implement,  have  to be manipulated  until the operating  conditions  is 
reached .  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  4:41) 
 
 
So, let us see a typical  condition  where  the axle power  is 50 kilo Watt and it is operating  at a 
forward  speed  of 1.8 meter  per second  and the total drive  load as per the recommendation  of Dwyer, it should  be equal  to 50 kilo Newton.  So, now there  are three  conditions  I have 
indicated  here.  One is optimally  ballasted , what  is coming  from  this Dwyer’s  equation.  Then  
the other  one is over ballasted  and the third  one is under  ballasted.   
So, in this figure,  three  figure , I have  drawn  two curves  in each figure.  So, let us now 
concentrate  on the optimally  ballasted  condition  assuming  that the tractor  is performing  a 
typical  heavy  draft  operation  such as ploughing and that the plough  depth  is gradually  
increase.  So, as the draft force  from  the plough is increase,  wheel  slip will also increase  and 
the power  effect  actually  delivered  by the drive wheels  will be given  by this dotted  line. 
These  are the dot line, this is the power  actually  delivered  by the tractor  and the red one is the 
power  which  is obtained  by multiplying  the tractive  efficiency  with axel power.   
So, suppose  we will consider  a point  here, somewhere  here,  say B1. Now  corresponding  to 
B1, what  we are getting  is, the slip is only 0.05.  That means  5 percent  and the, when  you 
further  increase  the draft,  what  will happen  till the slip is 10 percent , so, what  will happen , 
wheel  reach  to a point  here,  A1 that is indicated  as A1. Now  this is the point  where  the 
absolute  maximum  power  which  the tractor  can able to transmit  is matching  with the power  
which  is actually  transmitted.  Let me repeat.   
So, A1 is the point  where  the absolute  maximum  power  which  the tyres can transmit  in this 
condition  is matching  with the power  which  is actually  transmitted.  That means , it is properly  
matching  and the wheel  slip is only 10 percent . So, this is a perfect  case of matching  and the 
power  which  is available  is roughly  around  36 kilo Watt.  
Now  suppose  by chance  we have  overloaded  instead  of taking  weight  as 50 kilo Newton,  we 
have  overloaded  it. So, when  you overloaded  by 2 times,  so what  will happen ? The mobility  
number  will be half because  mobility  number
 . So, when  W is increase,  so 
obviously  mobility  number  will decrease.  So, if initially  it was 10, then now it will become , 
M will be equal  to mobility  number  will be equal  to 5.  
Now  in this condition  you can see the red line again  show s the maximum  power  which  is able 
to be transmitted  by the tractor.  That is nothing  but the product  of tractive efficiency  into axle 
power.  Now  for the typical  draft  operation , so when  we try to operate  a mouldboard  plough , 
so the power  which  is transmitted  to the mouldb oard plough for pulling,  so this will follow  
this line, this dotted  line green  colour one. This is the actually  power  transmitted.   So, what  we can observe  here is, this is the limiting  point.  Beyond  that, though  I have  
indicated,  but the engine  will stall. So, this is the maximum  point.  So, corresponding  to this, 
the slip is only 3 percent , 0.03,  and the power  transmit  is only 27 or 26 around , 26 kilo Watt. 
So, the power  actually  transmitted , crosses  the maximum  power  able to be transmitted  at a 
point  where  the slip is only 3 percent . That means , we are unable  to extract  maximum  power  
which  a tractor  is able to develop.   
Now  we look at the third  curve  where  we have  reduced  the weight , instead  of 50 kilo 
Newton , we have  made  it say 25 kilo New ton, we have  made  it half. So, in that case we can 
see the maximum  power  able to be transmitted  is giving  you the maximum  value.  You can see 
40 kilo Watt, roughly.  Whereas , when  you are operating  the same  tractor  under  this condition  
by operating  mouldboard  plough  and gradually  increasing  the depth,  so this will be the path 
followed,  that means  power  actually  transmitted,  which  is nothing  but P into pull into actual  
velocity.  So, that will give you this line.  
So, that indicates  that there  is never  nowhere , it crosses  this maximum  power  able to be 
transmitted  by a tractor.  That means , there  is no power  limitation,  but the loss is we are never  
reaching  to this peak point.  So, from  these  three  curves , what  it can conclude  is, whether  you 
over ballast  it or you under  ballast  it, there  is a power  loss. So, power  which  is transmitted  by 
the drive wheels   
 . That means  W, CT is the coefficient  of traction , W is the 
dynamic  load.   
So, this is nothing  but 
 , V is the actual  velocity  and maximum  power  able to be 
transmitted  at any value  of slip where  the drive  is given  by P2 is equal  to tractive  efficiency  
into power  in the axle. Tractive  efficiency  is nothing  but drawbar  power  by axle power.  So, I 
have  multiplied  axle power  with tractive  efficiency  to find out what  is the drawbar  power.   
Now  in these  three  cases,  the, when  the condition  is under  ballasted , the power  which  is 
actually  transmitted , never  reaches  or never  crosses  the maximum  power  available,  maximum  
power  able to be transmitted  by the tractor.  But in other  two conditions  you can see, it is 
crossing . That means  it is crossing  at a lower  point , where  the maximum  power  which  is able 
to be transmitted  is somewhat  higher ; somewhat  here.  So, how to achieve  this maximum  
power ?  Here,  yes, we are in the optimum  ballasted  condition,  we have  achieved  the maximum  power,  
but if it is under  ballasted  state or over ballasted  state, then we will never  reach  to this 
maximum.  So, how to achieve  this?  (Refer  Slide  Time:  13:33 ) 
 
If 
 , that means  the maximum  power  able to be transmitted  is equal  to the power  which  
is actually  transmitted  by the tractor.  Then  the, the power  transmitted  will equal  to, will equal  
the power  maximum  will equal  the maximum  possible  at that value  of slip. That means , 
 and 
, if I divide  in this one, 
 is nothing  but 
 ) 
. This does not 
guarantee  that the operation  which  is carried  out is at the absolute  maximum  power.   
That means , we are never  reaching  to the maximum  power  which  the tractor  is able to 
transmit.  If you want  to reach  to that point,  then the slip at which  P1 is equal  to P2 should  be 
equal  to the slip at which  you are getting  maximum  tractive  efficiency.  That is important.  
Then  only you can achieve  the max peak  value  just like I have shown  in the previous  slide,  
you will reach  to this point.  So, that means  
  at a slip where  the, that slip should  be 
equal  to the slip at which  we are getting  maximum  tractive  efficiency.   
So, in other  words,  we can denote  it as optimum  condition.  So, 
 . So, 
this is the optimum  condition.  Now  if I take the ratio, ratio between  this one and this one, so 
this comes  to 
   =
 . Now  what  is the drive  tyre load which  is required?  
That means  this W by axle power.  What  is required  at different  forward  speed , has been  
plotted  for mobility  number  3 to 30 and the middle  one is mobility  number  around  10.  So, if my tractor  is to operate  at 3 meter  per second , I will simply  draw  the vertical  line here.  
Suppose  my mobility  number  is 3 and then I will draw  a horizonal  line here.  So, this will, this 
point  will indicate  what  should  be the drive  tyre load for the given  axle power  so that I can 
reach  to the optimum  condition.  Similarly,  if my mobility  number  is higher,  so I will just 
extend  it wherever  it touches , so, from  there  I will try to draw  a horizontal  line. So, that will 
touch  the Y axis. So, that point  will indicate  what  should  be the drive  tyre load require  to get 
that maximum  tractive  efficiency.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  17:23 ) 
 
 
Then  question  comes , whether  it is always  possible  to operate  at this drive  tyre load or if you 
reduce  this drive  tyre load by 20 percent , what  is happening  or if you reduce  further,  what  is happening?  To verify  this one, we have  plotted tractive  efficiency , 
  for two different  
mobility  numbers  3 and 30. And the right  side we have  plotted  
 for mobility  number  10.  
So, what  you observe d here is, at when  the eta by eta maximum  or optimum  is 1. If you can 
draw  a line here,  this around  1. So, there  is a fairly  gentle  slope  here. M is equal  to 30 or M is 
equal  to 3, there  is a fairly,  fairly  gentle  slope.  Same  is the case in a M is equal  to 10. That 
means , if you are operating  up to this range,  operating  up to this range,  there  is not much  
reduction  in the tractive  efficiency.   
So, what  we can observe  from  here is, if you reduce  the weight,  say by 20 percent  from  the 
optimum,  you are not to losing  much.  But if you are reducing  further , reducing  weight  
further,  then there  is a drastic  reduction.  Same  is the case with the overweight.  Suppose  the 
optimum  weight  is X, now have  increased  to 1.2 X. So, that is not going  to harm  anything.  
You are not losing  anything  because  this curve  is flat for a range , say, starting  from  0.8 to 1.3 
like that. But if you further  increase  it, then it will land up at somewhat  here,  then your eta by 
eta efficiency  will be reduced  drastically.   
So, what  you can conclude  from  here is though  the recommendations  are given  by the, 
researchers . The, the most  commonly  used one is the Dwyer’s  recommendation,  which  is 
nothing  but,  
,  W is the dynamic  weight , P is the axle power , V is the actual  velocity.  So, if you 
follow  this, well and good  or by chance  the weight  which  is required  to satisfy  this condition  
is reduced  by 20 percent  or increase  by 20 percent , it is not going  to harm  much.  That means , 
we are getting  the same  tractive  efficiency  as we are getting  at the recommended  value  of W.  
(Refer  Slide  Time:  21:08 )  
So, we try to develop  a ballast  number,  which  is nothing  but  
. So, how I arrive  at this point  is P1 is nothing  but 
 , which  is 
nothing,  but V I can write  as 
 . V0 is the theoretical  speed  and S is slip. Similarly,  
P2, I can write  it, write  as eta into axle power . So, axle power  we have  taken  as P axle. So, I 
can write  as 
 . This is nothing  but tractive  efficiency  into P axle.  
Now, if I take the ratio of these  two expressions,  then I will land up with this value   
. Now  this 
  is called  ballast  number.  This is a non-dimensional  
number  and we call it ballast  number.  So, immediately  we can calculate  this ballast  number  
and then compare  with the optimum  condition.  If it is lesser  than that or higher  than that, then 
we will immediately  say that, this is not going  to give you the maximum  output.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  23:25 )  
So, next thing  is, after deciding  this weight  or the ballast  number,  which  is recommended  by 
different  researchers,  the next thing  is we have  to satisfy  these  three  conditions.  First thing  is 
when  we are recommending  a load,  the drive  tyre load,  the drive tyre should  be large  enough  
to carry  this load.  That should  the, that is the main  condition . So, and the recommended  load 
adjust  the drive  tyre load to the value  which  is shown  in this fig, in this figure,  this figure.  So, 
depending  on our mobility  number,  immediately  can find out what  should  be the drive  tyre 
load from  this figure.   
Now  this drive  tyre load,  once  you decided,  next thing  is the tyre should  be able to carry  this 
load at a low inflation  pressure , not at a higher  inflation  pressure.  Then  the third  condition  is, 
adjust  the draft  load so that the wheel  slip is around  10 percent , maximum  you can go up to 
15 percent . So, after getting  the desired  load to be added  for ballasting,  you have  to satisfy  
these  three  conditions.  Then  only you get the maximum  benefit.   
(Refer  Slide  Time:  24:42 )  
So, in short , we can say, I have  discussed  about , what  is ballasting  and how do you ballast  it? 
Then  what  will happen  if you go for, you go for improper  ballasting,  that means  whether  
when  you add more  weight  or when  you reduce  less weight . When you reduce  weight , so, 
how it is going  to affect  the performance.  Then  we have  discussed  about  the ballast  number  
which  is derived  from  those  recommendations  given  by the researchers.  So, our aim is to 
ballas t it so that we can maximize  the output  of a tractor  by properly  matching  the weight , the 
speed,  the draft . That is all. Thank  you. 