Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 14
Membrane Technology – Part 2
In this lecture, 2nd part of the membrane technology will be studied in which the different
types of modules and applications of membrane processes in the food industry will be
taken up.
The membrane modules are majorly of flat sheets geometry or tubular membranes. The
flat sheet membranes are plate and frame module or spiral wound module and the tubular
module may be the hollow fiber.The spiral wound modules are of compact layout. The basic unit is a sandwich of flat
membrane  sheets,  which  is  called  a  leaf.  And this  leaf  is  wound around  a  central
perforated tube. One leaf consists of two membrane sheets placed back to back and are
separated by a spacer called permeate carrier. Layers of the leaf are glued along three
edges, while the unglued edge is sealed around the perforated central tube. Feed water
enters the spacer channel at the end of the spiral-wound element in a path parallel to the
central tube. 
The filtered water in the permeate carrier travels spirally inward towards the central
collector  tube,  while  water  in  the  feed  spacer  that  does  not  permeate  through  the
membrane continues to flow across the membrane surface. The concentrate stream exitsthe element parallel to the central tube through the opposite end from which the feed
water enters. Relatively, large membrane area can be provided here per element. And it
is considered to be a good cost-effective solution for high volume applications. Primary
advantage of this type of module is low capital investment and energy saving. It is
available for all types of filtration processes starting from even microfiltration to reverse
osmosis, they can be applied for all types of membrane. 
The plate and frame module was the earliest module design based on the simple filters
and consisted of flat sheets of membrane confined in a filter press called plate-and-frame
module. Due to its simplicity, these plate-and-frame modules had been widely used in
lab-scale as well as in industrial applications. Here surface to volume ratio is typically
300 to 500 m2/m3 for these modules. Tubular  modules  have  tube-like  structures  with  porous  walls.  They  work  through
tangential cross flow and they are highly resistant to plugging. These tubular membranes
are typically used when the feed stream contains large amount of suspended solids or
fibrous compounds.
The tubular module consists of a minimum of two tubes. There is an inner tube inside,
called the membrane tube. And other is the outer tube, which is called the shell. The feed
stream goes across the length and enters the membrane tube, and then gets filtered out
into the outer shell while concentrate collects at the opposite end of the membrane. 
The most common frequently used module is the hollow fiber module. In this, several
fibers are bundled together longitudinally, they are potted in a resin on both ends andencased in a pressure vessel. They have extremely high packing density, high open
channel design, they provide high contact surface to volume ratio may be 7000 to 13000
m2/m3. They offer the possibility of backwashing from the permeate side, particularly
suited for low solid liquid stream. 
The fouling is basically a phenomenon where solute or particles either get deposited on
the  membrane  surface,  which  is  called  concentration  polarization  or  they  are
accumulated within the membrane pores, called pore blocking. Both of them degrade the
membranes’ performance in terms of productivity and quality.
Major types of foulants may be the bacterial growth, suppose if the cleaning of the
membrane is not proper and some bacterial cell remains adhered, so after sometimes it
will grow, multiply, may grow in size, and it will choke the membrane pores,  building up
a gel layer. Even organic materials, biological materials, colloidal particles or suspended
matters all these may cause this problem of fouling and concentration polarization. 
Major factors that influence the rate of fouling are membrane properties, feed solution
composition and operating conditions like pressure, temperature etc. Additionally, the
process duration and the mode of filtration affect the fouling, e.g. dead end flow causes
more blocking or more concentration polarization than that of the cross flow. So, these
also affect the rate of local increase of solids over the membrane surface and therefore,
problem of fouling. Consequences of the fouling: During filtration process, the long term loss of membrane
process  throughput  or  performance  capacity  results  because  of  this  concentration
polarization or pore blocking. 
In  the  long  run, the  solutes  get  deposited  over  the  surface  forming  a  gel  layer  or
boundary layer. It may act as a secondary membrane and may cause the rejection of
some solutes that are even intended to pass, reducing the native design selectivity of the
membrane. 
In figure, Cb is the concentration of the bulk solution. When pressure is applied, slowly
and slowly that is a boundary layer formed; here the concentration of the solute in the
boundary layer will be obviously more than that of the concentration of the solute in thebulk solution. In further long time, these solutes may get even more compact and form a
concentrated gel layer (C g). So, here the concentration of solute is much more than that
of the solutes concentration in the boundary layer or in the bulk solution. So, obviously
when the concentration layer is formed, the flux gets reduced.
The same thing is shown here in this figure i.e. the concentrated solution, boundary
layer, and gel layer.
Methods to reduce fouling: In order to get proper filtration for process efficiency, fouling
and concentration polarization phenomena should be kept as low as possible. The pre-
treatment  of the  feed  solution  is  one important  way; feed can be given  some  pre-
treatment or pre-filtered etc. in the normal filtration process to remove suspended solidsat  an  earlier  stage.  Periodic  pulsing  of  the  filtrate  like  backwashing  and  periodic
membrane  cleaning  with  acid-alkali  treatment,  and  increasing  shear  by  rotating  or
vibrating the membrane are other important methods that can be followed. So, these are
the ways by which one can reduce the fouling problem in a membrane process. 
Membrane technology has a great potential and a wide ranging application in food
processing like in concentration of fruit juices, vegetable juices, etc. 
Filtration  of  cane  sugar  and  other  fruit  juices;  particularly  in  the  cane  sugar,  the
characteristic flavor of the sugarcane juice is lost, if it is given heat treatment. Membrane
technology can be applied to clarify the cane sugar juice as well as to remove bacteria
and enzymes etc. from it. And therefore, its shelf life can be extended without any
involvement of heat in the process. 
Also this  membrane  technology can be used for preparation of low caffeine  coffee
extracts, for production of low or zero alcohol beer, and concentration of egg white. It is
also used in oil milling industries for removal of free fatty acids from the oil or for
removal of phospholipids, etc. For the fractionation of macromolecules, it is incorporated
in fermentation to immobilize enzymes in bioreactors. The use of RO membranes in
water purification, filtration and waste water treatment plants is a known application of
this technology. In dairy or milk processing industries, RO can be used for pre-concentration of milk and
whey  prior  to  their  concentration.  Also  the  nanofiltration  can  be  used  for  partial
demineralization and concentration of the whey, this is obtained after the cheese making.
Some colloidally dispersed suspended salts can be removed. Ultrafiltration technology
can be used in milk and dairy industry for fractionation of milk for cheese manufacture,
for  fractionation  of  whey  for  whey  protein  concentrate  preparation  and  so  on.
Microfiltration can be used for clarification of cheese whey, defatting and reducing
microbial load of milk and so on. So, it can be used as a low temperature or non-thermal
pasteurization or even sometime sterilization of the milk.
Similarly, in other food and beverage industry for the vegetable products processing, it
can be used for clarification and concentration of fruit and vegetable juices, because
these fruit and vegetable juices contain many bioactive compounds which are sensitive to
heat. When heat thermal processes are used for concentration or evaporation of such
products, health components or bio components may get destroyed, and their health
benefits  are lost. So, the membrane technology can be used for retention  of health
components  in  the  material.  It  can  be  used  for  clarification,  de-colorization,  and
concentration of beet and cane sugar juice. 
It has a great potential in grain processing industries, for the production of soy isolate,
wheat proteins, in preparation of plant extracts like concentration of coffee i.e. the de-
caffeination of coffee, concentration of tea and preparation of other herbal extracts, etc.
It  is  widely  used  in  clarification  and  concentration  of  corn  syrup  like  glucose  and
fructose,  recovery  of ion exchange  regeneration  effluent.  So, even  in  the  vegetable
processing industries, grain processing industries, in the plant extract preparations this
process has a very good use.
In the beverage industries and alcoholic drink manufacturing industries, it can be used
for de-alcohalization of beer and wine, even the beer recovery from bottom of the tank,
to clear the malt beverage, for clarification of the malt extract, wort etc. RO unit can be
used for preparation of alcohol-free beer as can be seen in the picture.Similarly, in the organic solvent recovery, it has a great potential for animal products. It
can  be  used  for  concentration  and  de-ashing  of  blood  plasma.  It  can  be  used  for
concentration and de-ashing of pork, beef, fish gelatin, etc. Concentration of egg white or
even clarification and fractionation of protein hydrolisates all these are possible using
membrane technology. In the fish and sea food products, concentration of fish proteins,
extraction  of  proteins  and  their  concentration  using  membrane  technology  can  be
possible.
In  the  bio-food  preparation;  like  in  processes  like  separation,  isolation,  purification
concentration of products from fermentation, even the separation of organic acids, amino
acids all are possible using appropriate type of membrane separation process and using
proper processing conditions.
Like in the water reclamation, polishing of evaporator condensate and RO permeate can
be used. Further process effluents like brine clarification for reuse, recovery of CIP
solution etc., even in the enzyme processing industry, recovery and concentration of
enzymes or pigment and dyes concentration and de-ashing of dyes, all these can be done
by using these processes. 
In figure, feed (tomato juice) of 5 ⁰Brix is passed through a microfiltration membrane.
So, the microfiltration  retentate  is  then  passed through another  RO membrane.  The
combined MF and RO retentate obtained is the pre-concentrated juice which can be sent
to the evaporator. The condensate is sent to RO filter for further use. The tomato juicethus can be concentrated from 5  ᵒBrix to 70  ᵒBrix by the combination of these two
processes. Otherwise, in the normal concentration processes such as evaporation etc.,
even in vacuum also, it is difficult to get such high concentrated juice. 
The protein and enzyme concentration from the fermenter medium are passed through
centrifuge and pre-coat filters and then they are sent to the ultrafiltration where the
finishing and formulation can be obtained. So, these two centrifugation and pre-coat
filtration processes can be avoided by having one simple microfiltration. The fermenter
output can be passed through microfiltration and then ultrafiltration to get the desired
product.
So, the membrane technology has a vast potential for application in processing industry.
It being a non-thermal process is a novel technology particularly for the preparation of
health foods, for concentration process, for the extension of shelf life of the material,
because the causative or deteriorative agents like micro-organisms, enzymes etc. can be
separated. Also, some useful components which are separated can be further used as
ingredients for preparing value added products. 