Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 17
Microwave Heating
Hello friends, let us today study another Novel and Emerging Technology in Food
Processing and Preservation that is Microwave Heating.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:32)
Before coming to the microwave heating let us understand what is it and particularly let
us  little  bit  discuss  about  the  dielectric  heating.  Actually  what  happens  when  an
insulating material is subjected to an alternating electric field; as you can see here in the
figure, there is some dielectric material is kept here it is held. And alternating electric
field through some AC source is supplied to this material. 
So, when this electric field is applied then the atoms in the material get stressed and
because of the inter atomic friction heat is produced. And, this heating process is known
as dielectric heating. This inter atomic friction is caused by repeated deformation and
rotation of the atomic structure, which also is referred to as polarization.
 So, this technology that is dielectric heating generates heat energy within the product
and  throughout  the  mass  simultaneously  due  to  the  frictional  interactions  of  polardielectric molecules rotating in response to an externally applied AC current. So, you can
say that it is an advanced form of heating much better form of heating in comparison to
the conventional heat processes which are normally used for the food processing.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:48)
Under the international agreement only certain frequencies are allowed for the industrial,
scientific and medical use. And, this is just to avoid communication with the federal or
interference  with  the  federal  telecommunication  system  because,  the  same  sort  of
radiation  are also used in telecommunication. So, normally for this  radio frequency
operations that is in dielectric heating may be of two forms that is radio frequency
heating or microwave heating. So, for radio frequency heating 13.56 and 27.12 mega
hertz frequencies are normally used or you can say in general that is 1 to 200 within this
mega hertz range.
Whereas, microwave it may be within the range of 300 to 300 giga hertz, 300 mega hertz
or 300 giga hertz. In generally that is the microwave systems which are used in food
processing they have frequency in the range of 2450 and the band width within the range
of 896 to 915 mega hertz.(Refer Slide Time: 04:22)
Let us see the microwave heating; microwave heating is generated by the absorption of
microwave by a dielectric material. And, this absorption of heat by the; this absorption of
microwave by the dielectric material results in the microwaves giving up their energy to
the material with a concomitant rise in temperature. And, you can see here in this picture
that is the conventional heating heat source is somewhere else and then this heat is
transferred either through conduction or convection whatever the system depending upon
the  type  of  the  material  and  heating  source  and  other  heat  transport  medium  it  is
transferred alright.
But,  in  the  case  of  microwave  heating  when  heat  is  generated  internally  and  the;
obviously, the time required to come to the target  process temperature here in this
microwave heating process is attained in a very short time. And, in fact some researchers
they have worked on these aspects and they conclude that it time it takes about one-
quarter of the time which is required for convectional heating processes. Microwave food
processing as I told you it uses two frequencies, that is 2450 and 915 mega hertz.
Normally, 2450 mega hertz frequency is used for home ovens whereas, for industrial
ovens both 2450 and 915 are used.(Refer Slide Time: 06:17)
So, the microwave heating processes like any other process this is also influenced by
certain factors that is factors of the material, factor of the environment and others factors.
So, here the important factor influencing this process that is microwave heating include
the dielectric properties  of the material, thermo physical properties  of the food and
frequency of the microwave used. 
Among the dielectric property dielectric constant and the loss factors or the loss factor
are the important process. Causative agents or which influence the microwave heating
process. Ability of the material to absorb and dissipate microwave energy; obviously,
depends upon the product composition, the temperature and microwave properties.(Refer Slide Time: 07:31)
The penetration of microwaves which is taken as generally which is the penetration is the
measure of the ability of the microwave to heat and this is determined by dielectric
constant and loss factor of the food. Microwave absorption decreases exponentially with
depth. Shorter the frequency higher is the penetration. You can take the example of ice
that at 915 mega hertz the microwave can penetrate 30 centimeter deep whereas, at 2450
mega hertz it can penetrate only 10 centimeter deep.
 Also the penetration depth depends on the state of the matter. Same we take example of
ice and water and if we take two microwave of 2450 mega hertz it can penetrate 10
centimeter in ice, but only 1 centimeter in water. So, these are the factors that is the
depth, frequency and even the penetration depth, either it is state of the matter these are
the factors which influence penetration depth or penetration of the microwave into the
food material.  And, accordingly that amount of heat is etcetera  is then is they can
generate.(Refer Slide Time: 09:25)
The penetration depth can be measured by that is x in meter can be measured by lambda
0 divided by 2 pi the root that is the dielectric constant and loss tangent that is the depth
lambda 0 is the wavelength. Epsilon is the dielectric constant and the loss tangent by this
equation one can calculate; if you know the dielectric constant of the material, if you
could know the loss tangent alright; you know the wavelength of the microwave you can
easily calculate what is the depth up to which it can penetrate.
Similarly,  the  power generated  in the food or power  absorbed by the  food can be
calculated using this equation that is P is equal to a constant 55.61 plus 10 to the power
minus 14 that frequency and electrical field strength. And, there is a power of the second
power of the electrical field strength multiplied by loss factor ok; that is P is the power
per unit volume, f is the frequency and E is the electrical field strength in this equation.
So, by these equations one can calculate the penetration depth of the microwave as well
as power generated into the when or power absorbed by the food material.(Refer Slide Time: 11:08)
Let us that loss factor is an important characteristic. So, let us little bit see that what loss
factor means actually, that is loss factor is the measure of the loss of energy in a
dielectric material. This loss may be due to conduction, slow polarization and other
dissipative phenomena either of these process or any other processes there might be the
loss of energy. So, the loss factor is the total loss of energy ok. Most of the food have
moisture content and therefore, they have high loss factor. And thus, that is high loss
factor means that they can readily absorb microwave and radio frequency energy and
flash over is not a problem.
As you have seen earlier loss factor of ice is less than that of the water, water has more
loss factor which you can also see in this figure. It has been shown here by some
researcher that variation in dielectric loss factor of water and ice. So, it shows that the
water has more loss factor than ice. So, water can heat easily and more heat, it can be
heated more than that of the ice. Glass, paper and some polymeric films have a low loss
factor that what does it mean that, they have low factor means they are not heated. And,
metals reflect microwave and they are not heated making the microwave oven very
efficient in energy use.(Refer Slide Time: 13:17)
How these microwave heating actually take place, let us see the mechanism of heating.
There may be two processes that is either it may involve heating through dipole rotation
or through ionic polarization. As you can see in this figure both, that is that dipole
interactions or ionic interaction is shown. That in the dipole rotation flip flop rotation of
dipole molecules like water is particularly that is water that has H positive, H positive
and O that is negative. 
So, these molecules they that a dipole molecules there is a rotation repeated changes in
the polarity of the field causes rapid reorientation of the water molecule. And, this rapid
reorientation of the molecule results in friction and generation of heat is mainly because,
of the friction of these molecules ok.
Back and also back and forth vibration of ionic salts like sodium chloride you can say
sodium ion plus positive chloride ions and these ions move at an accelerated place due to
their internal charge and collision between these ions can cause generation of internal
energy ok. So, these are the way by which actually the main thing is, that a molecular
collision alright. That is the oppositely charged ion when they are put in the microwave
field they try to realign towards the oppositely charge of the microwaves. And, then in
that there is a molecular movement and then actually friction and these friction causes
the generation of the heat.(Refer Slide Time: 15:34)
Microwave systems that is equipment in the microwave there are two main units or
components that is one is the magnetron, that is the source to generate the microwave
and other is the microwave cavity the where the food is other material which we want to
heat is loaded. You can see here in this a schematic representation of the microwave
system where, the cavity when the material is loaded oven cavity and then this set up for
a transformer etcetera which it will be electrical power plug meters. And, then it energy
is given to magnetron and which normally produces the microwave energy and then this
energy is passed inside the oven.
This is for the commercial or smaller scale smaller scale of batch oven microwave oven,
but in the industrial ovens industrial microwave systems are larger capacity microwave
systems. Waveguide becomes an important or essential component because, in that the
magnetron  is  situated  outside  the  oven.  So,  the  microwaves  are  generated  in  the
magnetron separately and then with the help of the waveguide these are transported to
the microwave cavity. So, this magnetron and a waveguide becomes two important
component  for  consideration  for  proper  that  is  heating  system  or  proper  design  or
manufacture of the microwave heating systems.(Refer Slide Time: 17:33)
So, let us see slowly that is with these two that is what does a magnetron consist of. In
this schematic figure it is shown that is a microwave oven showing the positioning of the
magnetron, here the magnetron you can see that is the magnetron. And other that is in the
system now when the microwave energy is generated then these are the waveguide
alright, how and this is where actually the cavity.
So, this is just a schematic; so, the magnetron actually consists of a vacuum tube with a
central electron emitting cathode of highly negative potential surrounded by a structured
anode ok. I will repeat it again that is magnetron consist of a vacuum tube with a central
electron emitting cathode of highly negative potential surrounded by a structured anode.
And, the power of the magnetron can range from 300 to 3000 watt depending up on the
capacity of the microwave system or capacity of the equipment.(Refer Slide Time: 18:54)
The waveguide as I told you earlier it channels the microwave into the cavity that holds
the sample for heating. There are several modes of waveguide in applicator: single mode
and multimode. Single mode ovens distribute the microwave into the reactor in a precise
way. In a single  mode  system  the heating  pattern  could be  confirmed  and thermal
processing  could  be  designed  and  controlled  whereas,  in  a  multimode  system  the
electrical  distribution  is  random.  And  it  is  hard  to  determine  the  heating  patterns.
Domestic ovens are generally designed with reflecting cavity walls and that produce
several modes of microwaves and thereby they maximize the efficiency of the heating
process.(Refer Slide Time: 20:06)
Now, the like any other process the microwave process also can be a batch process, it
can be a continuous process alright. That in a batch process; obviously, the food sample
is placed in the oven for a predetermined time to achieve a target temperature. And, the
power level is normally adjusted to achieve a certain desired temperature difference in
given time frame.
In this is that just again a schematic of the batch process and the system it is the
convectional microwave oven. But, it is modified to suit the drying process; you can see
here there is a one air inlet and then balance system to conduct the drying studies and
also there is air outlet. So, actually it is here the microwave capacity that is where the
microwave that is the food sample is kept.(Refer Slide Time: 21:20)
In the continuous process you can see in this diagram, that is the raw fluid or sample is
pumped may be peristaltic pump are used and this material is pumped through Teflon or
glass helical coils which are placed inside the microwave oven or cavity ok. And, it may
be one cavity or may be several microwave ovens connected in series for the desired heat
frequency or for desired heating process ok. And, the fluid after being exposed to the
desired amount of microwave is allowed to pass through a holding section.
And, allowed to be kept there or held for a predefined or predetermined holding time.
This is then followed by chilling in some form of a tubular heat exchanger or such other
device.  For  measurement  purposes  thermocouples  are  normally  used  for  gathering
sample temperature at the entry and exit points. Whereas, fiber optic probes are used to
monitor the temperature inside the cavity or oven.(Refer Slide Time: 22:57)
Now, after having studied in brief that process about the microwave how the microwave
heat is generated, what are the principles of microwave heating, what are the different
microwave ovens is the; let us see its application aspect. So, in the particularly in the
food processing; obviously, this microwave process has lot of advantages ok. It is a type
of volumetric heating. So, the heat is uniform, it is instantaneous, not much heat transfer
and other problem this is associated with the conventional heating processes are here in
this case.
 It results generally in the reduced processing time. It is instantaneous  process and
control  becomes  very  easy  even  cleaning  etcetera  becomes  easy.  Selective  energy
absorption by the polar molecules and this facilitates its use in the drying applications. It
can  be  combined  with  other  energy  sources  and  chemicals  etcetera  to  improve  the
efficiency of those processes.(Refer Slide Time: 24:14)
Of course like any other process the microwaves processing also it is advantageous, but
it also has certain drawbacks. Because, if you compare with other particularly with the
RF heating etcetera the microwave generally lack the desired penetration length or they
have less penetration power. And therefore, particularly its application for the large
samples may become problematic. Also because of the internal heating the development
of flavour etcetera which are associated with the Maillard reactions and other things,
they lack here.
That is those which are like delicate brown color of the development of the brown color
of the material, crispness alright all these processes actually not because, of the internal
heating involve no heat transfers alright low surface heating. So, these general which are
requirement of some food processes so, they lack here. So, these process heating process
cannot be of use or it limits its use in those products. And of course, the measurement
problems that is the actually there are although there are methods and optics or cables
etcetera by which with the temperature can be made.
But, anyway sometime it becomes difficult to insert that probe etcetera into the cavity
oven and without any loss of the microwave energy. So, it becomes problem. Other
important  aspect  here  the  problem  drawback  of  the  microwave  processing  is  that
dielectric loss factor increases with the increase in the temperature of the material, due to
ionic conductance. And, this results in the hot areas receiving more energy than the coldareas and, this phenomena which is known as thermal runaway results in significant non-
uniform heating.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:31)
So, that is the one major drawback of the; regarding food processing application of the
microwaves it can be used for tempering purposes, for pasteurization, for sterilization,
for blanching, for dehydration, for cooking or even for other food processes. For like for
example, baking they can be used in coagulation, improving the functionality etcetera
they can be used for coating, gelatinization puffing, roasting. So, for wide ranging of
process applications for accordingly for preparation of different products etcetera or for
improve the characteristics of the product, to increase their shelf life these microwaves
can be used.(Refer Slide Time: 27:20)
So, whatever the process where heat is used, these microwaves can also be used, but with
different objectives. So, that is the microwave can be used for pasteurization purposes or
for  sterilization  purposes.  Here  in  this  figure  you  can  see  it  is  a  continuous  flow
pasteurizer where there is for the juice or it can be used for any good material there are
two microwave oven. So, it can be back system 1 or it can be several connected together.
And, the microwave is coming, the material is going and it is exposed into one section to
the desired microwave alright which are the probes or fiber optics. And, then it is pass
through the second unit and after that it is finally, once it is sent to the holding tube and
followed by chilling. So, in fact that is the sterilization or pasteurization it is performed
in faster process that is rate of the process is because, that is energy efficiency is more
here.
So, it can be conducted and the very fast and the come up time is normally less here in
this,  required  temperature  can  be  obtained  instantaneously.  It  has  advantages  to
overcome  the  limitations  imposed  by  slow  thermal  diffusion  processes  of  the
conventional  heating  processes;  microwaves  can  easily  penetrate  the  whole  frozen
product.  Thus,  effectively  reach  the  inner  regions  within  a  short  time.  Microwave
tempering can be performed in few minutes for a large amount of frozen product like
even 24 to 40 kg weighing frozen products; they can be tempered just within 5 to 10
minutes.(Refer Slide Time: 29: 25)
In this system you can see that these are again taken from the literature. These figure
microwave  pasteurization  in  container,  solid  foods  pasteurization  system  for  the
microwave where the filling the product, then film and valve applications for the product
is done. Finally, cooking and pasteurization, this is the conveyor belt in the material
event and then it is passed through that microwave system where, it is exposed to desired
microwave power level. And then finally, it is given the as you have seen in the earlier
case it is given the whole required whole time and then finally, cooling. And similar
thing  is  the  microwave  sterilization  system  and  these  figures  are  taken  from  the
literature. Just to give show you an idea of that equipment ok.(Refer Slide Time: 30:18)
Similarly,  microwave  assisted vacuum drying of the food this  is another  very very
interesting and good application of the microwave that is MVD. MVD that is Microwave
Drying and you can see the material that is before in this figure see the material before
drying how does it look and after drying. There is there is a no much difference in the
color and other characteristics that was shrinkage. But however, the water is removed the
size has reduced, but there is not much difference on the structure an other things.
So, it microwave assisted vacuum drying results in significantly rapid drying rates and
the vacuum it enables the product to be dried at a lower product temperature. So, the
combination of microwave and vacuum it becomes a very good and novel means of
drying.  And,  particularly  the  drying  of  those  materials  which  have  heat  sensitive
components where, that is like bioactives or health ingredients which are which have the
danger of getting evaporated in the conventional processes. They can be retained to
better extent in this microwave assisted vacuum drying.
And here of course, as external heat transfer by convection is absent in the vacuum. So,
by using microwave drying time is reduced significantly. It results in significant decrease
in the operational cost and many researchers have successfully used this technology, that
is microwave assisted vacuum drying successfully for dehydration of grapes, cranberries,
bananas, tomato, carrot, garlic, kiwifruit, apple, pear, etcetera.  That is mostly fruits
which contain that is heat sensitive components or which because, of the low loss tangenttemperature in conventional thermal processes their drying and the dehydration becomes
difficult. So, for drying of such products this becomes a very good process.
So, well friends now in this lecture  we have so far discussed or studied about the
microwave  technology.  It  is  a  novel  technology  or  you  can  say  an  advanced  heat
processing technology which generally eliminates the problems which are there in the
conventional heating processes. And, it is a improved means of thermal technology of
the heating system for the food, where you can reduce the efficiency of the heating, you
can reduce the process time, you can get better energy savings and better economies in
the products. And, at the same time the quality of the product can be maintained; you can
get good quality in the processed product.
Thank you.