Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 19
Supercritical Fluid Extraction ( Part 1 )
Hello everybody. Now, let us study another emerging technology in food processing that
is Supercritical Fluid Extraction. This topic will also be taken in two parts. In the Part 1
today, we will discuss about the principles of the process and technological aspects
including the systems available for supercritical fluid extraction. In the part two, we will
study the application of this technology in food processing.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:11)
There is a great demand and in fact need is felt for the development of green technology.
Particularly in the food processing from the ancient time and time immemorial these
extraction and isolation of natural products from various sources has been done by using
large amount of organic solvent or these processes generate accordingly large amount of
organic waste. These industrial solvents which are generally used traditionally for the
extraction  processes,  many  of  them  are  hazardous  to  human  health  and  increasing
concern about the environment pollution and the other such factors or undesirable effects
of these organic solvents.Let us feel the need of green chemistry. Also, the structure regulations in the use of
industrial solvents have increased the demand of green technology like supercritical fluid
extraction.  Supercritical  fluid  extraction  method  uses  clean,  safe,  inexpensive,  non-
flammable,  non-toxic and environment  friendly solvents. Also, the energy costs  are
lower  in  this  process  when  compared  to  that  of  the  traditional  solvent  extraction
processes.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:21)
So, the first thing comes in our mind what is supercritical fluid extraction though what is
this process about. So, this process that is supercritical fluid extraction is the process of
separating one component from another using a supercritical  fluid as the extraction
solvent, ok. As you can see here in this flow diagram that the material from which the
component to be extracted is placed in some vessel, where the supercritical fluid is
introduced in the vessel under certain conditions, all right.
At under these conditions the fluid supercritical fluid extracts those materials or those
components from those materials. And then finally, it is separated using appropriate
methods that is the extracted materials is obtained in the collection vessel. This aspect, in
further we will elaborate little in more detail when we study, when we discuss the
technological aspects of the process. (Refer Slide Time: 04:51)
So, similarly what is now, supercritical fluid, supercritical extraction, the supercritical
fluid; so, what is supercritical fluid? And in this regard, you can see in this where there is
a concept there is a critical point, there is critical point is the highest temperature and
pressure above which a material can exist in vapour liquid equilibrium, ok. You can see
in this diagram phase diagram that is this is the triple point this line, that is this x axis is
the temperature  and y axis is the pressure. So, may be above this temperature and
pressure on this line the material is solid, but if the temperature and pressure is increased
beyond this, so in on this line the solid material may get converted into liquid.
Further increase in the pressure and temperature that is when the critical point curve, if
you increase the temperature and pressure beyond the critical point then this liquid will
be converted into some sort of its state nature and this is supercritical region, it becomes
a supercritical fluid and as I told you that the material exists in a equilibrium between
vapour and liquid. So, supercritical fluid is single homogeneous fluid formed at the
temperature and pressure above critical point. 
These have the properties intermediate to liquid and gas like they have the properties of
liquid as far as their weight etcetera is concerned, they are heavy like liquid, but they
have the penetration power of the gas, ok. For the production of the supercritical fluid
either  the  material  temperature  can  be  increased  above  that  region  or  the  material
pressure can be brought to the desired level either by compressing or by some othermethods. So, important thing is that it has to come that is like in this case above this, ok.
That is the critical temperature and pressure is to be maintained. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:41)
In this slide I have tried to show you that a comparison between the physical properties
of gas, liquid and supercritical fluid. The physical important physical properties like
density,  dynamic  viscosity,  kinematic  viscosity,  thermal  conductivity,  diffusion
coefficient and surface tension. And as I told you that they the supercritical fluid like you
can see in the data that this is for the supercritical fluid. So, and the values if you
compare that they have the properties intermediate to those of the liquid and the gaseous
state. And accordingly sometime this is SCF are also known as or called as compressible
liquid or dense gases.
They have higher solvent power and this high solvent power of these supercritical fluids
is mainly due to their liquid like density that is their density is much higher, that is 100 to
1000 times greater than gases. And they have excellent transport properties. And this
excellent transport property is owing to the gas like viscosity it is 10 to 100 times less
than the liquid, and diffusivity is also better and they in fact the gas like viscosity
diffusivity  together  with  the  zero  surface  tension.  This  contributes  to  the  transport
properties of these gases and rather they improve the transport they have the excellent
transport properties.(Refer Slide Time: 09:33)
So, different supercritical fluids and their critical pressure and temperature above which
they become super they come in supercritical stage is shown in this table. You can see
the data. But the two supercritical that is which is indicated by red is worth seeing that is
the carbon dioxide it has a critical temperature 304.1 degree Kelvin and critical pressure
73.8 bar. So, the in fact the temperature requirement is less here and the water has a
critical temperature 643 sorry 647.3 degree Kelvin and 221.2 bar pressure.
So,  the  most commonly  supercritical  fluid  used in  the  food  industry  is  the  carbon
dioxide. Its properties that it has the properties like it is inert, it is inexpensive, easily
available, odourless and tasteless, environment friendly. There is no solvent residue in
the food after the extraction, it is suitable for thermoliable natural products, low energy
inputs,  good  solvent  for  non-polar  substances.  So,  these  are  the  good  desirable
characteristics of the supercritical carbon dioxide which make it as a very good solvent
for making or for use in food processing industry.(Refer Slide Time: 11:43)
Water you can see you can compare the data it becomes another good equally good
solvent but the here in this (Refer Time: 11:45) just the data only of carbon dioxide and
water has been shown. So, the critical temperature you can see in the degree Celsius in
this figure the water has 31.1 degree Celsius and this pressure 73 point, means that is the
carbon dioxide above a temperature of 31.1 degree Celsius and the pressure of 73.8 bar,
it will behave like a supercritical fluid and its critical volume at this stage become 73.9
litre per kmol.
Whereas, the water which is again as far as its properties are concerned, it may be also
considered as a good solvent, it is inert and other characteristics are there but here you
see that both the temperature and pressure required to bring it in supercritical stage are
comparatively very high. The temperature in fact is 374 degree Celsius and the pressure
accordingly is 221 bar and under these condition its critical volume is also less that is
57.1.
So,  it  in  fact  from  the  practical  application  point  of  view  the  use  of  water  as  a
supercritical fluid rather becomes impractical or infeasible that is why it is not used and
the carbon dioxide its temperature and pressure it can be easily achieved and it can be
easily converted into. And this is the pictorial that is the diagram how the state changes
when the liquid carbon dioxide is converted into by increasing the temperature andpressure is brought in to the supercritical fluid. So, its nature or state is shown here in
this. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:51)
So,  let  us  before  we  come  to  the  process  application  technological,  let  us  briefly
understand the properties of the supercritical fluid. How these properties are actually
they different from the normal supercritical or normal carbon dioxide and liquid carbon
dioxide? Because that becomes an important consideration in the extraction processes
and designing extraction process or parameters and optimising the conditions and so on,
ok.
So, as I told you that is these supercritical fluids they behave as a dense gas occupying
all  available  volume  as  a single  phase, but they  cannot  be condensed as  liquid  by
increasing the pressure. The densities of the supercritical fluids depend on temperature
and pressure varying in the range of may be 400 to 700 kg per cubic metre and which is
significantly lower than the density of the liquid, ok.
Liquid you can say normally that is they have the density of 1000 kg per cubic metre. So,
this  significantly  lower  density  of  the  supercritical  carbon  dioxide  is  an  important
advantage in the extraction processes. Also, the transport properties of the supercritical
fluids are those between the liquid and gases. Viscosity of supercritical carbon dioxide is
about 0.5 mPa per second milli Pascal per second and which is significantly lower than
the viscosity of the hexane. Even the molecular diffusivity of supercritical fluid carbondioxide at 40 degree Celsius is about one order of magnitude higher than that of the
diffusivity in the liquid state, and in fact viscosity and diffusivity their multiplication are
constant. So, this provides a good; so, makes that is these properties are particularly
transport property density, viscosity, etcetera it makes it useful in the supercritical.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:07)
So,  that  is  the  favourable  transport  properties;  that  is  are  desirable  in  extraction
operations like low viscosities facilitate the penetration of supercritical fluid into the
particulate beds. And it reduce the power requirement in transferring the fluids through
the  system.  Higher  diffusivity  increases  the  mass  transfer,  and  approaches  to  the
equilibrium. Means you see it results in that is the higher diffusivity of the SCF gives
higher extraction efficiency in the processes.
And the phase equilibria between the SCF and food component that is the equilibrium
between SCF solvent and food component to be extracted are required for quantitative
analysis of the extraction processes. That is how, when, under which conditions, what are
the various factors, which influence and how the phase equilibria can be maintained
between  this  and  because  this  is  also  important  as  far  as  the  extraction  yield  and
extraction efficiency of the process is concerned. (Refer Slide Time: 17:25)
Another important property as I told you the solubility that is the solvent power of the
supercritical fluid depends on its structure, its polarity, as well as its density. Initial
stages  of  SCF  extraction  are  governed  by  the  distribution  coefficient  of  the  solute
between  the  dense phase and  the  sample  matrix.  Therefore,  it  is  controlled  by  the
solubility. So, solubility parameters of a dense gas can be estimated by these equations,
where rho by rho liquid is the ratio of the density of the dense gas to that of the liquid at
its boiling point and the Pc obviously, is the critical temperature. So, from this one can
get the solubility parameter of the dense gas from these equations. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:31)
And the equilibrium because this is again important equilibrium is expressed by the
solubility of the component at a given temperature and pressure. And this is usually
determined by the experimental methods that is for particular product, for particular
depending upon the material characteristics etcetera. What are the parameters, pressure
temperature  another  things  what  are  required  so  that  should  be  experimentally
determined.
But,  as  far  as  the  SCF  CO  2  is  concerned  and  its  usefulness  in  food  processing
operations, the following that is the rule which I have listed here they apply. And what
are those? There is three major points that is the number one solubility of low molecular
weight and low polarity organic compounds like carbohydrates, alcohols, carboxylic
acid, esters, aldehyde etcetera is very high in SCF CO 2. Means there is a complete
miscibility.
On  the  other  hand,  the  other  important  rule  which  governs  the  process  is  the
macromolecules and highly polar molecules. Like sugar, starch, proteins, salt etcetera are
not soluble. So, means there is these material that is which I have shown in the first that
is  they  can  be  easily  extracted  and  they  are  completely  miscible,  but  the  other
macromolecules  this  cannot  be  so,  and  the  food  this  components  macro  molecules
remain intact in the food but other bio actives or smaller components and low polar
component, low molecular weight components can be easily extracted. 
Also, the solubility of some insoluble components of course, can be increased by the
addition of some Co-solvents or entrainers such as ethanol, acetone etcetera. For like for
example, the solubility of beta carotene is increased to a great extent by using a mixture
of carbon dioxide, that is supercritical carbon dioxide and ethyl acetate, like ethyl acetate
here is used as a CO-solvent. (Refer Slide Time: 20:59)
So, the co-solvent that have seen in the last slide that is they have important effect
sometime they improve the efficiency of the process, they increase the extractability of a
particular  compound. So, accordingly  the co-solvents  or entrainer  actually,  they are
normally that is those which are use they are organic substances which have volatility
intermediate to supercritical fluid solvent and the solute to be extracted. And generally it
is added in small concentration may be 1 to 5 molecular percentage right and a small
amount of co-solvent increases the ability of a supercritical carbon dioxide to dissolve
polar compound without significantly changing its density and compressibility.
That is its soluble solubilisation power extractability is improved but other characteristics
are not disturbed. The co-solvent mixed with SCF solvent is supercritical that is the
important thing that is it mixture has also to come under the supercritical state. That is
means that is the may be that is individually solvent and co-solvent may be having
different critical pressure and temperature to come into the supercritical state, but here
mind it when the co-solvent is mixed with the SCF. So, may be there may be certain
change in the temperature.
So, there it should be it will be supercritical state at the mixture when the mixture or
pressure is above the mixture critical pressure and the temperature is above its mixture
critical temperature. And the common type of co-solvents used or entrainers used are
methanol, ethanol, acetone, and propanols etcetera. (Refer Slide Time: 22:57)
So, in this slide again that is this is or this data are taken from the literature. So, different
co-solvents, their characteristics, like what is the critical temperature, critical pressure,
molecular mass, dielectric constant, polarity index etcetera all those things that are given
here in this table. And they become useful consideration from this it becomes easy to
select a proper co-solvent which is suitable for extraction of a particular material in a
particular process. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:35)
Now, we come towards the another equipment part and its process part of the things like
in a supercritical fluid extraction system that is what are the different components, ok. 
We can see here in this figure that is number 1, that is the system should have one carbon
dioxide supply source all right that CO 2 or a SCF source means there is there either in
the carbon dioxide cylinder or some other that is you should have a carbon dioxide
source. And then a chiller unit. Then a co-solvent or modifier pump of course, it is
optional that is if required in the process it may not be completely necessary, ok. 
Then a pump is needed to pressurize the gas, and an oven containing the extraction
vessel that is where the actually material is put all right that is the vessel extraction
vessel. So, in this the material and carbon dioxide come in contact then a restrictor that is
to maintain high pressure in the extraction line and then finally, the separator it come to
through a separator all right, and then which normally works under a lower pressure and
finally, there is a material is collected, the restrictor material is collected. So, it has some
extract collection collecting vessel.
And accordingly as in case of any other system there is the necessary instrumentation for
controlling and maintaining the pressure, temperature, there is flow and other things are
obviously, they are provided even controller, indicators and etcetera accessories. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:37)
So, regarding operating principle of the supercritical fluid extractor, it can operate in
static mode, dynamic mode or in a combination mode. The process can be made batch or
continuous.  In  the  static  mode  there  is  the  supercritical  fluid  is  circulated  in  the
extraction vessel for a certain period of time after which it is passed through followed.
So, it is released through the restrictor to the trapping vessel whereas, in the dynamic
mode of extraction there is a continuous flow of SCF, that is the SCF is allowed to flow
continuously through the sample in the extraction vessel and go out to the restrictor to
the trapping vessel. And sometime also there are combination systems that is where
conduction of static extraction for sometime followed by a dynamic extraction.
So, combination is the mixture of a combination or both static as well as dynamic. So, all
these types of systems are available and the systems are batch operation or continuous
operation (Refer Time: 27:02). 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:01)
So, this it is a that is a just process flowchart for any that is the general supercritical fluid
extraction process. So, in here there is the fluid the introduction in the extraction vessel
that is by appropriate assembly, appropriate process, for the large scale process one
should  have  obviously,  with  a  conveying  equipment,  and  feeding  equipment  and
controller etcetera. So, thing is there the first the extraction vessel has to be fed with the
material from which that extraction is to be done. Then, before the pressurization, before bringing that is operating fluid then obviously,
there is here in this extraction vessel the material is brought to in contact with the
supercritical fluid under required conditions of the pressure and temperature. So, before
pressurizing the system is allowed to reach the pre-set operating parameters and these
operating parameters may be experimental trial and other all methods that is depending
upon what are the components one wants to extract.
So, it is set and then the supercritical fluid is cooled in the chiller to ensure liquid feed to
the pump. And then after that this chilled carbon dioxide is discharged into the pressure
vessel and adjustment of the pressure is done to the desired level. So, simultaneous
discharge of co-solvent through the pump at the predetermined flow rate is done in the
system,  where  the  co-solvents  are  used  and  then  the  conduction  of  the  extraction
operation it may be is allowed either in the dynamic mode or in the combination mode or
in the static mode, allowed in the batch system which may batch system may include one
set of the extraction unit whereas, the continuous system may have the combination of
different set of extraction unit either in parallel or in series. 
So, finally, after this it is allowed that is a particular time, definite time then it is the last
step is the isolation of the dissolved solute by precipitation and by adsorption or by any
other appropriate method and then followed by release or recovery of the supercritical
fluid. So, that is the there is the process operation of the method.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:33)
The supercritical fluid technology has many advantages like it is a very good green
process, it results in the replacement of organic solvent with environment friendly and
non-toxic solvent, it reduces the risk of the solvent residue because the in the organic
solvent,  most  of  the  material  fluids  is  a  that  is  the  solvent  residue  always  remain
particular in residual cake in the other things that remains a problem. So, no such type of
problem is here in this case. 
It is a rapid process, it is suitable for the extraction and purification of low volatile
component, ok. Even suitable for thermo labile natural products. So, both low volatile as
well as highly volatile thermo sensitive products etcetera they can be extracted easily
with and even the extracted product that is their quality can be improved. 
Complete and easy recovery of solvent from the extract or the raffinate both is possible
and it is very efficient, and the process can be made continuous. It has low handling cost,
selectively extract target compounds, and is a versatile set of technology. And this is in
fact one of the very emerging technology and novel technology for food processing
application, for getting that is the value added products from the food materials. And this
aspects that is the its application in the food processing industry etcetera we will take up
in the second part of this lecture.
Thank you.