Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 16
Food Irradiation – Part 2
Hi friends, I welcome you all to the second part of the Food Irradiation lecture.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:26)
You  have  seen  in  the  first  part,  that  irradiation  can  be  used  in  food  for
disinfestationspurpose for shelf life extension, for decontamination or for improving
product quality. (Refer Slide Time: 00:44)
But there are certain changes that takes place into the food during irradiation process.
That becomes an important very very important consideration as I told you in the earlier
lecture as well, that for optimizing the process; that is for getting the objective of the
process fulfilled.
We  must  ensure  that  it  is  not  resulting  into  any  undesirable  change  into  the  food
characteristics and the irradiation is a called a cold process, it is a cold pasteurization or
cold  sterilization.  It  can  accomplish  the  same  objective  as  is  done  by  the  thermal
pasteurization and sterilization processes.
The food irradiation has very little are no change in the physical appearance of the food,
there are no or very minimum or nil textural or color changes in the food; however, there
may be some chemical changes into the food and that may if properly not take care of
these chemical changes may result into the off flavor, it may result into the softening of
the fruits and vegetables or such other problems. (Refer Slide Time: 02:13)
So, it becomes important that is the chemical effects of ionizing radiation as to see. And
as you will all hope, I hope that you will agree that is this ionizing radiations, they are
capable of initiating a vast array of chemical changes in all the systems like in the
gaseous system, liquid system as well as in solid system. And in fact, even a summary of
the all the changes is very very difficult in this half an hour lecture, but I will try to give
you the important aspects of that particularly with relation to changes in the food quality
and it is characteristics. 
So, there are two important things; here important considerations here, that is one, is the
radiolysis  of  the  water  and  the  other,  the  effect  of  this  ionizing  radiations  or
macromolecules like protein, carbohydrate, lipids etcetera and other components of the
food like vitamins and enzymes. (Refer Slide Time: 03:28)
Radiolysis of the water, that is effect of ionizing radiations and water, that is, these
ionizing radiations they split or which is more technically called radiolyze water. And
since, most of the foods are aqueous systems, they have less or more amount of water
present in this. So, this effect of ionizing radiation on water is of key importance.
The passage of ionizing radiations through water results in the formation of intermediate
like excited water, it results in the formation of free radicals like hydroxyl free radical or
hydrogen free radicals, it may result in the formation of ionized water molecule, or even
hydrated water molecule. (Refer Slide Time: 04:32)
Now, these species that is these intermediates which are formed, due to exposure of the
ionizing radiation or put the ionizing radiations or water to the ionizing radiations, they
can react among themselves as well as they can react with other food components of the
system; other components of the system. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:49)
And if it is a pure water where only water molecules are there, there are no other
macromolecules etcetera, then these interaction among these intermediates may resultinto  the  formation  of  hydrogen  gas,  hydrogen  peroxide,  water  molecule  again,
hydronium ion and hydroxide ion and so on.
So; obviously, those intermediate as well as these new compounds which are formed like
hydronium ion, hydroxide ion etcetera all these things. They can again that catalyse or
influence  several reactions  in to the food material, they can interact  with the other
components of the food and that is the numerous possibilities may be there. That is
almost  every  class  of  food  the  constituent,  like  carbohydrate,  protein  and  other
nitrogenous compound, fats and oils, vitamins, enzymes, pigments what not, they can all
react by at least with one or the other of these intermediates to produce new intermediate
compounds and many of which are highly reactive themselves. 
Even, the oxidation reactions may take place, free-radical reactions may take place,
reduction reactions may take place like and these becomes important and as they may
influence; they may have important influence on the food characteristics.
So, this is was one that is effect of ionizing radiations on water and then it is further
effect of that another food constituent. In addition to that, these ionizing radiations they
can also have the direct effect or influence on the hydrocarbon chain. Many food have
the hydrocarbon chain like lipids etcetera alright are in many polymers like packaging
materials etcetera.
So, the direct action of ionizing radiations on these hydrocarbon chain also become
important ok, that is a number of primary events can occur. Most important event is the
abstraction of hydrogen that is they from the hydrocarbon, the hydrogen radical alright,
can be effected alright free radical.
And so, the hydrocarbon free radical is formed and this hydrocarbon free radical, which
is formed. Again, it can undergo a very large amount of reactions among which those
involving reactions with atmospheric or dissolved oxygen and cross linking reactions
etcetera becomes important. (Refer Slide Time: 07:43)
Then  deamination,  oxidation,  polymerization,  decarboxylation  all  this  have  been
implicated  in  protein  changes  during  irradiation.  Reactions  of  protein  exposed  to
radiations have similarities to those caused by organic peroxide etcetera. In both the
cases,  that  is  the  free  radical  of  proteins  can  either  cross-link  or  recombine  with
hydrogen, or result in scission that is depending upon, that there may be a transfer of
liquids or cross linking etcetera.
So, this in this diagram you can see that, oxidation as well as free radical mediated
pathology that is a processes as far as the effect of a influence of ionizing radiation and
the. So, again large number of compounds there are possibilities that is the there may be
large number of compounds which they have several effect on both that is on the food,
food constituent and even on the surrounding environment. (Refer Slide Time: 08:58)
Apart from that, that is they have a effect influence and lipids that is a lipids including
fats, many of the reactions are akin to the oxidative rancidity type reaction, peroxidation
by molecular oxygen, even various radiation specific reaction can also take place there.
Carbohydrates are also very sensitive to radiation. Oxidation reaction predominate as
well as condensation reaction similar to non-enzymatic browning may also take place.
And it has been suggested in the some literature, there are certain reports that some
products of radiation of sucrose even may have toxic effects on the cell. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:45)
So, we can summarize that effects of irradiation on food constituents, that they radiolyze
water there may be formation of peroxide or hydroperoxide about half of the cysteine,
that is 50 percent of the cysteine may get destroyed during irradiation about 10 percent of
the  tryptophan  is  lost.  There  may  be  development  of  oxidative  rancidity,  pectin  is
degraded which may cause softening of fruits and vegetable. And even, higher doses can
cause  off  flavours  because  of  the  formation  of  the  carbonyls  compound,  volatile
constituents, hydrocarbons etcetera. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:33)
 So;  obviously,  there  should  be  some  means  to  minimize  these  effect  because  in
optimization of the process or main criteria is that we should have, that minimum effect
on these constituents. So; obviously, you have seen that, that since the radiolysis of the
water is one of  the maor causative factor. So, we can minimize the effect by lowering
down the water content. Because if the water content in the food is less, then there will
be less radiolysis of the water, less free radicals will be formed alright, and then the free
radical initiated or mediated reactions will be stopped.
So, one best way or better way of irradiating the food is that to reduce to dry it alright,
before irradiation and then irradiate in the dried form. Then less aerobic conditions,
because if the oxygen is present in the environment then this oxidation reactions etcetera
may be that peroxide formation and other reactions may take place; which may result
into the development of off flavours off colors etcetera. So obviously, if irradiation isdone in the less aerobic conditions and the food irradiated food, if they are kept in
anaerobic environment.
So, it will help in preventing off flavour and off color associated reactions. Reducing the
temperature, that is the you have seen that the how this irradiation in the frozen state
alright, influences that and it gives a better quality because the sub freezing radicals are
immobilized free radicals take play major roles here. So, irradiation of food in the frozen
state is consider to be a better approach.
Then, addition of free radical scavengers, that is also depending upon the type of the
food in the system particularly if the liquid system etcetera there are powdery system,
then some free radical scavengers can be added into the food alright, or chelating agents
can be added into the food. And which these metal science and etcetera they can are
other free radical they can bind with them.
And then, start them for free radical initiated chain reactions and all those processes. And
of course that simultaneous distillation is another suggested means, but it has to see the
operational things has to be ensured, that is this helps in the removal of volatile off
flavours or off flavour precursors etcetera in the process ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:21)
So, after having done that, let us see now, what are the different applications that is for
what purpose is major purpose is this ionizing radiations can be used and as you couldsee, it has a vast ranging application in food processing. It can be used for different
purposes  in  different  food  right  like,  that  is  for  sterilization  of  the  army  ration  or
stabilization of the other food making the food room temperature is stable that is one.
In fact, in many country this irradiation is being used for sterilization of the army rations
or sterilization  of the ration to be given into the hospital  patients  etcetera  ok. And
obviously, here the micro organisms etcetera are killed and food is made shelf stable
room temperature is stable.
Another application as we also discuss earlier is the extension of shelf life of various
foods  which  are  normally  distributed  or  transported  or  stored  at  refrigerated
temperatures.  Particularly  perishable  foods, like fish, poultry,  meat,  fresh fruits  and
vegetables, milk, egg, cheese all these things are such material, it is desirable; that even
their fresh under parts they should be transported under refrigerated condition or even
sold under refrigerated conditions for quality reasons right.
So, here there is one this whole refrigeration setup can be eliminated, that is the these
foods they can be exposed to irradiation treatment and can be made room temperature
stable without any significant loss and influence on the quality factors; then, irradiation
can be used for treatment of water and food processing waste.
An interesting application in this respect is the treatment of cooling water for fish on
board ships and by this that is if that is the further transport of the frozen fishes etcetera
that is the for this purpose, water is used for their cooling and for their transportation in
the ship. That is by maintaining the microbial count in this water at a low level without
heating the water; it should be possible to retard deterioration of fish prior to the time of
their delivery for subsequent processing at the harbor. (Refer Slide Time: 16:18)
Other  possible  area  or  very  good  scope  of  application  of  this  irradiation  is  the
disinfestation of food grains or dried fruits. In fact, the insect infestation one is, one of
the major cause for the spoilage of the grains or for the spoilage of the several dried
fruits etcetera.
So, these commodities insects they are very very sensitive comparatively much sensitive
to ionizing radiation just by giving few 100 or few 1000 rads of ionizing radiation these
insects  can  be  killed;  so,  very  interesting  application.  Then  inhibition  of  sprouting
onions, potatoes etcetera like such vegetables when they are stored at room temperature
for longer period.
So, after sometime due to their own ongoing physiological process they sprout and this is
sprouting is. In fact, is major problem in such fruits and vegetables limiting their shelf
life.  So,  all  though  there  are  chemical  methods  for  control  of  sprouting,  but  these
chemical methods invariably they influence the flavor and other they bring about other
changes etcetera into those respect to food.
So,  here  ionizing  radiations  becomes  a  very  good  source  that  is  for  inhibition  of
sprouting these materials and only just a few thousand dose small doses like about 15000
rad etcetera, is required and the chemical effect under these conditions are also very
negligible or almost nil.Then another very interesting effect with the delay in ripening of the fruit, that is it can
that is if the fruits and vegetables or other that is the fruits particularly they can be
exposed to required (Refer Time: 18:25) radiation and their ripening can be, that is
delayed and their shelf life can be extended. And in fact, that is there are many fruits like
mango another things they are even commercially treated by irradiation and they are
shipped or transported to some countries and further. So, ripening of the fruits can be
delayed by exposing them to the desired level of irradiation.
Then another very very important or interesting application of ionizing radiations in the
vegetables and fruits is in the irradiation of dehydrated vegetables. In fact, when these
dehydrated  vegetables,  that  is  using  thermal  means,  another  means  when  they  are
dehydrated the major problem is their rehydration because the reconstitution properties
are not very good in the dehydrated vegetables of course, depending upon the process
(Refer Time: 19:23) etcetera. 
So, here those dehydrated vegetable products, if they are exposed to even little smaller
dose are comparatively, even lower dose of this irradiation, then this irradiation results in
the scission of the polymer chains; as you have seen that effect on the polymer chain.
So, it because that is the longer polymers may be broken into smaller ones and this
contributes  this  effects  to the structure  of the vegetables;  and even this  scission  is
beneficial in accelerating the rehydration or it improves the reconstitution properties or
rehydration properties of the this dehydrated vegetables.
Then  another  interesting  application  of  this  food  irradiation  may  be  in  the  for  the
accelerated ageing of scotch whisky, that is the freshly produced or freshly fermented
whisky etcetera, they do not have the desired flavoring characteristics and the aging is a
very important step in their manufacturing process. In fact, they are stored for sometimes
for several years to get the desired flavor in the whisky. 
So, those; in fact, during these ageing during the storage the there is secondary, that is
the  mellowing  or  ripening  which  is  called  whisky  that  is  it  flavor  is  improved
characteristic. So, that process what you can day; what you one can get a after storing of
the whisky for several years, just it can be obtained in comparatively lesser time by
exposing them to ionizing radiations.So, that ageing of the whisky ageing processes for the whisky and such other materials
can be greatly accelerated by exposing them to the ionizing radiation. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:26)
So, one thing comes in almost every consumers mind that is, how wholesome these
irradiated foods are. In fact, in some of the countries they still the consumers are not very
much convinced about that safety or wholesomeness of the irradiated food.
So, when we talk about wholesomeness of the irradiated food, how wholesome there are
at  least  three  considerations.  Number  1,  effect  of  these  ionizing  radiations  are  on
induction of radioactivity, number 2, that effect of these irradiation treatment and the
nutritive value of the food and then third and most important one, the induction of any
toxicity or carcinogenicity of that.
So,  will  take  up  these  three  aspects  briefly,  alright;  as  far  as  the  induction  of
radioactivityis  concerned, this Herschman equation can be used to measure the how
much radioactivity that is Q is the radioactivity in micro micro Curie that is, how much
will be produced into the food material. After it’s irradiation that is a constant D is the
dose of radiation in Mrad, E is the energy of radiation given to the food, N is the decay
constant and T is the half life of the radio isotope formed. 
So, using this equation one can measure that induction of radioactivity and of course, the
induction of radioactivity in the food may depend and different factors like for example,type of the radiation, used and it’s energy level, the dose of the radiation given to the
food and the abundance of any specific elements in the food. This can initiate which can
cause further more induction of the radio activity or which can accelerate or decelerate
processes.
In addition to this factors, even half life of the radioisotope produced is also important
because if the half life that is of the isotope which is forming very short then you may
consider that is the isotope may disappear before reaching the to the consumer. So, this
isotope  may be  present in  the food, but it  may  disappear before  the  food reaches,
irradiated food reaches to the consumer. 
So, it has been this aspect has been thoroughly devoted debated and it has been found
that irradiation of the food with the gamma rays with the x-rays up to; energies values up
to 5 MeV’s and electrons with energies value up to 10 MeV’s are comparatively safe.
There is no induction, no reported induction of radioactivity in this process.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:36)
The other influences on the nutrient losses, we have already seen in the details that is the
effect of chemical effects of these ionizing radiations on food nutrients, carbohydrate,
protein, fat and other components, water so on. So, it may obviously, depending upon the
process, depending upon the dose given etcetera; it may result into some destruction of
nutrients, alright.And of course, there are certain means also we have already discussed that these, how
these losses of the on the nutrients can be minimized and better to irradiate the food
either in the dehydrated form or in the frozen form alright. Because irradiation in the
frozen state greatly reduces the loss of vitamins and there is exclusion of oxygen which
protects  the  fat  molecules,  even  radiation  sensitive  vitamins  and  some  oxidation
susceptible amino acids. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:59)
Though,  third  aspect  regarding the production  of toxic  components  or carcinogenic
components in the irradiated food or during food irradiation; and in this effect there is I
think there is no hardly any other physical food preservation method which has received
such severe test in this regard as irradiation has been. So, this process of food irradiation
has been put to thorough scrutiny by various researcher, by various regulating entity
throughout the globe in different countries.
And of course, the studies have been conducted in this aspect and after all the data which
has obtained in such studies indicate, that there are no acute toxic effects or obvious
danger of chronic toxicity or carcinogenicity; provided the process is used meticulously
and with the proper energy levels right and processes are properly optimize, so under
optimum  condition.  So,  the  process  has  to  be  used  with  caution  that  becomes  an
important aspect ok. (Refer Slide Time: 27:18)
So, advantages  of the food irradiation we will briefly describe it may result in the
minimization of the food losses, improve public health, it increase the international trade,
it is an alternative to fumigation of food grain, it increase increases energy saving that is
the food irradiation processes are less energy intensive.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:42)
 And, that you can see here in this slide like, that is the by eliminating pathogenic
microorganisms or parasites, it removes or reduces the possibilities of the toxicity and
other things from the food and so, public health, that is health foods; that is why, it isused  even  sometime  it  is  used  for  that  processing  of  that  health  foods  and  other
components and sterilization of that foods.
Then  of  course,  minimizing  food  losses  like  delayed,  ripening,  sprout  inhibition,
disinfestations, etcetera; so, that is why the huge losses is normally occurs in the food,
processible foods, grains etcetera, that so, this a has a great potential for minimizing food
losses.  Alternative  so  like  grains  etcetera,  that  is  the  common  process  with  the
fumigation and this many times like chemicals like methyl bromide, ethylene, dibromide
or ethylene oxide etcetera.
And may they are few used for fumigation of the grains and other materials to extend
their shelf life or to kill insects. And many of these chemicals are sometime many a times
are toxic right. So, they should not be used they are not permitted. So, here that is these
influence of these toxic chemicals or use of these toxic fumigating agents can be easily
replaced by a even, few low lower dosage of, right.
Then energy savings here some data and literature says that there were some studies
comparative  studies  for  utilization  of  energy  in  different  processes  like  canning,
refrigeration; canning, refrigeration then frozen storage and refrigerated and irradiated.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:35)
So, in the case of canning 20180 kilojoules per kg energy involvement is there where as
in the refrigeration and frozen storage this respective figures are 17760 or around 46500,but in a food which is a both refrigerated and irradiated the total involvement is there are
just around 17860 kg. So, it results in to the energy irradiation of food basely, the data
shows that it results in energy saving.
Another important aspect because of the obvious effects, that is the there should be
proper labeling that is the irradiated food should be properly labeled, and in fact, FDA
requires that, the irradiated food bear this radura label; that is, this is the sign which has
to be compulsorily put on the irradiated foods. And of course, in addition to this side that
is the some the packet should state a label should state that treated with irradiation or
treated by irradiation. So, radiation like that.
And of course,  in  addition  to  that  FDA  many  countries  have  their  own regulatory
requirement for food irradiation, for labeling requirement or they that is the persons, who
want to use this facility, who want to establish irradiation facility; they need to take
permission from the these regulating agencies of course or in many countries there is no
statutory requirement specific to irradiation right.
So, in fact, there are many countries where it has been legalized food irradiation of
course, in some countries still there is consideration, but overall this process has a great
potential for huge and application in food processing industry. 
(Refer Slide Time: 32:00)
And here, in this again picture taken from the literature just to show you the effect how
this you can see here that strawberries ,that is the after harvesting just after 5 days of
harvesting and then irradiated, and then after harvesting and then stored; so, picture after
5 week 5 days and after 3 weeks.
Similarly, this strawberries 25 days after treatment and storage at 3 degree Celsius it is
the one the control that there is the irradiated 1 kilo gray and the other is irradiated with
1.5 kilo gray and you can see the effect. Similarly, even I think it is the sugarcane stock;
so, 36 days at 34 degree Fahrenheit and then, after they are irradiated and again are after
36 days and at 34 same temperature you can see the difference in the freshness and other
attributes.
So obviously, this becomes a very good it has a great potential for application in the food
processing industry. So, it now conclude that the food irradiation is a better non-thermal
mean and novel technology and it has a vast potential wide potential for application in
food processing for various useful purposes.
However, the process should be used with caution, it should be appropriately designed
and one should have that is even the facilities should be well constructed and it should be
made sure that there is no that is adverse effect of the process on the food constituents
and it is necessary another characteristics.
Thank you.