Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 10
Traditional Food Preservation Technologies – Part 2
In the first part of Traditional Food Preservation Technologies, different methods that are
traditionally  used  for preservation  of food,  the  target  factors  in these  methods,  the
objectives and the mode by which these objectives are achieved were elaborated in
detail. 
There are three sets: one set of technology are used to slow down microbial growth,
other  sets  of  technologies  are  used  to  kill  or  inactivate  microorganisms  and  other
technologies are used to reduce the contamination or restrict the access of microorganism
to food. In all these processes, control of water activity, control of pH and heat treatment
are the major factors which are used to preserve the food traditionally. 
Thermally processed food constitutes a large part of the food processing industry or the
products which are available in the market. This lecture basically discusses the effect of
heat on the lethality of microorganisms. 
The impact of heat treatment on microorganisms is estimated from the measurement of
the surviving cells against heating time. The destruction profile obtained forms the basis
for the designation of the operational requirement for the design of thermal process. Thisis mostly based upon the total energy input that is required for the inactivation of most
heat resistant form of the spore forming bacteria.
Traditional estimations of the efficiency of preservation and disinfection process are
based upon the assumption that microbial death follows a known evolution. Each species
of the microorganism has its own particular heat tolerance. Thermal operating conditions
are determined experimentally and the data are presented as the number of surviving
microorganisms or viable spores against the exposure time at a given temperature.
Different experiments under different temperature and time conditions are conducted and
the effect of these time and temperature combinations on either killing or survival of the
microorganisms are estimated. These recorded data are analyzed to find out whether the
effect of change in the temperature is influencing the microorganisms and its survival in
the  heat  process.  The  thermal  destruction  kinetics  of  microorganisms  becomes  an
important subject in the thermal process design.
Thermal death kinetics or survival curve is one of the major data which are generated
experimentally on the most heat resistant vegetative cell or spore of the bacteria. It is
plotted in the form of a survivor curve. The log number of surviving bacteria is plotted
against a time; generally a straight line is obtained. In the figure, Line 1 gives a linear
relationship and this linear relationship implies that thermal destruction phenomenon is a
first order reaction. However, as you could see in the figure 2 and 3, the deviation from
the thermal death curves may be observed and this thermal death curve can also becharacterized by shoulders and tails. The deviation from linearity may be related to the
composition  of  the  microbial  population,  germination  of  sporulated  forms,  or
heterogeneity of the thermal treatment .
In this graph, a schematic representation of the three types of microbial survival curves,
representing the number of viable cell against the time is depicted. Line 1 which is a
linear relationship, gives a straight line. This curve shows that in the population there is a
homogeneous mass of microorganism and it has been homogeneously heat treated i.e. all
the microorganism have received uniform heat treatment.
The line 2 is a typical curve, where composite population i.e. thermo sensitive as well as
thermo resistant cells coexist in the system. The 3rd line is the curve of microorganisms
that are activated by short exposure to heat. When the heat is given to the system, some
of the spores might germinate or there might be certain fragmentation.This indicates that in line 2, coexistence of strains, having different thermal resistance
gives  the  segmented  lines.  Thermal  activation  of  germination  is  responsible  for
maintaining the initial cell number which is shown in line 3. 
In the straight part of these plots, the number of cells thermally destroyed at temperature
T during the time interval Δt in seconds is represented by the equation 1.
X (t + ∆t) – X (t) = -k X (t) ∆t             … (1)
Where, X is the number of living cells, and
            k is the destruction rate (s-1)
Equation 1 can also be written as 
X = Xo e-k t                … (2)     
Where,  Xo  is the number of cells initially present, 
   X    is the number of survivors,
              t     is the exposure time (s), 
   k   is the destruction rate (s-1)
Early research introduced the D-value, defined as the decimal reduction time (average
time of exposure needed to reduce the number of microorganism by a factor 10) which
leads to the following equation                                   
                                            X = Xo  10 -1/D               … (3)
D value is obtained by plotting the log number of survivors (Y axis) against time (X
axis) on a semi log paper. A straight line is obtained. The time required to reduce the
microbial population by a factor of 10 is known as D value also called decimal reduction
time. If k is replaced by D in the equation 2, equation 3 is obtained.
Another parameter which is used to indicate the thermal resistance of microorganism is Z
value. Like in D value where, log number of survivors is plotted against time, if D value
is plotted against temperature, a straight line is obtained and the slope of this curve is Z
value. Z value corresponds to the increase in the temperature that induces a reduction of
D value by a factor of 10 and this is given by equation 4.D = Dref  10 - [(T- Tref) / Z]         … (4)
Where, T (⁰C) is the treatment temperature, and
              Dref is the thermal reduction time at the reference temperature T ref .
The reference temperature for pasteurization process is generally 71.7  ⁰C and for the
sterilization process it is 121  ⁰C. Z value gives a good indication about the thermal
resistance of the microorganism, for eg. consider there are two microorganisms. One
microorganism has a Z value of 10 ⁰; another microorganism has a Z value of 50 ⁰. One
has to increase the temperature to 50 ⁰C to get that 1 log cycle reduction in D value
whereas in other case just by increasing the temperature by 10 ⁰C, we can get a 1 log
cycle reduction in D value. Reactions or components (microorganisms/nutrients) that
have small Z-values are highly temperature sensitive.
Thermal  process  calculations,  therefore,  involve  the  need  for  knowledge  of  the
concentration of the microorganisms to be destroyed and the acceptable concentration of
microorganism that can remain in the final product. It is necessary to decide whether to
go for 12 or 8 or 5 log cycle reductions depending upon the number and type of the
microorganisms, thermal resistance of the target microorganisms, food characteristics,
and  the  time  temperature  relationship  required  for  the  destruction  of  the  target
microorganisms.There are specific D and Z values for the thermal inactivation, destruction of enzymes,
vitamins, pigment and the microorganism i.e. the unwanted elements in the food like
pathogenic cells, toxins, enzymes or desirable components in the food like nutrients,
flavor and color, have different D value as well as Z values. The differences of the D
value and the Z values of these undesirable and desirable components on the foods are
generally exploited to optimize the thermal treatments and form the main basis for the
optimization of the thermal process conditions.
In this figure, the relative change in the time temperature profile for inactivation of
microorganisms and the destruction of vitamins in the food can be observed. Z value and
D value for these components  differ. Z values for enzymes, vitamins  and pigmentsgenerally are found in the range of 20 to 70 ⁰C. This difference allows the manufacturer
to determine an optimal thermal process condition like temperature and exposure time.
Most of the thermal process may be of low temperature long time or high temperature
short time.
The low temperature long time methods generally lead to the destruction of the nutrient
and in high temperature short time, since the exposure of the food component to the
temperature  is  very  short;  it  results  in  better  nutrient  retention,  and  high  microbial
destruction. It can be seen in the graph that, for the pathogens the Z value is less than 15
⁰C whereas, the food nutrients like vitamins color, flavor, etc. they have a higher Z
value. Vitamins will remain intact for Z less than 30 ⁰C; if the Z value reaches 30 or
above, vitamins will get destroyed. So, the shaded area is the point of focus where the
pathogens  get  inactivated  and  the  desirable  constituents  of  the  food  like  vitamins,
pigments, colors, etc. are also retained. The shaded area represents the region where the
thermal parameters allow preservation of vitamins and destruction of microorganism
through the high temperature short time treatment. 
The classical microbial inactivation models based on the temperature levels and exposure
times are highly influenced by intrinsic and environmental conditions during the thermal
treatment. It also influences the thermal destruction kinetics of the microorganisms.One important factor is heating rate, the rate at which heat process is applied which is
generally not taken into account in the models of thermal destruction although it has
been found to be a determinant parameter affecting the survival of the microorganisms.
Even heat shocks are found more effective than the progressive heating. Heat shocks
enable the heat optimization of the thermal destruction process by increasing the heat
gradient. Instead of heating continuously if we give heat shock then it has more influence
on the microbial  death. At a fundamental  level, the effects  of heating  rates  on the
membrane permeability also emphasized the fact that cell membranes are structurally
dependent on heating kinetics.
The other factors include environmental factors in which the food is heated like water
activity  and  hydrostatic  pressure.  These  parameters  significantly  influence  thermal
treatment  effects  on  the  viability  of  microorganisms.  Microorganisms  appear  to  be
thermally stabilized by intermediate a w values in the range of 0.3 to 0.5 and the most
favorable  hydration  conditions  for their  destruction  correspond  to  fully  hydrated  or
dehydrated media.
As proteins are generally stabilized by extreme dehydration, it can be speculated that the
thermal destruction of cells in dehydrated media is enhanced by the oxidation or by
membrane destabilization. The major role played by membrane destabilization in the
induction of cell death can be seen in the way that passing through the membrane phase
transition  using  a  cooling  step  enhances  cell  resistance  to  osmotic  dehydration
significantly.  The  main  implication  of  these  results  is  that,  thermal  stabilization  of
dehydrated products can be optimized especially when high heating rates are used.The combination parameters also influence the heating process or thermal destruction of
microorganisms in food. The association of hydrostatic pressure with temperature is an
efficient  means  to  control  microbial  survival.  One  very  interesting  aspect  of  this
interaction  comes  from  the  elliptical  shape  of  the  viability  curves  on  temperature
pressure diagram. These curves which are analogous to the protein denaturation curves,
suggest that the inactivation effects that are obtained by heating under pressure can be
more efficiently obtained by cooling at negative temperature under pressure.
This forms the principle of hydrostatic high pressure processing i.e. the cold temperature
-high pressure inactivation effects is surely a promising means to provide safe, but non-thermally  affected  food  products.  This  forms  the  principle  of  the  high  pressure
processing of the food which is one of the emerging technologies in food processing.
The water activity and hydrostatic pressure are two thermodynamic parameters rarely
taken into account in thermal process calculation models but that greatly modify the
thermal effects observed in classical conditions of hydration and pressure. Hydration and
hydrostatic  pressure  levels,  as  well  as,  heating  rates,  strongly  influence  thermal
stabilization of food products and these parameters could be more efficiently used to
improve classical heating process. 
So,  by  proper  control  of  these  parameters  like  heating  rate  or  by  having  a  proper
combination of the heating process as well as the environmental conditions, a better
thermal process with better desired sterility level in the product can be established. A
better thermal process will have the desired level of nutrients and other quality factors in
the food. So, this thermal destruction kinetics becomes an important aspect in designing
the thermal process parameters for a food.