Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 01
Course Introduction and Food Constituents & Functions
In this first lecture, a brief introduction of the course followed by a brief discussion on
constituents of food and its function will be given. 
This course is a 12 week course having 60 lectures of 30 min each. There will be 12
assignments, most probably one at the end of every week. There will be one online
examination at the end of the course. The broad areas that will be covered in this course
include  food  structure  and  changes  occurring  in  food  during  processing,  novel  and
emerging  technologies  for  processing  and  value  addition  of  food,  food  products
manufacture, preservation and shelf life extension of perishable foods. Also towards the
end of the course, some selected ready to eat, ready to cook, health foods and beverages
manufacturing technologies will be discussed. The topics that will be covered in this course include: 
In the week 1, Introduction to Food processing, preservation and quality will be outlined
where the  basic  principles  and methods  of food preservation  and processing, water
activity  versus  food  stability,  how  changes  in  the  water  activity  and  other  factors
influence the stability and quality of food and also the relationship between structure and
function  of  food  will  be  discussed.  In  the  2nd  week,  changes  that  occur  during
processing of food will be introduced. It may involve browning reactions both enzymatic
and  non-enzymatic,  protein  interactions,  carbohydrate  interactions,  rancidity  and
reversion. A brief overview of the science aspects of the food will be then switched on to
the processing technologies wherein from 3rd week onwards, the processing technologies
like high pressure processing, membrane technologies, irradiation, radio frequency and
microwave heating, supercritical fluid extraction, extrusion technology for production of
RTE snack foods, textured vegetable protein, rice and dal analogues, etc. will be taken
up. Then, 6th week onwards, hurdle technology concepts, natural antimicrobials, bacteriocins
and freeze drying will be outlined. 7th week will include extraction and processing of oils
including  mechanical  expression,  solvent  extraction,  refining,  hydrogenation  and
winterization. Also the shelf life extension of oils using natural antioxidants, concept of
rancidity, measurement of rancidity and preparation of oil powder will be discussed. 
In the week 9, the issues related to the shelf life extension of fruits and vegetables will be
taken  up  where  the  novel  technologies  like  modified  atmosphere  packaging,  active
packaging, edible coating and related processes for the extension of shelf life of high
value perishable foods will be discussed. This will be followed by the methods for
control atmosphere storage of food grains, ozone treatment and microwave treatment fordisinfestation of food grains as well as the methods for detection of spoilage of grains. In
the last two weeks of the course,  i.e. weeks 11 and 12, food fortification technology will
be highlighted where in pilot-scale manufacturing technologies for RTE high energy
food pastes, iron fortified rice, nutri dal, fortified noodles and other products will be
introduced. Manufacturing technologies of products like pasta, food powders, beverages,
health foods and processes like microencapsulation, food nanotechnology, etc. shall be
discussed. 
A list of the suggested readings -i.e the books which might be useful for this course is
given as follow: 
Food Chemistry, Revised and Expanded Edition by Owen R Fennema. 
Modern Food Microbiology by James M Jay.
Mechanism of Action of Food Preservation Procedures by G W Gould.
Principles of Food Science (Part II): Physical Principles of Food Preservation by
M Karel Owen R Fennema and D B Lund.
Food Processing Technologies Principles and Practices by P J Fellows. 
Food Processing Principles and Application by Stephanie Clark and others.
Food Processing and Preservation Techniques by Peter Zeuthen and Leif Bagh,
Non Thermal Preservation of Foods by Gustavo V Barbosa and others.
Food Product and Process Innovations (2 volumes) by Hari Niwas Mishra.Food can be defined as anything eaten or drunk which can be absorbed by the body to be
used as an energy source, as a body building material or for the regulation of body
processes; food is the raw material from which our body is made of. Every person is
concerned about the food, but the aspect of concern differs with location as well as with
regional and cultural variations. A person from south would have different interest as far
as his food is concerned whereas the persons from north, east, west like to have their
special consideration. Taking the example of developed nations and developing nations;
in developing countries, where majority of the population is involved in production of
food but, still the main issue there is how to feed the people, how to provide adequate
quantity of food to the masses? On the other hand, in developed countries, the scenario is
just different. Although less proportion of the population is involved in agriculture andfood production in these countries, yet they have plenty of food. In these countries, most
of the produced food is processed or value added. So, the main aspect of concern about
the food in those countries or those regions of the world include how to give good
quality food, how to give health foods or the food which provide nutrition and health
benefits. 
The food is made up of a number of chemical components which are called nutrients.
These  nutrients  are  required  by  the  body  in  adequate  amounts  in  order  to  grow,
reproduce and lead a normal healthy life. Major nutrients in food include water, fat,
carbohydrates, proteins, minerals and vitamins. Over 40 essential nutrients are supplied
by food which are used by the body to generate literally thousands of compounds needed
for the life.These nutrients have specific roles or specific functions to perform in the body. For
example, the main function of water is body building and repairing as well as regulating
or protecting the body processes. Main function of protein is body building and repairing
whereas its additional functions include energy giving, regulating and protecting body
processes. Fats and carbohydrates are mainly consumed for energy purposes. Their main
function is energy giving whereas body building and repairing become the additional
function. Main function of minerals is body building or repairing as well as regulating
and protecting body processes. Main function of vitamins is regulating and protecting
body processes and additional function is body building and repairing. 
The energy is the capacity to do work. In case of food materials, it is generally measured
in Cal or kcal or sometime it is also expressed in kJ. One gram carbohydrate upon
complete oxidation gives 4 Cal; equal amount of energy is given by protein as well. One
g fat gives 9 Cal.The foods are classified on the basis of the nutrients they include as well as the functions
which the nutrients perform in the body. For example, the foods which are rich in water,
protein and minerals are generally termed as body building foods whereas the foods rich
in carbohydrates and fats are called energy yielding foods. The foods rich in water,
mineral and vitamins such as fruits and vegetables are termed as protective foods.
Apart from this six major group of nutrients that food contain, there are also certain
minor components present in food and these minor components include pigments and
colorings, flavorings, enzymes and bioactives. All these constituents, i.e. the nutrients as
well as the minor components give the food its structure, texture, colour, flavor, taste and
nutritional value. So, it is not only the content of these constituents but also the mannerin which these constituents interact in the food contributes to the characteristics of food.
For example, milk which on an average has around 14 to 16 % total solids including fat
and 84 to 86 % of water but it is a liquid food. On the other hand, tomato and cucumber
which have around 95 to 98 % water are solid foods. 
How they are present inside the food that decides actually the structure, function and
other attributes of the food. The characteristic properties of food affecting its quality are
determined  by  both  the  chemical  composition  and  the  physical  structure  of  food
components. The knowledge of chemical composition of a food is therefore a valuable
tool in predicting the effects of processing and preservation on quality of the finished
product. 
Foods are usually mixture of various substances in solid, liquid or gaseous state. These
mixtures are dispersion systems containing dispersed phases and dispersion medium.Dispersion system may be classified according to the state of the matter like gas, liquid
or solid in each phase. They may also be classified on the basis of the size of the
dispersed particle as true solutions, colloidal dispersions or suspensions.
There might be different types of dispersions depending upon the dispersed phase as well
as continuous phase. For example, if the dispersed phase is gas and continuous phase is
liquid, the dispersion may be a foam. Similarly, when the dispersed phase is liquid,
continuous phase is gas, dispersion may be fog or aerosol. When both dispersed phase
and continuous phase are liquid, dispersion may be an emulsion. When the dispersed
phase is solid, continuous phase is gas, dispersion may be a smoke, or a powder. Finally,if the dispersed phase is solid and continuous phase is liquid, the dispersion may be a
suspension or a sol. 
Another important thing in the food is emulsions i.e. emulsions may be present in two
forms; either oil in water or water in oil. Here again, milk is a good example. The fat
which is present in the natural milk is an emulsion of oil in water, but when this fat is
separated from the milk in the cream or then cream is further converted into butter, the
phase changes. There it becomes an emulsion of water in oil.
Small molecules or ions such as sugars and salts are usually dispersed in true solutions in
food. Large molecules such as protein and cooked starch are colloidally dispersed. Large
fat globules and uncooked starch granules form suspension. Various techniques and
treatments which are given to food during processing and preparation such as heating,
beating, homogenization or adding acid or any other treatment to which food come
across  during  handling,  processing,  distribution,  etc.  may  change  the  degree  of
dispersion. This  change  in  the  degree  of  dispersion  may  bring  about  different  changes  in  the
characteristics and properties of the final food and that what actually happens i.e. how
the changes take place in the food properties during processing and handling. Dispersed
particle may become more finely divided or may become more aggregated. Colloidal
dispersions in food are generally stabilized by Brownian movement of the dispersed
particle by like charges on the dispersed particles as well as by water of hydration around
the  particles.  Colloidal  substances  may  also  stabilize  other  suspended  hydrophobic
particles  by  forming  a  hydrophobic  coating  on  their  surfaces.  So,  the  surface
phenomenon plays a very important role in the food dispersion systems.
Surface active agents may be used to decrease surface or interfacial tensions by allowing
the mixing of two immiscible liquids such as fat in water. A surface active agent acts as a
bridge between fat and water because it has both hydrophilic polar and hydrophobic non
polar  groups  as  part  of  its  chemical  structure.  Water  is  a  unique  molecule  and  an
important constituent of the food. It serves as dispersion medium in most food systems.
It promotes ionization and provides a medium for applying heat because of its relatively
high boiling point.
HLB that is Hydrophile Lipophile Balance value, it is an important characteristic of a
small molecules surfactant. HLB value of 7 means the substance is soluble both in oil
and in water. Substances which have lower HLB values are generally soluble in oil.
Surfactants with HLB value more than 7 are used for oil-in-water emulsions whereas
surfactants with HLB less than 7 are used for water-in-oil emulsions. Food processing is a highly complex multidisciplinary activity involving the application
of  chemistry,  biochemistry,  biophysics,  microbiology,  mathematics  and  different
branches of engineering. Today, consumer has increased concern regarding food safety
and sensory qualities which need to find techniques for development of the minimally
processed foods with least distortions to the profile of the food during processing. After
the processing is complete, packaging, storage and distribution come into picture. 
Food  processing  ensures  generation  of  traditional  employment  through  forward  and
backward linkages, employment mostly done in rural areas. Food processing also helps
in reduction of wastages, it helps in increasing the farmer’s income by getting better
prices. It ensures consumers’ welfare by increasing availability of food.An  overview  of  the  current  and  likely  future  trends  in  food  processing:  The  food
processing techniques are utilized to maintain quality, prevent spoilage and reduce the
risk of food poisoning to a greater or lesser degree. The procedures themselves alter the
characteristics of food products; sometimes, in such a way as to generate completely
novel  food  but  sometimes,  in  the  direction  of  quality  reduction  particularly  when
compared with the fresh counterpart. Over the last few decades, therefore, the food
processing research has been increasingly concerned with the development of improved
means  of  technologies  for  minimizing  this  quality  reduction  while  maintaining
satisfactory  keepability  and  safety.  A  general  and  continuing  trend  is  towards  the
development of processing technologies that are less severe and therefore, less damaging
to the product quality.
There are trends towards more natural, less additive based preservation and foods that
are nutritionally healthier i.e., they contain less salt, less sugar, less saturated fats, more
polyunsaturated fats and have low calorie contents, etc.. Most of these current and likely
future trends have important implications for food preservations because many of them;
for  example,  less  heat,  less  drying,  less  sugar,  less  acid,  less  use  of  additives,
unfortunately make effective preservation more difficult to attain. 
Reduction in the severity of some techniques has been successfully attained but there is
clearly much greater potential and given the current pressure and incentives, there is no
doubt that improved techniques will be derived. But, the rate at which the improvement
occur will depend more and more on a sound understanding of the basis of the currently
used techniques from which most of the new and improved means will be derived rather
than on empiricism.
In any food product manufacturing and preparation, certain ingredients are needed. The
raw material might not be available in the form in which they are to be processed. So, it
might require certain preparation or primary processing like cleaning, sorting, grading,
peeling,  slicing,  etc.  After  the  ingredients  are  prepared,  they  are  scaled  as  per  the
formulation. Most of the food processes require mixing of one or the other kind. It may
be mixing of solid to solid, solid into liquid, liquid into gas and so on. After mixing, they
are processed and packaged. In some cases, the foods might be subjected to secondary
processing as well as secondary packaging and finally warehousing and storage. For the development of a food product; first the need or opportunity is to be identified,
some surveys might be conducted. Depending upon engineering as well as financial
resources, how the demand can actually be met is to be conceptualized. This concept is
then tested in laboratory. If it passes the laboratory test, it can be further proceeded to
market production. Sometimes, it so happens that the concept passes in the laboratory,
but when taken for the pilot or large scale production, it fails. This is mainly because, in
the laboratory study, the parameters are optimized on the smaller sample size. In such
cases, the concept should be revised or altogether a new concept should be developed
and tested using the similar procedure. It is to be made sure that while making a product,
one should not spend too much time in all these process. Otherwise in today’s highly
competitive world, one keeps on testing and doing these and some of the competitor may
bring a similar product in the market. 