Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 18
Radio Frequency Heating
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:28)
Well  friends,  now  let  us  study  another  form  of  dielectric  heating  which  is  radio
frequency heating. In fact, it is also known as high frequency dielectric heating. It refers
to the heating of dielectric materials with electromagnetic energy at frequencies between
1 and 300 megahertz. 
Here in this case, food is placed between electrodes and a radio frequency voltage is
applied across the electrode. It involves the transfer of electromagnetic energy directly
into the product and thereby it induces this dielectric electromagnetic energy that is
directly put into the product, it induces volumetric heating which is mainly because of
the  frictional  interaction  between  the  molecule.  So,  as  far  as  the  heating  process
mechanism is concerned it is almost similar to that in the microwave, but the generation
and operation etcetera or type of the system there are certain differences. 
It has higher penetration power than microwaves. Radio frequency heating allows greater
concentration of heat energy, selectively  in the location  of heating and accuracy in
control of heating duration, it is also better here in this case than that of the microwave.Thickness  of the food, however, is restricted  by the distance between the capacitor
plates.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:39)
Let us see the principle of radio frequency heating. It is also almost in the similar fashion
like that in the microwave heating. Here is space charge polarization or orientation
polarization are the phenomena, that is the molecular re orientation and friction due to
continuous  realignment  of the molecules  or ionic movement  towards  the oppositely
charged electrodes, and rapid change in polarity causes the resistive heating equivalent of
the ionic conduction of the electricity. So, this is the principle of the radio frequency
heating.  (Refer Slide Time: 03:38)
Regarding  the  mechanism  of  course  here  in  this  case,  the  electromagnetic  energy
transfers directly into the product therefore, it induces volumetric heating due to the
frictional interaction between the molecules.
The food is placed between two capacitor plates and it plays the role of the dielectric
where high frequency alternating electric field is applied. In fact, the capacitor plates
they  are  the  one  that  is  which that  is  where  the  dielectric  is  applied  and where a
frequency is they just pass the energy to the food. Such field will force polar molecule
that water to constantly realign themselves with the electric field and this molecular
movement is very fast due to high frequency of the field. And it will cause the generation
of heat within the food by energy dissipation caused by the molecular friction. So, this is
how the heat is generated inside.(Refer Slide Time: 05:02)
Regarding  the  equipment,  radio  frequency  heating  equipment,  the  fundamental
components  include  a  generator  and an applicator.  The generator  is  mainly  for the
generation of the radio frequency waves whereas, the applicator is for the application of
the RF power to the food and its main part is the electrodes. You can see here in this
figure there is electrode here, that is insulating tube here, the food material is kept here
these are the flange hold electrode and of course, the radio frequency generator is here.
So, the radio frequency that is the regenerated here it is passed through these electrode
and through this electrode then it is sent to the product, right.
So, the shape of the electrode determines the shape of the generated field. Rod electrodes
and plate electrodes are the common types of electrode which are used in this radio
frequency heating. The electric field strength is determined by the frequency, applied
voltage and distance of the electrode. The distance of the electrode of course, is limited
by the applied voltage, you cannot keep it at a very large distance. That is what are the
voltage applied; within that region that, so that it can pass the transmit the energy. The
maximum electrode distance, thus the maximum product thickness is determined by the
necessity to avoid arcing between the two electrodes. So, these are the considerations for
deciding the electrode, for the heating potential etcetera of the process.(Refer Slide Time: 07:03)
RF heating like micro heating has several advantages, it results in rapid and uniform
heating process, it has a higher penetration depth, high efficiency, it results in short
residence times and no heat transfer surfaces, involvement of no heat transfer surfaces.
So, it generally results into better quality products and more efficient processes. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:36)
It  can  be  applied  extensively  in  various  food  process  operations  for  both  for  the
preservation purposes, for improvement in the quality, for improvement in the process
efficiency. That is, it has common application like in any other heat process it can also beused for drying purposes, for pasteurization, for blanching thawing, for meat processing,
sterilization, for even baking or even toasting of the after baking the heating of the bread
etcetera. So, it has a wide ranging application in food processing, for preparation of the
products or for the improvement in the quality of the product. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:24)
Some report in the literature, that is reference you can see here. That is for what are the
successful  applications  of  radio  frequency  heating  in  food  processing,  like  for  the
thawing of the frozen foods the frequencies ranging between 14 to 40 megahertz have
been applied by various researchers on various products like in egg, fruit, vegetable, fish,
meat etcetera.
For tempering of the meat, radio frequency in the range of 10 to 300 megahertz has been
applied. For post baking drying of the bakery products, around 25, 27 megahertz has
been applied successfully, in cookies, crackers, snack, foods etcetera. For pasteurization
of meat, cured ham, sausages, emulsion etcetera, the radio frequency of the ranging from
9 to 60 megahertz has been used. 
For cooking purposes in the case of ham applied around 14 megahertz RF frequency is
used. For roasting,  there  is  of cocoa  bean is  successful has  been  applied  by some
researchers alright. And using as electro technology application centre and the radio
frequency they have reported is to the range of 60 megahertz. So, these data show
heating can be successfully applied for different food processing operations.(Refer Slide Time: 10:27)
So, now we will take a few cases and we will see that what is, how effective it is and
some advantages of it. For example, in the radio frequency drying you can see in this
picture this is the typical decreasing drying time. You can see here in this figure that the
same level of moisture content the time required in radio frequency heating is reduced to
more than 2 and 3 times, that is very less. So, it can be the desired operation that is it
becomes  very  very  advantageous  process  for  drying,  the  process  efficiency  can  be
improved,  right  even  drying  rate  is  increased  significantly  in  comparison  with  the
conventional drying processes and of course, the drying rate is increased, drying time is
reduced. So, the process results into the energy saving.
Moreover, in some applications it improves the product quality and the improvement in
the product quality that is the degree of improvement we get in the product quality it
justifies actually the even little more cost, involvement of the cost its higher cost, capital
investment etcetera or energy generation cost etcetera that can be overcome by having
greater or bigger product advantages. (Refer Slide Time: 12:08)
The another interesting application of radio frequency is the radio frequency assisted
fluidized bed drying. Fluidization would result in more uniform exposure of particulates
to electromagnetic energy. These are the in the figure some fluidized based RF drying
systems are shown. The radio frequency dryer has proven to be effective when it is fitted
after  the  conventional  baking  ovens.  And  this  results  actually  in  the  better  quality
products if it is fitted that is a small unit of the radio frequency if it is fitted in the baking
line after the baking oven, right it controls the moisture of the product more accurately,
and more uniformly, and which gives the added benefits to the product quality.
Fresh pasta is pre-dried in hot air to 18 percent moisture content and then it can be sent
to the combined system that is where this both hot air as well as RF are available for
drying. So, from then in the second stage in the combined system that it is thorough RF
drying this moisture content is brought down to 13 percent. So, if these are the suggested
if these two stage drying that is the conventional hot air drying followed by radio
frequency drying if it is used. Quality of pasta is improved, characteristics of the pasta is
improved significantly. 
And again few researches they have worked and they have come up with the data results,
suggested that drying times are reduced from 8 hours to 90 minutes, bacterial counts it
reduces by 15 times, there is reduction in energy consumption to the tune of 20 to 25
percent, drying tunneling various system may be 36 to 48 meter into 8 meters, clean uptime is reduced to 24 to 6 person hours, no case hardening in the product. So, in the
different  application  for  different  purposes  that  is  people  have  suggested  that  this
becomes a better and efficient process.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:02)
Radiofrequency assisted thawing, it becomes a rapid means of thawing of the meat and
sea foods. It enhances the product freshness quality, it is more suitable for industrial
heating of meats. Radio frequency has greater penetration depth than the microwave. So,
it has a better possibility of applying the industrial heating of the muscles etcetera. By
suitable radiofrequency treatment, thawing of meat block to within a target temperature
range of minus 1 to plus 5 degree Celsius is feasible that is without much increase in the
temperature of the muscle, thawing is possible. 
In some experiments, when this frozen white fish was thawed in a 6 kilowatt commercial
scale RF unit operated at frequencies ranging from 36 to 40 megahertz. The duration of
RF heating was reduced to few minutes compared to 16 hours in air based thawing
system or 3 hours in water based thawing system. And this radio frequency thawing
resulted in less drip loss and better odour and flavor.(Refer Slide Time: 16:30)
Radio  frequency  energy  can  be  used  for  baking  purposes,  RF  heating  has  a  good
application in baking industry. The addition of relatively small, as I told you earlier a
small RF unit to the end of conventional baking line results in substantial increase in the
product yield and improve the product quality.
The  post  baking  of  biscuits  like  cookies  etcetera  result  in  the  completely  uniform
moisture profile in the product, and this capability enables the baker to increase the oven
line speed and develop the desired crumb structure and even desired color, texture in the
products so on.(Refer Slide Time: 17:29)
It has good application in meat processing, I explained earlier. It reduces cooking times
up to 1 by 25 of the conventional cooking times in water bath. RF heating results in the,
results  of  the  RF  heating  indicated  that  the  surface  of  the  radio  frequency  cooked
products are heated at a faster rate than the centre. The radio frequency cooked samples
had lower juice losses and they have also acceptable colour, they have acceptable water
holding capacity that is the product cooked or heated by radio frequency heating, they
have better acceptability in the terms of their colour, water holding capacity etcetera.
The textural attributes of the RF cooked whole muscle meat are significantly better than
that  of  the  water  bath  cooked  samples.  The  RF  cooked  ground  beef  had  higher
springiness, chewiness lower hardness than that in the water bath cooked samples. So, all
these results indicate that, yes it has a good potential, it can be applied for meat cooking.(Refer Slide Time: 19:01)
Similarly, it can be used for the post-harvest treatment and dis-infestation of the fruits,
several results indicate that the insects can be easily killed by this RF heating, right and
therefore, they can be used for increasing the shelf life of the grains all right, they can be
used for fumigation of the vapor all those commodity which are likely to be spoiled by
this disinfestation. 
And the better application will be are the dried fruits etcetera, the dried fruits etcetera
sometime support the growth of insect in it. So, they can be, ok. So, the processors in
fact, are seeking alternative to some more traditional fumigation agents. So, here this RF
heating provides an alternative source.
The loss factors of the radio frequency are common of common pest insects has larger
than that of the fruit nut. So, it shows that the fruit nut without causing the heating of the
fruit nut one can kill the insect and then it becomes a good precaution without destroying
the or without raising the temperature of the heating etcetera, its bioactives (Refer Time:
20:35) can be retained this. (Refer Slide Time: 20:44)
Another there is that is RFID tags, they have wide ranging application not only in food
processing industry but also in other industries, but in the food frosting also they have a
good application.
Radio frequency identification tags, they work much like a barcode or uniquely identify
a large number of products. The RFID component of the tag have two parts that is one a
microchip that stores the process information, and then an antenna which receives and
transmits  a  signal.  They  can  incorporate  additional  information  like  details  of  the
product, and manufacturer, they can transmit the measured environmental factors such as
temperature etcetera, temperature, relative humidity etcetera or they can be used to for
the tracing the products, for recording the information. So, for various useful operation
etcetera, so this can be used for different food processing industry.(Refer Slide Time: 22:02)
This  RFID  tag has the potential  to increase  efficiency  of operations, improve asset
visibility, traceability, decrease reliance on manual processes, reduce operational cost
and provide useful data for business analytics. And in fact, theoretically it is possible to
trace the product back all the way of every raw material that went into the product, went
in to the product, what are the characteristics, all these things might be possible by
application of the RFID. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:46)
So, let us briefly that is compare between that RF and microwave heating. The RF
heating product should be of regular and simple in shape whereas, in the case of micro
wave heating there is no limitation of the shape of the product. In RF heating normally
lower  frequencies  and  longer  penetration  depth  are  there,  in  the  microwave  higher
frequencies and lower penetration depth are involved. RF heating no wave guide and
there is uniform field distribution, in the case of microwave heating, there is wave guide
and complex non-uniform standing wave patterns. RF heating is normally a directional
heating, unidirectional heating, and microwave is a uniform all directional heating. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:57)
Also, there are similarities  between RF and microwave heating. RF and microwave
heating  both  are  rapid  and  volumetric.  Radio  frequency  waves  and  microwaves
transferred to treated products by radiation, both RF and microwave heating take place
due to the polarization effect of the electromagnetic field radiation. 
Both radio frequency and microwave systems are capable of instantaneously applying
and removing the heat source. Microwave systems have been recognized to be 50 to 70
percent  heating  efficient  in comparison with 10 percent  heating  efficiency  with the
conventional ovens. Both microwave and RF heating are non-ionizing radiations. (Refer Slide Time: 25:10)
It is a pictorial comparison between the microwave and radio frequency dryers you can
see here, in the microwave as we already discussed in the earlier class, it has a generator
all right and through this, microwaves are generated through with the help of waveguide
and they are passed here and this internal heating. 
Whereas, in the case of radio frequency dryer you can see that is, there is a RF generator
this RF voltage is passed through these two electrodes and the food is held between in
these two electrodes. So, it is electromagnetic radiation which enters into the food and
then it gets heated internally. So, this shows the clear-cut differentiation between the
working principles of these two processes.(Refer Slide Time: 26:11)
Radio frequency heating is advantageous in many ways, it has or it results in increased
throughput and or shorter process lines. It has improved energy efficiency, improved
control, is a contactless heating, the equipment is simpler in construction, and space
saving it does not require lot of space for its working, it has increased power penetration
improved moisture leveling and uniform moisture distribution and improved food quality
through selective heating. So, the best thing is that you can maintain the quality of the
heating or heated product or quality of the processed products.
This, friends, now in these two lectures, in this lecture and in the earlier lecture, we have
seen that how  this dielectric  heating  it has a great  potential  in application  of food
processing industries. Both the radio frequency heating and microwave heating, they can
be used for various purposes in the food industry. They can be used successfully for the
advantages to the both industry, to the consumer they can be used for extending the shelf
life of the food materials, they can be used for processing or for making good quality
product, for value addition to the product for improving the process efficiency and so on.
However, these processes need to be applied or used of course, with the caution that is
because here that  the equipment  etcetera  should be properly designed and properly
constructed.
Thank you.