Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 15
Food Irradiation: Part 1
Hi  friends.  Today,  we  will  study  about  Food  Irradiation.  This  lecture  will  also  be
conducted in two parts; part 1, we will cover about the again process principles and
technological aspects of food irradiation. Whereas, the 2nd part of the lecture that is the
lecture  16,  we  will  cover  the  effect  of  food  irradiation  on  the  constituents  and
characteristics of the food as well as which will also take up some application as for that
is what are the different types of food where these irradiation treatments can be done. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:15)
You know, hope that there are several radiation types which have the characteristic
ability to ionize individual atoms or molecules, there by producing an electron and a
positively charged ion. As you could see in this figure, there is one high energy photon is
bombarding on this atom and there is an electron which receives the energy and then it is
gets ejected from the orbital and obviously, accordingly that is a positively charged, that
is the molecule are atom is formed and an electron is produced.
This symbol shows the symbol of the irradiation and the photon is then for what with the
reduced energy. In fact, this is the in fact, the Compton effect is shows this that whenatom is bombarded by and that by irradiation, a positively charged ion and a negatively
charged ion is produced. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:55)
And this is the characteristics ability of the ionizing radiations. That is the such type of
radiations which when they interact with the material and produce ions may be positive
ion or negative ions, they are called ionizing radiations. These ionizing radiations as I
told you, interact with an irradiated material by transferring the energy to electrons and
these electrons they after getting the energy, get raised to a high energy or excited state
and if the transferred energy is large enough that negatively charge electronic can leave a
molecule and therefore, it gives a positive ion. 
So, irradiation creates about one ionization for every two excitations. But, because the
ionizations are about a thousand times as likely to cause chemical changes the biological
effects caused by the radiations are almost entirely due to this ionization effect. The
ejected electron moves through surrounding materials and loses its energy by creating
further excited and positive ions. 
Eventually, in the process the electron is captured by a positive ion and is trapped by a
structure to form a negative ion which in turn combines with a positive ion. And, it is this
ability of ionizing radiations to create positive and negative ions is its characteristic and
it is used for beneficial purposes in food processing operations. (Refer Slide Time: 05:17)
There are several types of ionizing radiations. It maybe electromagnetic radiation, there
is a gamma rays and x rays. Gamma rays are generally produced by decay of certain
radioactive elements like cobalt 60; they have range of energies. 
X rays, they can be produced by a fast moving particle such as electrons etcetera and
they are bombarded on suitable target materials, then these are produced and they have
range of energies. The other type of ionizing radiations may be particulate radiations like
electrons, alpha particles, protons and neutrons, etcetera and the energy values contained
in these electromagnetic  radiations  particularly  gamma rays and x rays are of such
magnitude that for every ionizations, there is once it creates ionization, once it comes in
contact with the food material, there are for every primary ionization there are secondary
ionization tertiary ionization etcetera. 
And, the biological effect that is obtained in the food materials that is mainly because of
the secondary ionization and tertiary ionization etc, not much because of the absorbed
energy that is absorbed energy it causes the ionization, but other chemical effects in the
food constituents, another things are because of the secondary and the secondary and
tertiary ions which are produced due to this irradiation process. 
The gamma rays, x rays and beta rays, they can travel into the mass too little deeper.
Because of their mass, they can go deep into the taken penetrate deep into the material
and therefore, they have low linear energy transfer. Linear energy transfer that is calledLET value is that measure of the energy per distance travelled in the biological materials.
So, since whatever the energy they are containing it is a dissipated over a long path
because they can penetrate deep into the materials. 
So, the per distance energy dissipated is low. So, they are characterized by having low
LET therefore, sparsely ionizing. On the other hand, the alpha particles, protons etcetera
because of their high mass, they are frequently a stopped by the biological materials and
they are not able to penetrate deep into the materials. And due to this their energy is
dissipated over a small path and therefore, that is they have high LET value and high
LET value means they are densely ionizing. 
So, these are the characteristics of these ionizing radiations which becomes beneficial in
the process optimization purposes. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:09)
In this slide, you can see the radiation spectrum which is normally used in regard to the
frequency of the waves per second are energy of one photon and the radiations which are
used for food processing like x rays, gamma rays etcetera normally towards the higher
side that is having 10 to the power 16 and more, there is a frequency waves per second. (Refer Slide Time: 09:37)
Regarding the unit of measurement like we defined the dose of the radiation received by
the food materials because this becomes an important consideration in finalizing the food
irradiation processes that is what is the amount of dose that is required for a particular
operation for a particular purpose. So, the dose is the quantity of radiation absorbed by
the food. In the unit which is normally in fact, it as a older unit in the older days, in the
food process operations just to discuss are say that is unit of measurement of radiation is
generally used was rad.
Rad is radiation absorbed dose. And one rad equals the deposition of 100 ergs per gram
in the irradiated sample. Since that, there are certain some microorganism in some food
process operations that is they require there is little higher energy particularly when the
microorganisms etcetera, they are inactivation are involve. So, expressing this in terms of
rad was becoming little higher showing their little higher value. So, and recently and
another unit was into dose that is gray 1 gray is equal to 100 rad. So, in this, so, that units
become this so, but it is almost this same. (Refer Slide Time: 11:21)
In this slide, I have tried to show you that what is the effect of radiation and living
organism and they are lethal that is they have lethal effect radiations and potential lethal
effect of radiations was realized soon after the discovery of x rays by Roentgen and
radioactivity by Becquerel in the late 19th century. And it was established that the dose
of radiation required to produce a lethal effect varies with the compact complexity of the
organism. 
The most complex organisms tend to be most sensitive to radiation and which you can
see in this line diagram that is while the human beings which are considered to be the
most complex systems biological material, they can be destroyed, they can be killed only
by  the  exposure  to  a  few  hundreds  of  rads.  Whereas,  some  sterilization  of  some
microorganism single cell microorganisms etcetera, it is requires millions are millions of
rad, there is 2 to 10 to the powers 7.
So, the most complex is the system or most complex is the biological system, it is more
sensitive to ionizing radiations. (Refer Slide Time: 13:03)
Now, let us see how does this ionizing radiation work? So, there are two mechanisms of
their action have been proposed; one is the direct action mechanism, another is the
indirect action mechanism. In the direction action mechanism, it is assumed that it is said
that the radiation it is directly hits the target that is may be the genetic materials or DNA
etcetera of the molecule. 
So, the chemical events are there as a result of the energy deposition on the target
molecule, DNA etcetera and this theory is applicable that is a shown by the way on the
microorganisms  etcetera  which  are  single  cell  microorganism  single  cell.  And  the
microbial that is destruction kinetics of the microorganisms etcetera through a radiations
that is explains this are fits into this mechanism. But, this mechanism this direct action
mechanism does not holds true for the multi cellular organisms, if unless we assume that
this is multi cellular organism are a single entity. 
But in this case, the indirect action mechanism appears to be more correct where radicals
are formed from their maybe either by radiolysis of the water or the reactions originating
outside the cells that is radiation that is radiations they hit not the target molecule. But,
they does they are effect, they do they are effect the outside the cell on another and then
it ultimately effects maybe there ionization etcetera which you could see. And this multi
cellular organism, they get destroyed by indirect action mechanism. Now,  of  course,  that  is  electrons  disrupt  the  DNA  chain  either  destroy  or  prevent
reproduction of the organisms and the living cells like they cause sprouting and spoilage
in the biological material etcetera, food etcetera, they get a spoilt by microbial action or
by enzymatic process also that is physiological process in certain fruits and vegetable
result to there is sprouting which is not desirable for their good quality. So, this DNA
damage also may delay the spoilage or it may prevent the sprouting, it may promote
longer shelf life etcetera.
So, this is the way how this ionizing radiations work on the food systems or on the
biological material and do their job. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:53)
So, let us say technological aspect of the irradiation as you can see in this picture that is
where that this sample of the food material packaged or unpackaged is taken to through
appropriate means to a source of radiation, alright. Means that is in the may in this
technology is that food is exposed to control energy, that is ionizing radiations and the
normal types of ionizing radiations which are used in food processing are gamma rays
produced normally from cobalt 60 source, X rays with energies up to 5 milli cobalt volt
and electrons up to 10 MeV. 
And  these  radiations  arising  radiations,  they  kill  micro  organisms,  they  inactivate
proteins,  enzymes  or  they  destroy  other  causative  agents  or  inhibitory  factors  to  a
spoilage without raising the temperature of the food means that is it is considered to be acold process, non thermal process. However, one has to take care the contamination can
occur post the treatment. So, after the food material is exposed to the irradiation, one
must  properly  take  care  that  is  the  re  it  should  not  come  again  in  contact  with
microorganisms etcetera. So, recontamination should be avoided. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:53)
Otherwise, the purpose whole purpose of the process will be defeated. The different
doses depending upon the requirement of the process, depending upon actually what is
the  objective  of  the  process  different  doses  are  given  to  the  food  material  and
accordingly,  the  processes  are  different  given  different  names.  Like  in  the  case  of
thermal  processing, in the thermal processing we have pasteurization  process and a
sterilization process or blanching process depending upon the intensity of the heat given
to food material.
Similarly,  here  we  have  Rappertization,  Radurization  and  Radicidation.
Radappertization, you can say that it is a radiation sterilization that is complete removal
of the microorganisms or biological forms of the causative agents is targeted here. So
obviously, this process needs higher dose maybe to the tune of 4.5 million rad or even
more. It a sterilizers the food by killing the bacteria, viruses etcetera and in the low acid
food  or  in  the  other  foods  here  also  that  is  this  process  normally  is  based  on the
destruction of the, destruction kinetics of the a spores of Clostridium botulinum.However,  this  may  be  a  specific  to  different  foods  like  low  acid  ,  that  acidity
classification another things which are applicable in thermal processing. Similar type of
things are applicable here also. Radurization is the radiation, Pasteurization of course, it
needs medium dose maybe to the tune of 100 to 1000 kilo rad and here that is about 90
percent  destruction  of  the  organism  of  sometime  only  there  is  the  pathogenic
microorganisms  etcetera  or  only  spoilage  like  with  disease  causing  bacteria  or
microorganisms may be targeted or, there is the processes like a sprouting, fruit ripening
etcetera may take place in this dose and of course, the insects can be inactivated. 
The other term is the Radicidation which is a comparatively lower dose particular may
be in the range of 400 to 600 kilo rad. It kills most pathogens and many food spoilage
organisms  insects  and parasites  and in  fact, it  is  very very  suitable  process  that  is
radicidation basically targeted towards the killing or killing of the salmonella and which
is a food poisoning micro organism which more frequently effects that poultry and
poultry bird or etcetera. So, it is a used there is low level low dose irradiation can be used
to a sterilize or to kill salmonella in poultry array and etcetera and make it more suitable. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:07)
Now, the of course, as a we saw an earlier slide also, we discuss earlier that this ionize
ionizing  radiations  or  irradiation  of  food  can  prevent  food  poisoning  by  killing
pathogenic or toxin producing microorganism like E coli, Salmonella, Campylobacter,
Parasites, etcetera. It can prevent spoilage of the food materials by destroying moldsbacteria, yeast, etcetera. It controls insects and parasite infestation. It increases shelf life
by slowing down the ripening of fresh, fruits and vegetables means it has got several
beneficial effects. Of course, we will take up this issue again in the second part of the
lecture little in detail that is application of the irradiation on food. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:09)
So, another important consideration is the how to stabilize, that is a stabilizing radiation
stabilization process for food. So, means that is the, so that the food becomes room
temperature stable. It is all the biological processes which are detoriative processes are
stopped. So obviously, as in the case of any process, even in the heat treatment etcetera is
that the food may be stabilized by inactivating the microorganisms and enzymes or in
broader  sense  that  is  the  causative  or  biological.  And  other  factors  which  cause  a
spoilage or food or produced toxin in food and then more importantly protecting the
stabilized food from recontamination and their access to oxygen. 
That is once they are treated with the ionizing radiations care proper care should be taken
that, post treatment they are not again exposed to contaminated environment or they are
not exposed to oxygen environment,  oxygen rich environment. Otherwise, oxidative
reactions another reactions may take place there and they may again there is the spoil the
food. So, the stabilization of food with ionizing radiations accordingly involves two
major considerations.Number one; that is the characteristics of the food and number two, there is a suitable
source of radiation that is the characteristic of the food that is it is acidity it is moisture
content, it is other components present in the there is the polymers etcetera and the form
in which that macro molecules and other things are present that in fact, decides or that
dictates that what type of microorganism will be grow in a particular food or which will
not grow. 
So that, the on the basis of the food characteristics you try it the data of the food and it is
information about microorganisms another things which we it can support is needed to
establish that yes, the process radiation process that is how much energy is regrediation
energy is required to be given for a specific purpose. So, the food characteristics where
and then, other than suitable radiation source that; obviously, that is you should have a
good source for to produce the radiation or ionizing radiation. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:03)
Regarding  the  food  characteristics;  obviously,  suppose  the  process  is  based  on  the
destruction of microorganism. So, microbial death kinetics or in other words if it is on
the based on the enzymes, the enzametric that kinetics etcetera is to be considered all
right. 
So, the death of the microorganism basically when exposed to radiation can be evaluated
by plotting. Logarithm of the fraction of survival organisms against dose as in the case of
thermal processing also, this similar things we do here and we can see here in this plotthat ln n by n0 when plotted against dose in the red. It gives a linear relationship. It means
that for a given dose for equal doses the microbial population is decreased by a given
factor in this equation, n is equal to n 0 e to the power minus d by d 0.
 n is the number of live organisms after the irradiation; n 0 is the initial number of
organisms present in the food material; D is the dose of radiation received by the food; D
0 is the constant depending upon the type of the organism and environmental factor all
right and it is generally considered to be factor that which are radiation dose which
causes 63 percent death or death of the 63 percent of the organism available. Of course,
depending upon the process several other factors can also be considered, like D 10 value
a value causing a reduction n number of factor of microorganism reduction by a factor of
10. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:59)
Then, there are that is to decide the dose given we need to understand that how, what are
the  different  factor  that  affect  are  that  influence  the  radiation  sensitivity  of  the
microorganisms and both you can see here there both the environmental factor as well as
the  physiological  and  genetic  differences  between  the  strains  and  cultures  of
microorganism can affect the it is radiation sensitivity. The major factors in this regard
include type of the radiation, dose rate, presence or absence of oxygen in the irradiating
medium, state of the food and temperate. (Refer Slide Time: 27:49)
As for as the type of the radiation is concerned, it has no significant effect on the dose
response; in immaterial whether the irradiation is given in the form of a radiation energy
is given right in the form of electrons or X rays or gamma rays. At least, required amount
of energy has to be given right to the food for the desired use. Regarding dose rate that is
the intensity of the radiation, again amount of the radiation absorbed by the cell per unit
time it is the dose rate and it again does not seem to effect the sensitivity. 
That is required amount of energy has to be given to the material forgetting desired
output, right whether it is given at a fast rate or it given at a slow rate doesn’t matter. Of
course, it might influence the other environmental factors like for example, that is the
increase in the temperature etcetera during radiation. Presence of oxygen again does not
have a significant effect on the microbial sensitivity and the microbial requirement or it
is influence process of killing by the micro organism as the pH and the type of medium
in which the microorganisms are irradiated to ok. However, the oxygen, presence or
absence of oxygen may have other influence on the other chemical reactions.(Refer Slide Time: 29:33)
Instead of the food in which it is irradiated, it does irradiation in the dehydrated form
may  be  beneficial.  Irradiation  in the  frozen  state  reduces  radio  sensitivity  of some
microorganisms. So, a sterilization of food in the frozen state may require little greater
dose but it minimizes the chemical and other flavor changes in the food. As for as the
temperature is concerned, it has effect on the sterilization requirement and this effect
there is effect of temperature on the radio sensitivity of microorganisms are for the basis
of the potential combination processes utilizing both the heat and radiation.
Because there are certain agents microorganism and enzyme certain microorganisms are
more sensitive to irradiation, but stable to heat and vice versa. So, a suitable process that
is the process can be combined that is the give a low heat treatment and followed by
irradiation or radiation treatment followed by heat treatment can be given to have the
beneficial effect. And at the same time, if you use very high temperature, it has it is it is
it is own effects are only the effects into the food component. (Refer Slide Time: 31:07)
Regarding food irradiators and sources, there are normally two types of sources; one is
the radio isotope source, another we will see in the next slide in the machine source. In
the radio isotope source, presently commonly that is most commonly the cobalt 60 radio
isotope is used. It emits a two electrons that is a two radiations having energy value 1.33
and 1.17 MeV. It is has a half life 5.27 years, it is produced in a plaque source consisting
of flat a strips which may contain more than 10000 curie per strip and several such a
strips can be assembled together in may be and it wafer a steel wafers or other such
material wafers that is they can put and that is number of a strips are assembled by
remote controlled operations.
 And the source is immersed in deep food that is may be 25 feet or more deep storage
pool  of water when  not in use,  as  just to  prevent  the escape of radiation  into  the
environment etcetera. So, cobalt 60 is used presently but Caesium 137 can also be used it
has also good potential for application in food processing. (Refer Slide Time: 32:41)
The other machine sources, there are several types of a linear accelerators which have
been produced. We can generate electrons etcetera which you there is a they can generate
beta rays or x rays right and this of course, they are machine sources that produce no
wasye outside the machine which is used to produce these radiations and here as you
could see in this two picture diagram, that is electron is accelerated by an electron gun.
Similar to a TV tube, accelerating the electrons towards the a screen and it can be turned
on and off when not in use are when to be used and electron beams can only penetrate
about of course, little, that is one inch into the material. Here you see, that the working
principle of a two commonly used accelerators like linear accelerator and electrostatic
accelerator is shown here in this. In the case of electrostatic accelerator, electron row
through a high voltage terminal, they come down to high vacuum discharge tube and
they are accelerated finally, they are scanned to cover a target area. 
So, you can see here that is the when the food is coming, it will; so, in the next slide,
how the when the food comes, it will be exposed or this area. In the linear accelerators,
electron pulse they is a accelerated as it moves downwards right and the it trapped in
waveguide, it is accelerated and electrons move through the with the higher velocities let
us with the radio frequency accelerator some also provide. So, in this case also, there is it
is scanned finally, through the scanner to cover the uniform ray area. (Refer Slide Time: 34:47)
In this slide, I have already covered, but it is gives a comparison of the two there is the
sources. There is the commonly used like cobalt 60 source electron beam and X rays,
there is cobalt 60. It has a high penetrating power, permanent radioactive source, high
efficiency source replacement needed after sometime and when this energy is and then,
low throughput. Whereas, the electron beams or X rays, they have the electron beams has
a low penetrating power. It has the switch on switch off capability, it has high efficiency
high throughput power and cooling is needed and technically complex process little bit X
rays have high penetrating power switch on, switch off capability is here also. They have
comparatively low efficiency high throughput and power and cooling needed. 
And of course, it is also like electron beams, technically there is complex process. (Refer Slide Time: 35:59)
So, in this it is a you see, there is a pictorial presentation. It is shows a gamma irradiation
facility, there is for the food irradiation. See here, there is it is a gamma irradiation means
cobalt 60 and it is kept here in the storage in the deep storage pool of the water and there
are all there is conveying system. The food material depending upon the type material in
the packaged form or even, unpackaged form also can be exposed to the irradiation. 
So, this is the loading area. So, the food is in the packaged form or unpackaged form it is
loaded depending upon the requirement and it goes through those it comes here into that.
So, that is here your irradiation room chamber is this and this material passes there are
shields radiation shields at different layers of that is the of the concrete walls and it. So,
takes a zigzag route, access route just to make sure that the radiation is not leak leaked to
the environment. So, this now depending upon the type of the food, depending upon the
requirement of the process, that is a speed of the conveyor belt etcetera is controlled to
when it comes here by a remote control operation that is the is source radiation source
comes above the water.
And this energy is given that is a gamma rays are exposed that food is exposed to the
gamma rays, alright. And here, in this that is towards that target areas. So, there are
infact systems where again there is this food can be exposed from both side to the
gamma rays and after it is exposed, after it is given the desired energy for the required
operation again it returns by and comes it is unloaded in this. So, this makes that this isbasic actually the technological how this technology and the industry and commercially,
how this process is applied. 
(Refer Slide Time: 38:21)
This slide gives you that is what are the foods that can be irradiated and of course, the
dose and purpose like low dose may be less than 1 k grey kilo grey can be used for a
sprouting, innovation, insect and parasite disinfestation, delay in ripening and healthy in
the case of potatoes, onions, garlic, cereals, pulses, dried, fruit, pork etcetera. Medium
dose maybe 1 to 10 kilo grey can be used for reduction of spoilage of strawberries.
Reduction of non spore pathogens and poultry and shell fish are may be 7 to 10 kilo grey
can be used, microbial reduction in dry products like herbs and spices. 
Of course, high dose or very high dose, there is particularly for sterilization purposes or
for elimination or viruses or viral contamination etcetera particularly to produce a sterile
diet meals and armira sense etcetera, may be towards that 25 to 50 or 10 to 100 kilo grey
can be used. 
So, friends well, so by now I think you we have seen that what are the different types of
ionizing radiations for, what purpose they can be used in to the food, what are the
different doses and how it actually works the sources of the, how can these ionizing
radiations can be produced. And at least some and you have given to you how these
processes etcetera can be optimized and depending upon the requirement, there is one
has to require that there is the process has to be optimized so that we get maximumdestruction of the causative agents with maximum retention of the food characteristics.
In  the  next  part  of  the  lecture,  we  will  see  the  effect  of  these  radiations  on  food
constituents and we will also take up a few examples on it is food application.
Thank you.