Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 11
High Pressure Processing of Food (Part – 1)
High pressure processing of foods is organized in two parts. In part 1, the process
principle and technological aspects of high pressure processing is discussed, whereas in
part 2, the effect of high pressure process parameters on food constituents and its quality
is included.
High pressure processing (HPP) is a novel method for non-thermal food processing. It is
receiving worldwide attention now and is a new concept as compared to the conventional
thermal processes. High pressure processing is also termed as hyperbaric pressure, ultra
high pressure, high hydrostatic pressure processing or pascalization, etc.
In HPP, the food is subjected to elevated pressure (up to 900 MPa or 9000 atm) with or
without the addition of heat to achieve microbial inactivation, enzymatic inactivation or
to alter the food attributes in order to achieve desired qualities.Process Principles
There are basically three principles involved in high pressure processing –
(i) Iso-static principle
It states that application of pressure is instantaneous and uniform throughout the
sample
(ii)Le Chatelier’s principles 
It  states  that  the  reaction  volume  change  is  influenced  by  high  pressure
applications  during  high  pressure  processing  and  this  change  result  into  the
volume decrease which is accelerated with the application of high pressure and
vice versa. 
(iii)Principle of microscopic reordering 
It states that at a constant temperature, increase in pressure increases the degree
of ordering of molecules. Therefore, pressure and temperature exert antagonistic
forces and molecular structure and chemical reactions.HPP Technology
As far as the technology of high pressure processing is concerned, normally the food
material is taken in a sterilized package/container. This packaged food material is loaded
in the pressure chamber of HPP equipment and then the desired pressure is applied. The
food material is held at the desired pressure for desired duration of time.  At the end, the
pressure is released to depressurize the chamber and the package is removed.
The schematic diagram of HPP equipment is shown (see Fig.) which consist of pressure
chamber/vessel  with  the  arrangements  for  heating,  cooling  to  hold the  product  and
suitable  type  of  pressure  pump  to  generate  high  pressure.  The  pressure  vessel  is
completely or properly sealed.
Pressure generation system
There are two types of pressure generation system which are used in the commercial
equipment of the high pressure processing (i) Direct compression system (ii) Indirect
compression system.
In the case of direct compression system (see Fig.), the compression fluid (normally
water) is loaded into the pressure chamber and then pressure vessel is closed at the
bottom and top. In direct compression system, a pressure vessel is provided with the
piston arrangement. The medium i.e. water inside the vessel is pressurized by piston with
the help of a low pressure pump to develop the desired pressure.
In case of indirect compression systems, the fluid is pressurized somewhere else i.e. in
pressure  medium  tank  and  then  this  pressurized  fluid  is  loaded  in  the  pressure
chamber/vessel of the HPP equipment through or with the help of an intensifier.  
Components of HPP system
The high pressure system is shown in the picture. The HPP system consist of following
components – 
(i)Pressure vessel of desired capacity.
(ii)Closure(s) for sealing the vessel.
(iii)Yoke – a device for holding the closure(s) in place while the vessel is under
pressure.
(iv)High pressure intensifier pumps to generate the high pressure(v)Pressure and temperature controlling and monitoring system.
(vi)Product and material handling system.
Packaging requirements for HPP
In the high pressure processing, the food product is generally treated in its final primary
package form resulting a ‘secure unit’ until the consumer opens it for the consumption.
Therefore,  the  packaging  material  which  is  undergoing  the  high  pressure  treatment
should withstand the pressure inside the vessel. Generally, foods decrease in volume as a
function of pressure during compression and almost an equal expansion occurs upon
decompression. Airtight flexible packages that can withstand a change in the volume
corresponding  to  the  compressibility  of  the  product  are  needed  in  HPP  system.  In
general, the packaging material must be able to accommodate up to 15% reduction in
volume and return to it is original volume without the loss of barrier properties after
decompression.The packaging material those are impermeable to oxygen and opaque to light should be
used to retain the fresh colour and flavour of the high pressure treated foods. Because the
oxidation reactions are normally in the high pressure processed foods which changes the
product characteristics in presence of the oxygen and light, e.g. plastic films - ethylene
vinyl alcohol (EVOH) or polyvinyl alcohol (PVOH) copolymer films are generally used.
Depending upon the material characteristics, sometimes the semi-rigid containers can
also be used. Vacuum packaged products are ideally suited for high pressure treatment.
The use of metal cans and glass containers should be avoided because of their rigidity as
they can break during the compression.
HPP products and process parameters
HPP  products  are  commercially  available  in  international  markets.  Those  products
generally are jams, jellies, juices, salad dressings, fish, meat products, sliced ham, rice
cake, yogurt, etc. The share of HPP products includes 32% vegetable products, 27%
meat products, 16% sea foods, 11% juices and beverages and 14% other products. 
Various studies have been reported in literature on HPP treatment of food products using
different process combinations i.e. pressure, temperature and time depending upon the
requirement of the process. As presented in the Fig., generally 100-300 MPa pressure
and  comparatively  lower  holding  times  are  used  for  the  extraction  processes.
Commercial non thermal pasteurization can be achieved in the range of 400-600 MPa
with little higher holding times. If intention is to sterilize the product depending upon its
acidity & other factors, high pressures like 700-900 MPa or more with higher holding
times are required. This gives an idea about the pressure requirement depending upon the
characteristics of the food materials and the desired application.
Pressure-temperature effects 
The temperature increase of food materials under pressure is dependent on factors such
as final pressure, initial temperature and product composition, etc. The temperature of
water  increases  about  3°C  for  every  100  MPa  increase  in  the  pressure  at  room
temperature. Both pure water and most of moist foods subjected to a 600 MPa treatment
at ambient temperature will experience about 15 % reduction in volume.The interrelation of the pressure - temperature against time is shown in the figure. The
HPP curve consists of the compression phase, holding phase and decompression phase. 
(i)Compression phase (T 1-T2)
During this phase, the increase in pressure (P 1-P2) increases the temperature of
material  (T1-T2)  and  decreases  the  volume.  The  compression  rate  and  the
compression time affect the change in the temperature and volume. 
(ii)Holding phase (T2-T3)
The time during holding phase (T 2 - T3) is called as hold time or commonly
known as dwell time. During this phase, the product is held at constant pressure
and temperature.  However, there is slight decrease in temperature depending
upon the system and product constituents. Product temperature (T 2-T3) at process
pressure (P2-P3) is independent of compression rate. 
(iii)Decompression phase (T 3-T4)
The phase between T 3 to T4 is called as decompression phase, where the pressure
is released to its original value of P 4. Simultaneously, the temperature also drops
from T3 to T4, slightly lower than its initial temperature T 1, because of the heat
loss during the compression period. Mechanism of microbial inactivation during HPP
When  the  foods  are  processed  under  high  pressure  to  extend  the  shelf  life,  the
microorganisms  and  enzymes  get  inactivated  or  killed.  The  inactivation  of
microorganisms during high pressure involves disruption of membrane due to shear force
generated. This result into interruption of cellular functions, localized thermal damage
and protein deformation. 
When the pressure is applied from all the sides, the microbial cell compresses and after
decompression, it may again come to its earlier size, but here its activity is ceased
because the cell material oozes out, that makes it physiologically inactive. 
The resistance of vegetative cells of microorganisms to the high pressure treatment is
generally less than the spores.  The spores of Gram positive cells are more resistant to
that of the Gram negative cells. The pH and water activity of the food affect the lethal
effect of the pressure during high pressure processing. Effect of HPP on bacteria
The high pressure destroys both the pathogenic and spoilage microorganisms. However,
there is large variation in the pressure resistance of the different bacterial strains. Nature
of  the  medium  in  which  the  pressure  is  applied  also  affects  the  response  of
microorganisms to pressures. The cell wall of Gram negative bacteria are significantly
weaker than that of the Gram positive bacteria and therefore, Gram negative bacteria are
more pressure sensitive than Gram positive bacteria. 
Effect of HPP on bacterial spores
Bacterial spores are more resistant to high pressure. Very high pressure (may be more
than 800 MPa) are needed to kill bacterial spores at ambient temperature. Even spores of
certain  bacterial  species  might  need  as  high  as  1400  or  1500  MPa  for  killing  or
inactivation  particularly  in  low  acid  food  at  ambient  temperature.  Pressure  induced
inactivation of bacterial spores is significantly enhanced at temperature of 50– 70°C and
perhaps also at/ below 0 °C.
Bacterial spores can be stimulated to germinate by treatment at relatively lower pressure,
e.g. 50-300 MPa.  Then the germinated spores can be inactivated by relatively mild heat
treatments  or  even  higher  pressure  treatments.  It  is  always  advisable  to  have  a
combination of pressure and temperature to inactivate spores particularly in low acid
food. 
Effect of HPP on fungi
Fungi are normally lesser resistant than the bacteria. Treatment at pressure less than 400
MPa for a few minute is sufficient to inactivate most of the yeasts. At about 100 MPa,
the  nuclear  membrane  of  yeast  is  affected,  whereas  at  more  than  400-  600  MPa,
alterations in the mitochondria and cytoplasm of the yeast cell are caused. It ultimately
causes the destruction of its normal activity. Pressures between 300 and 600 MPa can
inactivate most molds. Factors affecting sensitivity of microorganisms in HPP
Various factors influence the response of microorganism including pathogens to high
pressure treatments and obviously, these factors must be considered while optimizing
high pressure process parameters or the microbiological safety.
The major factors affecting the sensitivity of microorganisms to HP includes pH, water
activity, temperature, pressure and holding or dwell time.  
Some results from the literature are presented in the Table. The high pressure treatment
required  for  15  min  to  achieve  5-log  cycle  inactivation  of  Escherichia  coli and
Staphylococcus aureus  in poultry meat and milk. Increasing temperature led to decreasein the pressure requirement for 5-log cycle reduction of E-coli in both the case of poultry
meat and milk. The pressure requirement for the similar inactivation in milk is more than
that of the poultry meat. Similar trend was followed for the Staphylococcus aureus . 
Another study reported the 5-log cycle reduction of certain microorganisms during a 15
minute  treatment.  It  was  found  that  among  the  different  groups  of  problematic
microorganisms in the food, Staphylococcus aureus was more pressure resistant than that
of the other microorganisms.
Enzyme inactivation during HPP
Enzymes are also resulted into the deteriorative reactions and their inactivation becomes
important  criteria  for  the  high  pressure  stabilization  of  the  food.  In  addition  to
microorganisms, process should also be able to destroy certain enzymes. As shown in
figure, the ∆G is a function of pressure change. ∆G indicates weather the protein remains
in its native state or denatured as a function of pressure and temperature.
It has been seen that the primary structure of protein generally is not destroyed or not
affected by high pressure treatments. Tertiary structures are modified followed by a large
hydration change. Disruption of hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions during high
pressure processing may lead to certain changes in the quaternary structure and there is a
dense hydrophobic hydration layer is formed which will lead to the volume changes. So,
by changing the confirmation of the structure, the activity of the enzymes might be
reduced. The stability of the various food enzymes like pectin methyl esterase, peroxidase, alpha
amylase, lipoxygenase, and polyphenol oxidase were studied by various researchers (see
Table). It is seen that the pH, water activity, and temperature of system influences the
stability at various high pressure and temperature ranges. It is found in general that, the
polyphenol  oxidase  and  peroxidases  are  comparatively  pressure  stable.  A  pressure
treatment at 800-900 MPa is required for their inactivation. Other enzymes like pectin
methyl esterase are also equally pressure stable. At 600 MPa pressure, the pectin methyl
esterase  enzyme  partially  (up to  90%)  and  irreversibly  inactivated  (which  does  not
reactivate during storage and transportation) e.g. tomato PME are more pressure resistant
and follow first order kinetics.
 