Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 13
Membrane Technology - Part 1
In this lecture, membrane technology and its application in food processing will be
introduced.
Membrane  technology  is  a  comparatively  recent  development  in  food  processing
industry. Major criterion of this technology is separation on the basis of size of the
molecules. Sometimes even surface charge may also have some effect. The driving force
is generally the pressure differential. There are two main purposes of this technology;
processing or value addition and shelf life extension.Of any membrane process, the basic unit or the heart of the process is the membrane.
The membrane acts as a filtering medium and a barrier that separates the solution into
two phases. It is semi permeable in nature; it allows some substances to pass through
while restricting the transport of various molecules in a selective manner. It is very
effective  as  filter  in  separation  and  purification  processes.  The  membrane  permits
separation of particles of wide ranging size and molecular weights, and performs the
separation by a combination of sieving and diffusion mechanisms.
The membrane separation process is shown in this figure, where it can be seen that, on
one side of the membrane there is the feed material comprising of different solutes. The
feed solution is forced with some pressure; a pressure differential between the upstreamand downstream is created that becomes the driving force for the passage of materials
through the membrane. Here, mostly the solvent particles and some solutes have come in
the permeate and major portion of the solutes are retained on the other side.
The component which is retained on the surface of the membrane is generally known as
retentate where as the solute or other components which are allowed to pass through by
the membrane are normally known as permeate. So, the feed stream can be divided into
two streams viz., retentate stream and permeate stream. So, it depends upon the process;
either the concentrate (retentate) or the filtrate (permeate) is the product of interest of any
membrane filtration process, sometimes even both the permeate and retentate may be of
use. So, it is decided on the basis of the product and process that whether to collect
retentate or permeate or whatever the case may be.
Depending upon the nature of the molecules or atoms which are to be separated by these
processes there are different types of membranes: 
(1)Microfiltration  membrane;  it  allows  the  passage  of  multivalent  ions,
macromolecule, monovalent ion, water, etc., but retain bacteria and all other
suspended solids. (2) Ultrafiltration; viruses, bacteria, and other macromolecules
are retained; multivalent ion and monovalent ions, water, etc. are allowed to pass
through. (3) Nanofiltration; it allows the passage of only the monovalent ion and
water (4) Reverse osmosis, it simply allows the passage of water and almost all
the components are retained on the other side. This is the table showing categories of the pressure driven membrane processes where
the normal size spectrum, operating pressures, purpose, and basis of the rejection of each
process has been reported.
In case of microfiltration (MF), the particles of size 102 to 104 µ are retained, whereas in
ultrafiltration (UF), 1 to 102 µ, nanofiltration (NF) further is smaller 1 to 10 µ and reverse
osmosis (RO) even further smaller pore size 10-1 to 1 µ. The operating pressure required
in MF is less, may be less than 1 bar whereas in UF, 1 to 10 bar. NF may require more
pressure may be 20 to 40 bar and RO processes need maximum pressure among all these
membrane technology processes i.e. may be 30 to 60 bar or even 70 bar.
In MF process which is based on a sieving mechanism, the basis of the rejection is
basically the absolute size of the particle. In other processes viz., UF, NF, and RO, the
separation takes place on the basis of the molecular weight cut off (MWCO). Solutes like
clay, paint, oil droplets, suspended matters, microorganisms etc. are retained by the MF
membrane. In addition to these, pectin, proteins, high molecular weights substances,
polyphenol, enzymes, etc. are separated in UF process. NF separates sugar, and other
low molecular weight substances, polyphenol, dyes, etc. while salt and electrolytes are
retained in case of RO.
The purpose of MF and UF processes are used for clarification or turbidity removal in
general, whereas NF is used for decolourization and purity increase and the RO process
is used for concentration and desalination processes.Suppose in a system, there are solution and solvent and if they are separated by a semi
permeable membrane. The membrane is selective to solvent that it will allow the passage
of the solvent, but not the solutes, then the flow will take place in a direction from the
solvent to solution and the gradient for this flow obviously is the osmotic pressure
exerted by the various solute particles. If a pressure higher than the osmotic pressure
exerted by different solutes present in the solution is applied, then the direction of the
flow can be reversed. So, this is known as reverse osmosis. Earlier case it was osmosis. 
Any food material like water, orange juice or sea water, they contain different types of
solutes. The solutes vary in their nature, in their size, and other characteristics. They all
contribute towards the osmotic pressure of the system. In general, the contribution of any
species to the total osmotic pressure is inversely proportional to its molecular weight.
Smaller molecules such as salt and sugars contribute much more to the total osmotic
pressure of the system than do the large molecules or macromolecules like protein, etc.
For example, sea water and casein solution with the same amount of total solids (3.5%),
there is a huge difference in the osmotic pressure of both, the sea water exerts 14.1 bar
osmotic pressure whereas, the casein solution gives only 0.03 bar pressure. Similarly,
milk  and whey both exert same osmotic  pressure of 6.7 bar approximately  but the
average total solids of milk is almost double than that of whey. So, the nature of the
macromolecule particularly the molecular weight and size of the macromolecule majorly
contribute to this. In solvent transport phenomena through membranes, two important properties should be
considered. One is permeate flux and another is the rejection rate i.e. what is the amount
of  the  permeate  that  is  allowed  to  pass  through  the  membrane  and  what  are  the
components that are rejected by the membrane. 
Rejection rate, R is equal to concentration of feed minus concentration of solutes in the
product divided by concentration of solutes in the feed. 
     
       
Solvent  flux,  Jp is  calculated  by  the  volume  of  filtrate  collected  per  unit  effective
membrane surface area per unit time. 
Membrane permeability, L p is determined by the permeate flux that is J p divided by
applied trans-membrane pressure.
There are certain factors which govern the membrane separation process. Three major
factors  which  influence  the  flux  are  membrane  properties,  feed  properties,  and
hydrostatic  effect.  So,  increasing  membrane  properties  like  pore  size  and  porosity
increases  the  flux, while  the  flux decreases  by increasing  thickness, tortuosity,  and
compaction. Regarding the feed properties, increase in concentration and viscosity of the
feed, results in decrease in flux, whereas increase in temperature causes increase in the
flux. Hydrostatic effects like trans-membrane pressure and cross flow velocity have a
direct effect on flux.
There are few other calculations which need to be taken into consideration for better
process efficiency. Solvent flux is proportional to the pressure difference i.e. applied
pressure minus osmotic pressure. 
Jw = Lp × A × (∆P - ∆∏)
From Hazen-Poiseulle equation, the solvent flux can be calculated by,
Where, d is the capillary or pore diameter, µ is the dynamic viscosity and L is the
capillary length. 
Another model equation developed for the flux is:
Where,  Rm is  membrane  resistance,  R f is  fouling resistance  and  R p is  resistance  of
concentration polarization layer.
Fouling and concentration polarization are the other important factors which influence
the membrane separation process will be discussed separately in the next slides.
The membranes which are normally used in this membrane separation processes are
categorized into two ways. One way is on the basis of the material of composition, by
which the membranes are classified as inorganic membranes or polymeric membranes.
Inorganic membranes can resist high temperature in the process streams. The lowest
particle size attainable in this case is micron range. Examples of inorganic membranes
include ceramic membrane, alumina, zirconium etc. Polymeric membranes have some
sort of temperature limitation i.e. maximum temperature they can tolerate is 90 ᵒC. Its
pore size can be tuned up to the angstrom level. Examples of polymeric membranes
include cellulose acetate membrane, polysulfone membrane, PS or PES, PAN, PVDF,
etc. 
Another way of classifying these membranes is in terms of their developmental stage and
by  this  way, the  membranes  are  classified  as  1st generation,  2nd generation  and  3rd
generation membranes.
First generation  membranes  used in the commercial  scale  was  the cellulose  acetate
membrane. These are prepared as 0.1 to 1 µ thick skin held with a thick porous support.
They are however pH dependent (2 – 8) and limited to temperature (up to 40 ᵒC) Also,
they require very frequent cleaning due to problems of clogging.
In 2nd generation membranes, most of the limitations of the 1st generation membranes are
taken care of. These membranes are mostly the polymeric membrane which are made ofpolyamide, PS, PAN, PVDF etc. These are much resistant to pH variations as well as
higher temperature as compared to the CA membrane.
The 3rd generation membranes include inorganic membranes like glass, metal, aluminum,
titanium  coated  on  a  solid  support.  They  are  tough,  highly  resistant  to  mechanical
pressure, pH  and temperature.  So, they are  very rough and they  have the  versatile
applications.
A module is the simplest membrane element that provides the necessary support for
keeping the membrane in normal place. Of course module design must deal with the
aspects like economy of the manufacture. There should be minimum waste of energy,
membrane integrity against leaks and damages, easy egress of the permeate and it should
permit  easy  membrane  cleaning.  So,  the  membrane  module  should  have  these
characteristics.There are basically two types of flow: one is the dead end flow; another is the cross flow.
In the dead end flow, the feed flows perpendicular to the membrane surface. This type of
flow normally is used in batch processes and it has some problems particularly regarding
fouling and concentration polarization as the solute particles tend to get deposited on the
surface of the membrane, causing a large reduction in flux.
These problems are reduced to a greater extent in the cross flow where the feed flows
parallel to the membrane surface. Here flow causes turbulence and produces shear and
thereby, making the surface resistant to pore blocking or concentration polarization.
It was the invent of the cross flow system which facilitated the application of membrane
technology in the industrial or commercial processes.
There are three types of systems batch system, feed and bleed system and multistage
system. In the Batch system, with the help of a pump, the material is allowed to flow
over the membrane module. There are pressure valves, necessary instrumentations for
the temperature control, pressure control, pressure indicator, etc. 
For example, suppose 100 kg tomato juice with 5 % total solids is to be concentrated up
to 20 % total solids. In the batch process, one can calculate the amount of permeate to be
removed using the formula, 
Where, FTS, RTS and PTS are the percentages of total solids in feed, in retentate, and in
the permeate  respectively and Q f is the initial  quantity of juice in kg. So, one can
calculate the amount of water that can be removed from the juice and accordingly, the
amount of desired concentrate can also be obtained.
In  case  of  Feed  and  Bleed  system,  the  materials  are  allowed  to  flow  through  the
membrane module with the help of a circulation pump for some time. When this process
system is stabilized, concentrate is allowed to flow at the same rate at which the feed is
pumped  in. So,  a  balance  between  concentrate  going  out  and  feed  coming  in  is
maintained. 
In the multistage plant, several feed and bleed systems are put in series or in parallel. So,
this improves the efficiency of the processes. They can be either continuous or batch
systems.As  the  food  industry  is  getting  wide  scope,  the  membrane  technology  has  a  great
potential.  The  membrane  filtration  process  provides  specific  separations  like  amino
acids, fatty acids or any selective compound can be separated using this process. It is a
pressure driven process that does not involve heat or temperature or any phase change. It
is  a non-thermal  processes;  the  problems  associated  with the thermal  processes  are
avoided here. This even operates at a low temperature or ambient temperature. It results
in minimal destruction of the components or bioactives etc. that helps in preserving
nutritional  and sensorial qualities  intact.  So, again it is  beneficial  from the product
quality or functionality point of view and it is a cost effective technology. 
In the next lecture, further details of this, particularly types of the different modules and
its application in food industry will be taken up.