Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 25
Aseptic Processing & Packaging
In this lecture, aseptic processing and packaging will be studied.
Technology of commercial sterilization
•There are two basic methods used to obtain commercial sterility in foods.
Heating the food after it has been placed in the container, and
Heating and cooling the food and then packaging it aseptically.
•The first process is the conventional canning method and is, in principle, the
same method that was used by Appert, the French man who invented canning.
•The second method is generally referred to as aseptic processing.
•Aseptic  processing  &  packaging  results  in  improved  product  quality,
energy savings and provides economic packaging alternatives.A pictorial representation of the aseptic packaging technology is shown. The product
sterilization line and sterilization of the container or the packaging material can be seen
in figure. And, then these come in the aseptic environment where they are filled and
sealed using appropriate machines and systems like form fill seal system or blow fill seal
systems. And, since generally higher temperature may be to the tune of 130 to 170 ᵒC are
common in aseptic commercial sterilization. These processes are referred to as UHT
(ultra high temperature) processes. Processing at these temperatures requires that the
process be based on enzyme inactivation rather than microbial destruction.
In practice there are generally two specific fields of application of aseptic packaging
technologies  accordingly  i.e.  there  are  two  types  of  aseptically  packaged  productsavailable in the market: One set of the products are those where the sterilized foods are
packaged; means the food inside the package does not contain any viable organism. For
example,  milk, dairy products, puddings, deserts, fruits and vegetable  juices, soups,
sauces and even other products with particulates etc. like pea in brine solution and so on.
There are other types of like fermented dairy products or other products where the live
bacteria are present. So, such type of products are prepared in good condition by having
good manufacturing practices and by following good hygienic practices etc. in their
manufacturing line and then these manufactured products are packaged under aseptic
environment. Examples of such products include yogurt, curd etc.
Aseptic processing facility design
•Aseptic processing area
Area where critical process steps are carried out.
Critical process steps
Activities  during which the sterilised  product and container/closures  are exposed to
atmosphere. 
•Material handling & conveying system
•Product  sterilization system
•Packaging material sterilization 
•Form, fill & seal (FFS) packaging • Design must minimise challenge to aseptic processing area 
Flow  of  raw  materials,  infrastructure  facility,  building,  processing  hall,  material
conveying  system,  components,  product  containers,  closures,  in-process
materials,  food  products  and  all  other  facilities  should  be  appropriately  designed
to prevent contamination in the processing line.
Sterilization of product
•In aseptic processing, the design to achieve commercial stability is based on the
well-founded  principles  of  thermal  bacteriology  and  integrated  effect  of
time/temperature treatment on spores of microorganisms.
•Pre-sterilization of a product usually consists of heating the product to the desired
UHT temperature, maintaining this temperature for a given period in order to
achieve  the  desired  degree  of  sterility,  with  subsequent  cooling,  usually  to
ambient temperature and sometimes to an elevated temperature to achieve right
viscosity for filling. 
•Heating  and  cooling  should  be  performed  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  achieve
the best quality, depending upon the nature of the product. 
•A fast heat exchange rate is desired for cost reasons. 
•Since  the  UHT  process  is  of  the  order  of  seconds,  the  residual  time
must be precisely controlled to avoid under processing.Processing systems
•Product sterilization and cooling systems may be of the direct or indirect heat
exchange type.
•Heat exchanger equipment used in aseptic processing include
Scraped surface heat exchanger
Plate heat exchanger
Tubular heat exchanger
Equipment involving direct steam injection
•Systems have been developed for liquids and liquids containing smaller particles.
•The primary problems, however, associated with filling and packaging of fluids
with  large  particles  (peas  or  corn  in  brine)  are  the  availability  of  suitable
pumping  system  which  does  not  damage  the  particles  and  assures
a failsafe residence  time.Holding time in relation to flow characteristics of fluids
•In the continuous system of sterilization, the fluid velocity in the heat exchanger
and in the holding tube may be approximated to one of the three types.
•In piston flow which is ideal and which, unfortunately is rare, the mean holding
time is equal to the residence time.
From knowledge of the holding tube capacity and average flow rate, the tube
length required for piston flow conditions may be calculated.
•For  turbulent flow, the maximum velocity  is assumed to be 1.25 times  the
average velocity. 
•In  laminar  or  viscous  flow  (as  in  non-Newtonian  fluids  like  sauces,
soups,  pulps  and  concentrates)  the  average  velocity  is  one  half  of
the maximum.
These assumptions hold importance in calculation of the tube length and processing time.Fruit  pulps  and  concentrates  show  yield  stress  and  laminar  flow.  And,  since  the
characteristics of laminar flow is well known, the holding tube length can be calculated
using this formula:
L = 7.07 x 10 -7 (Q tf / d 2)
Where,   L = length of the holding tube (m)
  Q = Fluid flow rate (L / h)
  tf = Fastest particle residence time (laminar flow) (s)
  d = Holding tube diameter (m)
When the product quality is the main consideration, the holding time must be based on
the mean velocity rather than the fastest particle velocity  because the measured mean
residence  time  is  twice the  residence  time  for fastest  particle  to  travel  through the
holding tube under laminar flow conditions.
Mean residence time  may be calculated using the equation
tm = 2.82 x 106 (L d2 / Q)
Where, tm = Mean product residence time (s)
  L   = Holding tube length (m)
 d   =  Holding tube diameter (m)
 Q  =  Fluid flow rate (L/ h)
•Optimization of sterilization temperature has been studied in order to maximize
the retention of nutrients and minimize undesirable changes.
•In view of the difficulties in ascertaining the residence time of the particles and
the contribution of the later to total microbial or enzyme inactivation, it would be
more appropriate to establish the HTST or the UHT process on the residence time
of the slowest moving particles and its temperature as it leaves the tube. •The same equipment can be used for dairy and non dairy products except that
scraped  surface  heat  exchangers  are  used  for  fluids  exhibiting  laminar  flow
and for products containing particulates.
Characteristics of the heat exchange systems used for aseptic processing
The table can be read and understood.Packaging systems
•Recent developments in aseptic processing generally have centered on a post
sterilization packaging operation.
•One system,  Flash 18, is used for filling solid foods which have been directly
sterilized in steam.
The operation is carried out in a room pressurized to 18 psig with air.
Since the boiling point of water at 18 psig is 124 C, product with 124 C ⁰ ⁰
can be handled without boiling.
After the product is heated at 124 C with steam, the product is filled into ⁰
non sterile cans under flowing steam, sealed and held for a time sufficient
to achieve sterilization. 
The  cans  can  then  be  cooled  and  transferred  out  of  the  pressurized
chamber.         
The system has been applied successful to sterilization of meat and fish
salads.
However, the equipment is expensive and it is difficult to maintain a staff
willing to work under unusual pressure conditions.•The packaging system must be capable of sterilizing the container and filling the
product by UHT or HTST system in an aseptic manner and sealing the container
hermetically  so  that  product  sterility  is  maintained  throughout  handling  and
distribution.
•Different systems (FFS machines) for aseptic packaging either in rigid or flexible
container in unit packs for direct sale to consumers or in bulk for subsequent
processing have been developed.
Commercially sterile products are expected to have an extended shelf life. Hence the
package should be:
Impermeable to gases, water and the other vapours.
Effective barrier in transmission of light.
Inert, i.e. it should not impart any flavor or taints to packaged products.
Resistant  to  chemicals,  radiation  and  heat  treatment  needed  for  sterilization
of packaging.
Capable  of  hermetically  sealed  to  provide  barrier  against  microbial
contamination.
Withstand insect damage.
Resist deteriorate changes.
Relatively less expensive.
Easily disposable.
•Metal  container  which  are  in  use  from  the  beginning  of  the  commercial
development of aseptic sterilization have all the intrinsic properties mentioned
earlier.
 The limitations to their use relate to the package geometry
and relatively high cost.
•Glass containers have limitations very similar to those of metal containers with
the additional disadvantage of fragility and high density. So, the metal and glass
containers used in aseptic processing and packaging are normally avoided.•Polyethylene  and  polypropylene,  being  thermoplastic  are  used  for  producing
bottle packs.
The bottles may be either preformed or made just before filling in
blow-fill & seal equipment.
•As no single plastic material has all the desirable characteristics listed earlier, co-
extruded  laminates  of  one  or  more  plastic  materials  having  complementary
characteristics are used.
•Aluminium  foil  used  in  lamination  with  plastic  films  improves  the  barrier
characteristics  of  the  package;  paper  provides  physical  resistance  to  the
package.
Sterilization of Aseptic Packaging Materials and Equipment
Heat
•Product supply lines and fillers are commonly sterilized by moist heat in the form
of hot water or saturated steam under pressure. 
•Dry heat, in the form of superheated steam or hot air, may also be used to
sterilize equipment. 
•However, due to the relatively high dry heat resistance of bacterial spores, the
time-temperature requirements for dry heat sterilization are considerably higher
than those for moist heat sterilization.
•Systems  employing  moist  heat  are  sterilized  at  temperatures  ranging  from
121-129 °C, while 176-232 °C is used for sterilization by dry heat. •Sterilization  of  air  by  incineration  usually  is  conducted  at  temperatures
ranging from 260°C to 315°C.
Chemicals
•Hydrogen peroxide is the overwhelming choice for use as a chemical sterilant. 
•Other chemicals which have been used as sterilants, primarily for use in systems
for acid food, include various acids, ethanol, ethylene oxide and peracetic acid.
•Hydrogen peroxide is not an efficient sporicide when used at room temperature;
the sporicidal activity increases substantially with increasing temperatures. 
Most  aseptic  packaging  systems  use  hydrogen  peroxide  (at  concentrations  of
30  to  35%)  as  a  sterilant  for  packaging  materials   followed  by  hot  air
(60°C to 125°C) treatment to dissipate residual  hydrogen peroxide.Radiation
•Gamma-radiation  has  been  used  for  decades  to  decontaminate  packaging
materials for use in aseptic systems for packing acid and acidified food. 
•Due to the penetrating powers of gamma-radiation, packages are treated in bulk
at commercial irradiators. 
•A  dose  of  approximately  1.5  Mrad  is  commonly  used  to  decontaminate
containers for acid and acidified food.  
•Doses  required  to  sterilize  containers  for  use  with  low  acid  food  are
considerably higher than those required for acid and acidified food.
•Average microbial counts on a plastic-food contact surface range from 0.3 to 10
organisms per 100 cm2
•On  a  polyethylene  food  contact  surface  of  paper  board  based  laminates
immediately after producing the packaging material, average total count  has
been reported  to be 2-5 / 100 cm2 (10.6 % yeast, 20.6 % molds and 68.8 %
bacteria).
•Four  to  five  decimal  reductions  are  considered  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
spoilage is not in excess of 5 in 10000.
•Following equation can be used to calculate the risk of defectives.
R = NO S x 10 –t/D
Where,    R  = Risk 
                NO =  Number of most resistant organism per cm2 
                        S   = Food contact area in sq. cm
                t   = time of the sterilization process, and
                D  = Decimal reduction time of most heat resistant organism.
Seals and closures
•Any  aseptic  system  must  be  capable  of  closing  and/or  sealing  the  package
hermetically to maintain sterility during handling and distribution. 
•The integrity of the closure and seal is, therefore, of paramount importance. •The  integrity  of  the  heat-seals  used  in  most  aseptic  systems  is  principally
influenced by the efficiency of the sealing system used and by contamination of
the heat seal area by the product. 
•Two systems are used. 
The longitudinal, and 
The transverse seam
•In the longitudinal system , a flat web of packaging material is used, supplied in
reels. 
•This  flat  material  web is  formed into  a tube,  which  is  sealed  longitudinally
resulting in a cylinder shaped structure. 
•Transversal sealing  is done below the level of the product in the packaging
material tube. 
•By constantly moving sealing and pressure jaws, pressure is applied from the
outside of the packaging material tube squeezing the product from the sealing
area.Aseptic processing & filling system
A schematic representation for aseptic processing and filling of the fruits. The process
flow can be seen and understood.
Aseptic packaging systems in consumer or institutional packs
The different  aseptic packaging systems that are available in consumer packs  or in
institutional packs i.e. the forms of the pack like cans, bottle, pouch, cups, cartons etc.
and different sterilizing & filling methods are summarized in the table which can be
studied and understood. So, this is  a very versatile  technology  for the  processing of the product and value
addition and shelf life extension; high quality products are obtained in economical forms,
in a variety of consumer package using this technology.