Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 24
Extrusion Technology (Part 2)
In this  2nd part of the  extrusion technology lecture, the effects of various extrusion
process parameters and the material characteristics as well as product characteristics will
be studied. A few case studies will also be introduced where some of the products have
been developed using extrusion technology.
Extrusion is a thermo mechanical process in which heat transfer, mass transfer,  pressure
changes and shear are combined to produce effects such as cooking, sterilization , drying,
melting, texturization, puffing, mixing, kneading, forming, etc. So, many different types
of  effects  can  be  obtained  in  the  product  by  having  proper  combinations  of  the
characteristics  of  the  material , extruder  process variables  and  system  variables  etc.
Specifically  designed d ie is  used to  shape the  product  such as  pasta , noodles,  rice
analogues or variety of other products in a variety of shapes and sizes are produced using
this technology.By  having  appropriate  combination  of  the  system  and  process  parameters,  one  can
produce  products  of  desired  characteristics.  So,  the  important  extrusion  process
parameters include barrel temperature, die head temperature, extruder screw speed and
feed moisture content. The product characteristics include physicochemical properties ,
functional properties , textural characteristics and cooking characteristics . The extrusion
system parameters are torque, die pressure, product temperature, specific mechanical
energies, etc. The extruder have three zones (see Fig.); feeding zone , transition zone and
metering zone. The feeding zone is used for conveying the solid; in the transition zone,
compaction, mixing and softening of the material takes place whereas, in the metering
zone, there is melting , pressurizing and pumping of the melt to the die. 
Some extruders (in Fig.)  have 3 or 4 heating sections like heater 1, heater 2 and heater 3.
The heat is applied using these heaters  and also the heat is generated due to friction
within the screw barrel. The material is compacted as the screw channel depth reduces .
So, the extruder screw actually mixes the material and converts it into a visco elastic
melt particularly towards the end of the die and then , when it passes through the die
because of its flexible nature and other conditions of pressure and temperature inside, it
takes the shape of the die. So, because of the pressure or temperature gradient, the
material either expands or compacts. 
If the barrel temperature increases , the product temperature , water absorption index,
expansion and colour change, all are likely to increase whereas, the torque, die pressure,
and specific mechanical energy are likely to decrease. As far as the feed moisture is
concerned, if it is high, the density and water absorption index will be more,  whereas the
change in colour, torque, die pressure and specific mechanical energy will be less. The
density, water absorption index,  torque and die pressure increase while change in the
colour  and  water  absorption  index  decrease  with  the  increase  in the  feed  rate.  So,
accordingly one should appropriately maintain the barrel temperature , the feed moisture
and the feed rate to get the desired system parameter and ultimately desired product
characteristics.
There are different types of raw materials used in the extrusion process and they have
different functions to play inside the extruder in final shaping the product characteristics .
For example, there are certain ingredients which are used as structure forming material
like for example maize , wheat, rice, potato, oats, etc.So, they are used to provide the final desired structure of the material depending upon
the size, type and amount present in the food system. For example,  maize which has
medium size granule s,  average protein content and definite flavour and yellow colour
imparts a good flavour and good colour to the extruded product; also because of it s
arrangements of the components and granular size etc., it expands well . Similarly wheat
flour also expands well because of its starch and protein characteristics.  Rice flour has
small tightly packed starch granules , it slowly hydrates and starch gets gelatinized  during
the processing, it has average protein levels and it gives bland flavour and white colour .
Potato on the other hand has large granules , high starch level, has definite flavour, gold
to light brown colour and the starch characteristics of potato also result in well or good
expansion, but the material becomes sticky. So, potato can be an excellent binder . Oats
contain large fibre and higher content of lysine as compared to other cereals etc.
The other type of material can be used as fillers ; fillers are most frequently protein
fractions of oilseeds and the cereal grains which are added to the main ingredients. They
improve the flexibility of the dough after hydration  during mass plasticization inside the
extruder. They reduce the swelling of starch during the mass forcing through the die and
also, they reduce the size of air bubbles during the expansion of the extruder there by
influencing the shape of the final products. So, these are the functions of the different
fillers. The plasticizers in an extrusion cooked mixture are normally water , oil, fats and
emulsifiers. They influence the flow of the material inside the extruder, reduce the
degradation  of  starch  and  positively  affect  the  quality  and  nutritional  value  of  the
product.The other type of the material ingredients can be used as hydrocolloids like they are used
for  providing  thickness ,  thickening effect,  stabilization  and  gelling  effects  for  the
improvement of the physical characteristics and textural properties of the end product .
These hydrocolloids modify texture of the starch based food products as well as they
influence  the  melting  characteristics , gelatinization, fragmentation  and  retrograding
processes. Hydrocolloids improve the thermal stability and provide lubrication during the
extrusion process. The emulsifiers are the lipid fractions with higher melting temperature
used as lubricants in the extruded product . They facilitate shear and formation of uniform
surface structure, they protect processed mass against stickiness and thus making further
treatment easier. The most commonly used emulsifiers in the products or in the extrusion
technology are the soy  lecithin and mono and diglyceride esters.
Apart from this, sometime depending upon the requirement of the product , some raising
agents can also be used such as to provide aeration of the mass and help to obtain the
typical crispy and porous structure of the extrudates e.g. the baking powder. Components
like salt, sugar, sometimes some spice s etc. are added to improve the taste in the extruder
product.Effect of extrusion processing conditions on the material characteristics : Starch  is one
major component in the structure forming action which influences the product texture
and other characteristics.  So, during the extrusion processing the starch granules  in
presence of water undergo the process of gelatinization if the extrusion conditions are
severe. In the rice granules (Fig.) how the starch looks like when gets gelatinized on
coming in contact with the water and heat which is there inside the screw barrel is shown
in figure.
Depending upon the conditions of temperature and pressure present inside the barrel,  the
starch granules get damaged by the shear forces etc. and finally, dry hydrolysis may take
place. It may undergo dextrinization and  in fact this dextrinized starch sometime gives
the sweeter taste because these dextrins are intermediate between glucose and the starch
molecule. They have the intermediate characteristics i.e. less sweeter than glucose, more
sweeter than the starch.
So, these high shear conditions are necessary  in order to maximize the conversion of
starch into glucose , so that the material gets the better sensory characteristics and other
components. Even the glucose might contribute to the browning of the extruded product
which is sometimes desirable.
So, the loss  of crystallinity  can also be observed in the extruded product which is
basically because of the gelatinization effect . The gelatinized starch, denatured proteinand the cellulosic materials etc. which might be there in the raw material  decisively
influence the product expansion ability after forcing them through the die. 
So,  the  starch is  an important  ingredient  as  far  as  the  extruder  products  and  their
characteristics are concerned. They are used for density control  and to provide strength
in the material. Actually certain modified starches can increase the strength and reduce
breakage in the expanded products.  They might result in the shelf life improvement,
moisture uptake, improve the flavour, water holding capacity , fat binding capacity , and
other functionalities.  
The  extrusion  process  conditions  have  an  important  influence  on  the  protein
characteristics like denaturation during extrusion process . The forces which stabilise the tertiary structure  and quaternary structure of the proteins
are weakened by a combination of increased temperature and shear within the extruder
barrel. All these forces in fact are responsible to keep the structure in its native form
bounded by covalent linkages , sulphide linkages, etc. So, the individual protein molecule
unfold and align themselves with the flow of the material towards the die . The exposure
of hydrophobic residues such as phenylalanine and tyrosine , they reduce the solubility of
the extruded protein in aqueous systems.
In the schematic diagram shown, native structure is seen to be disturbed . If there is a
hydrophobic R-group extended towards the surface on the native structure , then protein
has good solubility. They may get disturbed and these hydrophilic R group may go
towards the interior of the molecule as a result of this denaturation. So, the protein
solubility  may  get  disturbed  accordingly, the  extruded  product  may  have  been  less
soluble because of these changes in the protein characteristics.
As far as the effect of lipids on extrusion processing is concerned, extrusion of high fat
materials  is  generally  not  advisable  especially  in  the  case  of  expanded  product .  If
expansion of material is needed after extrusion,  the fat content should be kept low as low
as possible. For example if the lipid level is more than  5 to 6  %, it impairs extruder
performance and the presence of lipid in the raw material causes decrease in the torque
as the lipid reduces slip within the barrel . There is poor expansion of the product because
insufficient pressure is developed . Lipid is released from the cells owing to the high
temperature and physical disruption of the plants cell walls. So, high fat content mayhave some difficulties or may influence the product characteristics.  Low lipid level rises
less than 5 % in the material facilitate a steady extrusion and improve the texture.
The extrusion processes can prevent free fatty acid release by denaturing the hydrolytic
enzyme. So, the hydrolytic  rancidity in the extruder product can be prevented or can be
reduced in compare d  to the normal products because the pressure and heat generated
inside the extruder barrel can cause the hydrolytic enzymes denatured. 
Effect  of  extrusion  processing  on  vitamins:  The  retention  of  vitamins  in  extrusion
cooking decreases with increasing temperature , screw speed and specific energy inpu t. It
also decreases with decreasing moisture , feed rate and die diameter; if the die diameter
decreases, the vitamin retention will decrease . Then depending on the vitamin concerned,
considerable degradation can occur especially in the product with high sensory appeal.
So, care should be taken to have minimum  change  or minimum  destruction  of the
vitamins. 
The  usage  of  specific  vitamin  compounds  or  forms  of  application  with  improved
stability, i.e. those vitamins which have better stability  can be used. And some time
addition of extra amounts of vitamins may be in the form of vitamin mineral premix can
be  added  in  the  product  to make  up the  losses. This  addition  can  be  done  during
extrusion or storage stage or even post extrusion either by dusting , enrobing, spraying,
coating or filling together with other ingredients that can be applied. So, by this desired
quantity of vitamins can be maintained .Effects of extrusion process on minerals: Minerals are more heat stable and are not likely
to become lost in the steam distillate at the die , however extrusion can improve the
absorption  of  minerals  by  reducing  other  factors  that  inhibit  absorption .  Mineral
absorption could be affected by the phytate, polyphenols like tannins etc. and fibre
components. So, cellulose, lignin and some hemicelluloses affect the mobility of these
minerals in the gastrointestinal tract and interfere with their absorption while tannins
might be insoluble complex might form in soluble complexes with divalent ions in the
gastrointestinal  tract.  So,  the  extrusion  hydrolyses the  phytates,  decomposes  the
polyphenols, reorganizes the fiber components and changes chelating properties and this
explains the higher availability of the mineral after extrusion processing particularly after
high temperature extrusion . So, the availability of the mineral might be more in the
extruder  product as  extrusion process improves  the absorption characteristics  of the
minerals.Acrylamides normally classified as a group 2A carcinogen and it is found common in
foods which are prepared at temperature of more than 120 ᵒC e.g. potato chips, expanded
RTE snacks, etc. Here the causative agents are mainly amino acid which contribute to
the acrylamide formation is asparagine and especially in the presence of reducing sugars
like  glucose  etc.  This  asparagine  reacts  with  the  glucose  and  the  sugar -amine
acrylamides are formed. So, during extrusion , the feed and product moisture content,
process  temperature  and  resultant  energy  inputs  are  relevant  parameters  for  the
acrylamide formation and this accordingly they can be properly controlled . For example,
if the temperature inside the extruder barrel etcetera is maintained less than  120 ᵒC, the
formation of acrylamide can be either eliminated or can be avoided. Also  the presence of
glycine, cysteine and lysine has the significant effects on the decrease in acrylamide
content in the fried products.Using extrusion technology, fortified rice kernels, essential amino acid balanced nutri
dal, ready to eat snacks (may be from the millets etc.),  sweet potato extrudates , chlorella
fortified  pasta, fortified rice noodles, and such other innovative  products have been
developed at Food Chemistry and Technology Laboratory, IIT Kharagpur.
These have been done by appropriate selection of the process parameters. Most of these
products are in ready to eat form; frying and other things might not be required. Some of
these products and their manufacturing technologies will be taken up in further slides. 
Fortified rice kernels (FRK): These  are made by using the broken rice . Broken rice from
the rice mill is taken and converted into flour. The conditioned  rice flour is added with
the fortificants like iron, folic acid and vitamin  B12 in appropriate quantity as per theguidelines set by Food Safety and Standards Authority of India. The extruder is designed
and developed indigenously for this purpose and the rice die has been designed. The mix
is forced through the extruder and the fortified rice kernels are made using this extrusion
technology.
Inside the extrusion barrel just at the die head, the condition of temperature and pressure
are manipulated in such a way that when material comes out , there is a sufficient degree
of  compression  in  the  products .  It  then  expands  and  these  rice  get  the  desired
characteristics. They resemble to normal rice in their cooking , eating and other sensory
characteristics. After cooking (see Fig.), it does  not disintegrate and retains its shape.
Similarly another product  is the essential amino acid balanced nutri dal. Dal forms a
major  source  for  the  protein.  Split  pulses  are  taken  from different  dal  mills  and
appropriately mixed. The formulation was done using linear programming. This is forced
through the extruder and maintaining desired pressure and temperature conditions, the
dal can be obtained. So, this can be actually called ‘ nutri dal’ because in a single product,
all essential amino acids are contained. 100 g of this dal is comparable to 100 g of egg as
far as the essential amino acid composition is concerned. The other product is the  gluten free pasta. Here also chickpea flour and rice flour are
mixed together, a batter is formed that is mixed and conditioned and fed to twin screw
extruder. And finally, it is dried and gluten free pasta is obtained. The ingredients all are
gluten free but of course  the extrusion process conditions or particularly mixing and
conditioning are optimize d in such a way that the produced pasta retains its shape , and it
swells double when it is cooked. So, desired characteristics of the pasta are there in this
product.
Similarly, the fortified rice noodle is formed  that is found to resemble the commercial
products in its sensory and other characteristics. So, it is a health noodle as it has been
fortified by micronutrients  like iron, vitamin B12 and folic acid.Another  process is the preparation of sweet potato flour  using extrusion technology.
Sweet potato is taken ,  washed, made into slices and then ,  soaked. After soaking, it is
dried, conditioned and fed into the extruder. It results in the significant reduction of the
trypsin inhibitor and improvement in the in-vitro digestibility.
Finally the sweet potato extrudates are further ground into flour , and this becomes a very
good ingredient for use in the food production. So, this sweet potato flour was used in
the preparation of high energy ready to eat food for malnourished children.
The other product is protein and fiber rich ready to eat snack foods. The p ea protein is
added with corn flour in appropriate amount and some apple pomace. So, here it is a
protein  and  fiber  rich  material , comparatively  less  starchy.  So,  these are  mixed  inappropriate amount and then finally, fed to the extruder under desired conditions and
finally ready to eat expanded snacks of desired characteristics are obtained. 