Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 22
Freeze Drying (Part 2)
In the first part, the fundamental aspects of the freeze drying process were discussed.
Now, in the second part of the freeze drying, the equipment(s), systems and product
applications are elaborated.
Freeze dryers
The freeze dyers /freeze drying systems may be classified as pilot or laboratory scale and
industrial or large scale freeze dryer. The industrial or large scale freeze dryers may be of
multi batch type, continuous freeze dryer or tunnel freeze dryers. The continuous freeze
dryers are again classified into two groups, continuous tray freeze dryer or continuous
tray-less freeze dryer. The tray-less freeze dryers are different vibrational freeze dryer,
circular plate dryers, vacuum spray freeze dryer, belt freeze dryers and atmospheric
freeze dryers.Pilot/Laboratory scale freeze dryer
The schematic of the laboratory scale or pilot scale freeze dryer is shown in figure. They
can freeze-dry batches consisting of 2 to 20 kg of frozen product.
The unit consists of 
•Freezing  fluid system  can be sent to heat  exchanger  of the condenser or to
refrigeration coils for product freezing,
•Heating circuit (silicon oil -heating fluid) for heating the plate and defrosting the
condenser.
•Vacuum system for evacuating air from apparatus before and during drying.
•The chamber is often a bell jar with temperature of -45°C and pressure of 0.05
mbar.Industrial freeze dryer
These  are  normally  program  controlled  to  minimize  drying  time  and  to  maximize
production.  Optimal  utilization  of  the  resources  makes  possible  the  simultaneous
production with increased operation flexibility.  The multi batch freeze dryer is shown in
the figure. It consists of insulated chamber with condensers on both sides of the shelves
which  are  used to  keep  products.  The  system  is  provided  with  the  vacuum  pump,
refrigeration unit, oil and cold traps, etc.
Continuous freeze dryers
The other type of dryer is a continuous freeze dryer (see figure). Obviously, since it is a
continuous system, it involves less labour and is also less expensive process as compared
to that of the batch process. It gives continuity in processing throughout and the constant
operating conditions can be maintained. It is generally used for freeze drying of product
in trays as well as for agitated bulk materials. It has a drying tunnel with entry and exit
lock which is divided into different sections. Every section is provided with the heating
plates and condenser systems. The product is loaded in the tray and trays are moved
through different chambers using the conveyor belt. The inert gas is used to open and
close the lock.
Continuous tray freeze dryers
Similarly, the continuous tray freeze dryer is shown in figure. The product is placed on
trays and moves along the dryer in a continuous manner. There are two main types
depending on the type of the condenser used.
(i)Continuous tray freeze dryer where the condenser plates are alongside the tray
heater assembly.
(ii)Continuous tray freeze dryer where the condenser plates are placed separately.
The  condenser  joined  to  the  first  by  a  butterfly  valve .  Generally  used  in
pharmaceutical industries as well as in freeze drying of foods. Continuous tray-less freeze dryers
Continuous tray less freeze dryer is shown in the figure. In this system, the vibrational
conveyor  is  used  instead  of  the  trays  and  the  heating  plates  are  used  to  maintain
temperature. The vibration of the conveyor causes the movement of material from the
inside to product end. 
Circular plate dryers
The other type is the circular plate dryer, where the circular plates, heating platens and
the assembly to condenser, etc. are provided. The material moves from one plate to otherplate,  and  finally,  comes  to  the  bottom  in  dried  state.  The  pictorial  or  schematic
presentation of a circular plate dryer is shown in figure.
Atmospheric freeze dryer
The schematic presentation of atmospheric freeze dryer is shown in figure. Fluidized fine
particles of adsorbent and frozen product are put inside a column or drying chamber.
Fluidization media is dry and cold gas (air or N 2). The heat of adsorption provides the
heat for sublimation.  A final heating step with hot air is adopted to remove the bound
water in the product. The advantage of the system is that it provides good heat transfer
coefficient, but the disadvantage is the lower mass transfer rate than vacuum drying.
Vacuum spray freeze dryers
The  schematic  of  vacuum  spray  freeze  dryers  is  shown  in  figure  which  contain
refrigerated coil, atomizers (spray jet), moving belt, heating platens and hopper. Product
is  atomized by fluid nozzle  in the form of droplets  and gets  frozen by evaporative
freezing. The frozen mass is allowed to fall on the moving belt which comes in contact
with the heating platens in a vacuum chamber. The heat of sublimation is provided to the
frozen mass in vacuum chamber (nearly 67 Pa). In this process, upto 15% of moisture
loss in the product is reported in the literature and the size of obtained particles were
about 150 µm diameter.
Tunnel freeze dryers
Tunnel freeze dryer are similar to the continuous tray freeze dryer. The frozen food
products are loaded in the trolleys which are passed through the vacuum chambers. The
chamber  is  provided  with  entry  gate  and  exit  gate  valves,  forward  vacuum  locks,
condenser, etc. Tray-carrying trolleys are loaded through a large vacuum lock at one end
of  the  tunnel  and  discharged  at  the  other  end.  The  plant  capacity  utilization  is  an
advantage in multi batch plants, but lack of the flexibility for simultaneous production of
different products or in switching from one product to other, is generally difficult.Freeze-dehydration related processes
There are four important processes related to freeze drying. Those are pre freezing,
freeze concentration, condensing and defrosting. These require meticulous control to
ensure the process economy and quality of the final processed product.
Pre-freezing
Pre-freezing is done to reduce the freeze drying time during freezing process. It is
classified as direct contact freezing or indirect contact freezing. 
(a)Direct contact freezingFood material in any form which is to be frozen comes in direct contact with the
freezing media.
i.Individual quick freezing (IQF)
ii.Atmospheric bed freezing 
iii.Immersion freezing
(b)Indirect contact freezing
There is no contact between the food material and freezing medium.
i.Plate freezing 
ii.Air blast freezing
iii.Scraped surface heat exchanger
Freeze concentration
Freeze  concentration  is  another  important  aspect  in  the  freeze  drying  processes
particularly  required  to  reduce  the  cost  of  the  product  and  to improve  the  process
economy otherwise it becomes a very costly process to remove the moisture from the
food material.
Freeze concentration involves the fractional crystallisation of water to ice and subsequent
removal of the ice. It includes the process of crystal nucleation, crystal growth during
freezing process and then ice separated from the system, either through centrifugation
process or by other system. This is achieved in a paddle crystalliser. It is a potentiallyattractive method for concentration of fruit juices, coffee, tea and selected alcoholic
beverages. The separation of ice crystals is done in wash column.
The freeze concentration process is shown in the figure which consists of the scraped
heat exchanger, crystalliser, filter and melter. The food material is fed to the crystalliser
through the scraped heat exchanger after precooling where crystallisation takes place.
When the desired final concentration is achieved, the concentrate is used for the next
process of the freeze drying. The centrifugal system may be used to remove the ice
crystals.
Condensation
It prevents the water vapour from returning to the product or passing into the vacuum
pump. Condensers are arranged so that the vapour flow sweeps the non-condensable
compounds into the vapour stream removed by the vacuum pump. Defrosting
Defrosting is the removal of ice deposited in the condenser during the progress of the
freeze drying process. It should be continuously removed to get the process efficiency. 
The defrosting may be done by
•Passing hot air
•Hot water, or steam
•Using a heating element
Collapse
Freezing causes separation of ice and a concentrated solution of solutes. A change in the
bulk density is obtained when the product is heated to a certain temperature. This change
is known as  collapse. It occurs when mobility of the concentrate phase increases. The
temperature at which collapse occurs is a function of the moisture content and solutes in
the food.
Effect of rate of freezing
Another factor affecting the quality of the product is the rate of freezing i.e. use of
freezing process such as rapid or slow freezing. It affects the structure and texture of the
dried material. 
Rapid cooling results in small ice crystals, useful in preserving structures to be
examined microscopically, but resulting in a product that is, more difficult to
freeze dry.
Slower cooling results in large ice crystals and less restrictive channel in the
matrix during the drying process
The effects of the rapid cooling and slow cooling can be seen in the figures.These two phenomena i.e. the collapse and the freezing rate are the important factors
which contribute to the product quality during freeze drying process and these should be
properly analysed and considered.
Volatile retention
Freeze  drying  imparts  better  retention  of  sensory  characteristics,  aroma,  nutritional
qualities,  and  offers  long  shelf  life  to  the  products.  The  volatiles  are  retained  by
entrapment within the dry food matrix. The volatiles are localized and strongly bound in
in microregions, small areas in the dry material. However, the open porous structure may
cause  oxidative  deterioration  of  lipids.  Minor  changes  to  proteins,  starches  or
carbohydrates may take place.Applications of freeze drying in food processing
As far as the application of freeze drying in food processing is concerned, although it is
considered to be a costlier process, but still it is recommended or rather it is being used
for large scale processing of the various products. The applications of the freeze drying
are listed below:
It is a promising technique for dehydration of thermal sensitive foods like fruits,
vegetables, meat and meat products, poultry, fish and shellfish.  
Freeze dehydrated products are used as ingredients in several processed foods
such as corn flakes, cereal bars, ice creams, pastry sauces, dehydrated soups and
meals etc.
Also, freeze-dried food is used by hikers, hunters, astronauts, and military. The
largest application is freeze-dried instant coffee and tea. 
Freeze-dried egg yolk can be produced even at marketable costs. Dairy products
such as starter culture for yogurt and cheese production. 
Freeze-dried microorganisms are frequently used for fermentation reactions, in
bioconversion reactions and are stored for research.
Freeze-drying of coloring pigments.Freeze dried instant coffee
In the market, freeze dried coffee are available because the quality obtained after the
freeze drying is much better but little more cost is involved in the process. The steps
involved  in  the  process  are  extraction,  filtration  and  concentration,  recovery  of
aromatics, reserving the aroma and flavour, primary freezing, cooling, size reduction,
drying, aromatization and packaging. 
This is the flow diagram for the manufacture of freeze dried instant tea and coffee is
shown. In the making of coffee or even instant tea, first a brew is made which is filtered
and concentrated using suitable equipment. The volatile aromas are recovered and they
are kept aside. The de-aromatized concentrated coffee or tea extracts is frozen. The
frozen mass is then cooled and ground for size reduction. The ground mass is subjected
to the sublimation by using appropriate freeze drying equipment. After sublimation, the
aroma recovered earlier again is added into the dried material and finally, the product is
packaged. Freeze drying may be used instead of spray drying for converting the liquid coffee
extract to a dry form.
Freeze drying involves four steps
•Primary freezing
Coffee extract is chilled to a slushy consistency at about -6°C.
•Cooling
The pre-chilled slush is placed on a steel belt, trays, or drums and further cooled in a
series of steps, until it reaches temperature of -40°C to -45°C. 
•Size reduction
The slabs of ice ground into particles for the drying step. Too small are melted and
returned to the primary freezing stage.
•Drying
The  frozen  particles  are  sent  into  a  drying  chamber  where,  under  proper
conditions of heat and vacuum, the ice  vaporizes and is removed.Freeze dried fruit powders/ slices
The freeze drying technology can utilized -
• For making like fruit drinks, ice creams, thick shakes, yogurt.
•For making candy and toffee.
•For making instant juice mixes, flavoring infant foods, food premixes, and bakery
products.
•In rich cream fillings, chocolate products, cereals and fruit bars.
•In  products  where  the  fruit  content  is  desired  along  with  texture  and
crunchiness.
•For making freeze dried spices and vegetable are used in manufacturing of instant
vegetable noodles, soups, snacks and different kinds of fast food.Freeze drying is a good alternative to preserve foods that contain high quantities of
proteins  and  volatiles  and  that  are  susceptible  to  browning  reactions.  The  porous
structure resulting from the sublimation of ice allows instant properties in freeze dried
products. Some important parameters to be considered for a specific product are: the
freezing  procedure,  collapse  temperature,  secondary  drying  end  point,  vacuum,
condenser size, and heat source.