Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 20
Supercritical Fluid Extraction (Part 2)
 
Hello  everybody.  So,  we  will  study  now  the  second  part  of  the  supercritical  fluid
extraction technology and which includes or here we will discuss mainly about the
application aspects of this process in food industry.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:41)
Just an overview of the process what we already discussed in the lecture 1, but to refresh
your memory, let me tell you that this is a process of separating one component from the
other  using  supercritical  fluid  as  the  extracting  solvent.  The  component  which  is
separated is known as extractant commonly and the material from which it is extracted it
is known as you can call it as a matrix.
And the carbon dioxide gas is the most commonly used supercritical fluid sometimes it is
modified by co solvents like ethanol, methanol etcetera and it is a safe, expensive, eco
friendly, non toxic and economical process and here to refresh your memory there is just
you can see there is a this extraction vessel it is the extraction vessel. So, the carbon
dioxide generating source co solvent store, vessel so, this carbon dioxide through the
pressure into pump and those things. That is in the material that is the in the extractor ismaterial is loaded and the carbon dioxide with the help of some pump and this even co
solvent both there the air flow is regulated and in the desired proportions there earlier.
And finally, there is there is a decompression valve there is under this desired condition
above this desired condition of temperature and pressure which can be optimized for a
different process operations for different components in the material. And then these
particular that is the components of particular nature in from the food or from the bio
materials get extracted in the solvent and then they or the solvent is decompressed that is
the depressurised and these components are extracted or they are obtained from the
mixture of the fluid and the extract.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:10)
So, applications of the supercritical fluid extraction in the food industry and as you can
see here we will discuss it has a large or a wide range of application that is in the natural
products as well as food industries. It can be used for decaffeination of coffee and tea,
for extraction of oils and oleoresins from spices, for deodorization of oils and fats. So, in
the oil milling industry or oil refining industry it has a good application. It can be used
for preparation  or extraction  of flavours, fragrances, aromas  and perfumes  etcetera.
Decholesterolization of egg yolk and dairy cream that is the extraction of cholesterol
from  the  cholesterol  rich  materials,  extraction  of  antioxidant  from  plant  materials,
extraction  of food colours  from  botanicals,  natural  pesticides  or it  can be  used  for
extraction of nicotine from tobacco and all.So, it has a wide ranging applications, so, only few are listed here.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:30)
Therefore, super critical fluid extraction technology can be used as I told you in the
earlier through detail for that is extraction purification and separation of edible oils and
fats, hops extracts hop which is used in the beer making industry. So, and hops that is it
is a flower flowering part from which that is the flavouring it has a good it gives the
characteristic flavour to the beer.
So,  these  hops  can  be  extracted  using  this  SCFE  technology.  So,  the  natural  or
characteristics flavour of the extract is retained that is natural dyes like annatto, hibiscus
or vitamins like tocopherols, vitamin E, tocotrienols, carotenoids, sterols, essential fatty
acids  like  EPA,  DHA,  DPA.  Bioactive  compounds  like  caffeine,  theobromine,
cholesterol,  capsaicin,  even  monoglycerides,  diglycerides,  aroma  compounds,
thiosulfinate, even essential ions from citrus fruits etcetera, citrus oil or antioxidants such
as vitamin E, ascorbic acid, polyphenols or even diacin, genicin, etcetera. So, all sorts of
compounds that is they can be extracted from the food material using this.(Refer Slide Time: 06:04)
So, will take up one or two examples and here it is the decaffeination of coffee or tea
using SCFE technology. So, there is process flow chart SCFE technology and that is the
in the plants process flow where we can see that is there are extraction vessel. We have
already  seen in the  earlier  the  same  thing  that  it  is  a continuous  there are several
extraction  vessels  and  these  are  connected  with  the  through  piping’s  and  other
instruments etcetera.
So, CO2 supply or even extended supplies etcetera and then extraction and then the
pressurization. So, as far as the technology of the decaffeination is concerned, first the
coffee bean is wetted with water and this wetting of the bean tends to dissolve and
desorb caffeine from the solid matrix and then wetted green bean are loaded into the
extraction vessel and after it is loaded supercritical carbon dioxide is introduced into the
vessel. And the operating conditions normally maintained are 300 bar pressure and 40
degree Celsius temperature. So, under these conditions of course, that is it is given the
required time all right for the extraction.
And once the extraction process and of course, which is in the industry they have to
optimize it and for the optimized optimum time once it is given, then the extract which is
finally obtained it is transferred through an expansion valve to the separator and this in
the separator actually what is done, that is it operates at a comparatively lower pressure
at a low pressure sorry there are 2 spelling mistakes that that is at a lower pressure and lo w low pressure. So, this separator operates at a low pressure and separates the extract
which is obtained here in 2 phases, that is it separates the aqueous caffeine extract and
carbon dioxide.
So,  the  carbon  dioxide  is  again  recycled  further  to  improve  the  efficiency  and  the
caffeine is sent to the recovery unit where it is it can be recovered either by adsorption or
by  some  other  method  of  course,  by  decompression  and  another  thing.  So,  even
adsorption on an activated carbon column can be used to recover the caffeine from the
extract.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:11)
So, this in brief, so, of course, that is the here I have taken from the literature just to
show  you that  how  the  extraction  process  variables.  That  is  may  be the  extraction
pressure, extraction time, extraction temperature, they influence the yield of the caffeine,
you can see that is these are the 3 lines all right and they are the 3 lines shown which has
the temperature 85, 70 and 60 degree Celsius and also there is some points the other
points which are these which is the line in are shown. This is the temperature 80 degree
Celsius and pressure is 280 bar the other these temperatures are there and there are
pressure are 250 bar and 280 bars is maintained and the extraction time is varied.
So, you can see that is yield y axis is the yield that is yield of the caffeine varies or it
increases  with the increase in the time  with increase  in the temperature  as  well asincrease in the pressure. So, of course, for maximum yield or for maximum recovery
depending upon process one should always standardize the process and optimize it.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:38)
 Similarly in this slide you can see the concentration that is the concentration of the
material which is extracted in this case caffeine and if it is initially taken as the 100
percent concentration and which it was fed into the extractor vessel then in the extraction
time was maintained 12 hours all right. So, even the mass flow rate, how with the mass
flow  rate  the  extraction  the  concentrate  that  is  in  the  residue  part,  what  is  the
concentration of the material is remaining that you can and that increases with both that
is increase in the mass flow rate that is kg per kg solid as well as the pressure.
So, these in the nutshell, you can say that is the operating pressure mass, flow rate of the
material in the continuous system and then gas temperature, pressure other things. They
are influenced in the yield of the product as well as the concentration are remaining in
the material in the component so, once we properly optimize.(Refer Slide Time: 11:49)
The extraction of natural food antioxidants have been widely studied by several authors
at even that is a many common or important bio materials like rosemary etcetera has
been have been used. And their antioxidant has been processes or their extraction have
been standardized or optimized like some researchers they have demonstrated that the
antioxidant activity of supercritical extracts of rosemary or other different Turkish plants
were  higher  than  those  obtained  by  conventional  processes  like  steam  distillation
etcetera.
Even better results are reported in terms of antioxidant activity right when particularly
compared like this antioxidant or extract obtained from the supercritical food extraction
process and the extract obtained from the liquid solvent extraction process there is once
one it was compared it was found that those obtained from the SFE process they have
better antioxidant activity.(Refer Slide Time: 13:11)
Extraction of antioxidants from dried mushroom particularly the ergothioneine etcetera
and. In fact, we also in our laboratory have done some work on this aspect. This picture
just to make you just to show you that is the dried mushroom, mushroom is taken and
dried and then made into the powder allowed to improve the extraction efficiency and
then in the powder form it is introduced into the extraction vessel and the rest thing
follows as usual in the any other process that what we have discussed earlier. So, it is
given in the desired time or that is the contact or of the temperature that is the carbon
dioxide super critical carbon dioxide at desired temperature pressure etcetera.
And  then  finally,  ergothioneine  or  extract  is  obtained  and  we  have  found  that
ergothioneine that about 1.35 milligram per gram dry weight and that is total phenols
about 5.48 milligram gallic acid equivalent per gram dry weight in our laboratory we got
this result this data is already published.(Refer Slide Time: 14:35)
Also we have done work accordingly that is the extraction of bioactive components from
microalgae  it  was  used  to  extract  lutein  and  total  phenolics  and  antioxidants  from
chlorella vulgaries our result showed that of course, we did a studied we optimized the
process of the temperature pressure combination and all those things. And we about 6.6
milligram per 100 gram dry weight lutein, 22.8 milligram gallic acid equivalent per 100
gram dry weight total phenols and 5.3 milligram per 100 gram dry weight antioxidant
could be obtained using ethanol modified supercritical carbon dioxide in our process.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:34)
There  is  also  that  is  the  low  cholesterol  whole  milk  powder  and  cream  powder;
supercritical carbon dioxide alone and ethanol modifier carbon dioxide. They are implied
various researcher have done work on this aspect, we have also done substantial work in
our laboratory all right for the preparation of or low cholesterol dairy cream or milk
powder or cream powder. And in our process about we could recover about or we can
reduce that cholesterol from the milk fat about 55.8 percent and 46 percent cholesterol
removal  from  whole  milk  powder  could  be  achieved  by  using  supercritical  carbon
dioxide alone and ethanol modified SC CO 2 respectively.
So, of course, addition of ethanol led to enhanced extraction rate and this again the
similar process that is the here milk powder is introduced into the vessel it is given the
intimate contact with the supercritical SC CO 2 along with the modifier and then finally,
the rest procedure as usual is followed.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:07)
Let me elaborate little that is the process flow chart for the preparation of low cholesterol
milk powder using supercritical fluid carbon dioxide technology and here you can see in
this pictorial flow diagram that the as I told you milk powder is taken and the milk
powder is introduced into the extraction vessel and this vessel is fitted in to the SCFE
equipment, we have base bench top SCFE equipment and after it is the material is put
into the vessel than other processes as usual are followed that is the carbon dioxide as
well  as  together  either  as  we have conducted  lot of experiment  this  we conductedtogether we processed as well as along with that separately or a together with that
modifier.
And we standardized process parameter and finally, that is developed technology for
preparation and optimize the parameter and. In fact, the material which was cholesterol
which was obtained  and low cholesterol  cream  dairy cream and milk powder their
characteristics were also analyzed and this low cholesterol there you can it was found
that there is no difference in the properties as well as the in the taste of the cream low
cholesterol containing cream or even the after the removal of the cholesterol.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:35)
So this similarly that was from the milk powder similarly for the cream powder we. So,
what we did first, we lyophilized the cream and converted it into that is the cream
powder.(Refer Slide Time: 18:56)
And this cream powder was used for the study in the extraction process as I mentioned
earlier, we optimized the process of cholesterol removal from the cream using this. The
input variable were the temperature time and pressure; temperature ranging from 40 to
75 degree Celsius, time from 2.5 hours to 3.5 hours, pressure from 100 to 250 in this
range  all  these  variables  were  fed  and  different  about  20  experiments  having
combinations of these variables were conducted as per the experimental design and the
static time was kept 30 minute and the flow rate was fixed at 6 litre per minute.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:56)
This are the some of the response surface plots showing the effect of temperature and
pressure on the cholesterol removal, effect of temperature and dynamic time as well as
effect of pressure and dynamic time on the reduction in cholesterol from the dairy cream
or cream powder and here you can see here that is there by increasing these variables
there are different that is the both this increases for some time like, for example if you
increase the time that is the increase reduction is more, but with the pressure it first is
sometime increases with the temperature also it increases and then decreases and with
the pressure also it may at the higher pressure it is high and the when the pressure is
reduced it may become low, but after sometime again there is one say pressure. So, it has
all this factor like a temperature, dynamic time, pressure etcetera they have important
effect on the reduction of the cholesterol from the cream powder.
So, this is exhibited in these response surface plots.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:26)
But we should see that the cholesterol is removed, when the cholesterol is removed there
should not be substantial reduction of the fat from the. So, we also studied that is how
that  is  these  parameters  which  we  are  applied  for  the  extract  removal  or  of  that
cholesterol, how they are influencing the removal of the fat because in the food material
in the dairy cream these cholesterols that is which are phospholipids they are generally
found associated with the other lipid molecule. So, it is quite likely that the fat also get
extracted with the cholesterol.So, one has to optimize the process that is and that we have done so, that these for
maximum cholesterol removal or reduction in the with minimum fat content. So, this
again similar effect as which we have seen and these effects are on the temperature
pressure temperature, dynamic time and pressure dynamic time on the separation of fat
from the cream during supercritical fluid extraction.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:45)
So, accordingly that I told you, we could standardize the process we have optimized the
parameters and with the help of the modifier we could get at least around about 65 to 70
percent reduction in the cream all right. This is taken the picture of the low cholesterol
removed cream powder as well as there is the initial cream powder with full cholesterol
right and this cholesterol removed cream powder is was further used in the preparation of
products like butter and ghee etcetera and it was observed that there was no significant
effect in the characteristics of the products prepared from the low cholesterol. So, it
becomes a good and very effective say and means.(Refer Slide Time: 23:47)
So, also that is an important aspect of this supercritical fluid extraction is in the quality
control  ok,  it  is  a  unique  that  is  a very  good  advancement  for  the  quality  control
particularly in the case of fat analysis etcetera because in the products like baking dough,
milk,  chocolate  products  etcetera  the  conventional  methods  which  are  used  for  the
removal of the fat and determination of the fat content in these products are normally
labour intensive they require much time, they require large amount of hazardous organic
solvents.
 So, using this supercritical fluid extraction technology these sorry using carbon dioxide
as a solvent one can get the or under complete extraction of this lipids or fat molecules
even whole all fats and lipids or even selective fats like monoglyceride, diglyceride
etcetera. So, this becomes that is SCFE technology becomes an alternative method for all
extraction, isolation and purification of this fat content from that such materials etcetera.
So, it becomes a very useful tool for the industry as well as and this can be in fact,
propagated and industries should use ok.
So,  this  ends  the  lecture  with  a  few  examples  to  conclude  you  can  say  that  this
supercritical fluid extraction technology is a very good technology particularly where our
products of our interest are high value products, heat sensitive product we want health
ingredients  in this material to remain intact. So, they can be easily extracted  usingsupercritical carbon dioxide without any adverse effect on the health component as well
as adverse effect without any adverse effect on the environment and other things.
There is no by product, no residue and this is a completely green technology; however,
for every product and for every process depending upon the characteristics of the raw
material as well as depending upon the ingredient which is being extracted, which we
want to extract from this, one need to properly optimize the process and standardize the
process. And accordingly suitable plant and machinery need to be made to facilitate the
extraction process and to get proper and the plant machinery, equipment design etcetera
should be properly made.