Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 28 
Antimicrobials & Bacteriocins
This lecture is about antimicrobials and bacteriocins.
Food antimicrobials are chemicals, which are added to or are present in food that retard
microbial growth or kill microorganisms. Functions of food antimicrobials are to inhibit
or inactivate spoilage microorganisms or pathogens. A number of compounds have been
approved by international regulatory agencies.The chemical to be used in a food as an antimicrobial should have certain characteristics.
It should be less toxic or non-toxic. It should have its antimicrobial activities over broad
spectrum  ranges.  Particularly  the  bactericidal as  well  as  bacteriostatic  effect  of  the
chemical should be well established. It should be stable to heat and storage, it should
have acceptable taste and odour, it should not only act against vegetative cells, but also
against spores of trouble creating microorganisms in food. 
There  are  3  effects  of  the  chemical  (See  Fig.):  bacteriostatic,  bactericidal and
bacteriolytic.  Bacteriostatic  means  the  bacteria  comes  under  the  stationary  phase.
Whereas the bactericidal means the bacteria is killed, the viable count decreases but, the
bacteriolytic means total cell count and viable counts both decrease, they are completely
killed.
And this of course, very important that these antimicrobials should be effective in lower
concentrations, and the concentrations at which they are required to be added into the
food to get the desired effect should not result into any undesirable taste, flavor and other
characteristics of the food material.
So,  these  are  some  of  the  important  characteristics,  which  should  be  there  in  the
chemicals, in order to qualify it, for being used as a food antimicrobial.There are; however, certain limitations in the use of food antimicrobials. 
i) Effect of pH 
•Organic acids function at low concentrations only in high acid foods (less than
pH 4.5-4.6).
•Most effective antimicrobial form is undissociated acid which exists in majority
only at a pH below the pKa of the compound.
•All approved organic acids used as antimicrobials have pKa less than 5.0.
All  organic  acids  which  are  approved  as  antimicrobial,  they  have  pKa
(dissociation constant) less than 5 pKa, i.e. acetic acid has pKa of 4.75, propionic
acid 4.87, sorbic acid has pKa of 4.75 (See Table). 
•These acids will have maximum antimicrobial activity in high acid foods. 
•For food products with pH 5.5 or greater there are very few compounds that are
effective at low concentrations.
Because, in these foods even very high concentration of these acids might be
required which ultimately may influence the sensory characteristics or taste of the
product.
ii) Another limitation to the use of these food antimicrobials is the interactions among
the food constituents, i.e. the effectiveness of these antimicrobials get reduced because of
the food component interaction.Most of the antimicrobials are ampiphillic. So, they can solubilize in or be bound by
lipids or hydrophobic proteins and because of this, they are binding with the hydrophobic
proteins or lipids they become less available for their antimicrobial activities. 
So, these food antimicrobials many a times are classified depending on the basis of the
source from which they are obtained like, the antimicrobials obtained from the animal
sources, includes  chitosan, lactoferrin,  lactoperoxidase  system, and lysozyme. Those
obtained from the plant sources include allium, hydroxycynnamic acid, isothiocyanates,
or spices and essential oils, the antimicrobials of microorganism sources are the natural
antimicrobials produced by microorganisms, include natamycin, nisin, bacteriocin and
cultured products.
Lactoferrin: It is a primary iron binding compound in milk and colestrum, lactoferrin has
2 iron binding sites per molecule. And because of this iron binding activity, it becomes
inhibitory to a number of microorganisms. And therefore, it can be used to prevent the
growth or even to kill or inactivate the microorganisms in several food products.
Similarly the lactoperoxidase (LPS) system, it is an enzyme that occurs in raw milk,
colestrum, saliva and other such biological secretions. This LPS reacts with thiocyanates
in the presence of hydrogen peroxides. And, this forms the antimicrobial lactoperoxidase
system. The fresh milk contains about 1-10 mg of the thiocyanate/L. Hydrogen peroxide,
in fact, is not present in the milk. So, approximately 8-10 mg hydrogen peroxide/L of the
milk might be required to be added for the generation of the LPS system.
So, in LPS reaction, SCN is oxidised to the antimicrobial O-SCN (hypothiocyanate)
which  also  exists  in  equilibrium  with  hypothiocyanus  acid,  and  its  disassociation
constant is 5.3. So, because of this equilibrium it results into the inhibitory activity.
Lysozyme is the enzyme that catalyzes hydrolysis of beta 1,4 glycosidic bonds between
the N-acetyl muramic acid and N-acetyl glucosamine of the bacterial cell wall. This
lysozyme is present in egg, milk, tears, and other secretions. It is also present in insects
and fishes; in hypotonic solution of the enzyme, the lysis of the bacterial cell occurs.
Lysozyme is used to prevent gas formation in cheese (blowing) and the maximum limit,
which is recommended for use is 400 mg/L of egg white.As far as the antimicrobials from plant sources are concerned, there are large number of
compounds which have been identified and isolated. And in fact, their effectiveness
against the microorganism has been proved by lot of reports in the literature.
Even in very traditional or ancient literature, the use of spices and spice oil extracts as
antimicrobial system or antibacterial system, or for various medicinal purposes, etc. has
been reported. For example, allium, onion and garlic, hydrocyanic acids, and related
compounds in caffeic acid, p-coumaric acid, ferulic acid and sinapic acids etc.
The gulcosinolates and their derivatives like isothiocyanates, spices and essential oils,
like eugenol in cloves, cinnamic aldehyde in cinnamon, linalool in sweet basil, vanillin
in vanilla, all these are reported to have antimicrobial or antibacterial activity, and they
are used as food antimicrobial.This  slide  shows  a  list  of  the  food  antimicrobials,  which  have  been  approved  by
regulatory agencies in different countries. Alkyl esters of para hydroxy benzoic acids,
like  parabens  etc.,  acetic  acid  and  acetate  salts,  benzoic  acids  and  benzoate  salts,
dimethyl or diethyl dicarbonates, lactic acid and lactate salts, lysozymes, natamycin,
nisin, nitrates and nitrites, phosphates, propionic acid and propionate salts, sorbic acid
and sorbate salts, sulfur dioxide and sulfite derivatives, medium chain fatty acids and
esters.
Nitrites are generally used in heat processed meat, poultry and fish, to control growth of
toxin produced by clostridium botulinum. These are also used in some cheeses to preventgas  production  by  Clostridium  butyricum  and  Clostridium  tyrobutyricum .  They  are
inhibitory to Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter,  etc.
These nitrites react with the enzymes in vegetative cell as well as with the germinating
spores, and they result into the restriction of bacterial use of iron, and interference with
the membrane permeability, and thereby limiting the transport processes in the bacterial
cell. And, the nitrites when they are used, they again disturb the homeostasis of the cell.
There are certain side effects of the nitrites reported in literature that it can lead to
formation of carcinogenic compounds like nitrosamines. So, there is a trend to reduce the
use of nitrites for the preservation.
Sulphur dioxide and sulfites are used in soft drinks, fruit juices, lemon juice, beverages,
wine, sausage, pickles, fresh shrimp, etc. These are produced by undissociated sulfurous
acid that rapidly enters the cell wall and reacts with thiol group in the structural proteins,
enzymes, and cofactors as well as other cellular components. And, this disturbs the
normal physiological activity of the cell. It acts as a fungicidal at low pH and low water
activity.  SO2 act  as  a bacteriostatic  at  low  concentration  and as  a bactericidal  at  a
comparatively higher concentration.Hydrogen peroxide has a strong oxidizing effect on the bacterial cell wall. It can oxidize
sulfhydryl groups of cell proteins and membrane lipids. Hydrogen peroxide producing
reactions, scavenge oxygen, thereby creating anaerobic environment that is unfavourable
for the growth of certain microorganisms. Antimicrobial activity of hydrogen peroxide is
enhanced by the presence of lactoperoxidase and thiocyanates. 
Diacetyl is identified as the aroma and flavor component in butter, it is produced by
species  and  strains  of  genera  lactobacillus,  leuconostoc,  pediococcus,  streptococcus
etcetera. It is more active against gram negative bacteria, yeasts and molds, and later
reacts  with  the  arginine  binding  protein  of Gram  negative  bacteria.  And thereby  itinterferes with the utilization of arginine as the bacterial cell wall and which influences
its growth.
Mechanism of antimicrobial action of organic acids: The weak acids have more powerful
antimicrobial activity at low pH than at neutral pH. Acetic acid is the strongest inhibitor,
and has a wide range of inhibitory activity, inhibiting yeast mold and bacteria. And the
undissociated molecule is a toxic form of a weak acid.
So, the undissociated form of organic acid diffuses across the cell membrane, the acid
dissociates  in  the  cytoplasm,  and  releases  the  proton,  and  ultimately  leads  to  the
acidification and dissipation of pH gradient over the membrane causing the observed
growth inhibition. So, this is the way how these organic acids perform their antimicrobial
action.There  are  different  antimicrobials  like  acetic  acid,  benzoic  acid,  natamycin,  nisin,
nitrates, propionic acid, sorbic acid, sulphites etc. and, their mode of action. Majority of
them  function  by  disrupting  the  cell  membrane  permeability  or  disturbing  the  cell
homeostasis.
Bio preservation is a methodology to extend storage life and to enhance safety of foods
using natural micro flora and/or their antibacterial products.
So, in the food either the microorganism in life forms or the bioactives, which are
produced  by  the  microorganism  can  be  extracted  and  purified  that  can  be  used  as
antimicrobial in the bio preservation methods. In dairy products like milk, whey etc.
where the microorganisms can be allowed to grow, in the fermented products like liquoror concentrate containing the bioactives, which are produced by the microorganism they
can be used.
So,  this  has  a  wide  ranging  application  in  food  processing.  So,  there  are  certain
antimicrobials of lactic acid bacteria which are being used for bio preservation.
And, these include organic acid like lactic acid, propionic acid, acetic acid, or other low
molecular weight compounds produced by the lactic acid bacteria, when they grow in the
food etc. like reuterin, diacetyl, hydrogen peroxide, fatty acid, cyclic dipeptide, and
phenyl lactic acids. 
Another  important  component  is  the  bacteriocin.  These  bacteriocins  are  actually
antimicrobial peptides and they kill or inhibit growth of closely related bacteria. The
bacteriocins of gram positive bacteria are seldom active against gram negative bacteria.For the selection of microbial culture to be used as bio preservatives, certain points must
be considered. It should be able to produce antimicrobials in the food; it should not affect
the sensory characteristics of the food, it should result in limited number of acid or other
bio active productions.
So, it should have weak protease activity, i.e. it should not adversely affect the protein
and  other  components  of  the  food,  limited  gas  production,  and  absence  of  slime
production. 
Functioning of bio-preservatives: The microorganisms which are the protective cultures
can be used in the food either in the final product, or even in the pre stages during the
processing, or even they can be mixed with the raw materials. And, they result into theinhibition of growth of the pathogenic or spoilage microorganisms, or they can result
into the extension of shelf life based on targeted inhibition of the specific spoilage
microorganisms.
The protective cultures which are used in certain food operations or food process as bio
preservatives, they should be listed in the GRAS. There is no indication of health risk of
this bacterial group and which is used as bio preservatives . And, the use of lactic acid
bacteria  in  biological  preservation  is  recommended  like,  lactobacillus  species,
lactococcus species or propionibacteria etc. They might even contribute to the health
benefits of the products, as they provide probiotic effects etc. into the food material; they
result into the shelf life extension. 
Factors promoting the use of bacteriocins as bio preservatives are listed: They do not
alter acceptance quality of the food and are safe for human consumption; they provide
effective barrier under wide pH and temperature ranges. Their activity is not lost in the
presence of food additives and effective in dairy foods during storage.
They are effective in low concentration; advent of novel bacteriocins with the broad
spectrum of activity from food grade lactic acid bacteria has made the use of these
bacteriocins and the microbials into the food possible. Even, the consumer resistance to
traditional chemical  preservatives  and concerns over the safety of the existing food
preservatives  like  sulfites  and  nitrites  etc.  has  also  led  to  the  more  use  of  these
bacteriocins. Safe and efficacious use of nisin for more than 40 years in several countries
is reported. So, the bacteriocins are economical and are safe to use in the food products.
Some of the bacteriocins are produced by lactic acid bacteria. Nisin A and Z is produced
by lactococcus lactis subsp lactis, pediocin PA-1, AcH is produced by pediococcus, then
leucocins is produced by leuconostoc spp. and so on. So, there are many lactic acid
bacteria, which can produce bacteriocins.So, that is one way by which the microorganism itself can be used in the food where they
produce  the  various  low  molecular  weight  compound  acids  and  which  provide  the
beneficial effect in extending its shelf life.
They can be grown in certain foods, extracted, purified and then use. However, the only
commercially produced bacteriocin, which is used at present is nisin. It is produced by
lactococcus  lactis  sub  species  lactis,  and  pediocin  PA-1,  which  is  produced  by
pediococcus acidilactici. So, the use of purified bacteriocin; however, have to be labeled
as  additive  and  they  require  regulatory  approval . Nisin  is  approved  for  use  as  an
antimicrobial in food by the joint FAO WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives.
Bactericidal  action  of nisin: Nisin inhibits  synthesis  of peptidoglycans. And, also it
interacts between the lipid I and lipid II. And this may result into the pore formation and
which finally, results into the inhibition of cell wall synthesis. So, they can bind the lipid
II which is the main transporter of the peptidoglycan subunits from the cytoplasm to the
cell wall. It prevents correct cell wall synthesis, leading to cell death.
Antimicrobial packaging is another common use now a days, i.e. active packaging where
these bacteriocins are used. Incorporation of bacteriocins into packaging films is used to
control food spoilage and pathogenic  microorganisms. Antimicrobial packaging film
prevent microbial growth on food surface by direct contact of the package with the
surface of food.
However, in order to make this use more widen and commercially more viable, one
should have a system for evaluating the effectiveness of these antimicrobials. Once the
efficacy of the compound in vitro is determined in the microbial media as well as in the
food products, this would evaluate the activity or potential of an antimicrobial against
multiple strains of pathogens. Because, many a times in the food, multiple micro flora
are present. The  antimicrobial are bacteriostatic rather than bactericidal. So, once the
effect of the antimicrobial is removed,  the bacteria will again revive.
So, applying the  antimicrobial in a food involves either a model food system, or the
actual food. These systems demonstrate potential interferences by food components, but
allow for easier sampling by the researcher. The microorganisms utilized should be a
natural contaminant or a pathogen of interest and incubation condition should reflect use
and abuse. The success of application testing should be determined by increased shelf
life or reduction of potential health hazards.
There are certain antimicrobials or bacteriocins at present that are being used in some of
the food products in some countries. However, there are still certain issues, which should
be  resolved or which need an elaborated study, for making the natural  antimicrobial
more useful and its application more common.
These are activity spectra and application data; there are not much data available in the
literature. So, generally this type of data obviously will make this process more popular.Many a times it invites legal or regulatory problems, because these purified bio actives or
antimicrobial might be considered by the regulatory agencies as chemical.
The  data  about  the  combined  effect  of  different  antimicrobials  and  resistance
development will be of  great immense. The microorganisms develop resistance to the
chemicals after repeated or frequent use or after their exposure to these chemicals for a
little more time. Toxicological data and regulatory approval require that it has  to be
added into the food for providing the desired effect in the food at that level in which it
does not produce any toxic effect. There are many naturally occuring herbs or  plant
extracts etc., which have the potential antimicrobial effect. But many of them might be
toxic otherwise. Another factor is the purity of the compound which is to be added that
incurs cost. The bio-preservation of food has a great potential in producing safe and good
quality food materials. So, the use of these natural antimicrobials or bio-preservatives is
a promising way in improving the shelf life as well as quality and health value of the
food products.