Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 21
Freeze Drying (Part 1)
Freeze drying topic is divided in two parts. In part 1, the fundamental aspects of freeze
drying and the systems is discussed while in the second part, the different equipment
used for freeze drying of various foods, few case studies or applications of freeze drying
in food are elaborated.
Removal of moisture from the food is an important operation for its preservation as it
results in the microbial deterioration, reduced rates of enzyme and chemical reactions,
reduced product mass and volume, efficient product transportation and storage and often
more convenient food for consumer use.Role of water activity (a w) in stabilisation of food
The concept of water activity versus food stability is already described in earlier classes.
In the figure, it could be seen that water present in ionic, covalent or in the capillary or
physically entrapped in the tissue matrix take part in the chemical reactions. Bacteria and
yeast grow only at water which is present in solute and capillary, whereas, the other
process like browning reaction, enzyme activity, and mold growth can occur when water
is present in covalent form. In the lipid oxidation reaction, even the ionic water which is
more firmly bound in the food material can also be involved. So, this shows forms and
presence of water in the food material which ultimately affect the dehydration process.
Freeze drying 
It is also termed as lyophilisation. It is a drying process where the wet product is first
frozen to a solid phase and this frozen mass is subsequently dried by sublimation of the
ice under reduced pressure. Typically, the freeze dried foods might contain moisture as
low as 1 to 3 %.
There are two basic steps in the freeze drying process (i) Freezing of the product and (ii)
Drying  of  the  frozen  mass  by  sublimation  process.  The  freeze  drying  process  is
represented in the figure wherein the moisture is removed from the product in ice form
by sublimation process under reduced pressure.
A brief comparison between the freeze drying process and conventional drying processes
is presented (see table). The freeze drying is much better in many aspects than that of the
conventional drying. 
Conventional dryingConventional drying Freeze dryingFreeze drying
•The solid to be dried is exposed to a
continuous flow of hot stream of air 
where moisture evaporates.•Removal of ice or other frozen 
solvents from a material through 
sublimation.
•Temperature range 37–93 ºC •Temperatures below freezing point,
•Atmospheric pressures •Reduced pressures (27–133 Pa)•Evaporation of water from surface 
of food•Sublimation of water from ice front
•Movement of solutes and 
sometimes case hardening•Minimal solute movement
•Stresses in solid foods cause 
structural damage and shrinkage•Minimal structural changes or 
shrinkage
Conventional drying Freeze drying
•Slow, incomplete rehydration •Rapid, complete rehydration
•Solid or porous dried particles often
have a higher density than the original 
food•Porous dried particles have a lower 
density than original food
•Odour and flavour frequently 
abnormal •Odour and flavour usually normal
•Colour frequently darker •Colour usually normal
•Reduced nutritional value •Nutrients largely retained
•Costs generally low •Costs generally highFundamentals of freeze dehydration
The phase diagram of water (pressure vs. temperature) is presented in the figure. The
changes in the pressure and temperature of the system change the state of the substance
i.e. water. The state of the substance means solid, liquid and vapour state. In figure, the
point ‘A’ is called as triple point because at this point, all the three states of water
coexist. The pressure and temperature at this point is 4.18 Torr and 0 C or in other words
it is about 611.73 Pa and 0.01 C.
If the system containing frozen solid mass i.e. ice mass maintained at the pressure and
temperature below the triple point, then there is direct conversion of solid (ice) into gas
(water vapour). This process is called as sublimation. In freezing, when the similar
conditions are applied, the gas also can be directly converted into solid phase, which is
called as deposition.
On the other hand, if the system pressure and temperature is above the triple point, the
solid will change to liquid that is called as melting and the liquid will change to solid
which is called freezing. Similarly, the liquid will change to gas which is known as
vaporization and gas to liquid is called condensation. In this way, the change in the
temperature and pressure influence various phase transition processes. In freeze drying
process, the direct transition from solid to gaseous state without going through a liquid
stage is important. This can only if the vapour pressure and temperature are below the
triple point of water (below 611.73 Pa & 0.01 °c)General considerations
Ideal distribution of moisture during sublimation is shown in the Figure A. There is an
interface at which the moisture drops from the initial level (m o) in the frozen layer to the
final moisture content of the dry layer (m f). This (mf) is determined by equilibrium with
partial pressure of water (P s) in the space surrounding the dry matter.
Actually  this  ideal  representation  is  not  true  and  the  process  is  represented  more
accurately in Figure B which shows the existence of some gradients in the dry layer. This
also shows that there exists a transition region in which there is no longer any ice and the
moisture content is still substantially higher than the final moisture content of the dry
layer (mf).
Freezing step
•The freezing temperature and time is a function of the solutes in solution.
•The eutectic state is required to ensure the removal of the water by sublimation
only.
•Melting and inadequate freezing may form frothy and gummy substances in the
final product.
•The  permeability  of  the  frozen  surface  layer  can  be  affected
by the migration of soluble components.
Drying step
Drying occurs in two parts (i) primary drying and (ii) secondary drying. 
•The primary drying step involves sublimation of ice under vacuum.
•The secondary step begins when no ice (from unbound water) is in the product
and the moisture comes from partially bound water  in the drying material.
Therefore, the primary and secondary drying step are important for process analysis .Heat and mass transfer in Freeze drying – General Considerations
The schematic  representation  of the heat  and mass  transfer occurring during freeze
drying is shown in the figure. Freeze drying represents a coupled heat and mass transfer
and both should be considered simultaneously in an analysis of the operation. 
It can be seen in the figure that, the heat is supplied to the food material in proper
conditions (temperature & pressure) which causes the sublimation of the ice. The water
vapour is then removed through condenser. 
The rate of sublimation is given by
       Where, G is the rate of sublimation
A is the sublimation area (ft2)
Pi is vapour pressure of ice (torr)
Pc is condenser vapour pressure (torr)
Rd is the resistance of dry layer in the food
Rs is the resistance of space between food and condensor
K1 is a constant depending on the molecular weight of sublimation substance
(ice)At the same time, there must be a proper supply of heat of sublimation ∆H s, 
G = q / ΔHs  
Where, q is the heat flux (Btu / hr)
Heat transfer
The interface between the frozen zone and dry zone is - ‘sublimation front’ (see figures).
From this front, solid is getting sublimed into vapour. So, it indicates that the heat
transfer occurs in sublimation front. There are three ways in which this heat transfer
might occur. 
(i)Heat transfer through the frozen layer
(ii)Heat transfer through the dry layer 
(iii) Internal heating by microwaves
In figure, A, B and C – three cases of the freeze drying processes are shown. In the case
A, heat transfer occurs through the frozen layer and mass transfer through the dry layer
and both of them are in the same direction. In case B, the heat transfer and mass transfer
are through the dry layer and they are in opposite direction whereas, in the case C, the
heat is generated internally by microwaves and heat transfer here is by radiation and
mass  transfer  is  through  the  dry  layer.  Therefore,  while  calculating  the  process
efficiency, all the situations of the freeze drying should be properly considered.Rate of heat transfer
a)Heat transfer through the frozen layer 
The rate of heat transfer depends on the thickness and thermal conductivity of the
ice layer.
b)Heat transfer through the dried layer 
The rate of heat transfer to the sublimation front depends on the thickness and
area of the food, the thermal conductivity of the dry layer and the temperature
difference between the surface of the food and ice front.
c) Heating by microwaves 
Heat  is  generated  at  the  ice  front,  and  the  rate  of  heat  transfer  is
not  influenced  by  the  thermal  conductivity  of  ice  or  dry  food,  or
the thickness of the dry layer.Rate of mass transfer
The figure shows the changes in temperature causes change in the rate of the mass
transfer in terms of moisture change.  The dotted line shows the temperature change and
continuous line shows the moisture content. It can be seen that moisture content falls
from initial high level in frozen zone to a lower level in dried layer. The water vapour
pressure gradient actually determines the rate of removal of water and depends on the
factors such as (i) pressure in the drying chamber temperature (ii) temperature of the
vapour condenser and (iii) temperature of the ice at sublimation front.
Drying time
Drying time in the freeze drying process can be calculated by using the formula 
Where, Ts is Max permissible surface temperature (ºC)
Ti is Temperature at the sublimation front () (ºC)
 mo, mf are Initial and final moisture contents (%db)
 ρ is Bulk density of the solids (kg/m3)
ΔHs is Latent heat of sublimation (J/kg)
L is Thickness of the slab (m)
k is Thermal conductivity of the dry layer (W/m  ºC ) 
Components of a freeze-dryer
1.Vacuum chamber 
Contains trays to hold the food during drying
2.Heaters 
To supply latent heat of  sublimation 
3.Refrigeration coils  
To condense the vapours directly to ice
4.Condenser  Vapours contact the condensing surface, they give up their heat energy and turn into
ice crystals
5.Vacuum pump   
To remove  non-condensable vapour
6.Control and measurement instruments
Pressure, temperature,  possibly  weight  measurement  instrument  are  provided  in
equipment.
Freeze drying methods
(a)Contact (or conduction) freeze drying  
Food is placed onto ribbed trays which rest on heater plates with uneven contact.
It dries the food more slowly as heat is transferred by conduction to only one side
of the food. It is generally available in higher capacity.(b)Accelerated  freeze drying  
In this equipment, food is held between two layers of expanded metal mesh and
subjected to a slight pressure on both sides. Rapid heat transfer occurs during the
drying which ultimately cause reduction in drying times.
(c) Radiation freeze drying
In this method, infrared radiation from radiant heaters is used to heat shallow layers of
food on flat trays. In this case, heating is more  uniform than in conduction  types and
constant drying conditions are obtained. Vapour movement is approximately 1 m/s, so, it
results in a fast drying. Also, there is little risk of product carryover in this process.(d) Microwave heating in freeze drying
Like radiations, similarly the microwaves can be used to heat the foods during the freeze
drying process. In this system, special oscillators known as magnetron generate high
frequency microwaves. These microwaves with the help of waveguides are supplied to
the vacuum chamber, which provide the heat energy or latent heat of sublimation to the
product inside the vacuum chamber. The interaction  of electric  and magnetic  fields
results  in  the  development  of  a  space  charge  and  the  sublimation  occurs.  The
disadvantages are process control, cost and ionization of gases. However, if suitable
economic  equipment  is  made  available,  this  may  be  a  comparatively  much  better
process.
Advantages of freeze drying  
(i)Retain taste, smell and texture 
(ii)Fewer loss of Nutrient 
(iii)Reduced weight 
(iv)Extended Shelf Life
(v)Sterility of product 
(vi)Rapid Rehydration  
Drawbacks of freeze drying
(i)The high investment, operating and maintenance costs.
(ii)The complex process.
(iii)The equipment requires a team of skilled and permanently trained collaborators.
(iv)Volatile compounds might be removed when a high vacuum is used.