Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 23
Extrusion Technology (Part 1)
Extrusion is a versatile technology used for manufacture of variety of food products. In
two parts, the extrusion technology is discussed. In this part, the basics engineering and
technological principles of food extrusion and also about the different types of extruders
are explained. In the second part, the effect of extrusion on food characteristics, food
components, raw ingredients suitable for extrusion and the product characteristics  is
elaborated. 
Extrusion technology
Food extrusion is a versatile high temperature short time process which has become
established for continuous manufacture of new and traditional products. In extrusion
cooking, the food material is heated either by external heat source or by heat produced
through  dies  to  expand  and  extrude  in  desired  shape.  Extruder  is  used  to  produce
extrudate of different shapes by forcing a specially designed opening after a previous
heating of the material.Advantages of extrusion
Versatility
A variety of products can be produced easily by changing the ingredients and process
conditions.
Cost
Extrusion has lower processing cost and higher productivity than other cooking and
forming processes.
Productivity 
 Extruders can operate continuously with high throughput. 
Product quality 
Extrusion  cooking  involves  high  temperature  applied  for  a  short  time  retaining
many heat sensitive components of food.
Environmentally friendly  
As  a  low  moisture  process,  extrusion  cooking  does  not  produce
significant  process  effluents,  reducing  water  treatment  cost  and
level of environmental pollution.Extruder
The extruder machine is basically a pump that transports, mixes, shears, stretches and
shapes material under elevated pressure and temperature. In fact, this is single machine
in which more than one unit operations take place simultaneously. And this extruder can
be considered a screw reactor for physical, chemical and biochemical transformations of
the materials.
General view of an extruder system
Extruder  system  consists  of  a  variable  screw  feeder,  holding  bin,  pre-conditioner,
extrusion barrel assembly and die head assembly. Feed material from hopper is fed to
pre-conditioner where the moisture is adjusted and further it moves to extrusion barrel
assembly. Appropriate conditions i.e. process and system parameters are maintained to
get the desired characteristics of the end product. Finally, the material is forced through a
specially designed die assembly to get predefined shape.
Types of extruder
There are two types of extruder i.e. single screw extruder, and twin screw extruder used
widely in food industry.
(i)Single screw extruders – It contains one smooth, deep flighted Archimedes screw
within a grooved barrel (see figure).
(ii)Twin screw extruders – It contains two screws inside a barrel. It consumes less
energy and shows  higher rate of production,  therefore,  industries  widely prefer
twin-screw extruders.Screw rotation in a twin screw extruder (TSE)
The twin screw extruder may be a co rotating type or counter rotating type. 
Co-rotating TSE
Both screws rotate in same direction.
Generate high and low pressure region for material near the apex.
Counter rotating TSE
Screw rotates in opposite direction.
Material flow results high pressure at the nip, where material is being forced
between the screw and low pressure region at the nip exit.
Extrusion processing zones
1.Feeding zones
•Area  where  preconditioned  low  density  particles  of  raw  material  are
introduced in the barrel. 
•The density is low due to the entrapped air.
•The material is conveyed and compressed slightly.
2.Kneading zone
•Compression of material occurs; the flow channels of the extruder achieve
high degree of fill as their volume and screw pitch decreases.
•Mechanism of shear begins to play predominant role because of barrel fill
condition. 
•Increase in temperature, pressure and extrudate density can be observed.
3.Cooking zone
•Area where amorphousizing and/or texturization occurs.
•Temperature and pressure increases very rapidly, also shear rate is higher
due to the screw configuration.
Geometry of screw
In order to get the desired characteristic of the product and to understand the mechanism
of the extrusion process, it is essential to understand the geometry of screw (see figure).
The different terminologies related to the extruder screws are described below:1.Flight
It is the space enclosed by the thread and the surface of the root in one complete turn
of the screw.
2.Flight depth 
It is the perpendicular distance from the top of the screw thread to the root surface.
3.Pitch 
It is the horizontal distance of the corresponding points of the two successive lands.
4.Screw root 
It is the continuous central shaft, usually of cylindrical or conical shape.
5.Helix angle  
It is the angle between the screw thread and the transverse plane of the screw.
6.Land 
It is the surface at the radial extremity of the screw thread constituting the periphery
or outside diameter of the screw.
7.Lead 
It is the horizontal distance travelled by the material in one complete revolution of
the screw assuming 100% efficiency.  It is equal to the pitch multiplied by the
number of start.
8.Number of starts
It refers the number of separate threads traced along the length of the screw (e.g.
single and double flighted screw).Screw design variables
VariableDefinition Effect
L/D ratio Ratio of the flighted length
of the screw to its outside 
diameterLarger the L/D ratio
•More shear heat can be uniformly generated.
•Greater opportunity for homogenous mixing.
•Greater residence time.
Compression 
ratioRatio of channel volume 
in the feeding zone to the 
channel volume in 
metering zoneHigher the compression ratio
•Greater shear heat imparted to the material. 
•Uniform heat distribution.
•Potential creating stresses in the material.
Helix angleAngle of screw flight 
relative to the plane 
perpendicular to the screw 
axisA change to a smaller helix angle, hence more flight
turns per diameter
•Reduces the axial melting length.
•Conveys stiffer materials with greater ease 
(and less torque).
•Reduces the rate at which                               
material is conveyed..
Varying configurations of screw and barrel to achieve compression
There are different configurations of screw and the barrel present in the commercial
extruders and accordingly it gives the desired compression (See Figure). The list of
configuration is given below-
1.Constant pitch, increasing root diameter
2.Constant pitch, constant root diameter, decreasing diameter
3.Variable pitch, constant depth, increasing root diameter, increasing number of
flights, shear-locks, decreasing diameter
4.Constant pitch, constant root diameter
5.Constant pitch, constant root diameter with breaker bolt
6.Decreasing pitch, constant rootExtruder die
Another very important component of the extruder machine is the extruder die. Different
types of extruder die can give products of different size, shapes, etc. By adjusting the die
opening, the pressure and retention time, the dimensions and shape of the final product
can be controlled.
Some functions the die serves are
Shapes the melt pumped from the extruder to provide the   desired cross sectional
dimensions at a specific throughput rate.
Contributes to the physical properties by controlling molecular orientation in the
product.
Controls product surface aesthetics.
Die swell - The material swelling as it exits the die. Material flow in the barrel
When the die is fitted at the end of barrel, pressure develops at the end of the screw and
before the die that causes the reverse flow of the material through 
(i)the screw channel from die to feed end, &  
(ii)the clearance between the screw flight and inner surface of the barrel.
1.Drag flow 
It is the flow of material inside the barrel due to the action of dragging.
2.Pressure flow 
It is the reverse flow of the material in the screw channel.
3.Leakage flow
It is the reverse flow through the clearance. Extruder net flow
The extruder net flow through the extruder is given by the equation
Net flow = Drag flow – Pressure flow – Leakage flow
Drag flow – The drag flow through the screw channel  can be calculated as 
Pressure flow – The pressure flow through the screw channel can be calculated as 
Where, W is width of screw channel, 
            p is pitch of the screw, 
            h1 & h2 are depths at the metering and feeding zone, respectively,
            D is barrel inner diameter,
 is helix angle, 
N is screw rotation,
 is viscosity of material, and
FD & FP are drag & pressure flow correction factors, respectively.Leakage flow – The drag flow through the clearance can be calculated as    
Where, δ is clearance between screw flight and inner surface of the barrel,
             ΔP is pressure drop
                P is pitch of the screw, and
               s is viscosity of material flowing through channel. 
Energy consumption 
The specific energy consumption E (J/kg) by the extruder during the operation will be
Where, N is the screw speed, 
           Tm is the torque required to rotate the screw,
           Qm is the flow rate of the material, and 
            ρm is the density of extrudate.Flow through die
The extruder flow is also equal to the flow rate through the die. Assuming that the flow
through die is laminar, the value of Q can be obtained by using Hagen Poiseulli equation
as  
Where, △P is a pressure drop,
          K is a Geometric constant depending upon type of die opening, and
           d is the viscosity of material flowing through die 
K for different die cross section
Where, d is the diameter of the die;    
 l  is the length of the die
        w is the width of slit;               
  h is the height of slit
  R0 is the Outside radius;            
R0 is the Inside radius Screw configuration and pressure profile 
The screw configuration affects the pressure profile inside the barrel (see figures). Once
the material is in the screw channel, it is compacted and transported down the channel.
Compacting and moving can only be accomplished by friction at the screw surface. The
frictional forces result in a pressure rise in the feed section, this pressure compresses the
solid bed.
The rise in the pressure is observed with the decreasing channel depth. The low channel
depth in the metering zone results in higher pressure which is sufficient to pump the
material through die. Some extruder may have venting zone to remove volatile, therefore
the melt pressure is reduced to atmospheric pressure in decompression zone.Die and screw characteristics: Pressure-throughput curve
Die  and  screw  characteristics  are  explained  by  the  graphical  plot  of  the
output/throughput  versus  pressure drop across  the  extruder.  The output  of the deep
channel screw at equal N (screw speed) and D (diameter of screw) is substantially larger
than the output of the shallow channel screw because the drag flow is proportional to
depth of channel. The deep channeled screw output is, however, highly dependent upon
the pressure flow such that the output decreases rapidly as back pressure increases. The
shallow channel screw is relatively unaffected by back pressure and its output is nearly
constant  with increasing  back pressures. The intersection  of the curve indicates  the
operating points.
Die and screw characteristics: Pressure-throughput curve
•If the size of the die : die 1 > die 2 > die 3 > die 4 , then  Die 1 represents a low
resistance whereas die 4 represents a  restrictive die.
•The pressure drop increases as the die size decreases and throughput increases.
•The maximum throughput and no pressure build- up is called point of open
discharge. This occurs when there is no die.
•The point of maximum pressure build-up and no throughput is called the point of
closed discharge. This occurs when the extruder is plugged. 
•The  feasibility  line  (m˙ min)  represents  the  throughput  required  to  have  an
economically feasible system. 
Some useful points in daily operations of extruder
•Homogenous 
moisture content and 
particle size distribution i.Prevents  irregular  work  of  the  extruder  (shooting  or
blocking).
ii.Ensures desired quality of product.
•Reduced moisture 
contenti.Influences extrusion pressure.
ii.Increase in the viscosity of material.
•Intensive cooling of 
the barrel i.Contributes  to a lower  temperature  and increases  the
friction inside the material.
ii.Temperature drop in the material raises its viscosity. 
•Blocking of a few 
die-holes Sudden increase in pressure and leads to a powerful back flow
or even lockout of the machine.
•Smallest holes in the 
die i.Cause a higher resistance during the extrusion .
ii.Increase pressure and reduce the extruder’s output as the
back flow is higher.