Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural & Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 25
Textured Vegetable Protein
In this lecture, the textured vegetable proteins, different methods for their manufacture as
well as their applications, and the product quality characteristics are elaborated.
The  properties  of  food  proteins  are  altered  by  environmental  conditions,  process
treatments and the interactions with other ingredients. Processing methods are generally
heating, freezing, drying, shearing or mixing, pressure etc.; environmental conditions
such as pH, ionic, structure, type of salts, moisture content, oxidation-reduction potential
and so on. All these conditions have important influences on protein structure.
So, with the varying conditions of processing methods and environmental conditions,
protein structures get changed and this change in the protein structure influences its
physical properties, functional properties and many other factors.So, in most of these processes, it is basically the heat, pressure, or alkali treatment, etc.
which are involved and these factors result in the denaturation of proteins and this
denaturation process modifies the structure and texture of the protein.
The recent developments in the technology have made it possible to mimic meat in the
form of plant proteins with diverse taste and textural qualities. A combination of heat
generally above 60 ᵒC, pressure, pH and ionic strength is used to solubilize and denature
food  proteins.  Under  these  conditions,  proteins  rearrange  themselves  into  3D  gel
structures and which gives the meat like texture and other properties.
Texturization of plant protein has been really a very significant development in the food
processing industry. Processes have been developed which impart a fibrous structure toamorphous defatted plant protein flours. In fact, these defatted plant protein flours are
important by products of the vegetable oil milling industries.
The major impediments to the direct use of these plant protein flours have been their lack
of  meat  like  texture,  flavour  and  appearance.  After  the  plant  proteins  have  been
texturized  and  rehydrated,  it  has  found  extensive  use  as  an  extender  of  fresh  and
processed meat product and as the meat like ingredients in many ready to eat or ready to
cook processed food items.
Texture vegetable proteins (TVPs) are generally those protein rich items which have
been  modified  in  structure,  shape,  texture,  flavour  and  appearance  to  simulate  the
conventional food items such as meat. So, ideally the TVP should show a marked degree
of structure or fibre characteristics of the muscle meat. It should absorb water and fat
appropriately so that they have the composition similar to meat and more importantly, it
should retain their integrity through the heating and flow processes which exist in the
food processing industries. Nowadays throughout the world, more and more people not
just vegetarians, are preferring alternative proteins in the form of TVP in their diet. In
fact, textured vegetable proteins are also known as vegetable meat and these become
very good products for the vegetarian people or other people who want to enjoy the
texture of the animal protein or meat like product from the vegetable sources.So, these TVPs can be categorized into two types; one is the meat extenders and other is
meat analogues. The meat extenders are the TVPs produced by a process having a single
high  temperature  or  pressure  extrusion  system.  The  product  shows  a  distinct  fibre
formation and has a highly expanded character. Once these TVPs are hydrated, they can
be used to extend ground meat or meat products means that they can be used to replace
the  natural  meat  or as  an ingredient  etc.  These TVPs  have found extensive  use in
prepared foods such as meat sauces and different fabricated food formulations.
The other category of the TVP which is the meat analogues are actually used in place of
meat in routine cooking operation or for general cooking purpose. It must be dense i.e.
their density is normally is up to 0.4 to 0.6 g/cc and they should be devoid of air pockets.They should have a layered fibre confirmation and should be able to maintain a meat like
character after extensive cooking or retorting. So, they should resemble in every aspect
to meat like products, they must give texture, appearance and mouth feel of the red meat.
The manufacture of meat analogues requires the use of multiple extrusion processes or
specially cooled dies.
Generally the approaches to vegetable protein texturization can be categorized into two:
One approach tries to assemble a homogeneous structure comprising a certain amount of
protein fibres within a matrix of binding material. In fibre spinning technology, the fibres
are produced by a spinning process which is similar to the one used for the production of
synthetic fibres for the textile industry.
In the second approach, the vegetable proteins are converted into a hydratable, laminar,
chewy mass that do not have fibres. So, in this, there are two methods which can be used
like steam texturization and extrusion texturization. In the steam texturization, there is
another method press texturization can also be used and finally, extrusion texturization
process. So, these are different methods which can be used for texturization of plant
proteins.In the fibre spinning technology, a relatively pure vegetable protein which is called
spinning dope is pumped through a spinneret. This spinneret contains thousands of tiny
holes, may be of 75 micron. When the dope is forced through these spinnerets, it comes
in the form of minor threads and these threads are allowed into acid coagulation bath
where these proteins get coagulated.
The bundles of fibre produced in this manner are stretched, washed, coloured, flavoured
and bound into aggregates to produce a simulated meat like item. The fibre bundles
produced as above are passed through a special type of heated forming extruder where
they are aligned, compressed and bound unto a chunk like mass which have the property
analogous to meet. After formation the spun fibres are cut into convenient length, mixed
and impregnated with fat and other heat coagulable binders like egg albumin, etc.
This spun fibre technology or fibre spinning technology produces a comparatively high
quality meat analogue because here pure vegetable protein is used as a raw material. But
it is of comparatively highly cost since the extraction or purification of the protein itself
involve certain cost. Further, the low yield and disposal of the waste steams are some of
the drawbacks of these technology.  Otherwise, it becomes  a very good process for
manufacture of good quality protein products. A schematic representation of the spun fibre based protein texturization process is
shown in this diagram. The top section involves basically the preparation of the protein,
i.e.  extraction  of  the  protein  using  appropriate  methods  like  solubilization  and  its
extraction. The proteins which are obtained are aged and made into a viscous honey like
material and which generally called a dope. Now, solution of protein dope is passed
through the spinneret from where it comes in the form of thread and falls into the acid
coagulation bath. Here, the protein gets coagulated and forms fibres. Then, it is sent to
the washing section for removing any adhering acid or excessive salts. After that, it is
passed through the stretching section where the diameter of the fibres is further reduced
even less than that of the opening of the spinneret hole. Then, it is passed through
another vat containing various binders, colours, flavours, heat coagulable binders like
egg albumin, etc. And then, sent again through the rollers where there is flavor, colour
stabilizer, supplementary nutrients etc. finally, it is cut to the appropriate size. Different
types of fabricated meat like products can be obtained. Spun-fibre  based  texturization  –  Method:  The  protein  solution  which  contains
approximately 20% protein at pH around 12 to 13 is aged. Once its viscosity reaches to
that of the honey i.e. around 50000 to 100000 centipoise, the dope is passed through the
spinneret with holes of about 75 µ.
The same process is explained in this slide which could be understood.The next step is the stream texturization. This process involves texturising vegetable
protein by thermal coagulation coupled with some form of shear induced orientation to
provide a fibrous like structure. The heating of protein particles in a steam environment
and rapid release  of pressure result in the expansion and texturization  of vegetable
protein. In one of these processes like steam texturization processes which has been
patented  by  some  researchers,  the  moistened  soy  flour  is  fed  continuously  into  a
pressurized reactor where it meets high pressure steam at around 7 to 8 atm. The thick
mass then flows under the action of the pressure through a cylindrical barrel at the
discharge end of the barrel which is open to the atmosphere.
In the press texturization, the press is heated to a temperature of around 150  ᵒC and
whole soybean or whole soya flour is added into the press. The mass taken at 40%
moisture content is heated for about 5 sec at a pressure of about 25 atm. When the press
is suddenly opened by trigger mechanism, the material expands quickly flashing off
some  of  the  moisture  which  yields  a  texturized  expanded  patty.  And  this  pressed
texturization particularly is suitable for texturizing full fat soya flour.
Other next process which is mostly used by the industry for the preparation of textured
vegetable protein products is the extrusion texturization. Although there is potential of
using a wide variety of plant proteins in this process like defatted groundnut protein,
defatted  sunflower protein, sesame defatted sesame protein or other proteins, but at
present the soy flour is used more commonly. 
So, the defatted soy flour containing a certain amount of water is passed through a high
pressure  extruder  cooker  to  produce  an  expanded,  porous  and  somewhat  oriented
structure. The defatted soy flour should have a minimum 50 % protein, a maximum 3 %
fibre,  less  than  1  %  fat  and  a  NSI  (nitrogen  solubility  index)  or  PDI  (protein
dispersibility index) of around 50 to 70.
Although, these products which result from the extrusion process are devoid of true
fibres but they possess the textural characteristics particularly chewiness, elasticity etc.
like that of the natural meat.In this figure, shown the process of protein texturization during the extrusion process. 
During extrusion process, the protein undergoes several conformational changes like
shearing action, heating, pressing etc. depending upon the processing conditions. There
may  be  unfolding  of  the  natural  structure,  secondary  or  quaternary  structure  or
conformational changes of the protein. There may be unfolding of the molecular chain
association, aggregation or even cross linking with potential degradation of oxidation
etcetera.
In fact, by varying the extruder system conditions, extruder process parameters and other
material conditions like extruder process parameter, L/D ratio or specific mechanical
energy etc. a variety of textured vegetable products with varying characteristics can be
obtained.Extrusion texturization  technology:  The defatted  soy flour and grits are conditioned
approximately to 20-40 % moisture and the pH is adjusted between 6.5 and to 7.5 using
appropriate acidic or basic salts. If pH is less than 5.5, the extrusion process will be quite
difficult and the product will be tough. If the pH is more than 8.5, the product will be
more  tender,  less  chewy  and  absorb  more  water.  Even  alkaline  taste  may  also  be
introduced  into  the  product;  the  product  may  taste  little  bitter  because  of  the  high
alkalinity in the material. So, these flours or grits are conditioned and pH adjusted, they
are being heated to around 60-90 ᵒC to reduce their stickiness, aid in the feeding process,
and improve hydration of the mix.
And generally for this purpose a preconditioner consisting of a paddle blender is used
which  provides  the  desired  mixing  and  residence  time.  At  this  stage,  even  several
additives  like  colours,  flavours,  minerals,  emulsifiers,  cross  linking  enhancers  like
elemental sulphur etc. maybe used to improve the product characteristics.After the preconditioning, the precondition flour is fed into the extruder and picked up by
the screw barrel. As it advances forward in the barrel, it is rapidly heated by the action of
the friction as well as energy supplied by the heating elements around the barrel.
And the  pressure normally  20-60 atm  attained  through the compression mechanism
permits the heating of the material to around 150 to 200 ᵒC. Under the high pressure and
high temperature condition, it is very flexible but the residence time at this elevated
temperature in the extruder can vary from 20 to 60 sec depending upon the material
characteristics as well as the characteristics desired in the end products.
The  directional  shear  forces  cause  some  alignment  of  the  high  molecular  weight
components whereas, the proteins undergo extensive heat denaturation. When it comes
out of the extruder die because of the sudden release of the pressure, there is an instant
vaporization of some of the moisture and which gives a porous and laminar texturized
structure; the material is flexible enough to take the shape of the die.So, based on the moisture content of the textured vegetable protein, they can be of two
categories; one is the low moisture TVP, the other may be a high moisture TVP. The low
moisture TVP contain generally 20-40 % moisture, shorter die is used and temperature
usually higher than 160 ᵒC. Whereas, the high moisture TVPs contain more than 40 %
moisture, larger cooling die, relatively low temperature (lower than 75 ᵒC) and possesses
a texture similar to animal meat with a rich fibrous structure, dense structure, strong
elasticity and high moisture content.
The  characteristics  of  different  textured  soy  product  are  tabulated.  When  the  flour,
concentrate or isolate is used as a raw material, how the flavor, stability and flatulence,form, shape, cost and other characteristics of the product vary. It can be understood by
reading.
Different types of TVPs which are available in the global market include high protein
snacks, chunk-style TVP, structured meat analogues, fibrous vegetable, proteins high
moisture meat analogues, low moisture meat analogues, texture meat proteins and so on.
Different  types  of products  are available  in the  market;  there may be chunks  type,
granular, larger thread like material, sheet like material and so on. So, these textured
vegetable proteins like high moisture textured snacks, high moisture meat analogue or
chunks and mixed style of extenders and meat analogue they are all produced by usingvarying  materials  and  process  parameters.  They  also  have  some  natural  bioactive
components or health ingredients. 
These  novel  products  have  a  vast  commercial  and  industrialization  potential.  If  in
addition to the soy flour, other protein flours like groundnuts, peanut, sesame, sunflower,
etc. are used and processes are developed for their texturization, it will be an important
addition. It will improve the conditions or even economics of the oil milling industry
and, the benefit will be both to the consumers as well as to the industry.