Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 02
Quality and Safety Aspects of Food
In this section, a brief overview of the Quality and Safety Aspects of Food is highlighted.
Food  quality  is  a  complex  concept;  it  includes  the  properties  like  taste,  texture,
appearance, nutritional value and safety. These properties must be evaluated in order to
assess or assure the quality of raw and processed foods. These quality attributes may be
evaluated by subjective or sensory methods or objective like instrumental or chemical
methods.The sensory quality of food may be classified according to the major senses by which
they are perceived. Subjective or sensory evaluation of food generally uses the human
sense organs for taste, smell, mouthfeel etc.
For this, a group of consumers or even trained panelists may be used in preference
testing for marketing purposes and scoring using standard sensory test procedures or
protocols. Sensory evaluation; however, is an expensive and time consuming process;
although it is highly desirable particularly when a new food is to be introduced in the
market. So, before that it is always desirable to be tested by human individuals or by
consumers for its attributes. Objective evaluation of food normally involves instruments
and this instrumental analysis or chemical analysis may generally ease the processes.
Objective  evaluation  may  use  imitative  or  non  imitative  measurements  of  sensory
properties.Before the food material  goes  to the table  for consumption,  it  has to pass through
different stages. In this slide, the stages in the food value chain i.e. starting from the raw
material to the consumption are given. Sometimes, the actual raw material that is taken
may be little inferior than that required in the ideal raw material and this may be because
of different agronomical, environmental, horticultural or other factors.
Except for the case where by appropriate selection of the proper material, its blending
and formulation in proper proportion, in each and every stage there is reduction in the
quality.  Whether  in  processing,  packaging  further  processing,  storage  in  factory,
distribution to depots etc., in each and every stage there is a great potential for the loss in
quality  of the food. Food has  different  chemicals,  biochemical,  bioactive,  enzymes,
microorganisms etc. These have constant and continuous interactions during all these
stages and therefore, they bring about changes in different constituents of the food.
So, in the actual quality of the product is less than what was to be perceived in the
potential quality of the ideal raw material. All these changes in the quality i.e. whether it
is a microbiological, enzymatic, physical, or chemical; can be minimized or accelerated.
This is done in processing by appropriate selection of process or other parameters during
storage and handling. Aim is to keep the undesirable changes to as minimum as possible;
so that the food quality is retained to the maximum extent.Undesirable changes in food quality attributes may be numerous. In texture, there may be
loss of solubility, water holding capacity; the food may become tough it may become
soft. Depending upon the components present in the food, the factors which are there
during processing and handling; there may be development of rancidity, both either
hydrolytic or oxidative. There may be development of cooked or caramel flavour or
other  off flavours. Regarding  undesirable  changes  in  the colour  of the  food during
processing, handling and storage etc., there may be darkening, bleaching or development
of a new colour.
All these changes are macroscopic changes arising from the microscopic or chemical
changes in the product during processing and storage. There might be certain undesirablemicroscopic  changes  in  the  nutritional  value  of  the  food  because  of  the  loss  or
degradation of vitamins, minerals, proteins, lipid, etc. 
When  the  food  is  transported,  handled,  or  exposed  to  various  conditions  during
processing, it comes across various reactions which influence its quality. Major reactions
may  be  non-enzymatic  browning,  enzymatic  browning,  lipid  hydrolysis,  oxidation,
protein  denaturation,  crosslinking,  protein  hydrolysis,  oligo  and  polysaccharide
hydrolysis, polysaccharide synthesis, degradation of certain natural pigments, glycolytic
changes, etc.
Each reaction can involve different reactants or substrates depending upon specific food
and the particular conditions for processing and storage. They are treated as reactionclasses because the general nature of the substrates or reactants is similar for all foods.
For example, non enzymatic browning involves a reaction of carbonyl compounds which
arise from different diverse reactions like oxidation of ascorbic acid, hydrolysis of starch,
etc.  Similarly,  lipid  oxidation  may  involve  primary  triglycerides  in  one  food  or
phospholipids in other food, but the oxidation of unsaturated fatty acid is the primary
event.
A brief overview of the chemical interactions among the major food constituents and
which ultimately bring about certain changes in the quality is given in this slide. These
changes may be desirable or even may be undesirable. In any food material, the three
major pools are lipid, carbohydrate and protein. When lipids come across oxygen, heat or
other catalysts, it may be converted into peroxide. These peroxides may interact with
proteins which may be oxidized. Similarly, carbohydrate pool of the food if come across
various factors like heat, strong acid, strong base, it may be converted into different
reactive  carbonyls.  These  reactive  carbonyls  further  may  interact  with  pigments,
vitamins, flavours and finally, result to off flavor, off colour, loss of nutritive value, loss
of colour etc. Even the peroxides may also react or interact with reactive carbonyls;
protein pool may directly interact with the reactive carbonyls and the chain may follow.
Depending upon the water activity, temperature etc., they may get degraded or may
interact with pigments, vitamins, flavours, etc. which may result in change in flavour,
colour, nutritive value, taste etc.When the food is exposed to certain factors during processing, many desirable changes
can also occur. These changes can influence the sensory properties, functional properties
or nutritional value of the food. Few such changes include development or preservation
of pleasing colours and flavours, improvement or preservation of texture, improvement
of  the  functionality  of  food  ingredients,  inactivation  or  control  of  enzymes,  and
microorganisms or inactivation of anti-nutritional substances or other approaches for
improving the nutritional value.
Regarding development or preservation of pleasing colour and flavour during processing,
there are different examples in the food to this effect. The desirable colour and flavour
develop in food during processing of foods like meat, coffee beans, nuts, olives etc. Thefreshly  harvested  coffee  beans  do  not  have  characteristic  flavour  or  colour,  but  it
develops during the roasting process. Similarly in processing of fabricated foods like
bakery products, confectionery products, snack foods, breakfast cereals etc., they might
differ in taste and flavour depending upon the raw material and other ingredients as well
as process used. In fermentation processes like cheese, alcoholic beverages etc., the
desirable change in flavour can be easily noticed. The desirable changes  in colour,
flavor, taste etc. can be seen even when the fruits ripen. 
The preservation of colour and flavour is also often achieved by addition of certain
chemicals like antioxidant etc. or by removal of undesirable components from the food.
Like for example, glucose is removed from egg white to retard the browning of the dried
product. Before it is put to the thermal processing or heating or drying, the egg white is
given certain treatment or even sometime it is allowed to be acted upon by certain
microorganisms which eat away the glucose pyramid; so it retards the browning reaction.
Examples of desirable modification of the texture in food during processing include
softening of the plant tissues by heat, firming of plant tissues through the action of
calcium and endogenous pectin methyl esterase, tenderization of meat by addition of
proteases,  development  of  desirable  texture  in  meat  analogs,  gelling  coagulation  or
firming of egg products, puddings and bakery products by heat.Formation  of  cheese  by the  development  or  addition  of acid  to  milk;  even  certain
hydrolytic reactions many of which are enzyme catalyzed appear predominantly among
the processes that cause softening of texture of the food.
Examples of improved functionality of processed food include heat denaturation of whey
protein in dried milk intended for bread making, pre rigor freezing of meat intended for
sausage making, alteration in the functionality of starch by gelatinization or chemical
modification, alkali processing of soy proteins to impart new textural properties, control
of thiol-disulfide interchange reactions in gluten to develop proper rheological properties
in bread dough or increasing the sweetness of corn syrup by isomerizing glucose to
fructose. In all these processes, the functionality of the food is improved by processing.
During processing there may be inactivation of anti-nutritional substances. The foods
contain various natural anti-nutritional substances like trypsin inhibitors, hemagglutinins
in legumes, thiaminase in fish, avidin in egg, phytate in cereal grains and many of these
are protein in nature, and therefore, are subject to inactivation during moderate heating of
moist food.
In  other  instances,  removal  or  chemical  modification  is  a  feasible  approach  for
inactivating  anti-nutrients  factors. For example,  enzymatic  hydrolysis  or removal  of
lactose  from  milk  that  is  intended  for lactose  intolerance  individuals.  Reduction  of
stachyose  and  raffinose;  this  stachyose  and  raffinose  are  the  flatulence  producing
chemicals present in pulses etc. So, their concentration if it is reduced in leguminous
seeds by the processes like germination etc. then it may provide beneficial effects or
results in the inactivation of anti-nutritionals. Similarly, removal of phytates from grain
by  milling  is  an  example  of  this.  Bran  and  hulls  of  cereal  grains  contain  some
undesirable substances called phytates etc.; when the grains are dehulled or polished,
these phytates are removed.
There might be certain damages to the food texture during processing. The common
examples include excessive softening of fruits and vegetables during thermal processing,
toughening of fish muscle during frozen storage, firming or staling of bread during
refrigerated  storage,  emulsion  destabilization  by  heating  or  freezing,  coagulation  of
sterilized milk during storage, cold shortening of red meats when it is excessively cooledwhile it is in a pre rigor state, or adverse textural changes in tissue foods during air
drying.
Safety is the first requisite of any food. In broad sense, the food safety is taken to mean
that a food is free from any harmful chemical or microbiological contaminant at the time
of its consumption.
Often this concept of food safety is used in its operational sense for practical reasons.
Few examples include; in the canning industry, the commercial sterility as applied to low
acid foods is taken to mean the absence of viable spores of clostridium botulinum. This
in turn can be translated into a specific set of heating conditions; for a specific product in
a  specific  package  and  given  this  information,  one  can  approach  optimization  or
retention of other quality attributes.
Similarly, in a product such as peanut butter; operational safety may be taken as the
absence of aflatoxins. Steps taken to prevent the growth of the mold which is responsible
for the production of aflatoxin, may or may not interfere with the retention of some
quality attributes; nevertheless the conditions of the safety must be satisfied.Food safety hazards refer to all those hazards whether, chronic or acute that may make
the food injurious to health of the consumers. These hazards may be inherent to food like
natural toxins, allergens, intolerable ingredients, there may be hazards associated with
the  environmental  contaminants  like  persistent  organic  pollutants,  heavy  metals,
radionuclides, etc.
Hazards  arising from microbiological  activity  in  the  food such  as  viruses, bacteria,
bacterial toxins, biogenic amines, mycotoxins etc. or even hazards emerging from food
processing like acrylamides, chloropropanols etc.There are safety concerns following the food processing; i.e. whatever the ingredient that
is  being taken  should should  meet  the quality  requirements;  GMP, GHP  procedure
should be followed. Like for example, if taken the safety of the bottled water, it is to be
monitored that, what is the source of the water that has been used, piping treatment
processes and bottling equipment even packaging material or what are the different
quality control systems. 
Sometimes  gases  are  found  in  the  packaged  bottle  when  opened.  So,  that  clearly
indicates that the bottle while its packaging, the good conditions were not maintained.
Similarly,  in  the  case  of  soft  drinks,  safety  aspects  include  microbiological
contamination,  packaging  material,  chemicals,  additives,  even  equipment  used  in
processing,  formation  of  mutagens  or  carcinogens  or  even  nitrosamines  etc.  during
processing. In the process foods, even the processing conditions itself sometime create
some problems; for example, the trans fats. Normally, in the virgin vegetable oils, the
unsaturated groups have the cis fatty acids, but when these oils are heated, cis  are
converted  into trans  fat. Intake of trans fatty  acids  from the partially  hydrogenated
vegetable oils have deleterious effects on cardiovascular health. Even trans fatty acids
are more atherogenic and high intake can promote insulin resistance.Summary about how the quality and safety are interrelated, particularly the processing
condition is given in the above slide. If a more severe process is used, it may be safe or
its quality may get deteriorated. So, more severe process will ensure the safety i.e.
microbial inactivation, toxin decontamination etc. but can compromise the quality.
In food processing, depending upon the requirements, the food, and its consumption
pattern etc., a balance has to be made i.e. up to what extent it should be processed, so that
it has a good quality as well as at the same time, it is safe for the consumption.