Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 29
Food Lipids (Nature & Occurrence)
This part of the lecture on food lipids will mainly focus on the nature and occurrence of
lipids in various biological materials.
Lipids are heterogeneous group of naturally occurring substances which are insoluble in
water, but soluble in organic solvents such as chloroform, ether, benzene, hexane, etc.
They contain hydrocarbon groups as primary parts of the molecule and are present in or
derived from living organisms, may be either from plant source or from animal source.
The compound classes of lipids which are covered in this definition include fatty acids,
acylglycerols, fatty acid esters and isoprenoid hydrocarbons.Functions of lipids: These lipids are stored in adipose tissues in the form of triglycerides.
They are one of the major sources of energy to the cell.  Some lipids  are essential
nutrients like fat soluble vitamins. They also are the constituents of biological membrane
and are very important to their structure and function. They act as receptors, antigens and
membrane  anchors  for  proteins.  They  facilitate  the  digestive  process,  they  act  as
electrical insulator of action of neurons and, more importantly they improve texture,
flavour and palatability of foods.
The lipids constitute of fatty acids. So, the fatty acids are characterized by a long chain
of carbon atoms generally 12 to 22 carbons, ending in a carboxyl functionality. There
might be different substitutions or variations in the chain structure and which may resultinto different types of fatty acids, including saturated, unsaturated, branched chain, or
oxygenated fatty acids.
Plant lipids occur in leaves, stems, flowers, fruits, pollen grains and but the largest
concentration of the lipid in plants is found in seeds. They are found in plant cells as very
small droplet or globules dispersed in the protoplasm. Plant lipids act as store house of
metabolic  energy.  Their  important  functions  in  the  plant  include  protection  against
dehydration and pathogens, carrying of electrons, absorption of light and contribution to
the structure of membrane.
The commonly found lipids in plant systems include saturated fatty acids (SFA) like
palmitic acids, monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) like oleic acid and polyunsaturatedfatty acid (PUFA) such as linoleic and linolenic acids. Plants contain comparatively less
saturated fatty acids  like lauric and myristic acids. Plant oils are mixture of mixed
triglycerides.
Difference between the plant lipids and animal lipids:
Animal fats Plant fats
Example : Butter fat, lard, etc.Example : Butter fat, lard, etc.Example : Coconut / olive /sunflower etc.  Example : Coconut / olive /sunflower etc.  
oiloil
Relatively rich in SFA Relatively rich in SFA Comparatively rich in USFAComparatively rich in USFA
Solid at room temperatureSolid at room temperature Liquid at room temperature Liquid at room temperature 
Less iodine number Less iodine number High Iodine numberHigh Iodine number
Higher Reichert-meissl numberHigher Reichert-meissl number Relatively Lower reichert-meissl numberRelatively Lower reichert-meissl number
More prone to hydrolytic rancidity More prone to hydrolytic rancidity More prone to oxidative rancidity More prone to oxidative rancidity 
Stored in liver, beneath the skin Stored in liver, beneath the skin Stored in fruits and seedsStored in fruits and seeds
Stored in cells called adipocytes Stored in cells called adipocytes Stored as granules (oil droplets)Stored as granules (oil droplets)
In fact, fats and oils basically are in form of lipids. They are triglycerides that are solid or
may be liquid at room temperature.So, the triglycerides which are solid at room temperature are generally termed as fat.
They are usually derived from animals and they contain mostly saturated fatty acids.
Whereas, the oils are the triglycerides that are mostly liquid at room temperature, they
are usually derived from plants and they have more amount of unsaturated fatty acids.
So, chemically both of them are triglycerides. And, it is the basic difference of the fatty
acids which are present in them like nature of the fatty acid, chain of the fatty acid
lengths or degree of saturation of the fatty acids, which makes them solid or liquid.
Saturated fatty acids are those that contain only single bond between carbon atoms. They
fit to the general formula C nH2nO2. Food lipids saturated fatty acids possess in general an
even number of carbon atoms; odd numbered fatty acids are produced by certain bacteria
and are considered as markers of the bacterial growth.Unsaturation means all the carbon balances are not saturated; there is some double bond.
So, the monounsaturated means 1 double bond; this is a fatty acids that contain 1 double
bond between adjacent carbon atoms and they fit to the general formula of CnH2nO2. The
double bonds in monounsaturated fatty acids is generally at a number of locations along
the carbon chain, resulting monoene isomers for example, 16:1 (n-9) and 16:1 (n-11). All
double bonds in fatty acids are generally of cis geometry. However, when these fats are
exposed to heat treatment  like cooking, frying etc., then cis is converted into trans
geometry. In cis geometry, in a double bond OH groups are on the same side of the chain
whereas, in the trans geometry they are located on the opposite side of the chain. So, the
composition of cis and trans fats is of nutritional significance and importance in food
science.
Polyunsaturated fatty acids contain more than 1 double bond; poly i.e. 2, 3, 4, 5 or more
double bond in the carbon chain. Polyunsaturated fatty acids are commonly called as
PUFA. They contain double bonding in cis geometry; majority of natural PUFA contain
double bond in a methylene interrupted pattern. The maximum number of double bond
possible in a PUFA is limited by the chain length and position of the first double bond
form  the  carboxyl  atom. Maximum  number  of double  bonds  in  naturally  occurring
polyunsaturated fatty acids are 4 for C18 carbon, 5 for C20 carbon and 6 for C22 carbon
containing fatty acids. So, most of the food fats or oils contain double bonds  ranging
from 1 to 6. So, polyunsaturated fatty acids are those that contain higher number of
double bonds like 4, 5, 6 in their structure.
Another important fatty acids is the branched chain fatty acid (BCFA); however, they are
normally  not  found in  food  materials.  They  are  of  2 types;  methyl  group replaces
hydrogen atom of the carbon chain in one group of the branched chain fatty acids. In
another group, it is the isoprenoid acids (normally derived from isoprene units).Oxygenated fatty acids (OFA):
They most commonly occur as a hydroxyl or keto group. They are produced from the
partial oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids, during cooking or heating processes. And
therefore, they become of nutritional significance that is of concern in food science and
processing. Hydroxy fatty acids (HFA) occur in both saturated and unsaturated forms
with various positional isomers. There are 3 major types of OFA or HFA:
2-Hydroxy (2-OH) or α-HFA  : Even numbered acids from C10 to C26 and
components of animal tissues
3-Hydroxy (3-OH) or β-HFA : exist as  series of even-numbered  acids  from
C10 to C18 & components of many bacteria and yeasts 
Hydroxyl  group  may  be  present  at  the  penultimate  carbon  from  the
carboxyl group of chain series C11 to C19.
Ketone functional group occur as 2-keto, 3-keto or omega 1-keto acids.Acylglycerols or glycerides consist of 1, 2 or 3 fatty acid residues esterified to hydroxyl
residue of a glycerol molecule. A glycerol molecule having 3 hydroxyl groups reacts
with fatty acids fatty acids (RCOOH). So, ester linkage is formed between the hydroxyl
group,  as  well  as  carboxyl  group  of  the  glycerol  and  fatty  acids.  The  resulting
compounds like glyceride, monoglyceride, diglycerides, or triglycerides are formed. In
this case, it is one fatty acid esterified with alcohol linkage of the glycerol molecule. So,
monoglycerides are formed by substitution of glycerol backbone by acyl residues in
which substitutions are along with the fatty acids carbon chain.
So, if it is 1 substitution, it is monoglyceride; 2 substitutions diglycerides and if all the 3
hydroxyl groups are substituted  by fatty acids or esterified  with fatty acids, then it
becomes triglycerides.Monoglycerol or monoglyceride (MG): The fatty acids may join at the Sn-1 position, at
Sn-2 position, or at Sn-3 positions. And, depending upon their position there may be 3
isomers, or 3 positional isomers like, like  Sn-1 isomer Sn-2 isomer or Sn-3 isomers; Sn-2
isomer  retains  its  molecular  symmetry  and  is  therefore,  non-chiral.  These  are  very
important group of lipids, which are generally used as emulsifier in food processing in
preparation of different types of product.
Diacylglycerols  or  diglycerides  (DG):  There  are  2  hydroxyl  group  of  the  glycerol
molecule esterified with 2 fatty acids. Again 3 isomers might be possible i.e. Sn-1 Sn-2,
Sn-3, etc. Diglycerides also act as emulsifiers.In case of triglycerides or triacylglycerols (TG), there is full substitution i.e. all the 3
hydroxyl groups of the glycerol molecule are esterified. It may so happen that all the 3
hydroxyl groups are esterified with the same fatty acid i.e. 3 molecules of same fatty acid
like stearic acid. Stearic acid is attached in all the 3 positions Sn-1, Sn-2, Sn-3, or 2 fatty
acids Sn-1, Sn-2, may be stearic acid and Sn-3 may be formic acid or in all the 3
positions, Sn-1, Sn-2, Sn-3; there may be 3 different fatty acids. So, if at all the 3
positions there are same fatty acids attached, it is called simple triglyceride and if the 3
fatty acids are different, the resulting triglyceride is known as mixed triglyceride and
most of the food fats and oils are mixtures of mixed triglycerides.
Triglycerides  from  the  plants  like  palm,  coconut,  etc.,  contain  comparatively  high
proportion of saturated fatty acids and are solid at room temperature. And, on the other
hand, the triglycerides from plant materials like corn, peanuts, soyabean, sunflower oil
etc.  or  even  olive  oil  contain  high  proportion  of  unsaturated  fatty  acids,  or
polyunsaturated fatty acids, and they are liquid at room temperature.Phospholipids  are another  important  category  of lipids.  They are the derivatives  of
glycerophosphoric acid or more strictly Sn-glycerol 3-phosphate.
The fatty acid at Sn-3 position (see Fig.) is replaced with a phosphoric acid. And, the
phosphoric acid in turn may be joined with another molecule. Like in the case of lecithin,
phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylserine, phosphatidyl helin
etc. are attached.
These phospholipids are very important groups of lipids commonly found in the food
materials. They contain  hydrophilic or polar region (the phosphate and head group)
together  with  a  hydrophobic  or  non-polar  region  (the  acyl  residues  and  glycerol
backbone). 
And accordingly from the structure and function wise they are very important in the food
processing or food chemistry.The other group of lipids is the waxes commonly called wax esters. These are the esters
of fatty acids and long chain alcohol generally monohydric alcohol. Simple waxes are
esters of medium chain fatty acid (16:0, 18:0, 18:1v9) and long-chain aliphatic alcohols
(C8 to C18). Complex waxes also exist where either the fatty acid or alcohol components
have complex structures in their own rights; for example, vitamins esters or sterol esters
etc.
Waxes generally occur in bacteria and marine organisms and they serve as short term
storage lipids or aid in their buoyancy. Simple waxes are found on surfaces of animals,
plants and insects and they prevent water loss. Compounds with C21 to C44 have beenreported  from  marine  organisms.  Fatty  acid  involved  in  the  waxes  may  include
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), although 16:1 and 20:1 are major components.
Important waxes in food as additives are beeswax, carnauba wax, candelilla wax, etc.
They are used for several processes like edible coating application etc. and in food
processing for different functions to perform different operations.
Another important category is Terpenes. They are lipids that are composed of 2 or more
5-carbon isoprene units. They contribute to the flavour and aroma of many plant foods
such  as  citrus  foods.  Plant  terpenes  and  terpenoid  derivatives  include  phytol  (a
constituent of chlorophyll), beta carotene (a photosynthetic pigment and precursor of
vitamin A in animals). They are also found in rubbers etc. Geosmin, albaflavenone, 2-
methylsoborneol borneol all these are the examples of terpenes.Isoprenoid  lipids  are  the  major  classes  of  compound  such  as  terpenoids,  steroids,
carotenoids,  etc.  The  backbone  structure  from  multiple,  repeating,  branched  chain
unsaturated  C-5  units  called  isoprene  or  isopentile  units.  And,  lipid  can  be  easily
identified by the ability to divide the compound structure neatly into its original isoprene
synthetic units. Their subsequent cyclization and addition of functional groups may take
place at sites of unsaturation. Large diversity of complex nomenclature of isoprenoid is
available there.
Another  important  group  of  the  lipids  include  steroids  and  sterols.  Steroids  are
compounds of structural motif of C30 (triterpenoid) derived isoprenoid lipids. They are
derivatives of steroids and are common in eukaryotic cells. Natural occurring sterolshave  a  have  a  1,2-cyclopentano-phenanthrene  skeleton  and  27–30  C  atoms  with  a
hydroxyl group at C-3 and side chain of at least seven carbon at C-17. 
Cholesterol is another important group; the main animal sterol. Although it is a sterol,
but it is found associated with the phospholipids in food materials. It contains 27-C
atoms arranged into 4 fused rings and a hydrocarbon tail. It is the precursor of bile acids
vitamin D and steroid hormones. It is synthesized primarily in liver and adrenal gland.
Cholesteryl esters are hydrophobic, and are used for storage and transport of cholesterol.
And, this cholesterol has important functions to perform in our diet. It is also synthesized
in our body, but many times it needs to be regulated, because excess of cholesterol gets
deposited in the body and may create some problems.
Phytosterols constitute another group of lipids having structure related to cholesterol.
Only difference which they have with the cholesterol is in the structure of side chain.
Phytosterol are of two types; one is the sterol in which double bond is present in the
sterol ring, generally unsaturated compound; other is the stanols which do not have any
double bond; so they are saturated compound.
The  most  common  phytosterol  and  phytostanols  are  sitosterol  and  brassica  sterol.
Phytosterols are isolated from vegetable oils.
Another important components  of lipids  which are of nutritional importance are fat
soluble vitamins.
Vitamin A
•Most bioactive form is all-trans retinol, and cis forms created via light-induced
isomerization.
•α- and β-carotenes have bio-potencies of about 8.7% and 16.7% of the all-trans
retinol.
• The daily value (DV) for vitamin A is 1000 retinol equivalents (RE), represents
1000 mg of all-trans retinol or 6000 mg of β-carotenes .
•Animal  liver  is  an  excellent  source  of  vitamin  A,  it  helps  in  cure  of  night
blindness.
 Vitamin D
•Biologically active ergocalciferol (vitamin D2) and cholecalciferol (vitamin D3).
•Can be synthesized in humans from 7-dehydrocholesterol, which occurs naturally
in the skin, via light irradiation.
•Hormonal forms of the D vitamins are the hydroxylated derivatives.
•Vitamin D is converted to 25-OH-D in kidney & further hydroxylated to 1,25-
diOH-D in liver.
•The dihydroxy form is most biologically active form in humans.  
The structure of 7-dehydro cholesterol gets converted into pro vitamin D3 and vitamin
D3 cholecalciferol.Vitamin E
•Vitamin E compounds include the tocopherols and tocotrienols. 
•Important group of antioxidants.
•Tocotrienols have a conjugated triene double-bond system in the phytyl side
chain, whereas tocopherols do not. 
•Methyl substitution affects bioactivity of vitamin E, as well as in vitro antioxidant
activity.
The structure depending upon the side chain, i.e. whether CH 3 or R-H-R, alpha, beta,
gamma and delta tocotrienols and tocopherols are found, and their antioxidant properties
vary significantly.Vitamin K
•Vitamin K1 (Phylloquinone) is found in green leaves.
•Vitamin K2 (Menaquinone) is synthesized by intestinal bacteria. 
•Involved  in  blood  clotting  as  an  essential  cofactor  in  synthesis  of  ϒ-
carboxyglutamate.
•Vitamin K deficiency is rare due to intestinal microflora synthesis. 
So, lipids are very important in food processing, food science, food engineering and food
products manufacturing or in human nutrition.