Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 03
Factors Affecting Quality during Processing and Storage
In this lecture, different factors influencing the quality of food during processing and storage
are discussed.
Some variables need to be controlled during processing and storage operations in order to get
the desired quality in the product. The important variables include temperature, time, rate
(dT/dt), pH of the ingredients, composition of the product, composition of the gaseous phase
and water activity. These factors are important contributors to the overall quality of the
product and therefore, the precise control of these parameters would be desirable.
(1)Temperature 
Temperature is important among all the variables because of its broad influence on almost all
types of chemical and microbiological reactions which ultimately affect the quality of food.
The effect of temperature on an individual reaction rate has been well explained by Arrhenius
relationship which is expressed in the following equation.
k=Ae−EaRTWhere, k is reaction rate, A is pre-exponential constant, E a is activation energy, R is universal
gas constant and T is absolute temperature.
The data confirming the Arrhenius relationship generally yield a straight line if ln(k) is
plotted  against  1/T.  This  is  well  established  as  far  as  the  chemical  reaction  kinetics  is
concerned.
However, in the food reactions, it has been seen that the components of the food usually
confirm the Arrhenius relationship over a certain intermediate temperature range only. In the
non-enzymatic reaction (see fig.), only the range (a-b) is following the linearity i.e. the
Arrhenius relationship whereas the deviation from the linearity is taking place on both the
sides i.e. on the higher temperature side and the lower temperature side. At the higher
temperature  side, above a certain  value  of the temperature  depending upon the  product
characteristics or other variables present in the system in which the food is being processed,
there might be deviations from the linearity because of the change in the path of the reaction.
For example in the evaporation process, the rise in temperature causes evaporation of water
and this increases the concentration of the solutes. Because of this change or increase in the
solute concentration, the reaction path may change. When the temperature is lowered below
the freezing point of the system, with the progress of time, the ice phase essentially enlarges
and the fluid phase which contains all the solute diminishes. The concentration of the solutes
in the unfrozen phase increases which causes a change in the properties of the material. This
change in the properties can decrease or increase the reaction rate (point ‘b’) that depends
upon nature and type of the solutes. Enzymes  are generally protein and temperature  has a significant  influence  on it. In the
enzymatic reaction, enzymes have got some acceptability over a certain temperature range
during  which  it  remains  stable.  Beyond  that  temperature  range,  the  enzymatic  reaction
process is affected due to denaturation of proteins vis-a-vis inactivation of enzymes. In fact,
the denaturation process competes with the product formation process and over the higher
temperature side, denaturation process dominates, the reaction might even stop and that can
be seen here in this figure at point ‘c’ wherein above a certain temperature, the reaction rate is
decreased. In the vicinity of the freezing point of the water, subtle changes such as change in
the dissociation of an enzyme complex or other such changes can lead to a sharp decline in
the reaction rate.
So, these two examples are sufficient to explain that food reactions generally confirm to the
Arrhenius relationship over a certain intermediate temperature range only and deviation can
occur on either side. Therefore, the Arrhenius relationship should not be blindly applied to
the food system.
First depending upon the type of food using appropriate experiments, one should find out
those temperature ranges which are following Arrhenius relationship. In modelling and other
processes, the specific temperature range that has been experimentally tested should be used.
Overall, the deviations from the Arrhenius relationship in foods may be because of:
(i)The enzyme's activity might get lost depending upon the temperature and other
factors. 
(ii)The reaction pathway might get influenced by competing reactions. 
(iii)The physical state of the system may change. 
(iv)One or more of the reactants may become depleted. 
These all factors together or individually influence the Arrhenius relationship.(2)Time
It is an important factor to be considered together with the rate at which the temperature
changes with time. During storage of a food product, it is generally desired to know the
keepability of the food. Keepability of the food means the quality that is focused on the time
and risk with respect to the integral of chemical and microbiological changes that occur
during a specified period of time.
(3)Rate (dT/dt)
The rate becomes an important consideration during processing. The attention should be
given to the time variable as it appears in the rate expression. The relationship (dT/dt) is
important, because, it determines the rate at which the microorganisms are destroyed and therelative rates among the computing chemical reactions. For example, if a food can deteriorate
both by lipid oxidation and non-enzymatic browning reaction, it is important to know if the
time scales for the two reactions overlap sufficiently to cause a beneficial interaction.
(4)pH
The pH influences the rate of many chemical, microbioogical and enzymatic processes. In
fact, most of the enzymes need optimum pH for their maximum activity. Extreme pH values
are usually required for inhibition of microbial growth or enzymatic processes. The pH of the
material  may result  in the acceleration  of acid  or base catalyzed  reactions.  Even  small
changes in the pH can cause a profound change in the quality of the food. The change of pH
of muscle post-slaughter changes its textural and sensory characteristics. Even increase or
decrease in the pH of the food might cause an increase or decrease in taste of the food. So, it
becomes a very important variable one must consider during food processing.(5)Composition of the product
The other important variable which should be considered by processors who are handling
food material in the industry are composition of the product, the raw material or ingredient,
because the characteristic or composition of the ingredients and quality of the ingredients
actually govern or control the quality of the end product. 
The manner in which the fruits and vegetables are handled post-harvest can influence the
sugar content and can affect the degree of browning during dehydration and deep fat frying,
e.g. preparation of potato chips. 
Similarly, in the case of muscle tissues, after slaughtering the manner in which these muscles
are handled, influence the extent and rate of proteolysis, glycolysis, etc. which ultimately
affects the texture, flavor, color and other attributes.Even the blending of raw materials, if two or three or more ingredients are used, the type of
ingredient, the proportion of ingredients, methods of blending/mixing, etc. may also influence
the  quality  of  food,  e.g.  the  rate  of  oxidation  reaction  can  be  accelerated  or  can  be
decelerated, depending upon the amount of salt present in the mixture.
Similarly, in the case of a fabricated food, the composition of the product can be controlled
by  adding  certain  food  grade  approved  chemicals  such  as  acidulants,  chelating  agents,
antioxidants or by removing undesirable reactants. Chelating agents can be added to bind the
metal ions so that their reaction with the other component ceases.
Antioxidants can be added to control the oxidative hydrolysis, oxidative rancidity and other
reactions by removing the undesirable reactants from the system e.g., removal of glucose
from dehydrated egg albumin improves the color and other characteristic of the powder,
otherwise this glucose may react with the amino acids or amines that may result into the
Maillard browning reaction and the egg powder ultimately becomes brown in color. (6)Composition of gaseous phase
In addition to the composition of the ingredient, the composition of the environment in which
the material is handled, processed and stored have important influences on the properties and
characteristics of the product. For example, the presence or absence of oxygen may result in
spoilage of food material due to microorganisms. There are many situations where oxidation
processes can be avoided or limited. The instrumental methods or such other methods for the
exclusion  of  oxygen  can  be  employed.  However,  the  complete  exclusion  of  oxygen
accelerates the anaerobic processes.
For example, in coffee, a small amount of oxygen might have a significant influence on the
characteristics or quality of the product. During storage, even early formation of a small
amount of dehydroascorbic acid by the oxidation of ascorbic acid can lead to the browning
reaction.  Therefore,  oxygen  becomes  an  important  variable  which  should  be  properly
checked and controlled.(7)Water activity (aw)
Water activity is one of the most important variables that control the reaction rate in food. It
is not the water content, rather water activity that is important in food processing, handling
and  storage.  Most  of  the  enzymatic  reactions,  lipid  oxidation,  non-enzymatic  browning
reactions, sucrose hydrolysis, anthocyanin degradations, etc. are influenced by water activity.
Many of these reactions  tend to decrease at the lowest possible  rate over the range of
intermediate moisture food (0.75 to 0.85).
The reason for this is the reduced solvent capacity of the decreased water phase which
reduces the rate of these reactions. However, lipid and associated secondary effects such as
carotenoid degradation are exceptions because their rate is accelerated even at a low water
activity. This is an overview of water activity which influences the characteristics or quality
of the food material. Types of foods
Depending upon the different constituents present particularly water and other components,
the food is generally classified into three major groups: 
(1)Perishable foods 
Perishable foods are those that deteriorate quickly after harvest or slaughter.
(2) Semi-perishable foods 
Semi-perishable foods are those which contain natural inhibitors to spoilage or those
that have been given some type of mild preservation treatment which creates greater
tolerance to the environmental conditions during handling and distribution.
(3)Non-perishable or shelf stable foods 
Shelf stable foods are those which are non-perishable at room temperature. Even
some of these foods have been made room temperature stable by suitable processing
means like canning or drying to reduce their moisture content to significantly lower
values.In this table, it can be seen that, the perishable foods (e.g. poultry, sea-foods, milk, juicy
vegetables, etc.) have medium to high moisture content and can be stored for 1 to 7 days at
ambient  condition.  The  semi-perishable  foods  (e.g.  root  crops,  pears,  eggs,  pickled
vegetables, etc.) contain medium water content which can be stored for 1 to several weeks
depending on the storage environment. The shelf stable foods or non-perishable foods (e.g.
food grains, nuts, beans, etc.) have longer stability at room temperature and can be stored for
1 year or more as they have low moisture content. 
Shelf life
Another important aspect associated with the food quality and storage is the shelf life.  The
shelf life of food is a period between the processing and retail purchase and use of a foodproduct. During this finite period of time, the product is in a state of satisfactory quality in
terms of nutritional value, taste, appearance, flavor and use.
Metabolic inter-relations among various stored products
A mature harvested food crop/material contains a variety of oxidizable substrate and the
molecular machinery which are required to perform oxidative reactions.
The respiration, wherein sugar is converted into carbon dioxide, water and energy under
aerobic conditions, is the process of major concern. The mechanism of respiration reaction is
essentially the same in fruit, vegetable or other plant and animal life.
C6H12O6 + 6 O2                          6 CO2 + 6 H2O + Energy
The biological oxidations involve a number of metabolic pathways in which synthetic and
degradative reactions are inter dependent. In most of the cases, the respiration and other
oxidation reactions control the shelf life of the food material.The major interactions and chemical changes among different components during processing
and storage ultimately influence the quality of the food such as textural, sensory quality;
color, flavor, nutritional value. These are the same set of the reaction which also might result
in the development of certain toxic components. 
Carbohydrates  include  different  polysaccharide,  disaccharide,  oligosaccharide,
monosaccharide,  etc.  There  may be different  interactions  among  these constituents  with
proteins or lipids under different environmental and processing factors such as temperature,
pressure, heat, acid, light, and various other factors. This ultimately results in decomposition,
degradation  or  other  changes  in  components  and  formation  of  various  new  carbonyl
compounds like furfural, etc. There may be caramelization or pyrolysis, Maillard or Strecker
degradation reactions which ultimately influence the quality of the product.Similarly, in protein-rich food, the polypeptide can be broken down into di-, tri- and tetra-
peptides, etc. Similar to carbohydrate, protein also may get in contact with acid or certain
enzymes, water, even under anaerobic condition, etc. which induce different types of cross-
linking, oxidation and Maillard reaction, etc. which result in the formation of various new
compounds  influencing  the  product  characteristics.  This  graphical  presentation  gives  an
overview of the major chemical reactions which take place among the protein constituents
and its interaction with other components of the food.
Similarly,  the  lipids  may  come  across  various  factors  like  enzyme,  temperature,  heat,
irradiation,  air,  etc.  Lipids  may  undergo  different  reaction  processes  such  as  oxidation,
interaction with the protein, formation of hydroperoxides, etc. These hydroperoxides mayinteract  with protein  and other components. Also, various  carbonyl  compounds  may  be
formed which influence the quality of the food material.
This slide shows the interaction between major components of the food material during its
handling  or  storage.  The  polysaccharide  may  be  fragmented  into  pectic  substances,
celluloses, starches. There may be decomposition into smaller units like monosaccharide,
glucose or galacturonic acid, etc. These components may enter into the glycolytic cycle or
pentose phosphate pathways. Finally, it converts into pyruvic acid and at this stage, even the
fat  get  decomposed  to  glycerol  and  fatty  acids.  This  glycerol  enters  to  the  TCA
(Tricarboxylic acid) cycle. Similarly, proteins under different conditions can be broken down
into different amino acids. These amino acids like alanine, cysteine and serene interact with
the pyruvic acid whereas, the histidine, proline, and arginine enter at a later stage in the TCA
cycle and ultimately the series of complex reactions occur. Further in the oxidation reaction,
energy is released from the system and other components are formed. 
Therefore,  it  becomes  an  important  consideration  that  during  handling,  processing  and
storage of the food, these factors must be meticulously and properly controlled to get the
desired result in end products.