Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwaa Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 37
Microencapsulation (Part 1)
An  important  aspect  of  food  processing  i.e.  microencapsulation  technology  will  be
studied. This has a lot of potential for being used in different products for various
purposes.  This  topic  will  be  taken  up  in  two  parts;  in  the  part  1,  the  basics  of
microencapsulation technology including different methods of microencapsulation will
be introduced and this will be followed by the application of this technology in food
industry in the second part of the lecture.
Microencapsulation
Microencapsulation is a process by which very tiny droplet or particles of liquid or solid
materials are surrounded or coated with a continuous film of polymeric material. The
particles  having  diameter  between  3-800  µ  are  known  as  micro  particles  or
microcapsules or microspheres.
There is some active ingredient. This is subjected to a suitable process technology or
process called microencapsulation in which a coating of the material is applied over it
and  finally,  a  coated  particle  (microencapsulated  particle)  is  obtained  where  these
ingredients are protected.Encapsulation provides stability and protection to the materials, enhances acceptability,
improves flavor and other properties of the product. It may even be used for controlled
release  or  targeted  nutrition  delivery  or  for  immobilization  purposes  etc.  So,
encapsulation technology provides lot of benefits to the food processing industries as
well as consumers.
Different terms are related to the microencapsulation. There are some core materials and
on this core material some coating is applied. For application of the coating, there should
be  some  suspending  liquid  or  vehicle  through  which  coating  is  applied.  Finally,
dehydration media i.e. the solutions or vehicle which are used to apply the liquid isremoved or evaporated from the material so that the coating which is formed on the core
material becomes rigid, it provides the structure and desired properties.
Depending upon the different types of processes and materials used, the microcapsules of
various shapes and sizes can be formed. Different shapes include simple sphere, multi
walled  microcapsules,  matrix  particles,  irregular  shape  microcapsules  or  multi  core
microcapsules.
The core material used in the microencapsulation process might be a solid or a liquid
material.  Coating  materials  generally  used  are  polymers,  waxes,  resins,  protein  or
polysaccharides. The vehicle to be used for microencapsulation may be an aqueous or
even non-aqueous material. So, both aqueous and non-aqueous vehicles can be used for
this purpose.Different coating materials which are commonly used for microencapsulation process
include water soluble resins like gelatin, gum arabic, carboxymethyl cellulose, methyl
cellulose etc. Water insoluble resins are ethyl cellulose, polyethylene, polymethyl crylate
etc. Wax and lipids like paraffin, carnauba wax, bees wax, stearic acid etc. can also be
used as coating material. Or even different proteins like skim milk protein, milk protein
isolates, soya protein isolates, pea proteins etc. are used for this purpose.
There are certain points to be considered while deciding the core material as well as
coating or wall materials. For example, the solid core materials, can be mixture of active
constituents, stabilizers, diluents, excipient and release rate retardants or accelerators etc.So,  core  material  either  alone  or  in  combination  with  various  function  improving
constituents like stabilizer, diluents, etc. 
As far as the coating and wall materials are concerned they should be comfortable and
non reactive with the core material, they should provide desired coating properties like
strength, flexibility, impermeability, optical properties, non-hygroscopicity, tastelessness
as well as stability to the materials and more importantly they should be economic food
grade substances.
Microencapsulation techniques can be broadly classified into three major categories;
physical, physico-chemical and purely chemical processes. 
The  physical  methods  of  microencapsulation  include  pan  coating,  air  suspension,
extrusion, spray drying, freeze drying, microwave drying, vibrational nozzle and so on.
The physic-chemical processes include ionotropic gelation, coacervation or super critical
carbon  dioxide  assisted  microencapsulation.  The  purely  chemical  methods  include
solvent evaporation and polymerization.Pan coating
•Oldest industrial procedure for forming small, coated particles or tablets.
•Solid particles greater than 600 µ in size are generally considered essential for
effective coating.
•The particles are tumbled in a pan or other device while the coating material is
applied slowly.
•Coating solution is sprayed on the solid core material.
•Usually warm air is passed over the coated material as the coating is being
applied which evaporates the solvent.
Air suspension (Wurster process)
The fine core materials are suspended in a vertical current of air and sprayed with
the coating material.
After evaporation of solvent, a layer of encapsulating material is deposited on
core.
Gives improved control and flexibility as compared to pan coating.
Disadvantage
Agglomeration of the particles to some larger  size is normally achieved.
Microencapsulation through extrusion
There are three variations in this case; melt injection, melt extrusion and centrifugal
extrusion. In the melt injection, the core material is dispersed in molten carbohydrates, is
pressed through one or more dies into a bath of cold dehydrating liquid. The wall
material solidifies forming an encapsulating matrix to interrupt the core material. The
granules are recovered by filtration or centrifugation and the residual solvent is removed
by air drying or vacuum drying. The melt extrusion method is similar to that of the melt
injection method. The major difference is that the melt extrusion method is a vertical
screw-less process whereas, the melt injection is a horizontal screw process. In the melt
extrusion process, they contain surface washed particles whereas; in the melt injection
process, the particles are not surface washed.The  third  type  of  the  extrusion  technology  for  microencapsulation  is  centrifugal
extrusion. It consists of a concentric feed tube through which the wall and core materials
are pumped separately to the nozzle mounted on the outer surface of the device. The core
material flows through the center tube and the wall material flows through the outer tube.
Vacuum drying process is used to provide rigidity to the microcapsules.
Spray drying: It is the most commonly used encapsulation method in food industry. The
process is economical and flexible. It produces particles of good quality. The process
involves three basic steps like, preparation of a dispersion or emulsion which is to be
processed it is followed by homogenization of the dispersion and finally, atomization of
the mass into the drying chamber.
Spray dried ingredients typically have a very small particle size generally less than 100 µ
or  so  and  which  makes  them  highly  soluble.  Spray  technology  technology  in  fact,
produces microcapsules of good solubility.Freeze drying
Freeze drying is another good technology for microencapsulation of the heat sensitive
materials. It is also known as lyophilization or cryodesiccation. So, before freeze drying
the essential oils or such other materials are first frozen and depending upon the type of
the  material  the  freezing  temperature  may  range  between  -90  to  -40  ᵒC. After  the
material is frozen, the surrounding pressure is reduced in the set up and enough heat is
added to allow frozen water in the material to sublimate directly from the solid phase to
the gas phase. These freeze dried materials seem to have the maximum retention of
volatile compounds in comparison to those of the spray drying materials.
Microwave drying is another technology for microencapsulation which is based on the
unique  volumetric  heating  mode  and  internal  vapour  generation  facilitated  by
electromagnetic radiation of 2450 MHz. Heating from the interior of a food product
leads to the buildup of internal vapour pressure and this drives the moisture out of the
product. A significant reduction in drying time is accompanied by an improvement in
product  quality.  It  is  particularly  beneficial  and  desired  for  encapsulation  of  the
temperature sensitive products.
The vibrational nozzle technology is based upon the Rayleigh instability in this process.
A fluid stream of liquid core and shell material is pumped through the concentric tubes
and forms droplets under the influence of vibration.
To guarantee production of uniform beads and to avoid large size distributions due to the
coalescence effects during the flight, the droplets are passed through the electrostatic
field to be charged. As a result these droplets do not hit each other during the flight and
the separate individual droplets or microcapsules are formed.Ionotropic gelation (polyelectrolyte complexation): This technique involves interaction
of a cation or an anion with an ionic polymer to generate a highly cross linked structure. 
Generally, sodium alginate is used which is first dissolved in water, then in this solution
of sodium alginate in water, polymers are added with continuous stirring. These drugs
are dispersed properly they are placed on magnetic stirrer and the ionic solution is added
drop wise through needle which results into the ionotropic gelations or microspheres are
formed.
The  other  technology  is  the  coacervation.  Coacervation  is  a  unique  type  of
electrostatically  driven  liquid-liquid  phase  separation  resulting  from  association  of
oppositely  charged  macro-ions.  The  term  coacervate  is  sometimes  used  to  refer  tospherical aggregates of colloidal droplets which are held together by hydrophobic forces.
They  are  normally  two  methods  of coacervation;  simple  coacervation  and  complex
coacervation.
The mechanism of microencapsule formation in both of the processes is identical, except
for the way in which the phase separation  is  carried  out. In simple coacervation  a
desolation  agent  is  added  for  phase  separation  whereas,  the  complex  coacervation
involves complexation between the two oppositely charged polymers.
The  general  process  consists  of  three  steps  which  are  conducted  under  continuous
agitations and the first step includes the formation of three immiscible chemical phase,
maybe  a  liquid  manufacturing  vehicle  phase,  core  material  phase  and  the  coating
material  phase.  Then the  second step is  the  deposition  of coating  where  the  liquid
polymer is deposited around the interface formed between the core material and the
liquid vehicle phase. And, finally, rigidization of the coating takes place where the
prepared microcapsules are stabilized by cross linking desolvation or thermal treatment.In this picture, the process of simple coacervation can be seen. There are three stages for
formation of three immiscible phase deposition of coating and rigidization of the coating
material.  First,  there  are  some  droplets  and  these  core  material  are  put  into  a
homogeneous polymer solution. Then it results into the phase separation process where
the coacervate droplets of the polymer solutions are formed, and this coacervate droplets,
they  now  get  assembled  on  the  core  material  slowly  and  slowly  and  finally,  the
membrane formation takes place. So, in this way the microcapsules with the desired
characteristics and strength are formed.
Complex  coacervation  process: In the first step, the emulsification  of the  oil in an
aqueous  solution  containing  two different polymers  generally  polysaccharides  and aprotein are emulsified at a temperature and pH above the gelling point and isoelectric
point of protein. The second step is the separation of the liquid phase from the insoluble
polymer rich phase as a result of the electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged
polymers caused by lowering the solution pH below the isoelectric point of protein. The
third step is the wall formation due to the deposition of the polymer rich phase around
the hydrophobic droplets followed by controlled cooling below the gelling temperature.
And finally in the fourth step, then wall hardening i.e. the rigidization of the coated
materials results into the wall hardening of the microcapsules is achieved by the addition
of cross linking agents.
Super critical fluid technology
•The system consists of a high-pressure stainless steel impregnation vessel,  a 
temperature-controlled bath,  a magnetic stirring plate, a pressure transducer, and 
a high-pressure CO 2 liquid pump. 
•The impregnation cell is fed with a fixed amount of essential oils/core material at 
the bottom                                               
•Wall materials are placed in a stainless mesh elevated from the bottom by a 
support.                                                        . 
•After loading the oils and the wall materials, the impregnation cell is immersed in
the water bath at less than 80 °C and CO 2 is then fed into the cell until the desired
pressure is achieved in order to ensure the solubilization of active ingredients in 
supercritical CO2.