Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 38
Microencapsulation ( Part 2 )
This is the 2nd part of lecture on microencapsulation. 
In the earlier  part of this  topic,  the basic principles  of microencapsulation  and the
physical and physico chemical methods of microencapsulation were discussed. Now in
today’s lecture, the chemical methods of microencapsulation like solvent, evaporation
and polymerization will be studied. Further, the applications of this technology in food
processing or in different food products will be elaborated.Solvent evaporation
The solvent evaporation methods includes 3 step. First of all there is a formation of
solution  or  dispersion  of  the  core  material  into  an  aqueous  solvent  phase.  This  is
followed by emulsification of the core material into an aqueous phase containing a
suitable stabilizer and therefore, this results in the formation of a water in oil emulsion or
oil in water emulsion. After this, in the third step, the solvent is removed from the
dispersed phase either by extraction or evaporation and this leads to precipitation and
formation of microspheres. 
Polymerization
The polymerization process occurs in the continuous phase rather than on both sides of
the interface between the core material and the continuous phase. The micro capsule
formation process is conducted by the addition of oil in a melamine-formaldehyde resin
solution and a sonication process to emulsify the oil in the aqueous phase. The resin is
then added into the emulsion under continuous stirring and finally, the adjustment of the
emulsion pH is done to the acidic range. After this, the micro capsule shell formation
occurs due to the reaction of melamine with formaldehyde at the interface of oil droplets
producing a cross linked film of melamine-formaldehyde polymer. 
The whole process of polymerization is schematically or pictorially presented in the
figure. The solution of melamine-formaldehyde is a pre condensed form and co polymer
added in water has a pre cross-linked polymer. Then oil is added step by step and it is
agitated  to  form  the  emulsion,  then  the  wall  formation  takes  place  and  finally,
rigidization  of  the  wall  is  encapsulated  or  coated  with  melamine  formaldehyde
membrane. 
Types of polymerization
The polymerization can be conducted in 3 ways; one the interfacial polymerization, in-
situ polymerization or matrix polymerization. In interfacial polymerization, 2 reactants in
a  poly  condensation  meet  at  an  interface  and  react  directly.  In  the  case  of  in-situ
polymerization, there is a direct polymerization of single monomer and this is carried outon the particle surface. Matrix polymerization includes a core material embedded in a
polymeric matrix during formation of the particles.
Single emulsion method
The process can be done either in single emulsion method or in double emulsion method.
In the single emulsion method, (see picture) oil and polymer are mixed using proper
sonication or mixing and water in oil emulsion is formed. This water in oil emulsion is
added with the cross-linking agents. By heating the denaturation occurs or by the process
of  chemical  cross-linking  microspheres  are  formed  in  the  organic  phase.  Once  the
microspheres  are  formed,  they  are  isolated  either  by  centrifugation,  washing  and
separation processes. 
Double emulsion method
In the double emulsion method, (see picture) the inner phase and dispersed polymer
phase are mixed together to emulsify it and in this process, water and oil emulsion is
formed. The water in oil emulsion is added with the continuous phase having surfactant
by stirring etc., the suspension or emulsion is formed. So, the double emulsion water-oil-
water  once  formed  and  using  appropriate  methods  of  evaporation,  heating  etc.  the
solvents are evaporated and finally, the rigid microspheres or microcapsules are formed. 
Characterization of microencapsules
They include determination of particle size, physical properties of the microcapsules,
encapsulation  efficiency,  viscosity  of  emulsion,  thermal  stability  of  microcapsules,
morphologies, and in-vitro studies. It is a very important aspect that the microcapsules
would be properly characterized to ensure the purpose of microencapsulation.Application of microencapsulation technology in food processing 
•Adding ingredients to food products to improve nutritional value can compromise
their taste, colour, texture and aroma.
•Sometimes they slowly degrade and lose their activity, or become hazardous by
oxidation reactions.
•Microencapsulation offers promising solutions to these problems.
EPA and DHA levels in milk can be increased without any adverse effects on its
flavour by the incorporation of microencapsulated fish oils; the flavor of the milk
may get some sort of fishy flavor.
Milk can be fortified with vitamin D entrapped in liposome.
Microencapsulated  iron  ingredients  can  prevent  off  flavor  development  and
maintain bioavailability. 
Probiotic bacterial cells encapsulated in calcium alginate are provided protection
in fermented frozen dairy desserts.
The objectionable tastes and aroma of popular nutritional ingredients like soy
extracts, bitter herbs and ω-3 oils, can be masked by microencapsulation.
Microencapsulation of β-galactosidase in liposomes can be used to act in-vivo but
protect from acting on lactose during storage.
Ascorbic  acid  entrapped  in  liposome  together  with  vitamin  E  is
used for protection of emulsion-type foods.
Hygroscopic properties of materials like sodium chloride, etc. may be reduced by
microencapsulation.
Fluid-bed encapsulated salt is used in meats to prevent development of rancidity,
as well as premature set due to myofibrilar binding.
Among all existing microencapsulation methods, molecular inclusion of flavour
volatiles in β-cyclodextrin molecules is the most effective method for protecting
the aromas. 
Ascorbic  acid  is  added  to  bread  to  improve  its  quality.  The  encapsulated
form  can  protect  this  acid  from  water  and  oxygen  in  the  bread  which
causes degradation. The  category  of  various  food  ingredients  suitable  or  preferred  methods  of  their
encapsulation and their use in different food processes are shown in table. For example
the preferred method for encapsulation of acidulants like lactic acid, vitamin C, acetic
acid or such other acidulants or the fluidized bread coating or extrusion is tabulated. The
coated acidulants are used to assist in the development of color and flavor in meat
emulsions, dry sausage products, meat containing products, etc. The baking industry use
stable acids and baking soda in wet and dry mixes to control the release of carbon
dioxide during processing and subsequent baking.
The acidulants and other ingredients; flavoring ingredients like, citrus oil, milt oils, onion
oil,  garlic  oil,  etc.;  the  preferred  method  for  their  encapsulation  is  inclusion
complexation, extrusion, centrifugal extrusion, spray drying, etc. And these are used to
transform liquid flavorings into stable and free flowing powders which are easier to
handle and incorporate in a dry food system. Sweeteners like, sugars, nutritive or artificial sugars like aspartame etc. are generally
microencapsulated using co crystallization or fluidized bed coating processes and the
microencapsulated forms of these sweeteners are used to reduce the hygroscopicity to
improve flowability as well as to prolong sweetness perception.
Colorants  like  annatto,  beta,  carotene,  turmeric  etc.  are  microencapsulated  using
extrusion or emulsion methods and their encapsulated colors are easier to handle and
offer improved solubility and stability to oxidation and control over stratification from
dry blends. Lipids like, fish oil, linolenic acid, rice brain oil, egg white powders etc., are
spray dried or freeze dried or vaccum dried to encapsulate them. And these encapsulated
forms are used to prevent oxidative degradation during processing and storage. Similarly
vitamins  and  minerals  are  encapsulated  using  coacervation  process  or  inclusion
complexation, spray drying and such other methods.
The microencapsulated vitamins and minerals like, vitamin fat soluble vitamins or water
soluble vitamins and niacin, folic acids etc., are used to reduce off flavors to permit time
release of nutrients to enhance the stability to extreme temperature and moisture. They
are  also  used  to  reduce  the  nutrients  interactions  with  other  components  or  other
ingredients.  Enzymes  and  microorganisms  are  microencapsulated  generally  by
coacervation method or spray drying method and these are used to improve the stability
or to reduce the ripening times. Microencapsulation of fish oil
•Fish  oil  powder  is  produced  by  microencapsulating  fish  oil  with
micellar  casein  in  the  form  of  SMP  using  homogenization  and  spray
drying. It is easier to be used in different products.
•It had acceptable taste and modest shelf life of 3 weeks at 4 °C.
•It  is  successfully  incorporated  into  number  of  food  products  including
infant foods.
In this slide, the process flow chart for different methods of microencapsulation of fish
oil is presented which can be read and understood. Microencapsulation of polyphenols
The polyphenols have very good antioxidant properties, functionality and in many foods
many a time they are required to be added. But most of the polyphenols have bitter taste,
so,  when  added  to  the  food  materials  etc.,  they  impart  sensory  profile.  So,  these
polyphenols if they are encapsulated and then used in the encapsulated forms, then their
interaction with other food components can be avoided.
From the natural products like grape seed, soybean, oak etc., the polyphenols may be
extracted using standard methods and then these extracted polyphenols are mixed with
wall materials like polysaccharides, proteins, gums etc., to form solution. The solution is
then spray dried to form microcapsules. 
Microencapsulation of high PUFA containing edible oils 
In our lab, some work in microencapsulation of edible oils has been done; different oil
blends  like,  sunflower  oil  and  sesame  oil  in  different  proportions  were  taken  and
conditions were optimized to have high content of PUFA as well as more antioxidants.
Oils alone or in combination (see picture) were emulsified with the wall materials and
with suitable aqueous medium, then oil-in-water emulsion was formed. This oil and
water emulsion was dried using spray drying as well as microwave drying and good
quality free flowing oil powder was obtained. 
Spray drying yielded a good free flowing powder and the microwave drying also was
found  to  be  equally  better  process.  The  oil  entrapped  in  the  microencapsules  was
comparatively found more in the microwave drying process than that of the spray drying
process. 
Microencapsulation of probiotics
Lactic acid bacteria are mixed with suitable wall materials i.e. the sources of the wall
materials may be carbohydrate sources, maltodextrin or some protein sources. Aqueous
medium is used for their emulsification and 2 methods are used; one is spray drying and
another freeze drying; probiotic powder is obtained. Mechanism of controlled release of ingredients
The bio actives or ingredients are coated with certain materials to provide them stability.
Before they are used actually in the food system it has to be ensured that, this coating
material  is  disintegrated  or  ruptured  at  the  time  of  its  use.  So,  variety  of  release
mechanism or variety of methods have been proposed for breaking or rupturing of the
wall of the microcapsules and they include pressure or shear stress, melting the wall by
suitable  method  by  thermal  or  such  other  methods,  dissolving  it  under  particular
conditions  as in the case of an enteric  drug coating, solvent action  enzyme  attack,
chemical reaction, hydrolysis or slow disintegration. These methods depending upon
type of the micro capsule, wall material, core material, its sensitivity, its strength etc.,
either of these processes can be used to release the bioactives.Controlled release of ingredients
Some bio-actives are encapsulated and there is a hard rigid cell outside. There is a water
or acidic condition etc., there may be water soluble material they can be dissolved in this
acidic medium. The wall material is dissolved and finally, the active ingredients are
released. 
Advantages of microencapsulation technology
•Handling and flow properties can be improved by converting liquid to a solid
encapsulated from. 
•Hygroscopic materials can be protected from moisture.•Various properties of active agents may be changed by encapsulation.
•Studies  on  the  macrophage  uptake  of  microspheres  have  demonstrated  their
potential in targeting drugs to pathogens residing intracellularly.
•Reliable means to deliver the drug to the target site with specificity.
The conversion of bio actives from liquid form to solid form improve their restorability,
usability;  even  hygroscopic  materials  can  be  protected  from  moisture  after  being
encapsulated.  Various  properties  of  active  agents  may  be  changed  by
microencapsulation.  And  studies  on  the  macrophage  uptake  of  microspheres  have
demonstrated their potential in targeting drugs to pathogens residing intracellularly. This
is a reliable means to deliver the drug to the target site with specificity. 
•The  desired  concentration  can  be  maintained  at  the  site  of  interest  without
untoward effects.
•The  development  of  cyclodextrins  has  been  a  major  breakthrough  in
microencapsulation technology; it provided good wall material for improving
shelf-life, reducing volatility and protection of heat-labile substances.
•Due to encapsulation flavours are more stable after processing with microwave,
heat, oven drying and frying.
•Liposomes  have  many  benefits  for  the  food  industry  including  protection
of materials until desired release or targeted delivery.So, in nut shell, this microencapsulation technology has a wide ranging application in
food processing industries. It is a very good and efficient method for improving the food
functionality, characteristics and their usability. 
 