Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 32
Edible Oil Refining (Part 1) Degumming & Neutralization
In  this  lecture,  removal  of  impurities  from  the  edible  oil  using  degumming  or
neutralization processes will be studied.
Depending upon the method used for extraction of oil and the process parameters, along
with the triglycerides some other components also get extracted and they may include
free fatty acids, phosphatides, pigments, etc. For example, if the severe pressure or heat
conditions etc. are used that may result into some hydrolysis or breakage of the ester
linkage of the triglyceride. The phospholipids may also get extracted along with the
triglycerides; the free fatty acids development may lead to the amount of diglycerides,
monoglycerides etc. The major non-triglyceride compounds present in the oil depending
upon the process and process parameters used for oil extraction might include free fatty
acids, phospholipids, diglycerides, monoglycerides and so on. Similarly, some of the
minor non-triglyceride components which oil might contain include tocopherols, sterols,
esters, tocotrienols, colour compounds or even the oil decomposition products such as
polar  compounds,  polymeric  aldehydes,  ketones  and  other  volatile  and  non-volatile
compounds.Refining of crude oil
The non-triglyceride components which are present in the oil should be removed before
the oil is sent for further use as a crude oil for cooking and frying purposes or for its
convergence into various processed products or its use in different food products. So, in
order to get good quality oil which contains mainly of triglycerides, the extracted oil or
crude oil is subjected to various processing steps for the removal of non-triglyceride
components and these are called refining. 
•Refining  is  the  important  processing  steps  that  reduces  or  removes  certain
undesirable impurities from the crude oil.
•In refining, physical and chemical processes are combined to remove undesirable
components from the crude oil. 
•The impurities includes major and minor non-triglycerides.Objectives of   r  efining   process  
The objectives of the refining process therefore, includes the removal of undesirable
components from the crude oil like free fatty acids, phospholipids, oxidised products,
metal ions, colour pigments and other impurities. But at the same time the refining
process  should  be  conducted  in  such  a  manner  that  the  valuable  components  like
tocopherols, tocotrienols, sterols, sterol esters etc., also get extracted along with the oil.
They are the valuable component having good antioxidant properties etc. So, the refining
process should not remove these desirable component which the oil contains.  Apart
from this, oil losses should be minimized and the refined oil should be protected against
any deterioration i.e. even the refining process parameter itself should not lead to the
decomposition of the oil. In this slide, the major processes to which oils are subjected are shown. The removal of
phosphatides  etc.  is  called  degumming.  After  degumming,  the  degummed  oil  (see
Figure) is sent to the neutralization step that is again very important. In the neutralization
step, free fatty acids are removed. The neutralized oil is sent to the bleaching process
where the undesirable colouring pigments are removed. Finally, last step of the refining
process  is  the  deodorization  which  is  an  important  step  where  the  materials  or
components which are not removed in earlier processes or generated if in case will be
retained in this process. So, after this step, the oil should basically be bland in taste, it
should be principally only triglyceride; odours, flavours and all other components should
be  removed.  Sometimes  even  after  deodorization,  these  oils  are  also  winterized.
Bleaching earth added during the bleaching process is further separated by the filtration,
but it might so happen that a few minor earth particles might remain in the oil. During
the storage these earth particles get deposited on the bottom of the tank which should be
removed. Degumming
Aim of degumming operation
The emulsifying action of PL increases oil losses during alkali refining.
Gums lead brown discoloration of oil after heating during deodorization.
Salts may be formed with cop per, magnesium, calcium and iron, accelerating
oxidative degredation of oil.
Certain PL, such as lecithin, find widespread industrial application.
The gums or phospholipids which are present in the oil are of two types either hydratable
or non-hydratable. The hydratable gums or phospholipids are easy to remove just by
simple water washing whereas, non-hydratable phospholipids are difficult to remove.
They require acid treatment for their complete removal. Acid treatments in fact, convert
the non-hydratable phospholipids into hydratable phospholipids and they get removed.
Different degumming processes include water degumming, acid degumming, enzyme
degumming and membrane degumming. Water degumming
The process which is followed for degumming of the oil using water can be seen in the
flow sheet shown in slide. These steps are normally done at the extraction plant. 
Immediately after extraction, they are treated with a definite amount of water depending
upon the quality of the crude oil and this process is called hydration process.
•Hydration process; warm water is added to the crude oil at 80-85 °C and the
mixture is agitated slowly for approximately 20 min or passed to the reactor for
about half an hour. 
•The water dosage used is usually based on the expected amount of PL in the
crude oil.
•In the reaction vessel the hydratable phospholipid agglomerate at the interface of
the oil and water, capturing some of the non-hydra table phospholipids  with
them.  They  precipitate  and  in  the  next  step  by  using  appropriate  separation
method normally centrifuge etc. they are removed. So, these gums which are
removed from here they are sent for purification. The oil is sent to the drying and
storage so that  whatever  water has been added here can be removed before
sending it to the next step. The oil is also trapped by the phospholipids forming an emulsion referred to as ‘gums’ or
‘wet gums’. So, after a certain reaction period the hydrated phospholipids are separated
either by using decantation (settling) or centrifugation processes. 
Acid degumming
Then, after water degumming done at the extraction plant, the oil is pumped through
appropriate transportation or conveying means to the refining plant. And it is said that
the refining of the oil starts from the storage tank itself, because during the storage also
depending upon the environmental conditions and pumping practices followed, some of
the insoluble oil get settled in the storage tank and separated. So, from this oil storage
tank the oil is passed through the acid degumming unit.Dry acid degumming
Acid  degumming  unit  may  be  of  two  types:  dry  acid  degumming  and  wet  acid
degumming.
•Dry acid degumming is particularly suitable for processing oils with low gum
contents such as palm oil, coconut oil, or animal fats. 
•Intensive mixing is implemented following addition of acid to the pre-heated
crude oil. 
•The conditioned gums are absorbed into the bleaching earth and are separated by
filtration. 
•The benefits of the dry acid degumming process are
Efficiency as a result of 
Low energy consumption, 
Low operation and maintenance costs  
Long service life (the components are acid proof), 
Low investment costs, 
Environmental-friendly as no waste  water or soap stock occur. 
Wet acid degumming
•Initially oils with higher gum contents (e.g. corn oil) are similarly processed as in
dry acid degumming. 
•However, to achieve gum hydration, water is added following acid apportioning. 
•The gums are removed by a separator prior to bleaching. •This  process  is  beneficial  as  centrifuges  enable  easy  separation  of  gums
in  oil  with  higher  non-hydratable  gums  (e.g.  rapeseed  oil  and
soybean oil).
•The  consumption  of  bleaching  earth  is  reduced  because  the
oil has already been extensively degummed.
Acid degumming process steps
Steps 
Oil is heated to 60 -70 °C.
Acid (0.05-0.2 % phosphoric acid) is added and mixed.
Allowed hydration mixing time for 30 min.
Centrifugal separation of hydrated gums.
Vacuum drying of degummed oil.Enzymatic degumming
Enzymatic degumming is another potential process for removal of phosphatides or gums
etc. from the oil (see Figure). In fact, the processing steps are same only difference here
is that, in earlier case water or acid solution is used, here enzyme solution is used. 
The enzyme solution ( aqueous solution of citric acid, caustic soda and enzymes) is
dispersed into filtered oil at mild temperature . A high speed rotating mixer is used for
effective mixing of enzyme solution and oil. The conversion of non-hydratable PL into
hydratable phospholipid is attained by the effect of enzyme.                              
Membrane   degumming  
The principle of membrane degumming is same as membrane separation process. Micro
filtration or ultrafiltration offer promising potential in oil industry for the removal of
phosphatides and other components which are present. 
MF and UF have been explored for membrane based degumming.
Membrane degumming of the oil can be done in two ways:
Degumming of crude solvent free vegetable oil
Degumming of oil-solvent micella
The major problem in membrane degumming of the crude oil was the drastic flux
drop  at  the  initial  experiment  stage  which  was  attributed  to  the  pore
blocking,  concentration  polarisation,  and  cake  formation  by  the
rejected solids. So, operation becomes little difficult or costly to manage. 
After degumming, the degummed oil with no water content is sent to the refining. The
refining is basically removal of free fatty acids or such other components from the oil.
There are two methods used for the refining process, it may be physical refining process
or chemical generally called alkali refining process or neutralisation, which may be
accomplished in batch or continuous process. Physical refining process
The crude oil is sent to filter and acid conditioning, after removing the gum etc. it is
bleached in a bleacher with acid activated clay and citric acid. And then filtration to
remove the suspended particles or even free fatty acids etc. 
•It helps to reduce the total phospholipids in the oil to a lower level.
•The bleaching in addition removes the remaining phospholipids, trace metals, oil
decomposition products, and color bodies such as chlorophyll, carotene, etc. from
the oil.
•FFA,  monoglycerides,  oil  decomposition  products  are  removed  in
deodorisation process.Chemical refining (neutralization) process
•Chemical refining is widely used for vegetable oils.
•In  this  process  the  crude  oil  is  pre-treated  with  phosphoric  acid  and  then
neutralised with a caustic (sodium hydroxide) solution.
•The caustics reacts with the FFA in crude oil and produces soap.   
•The  soap  is  then  separated  from  the  refined  oil  in  primary  centrifuge;  the
remaining soap is mostly removed from the oil via water washing and separating
the oil and water in water washing centrifuge.
Neutralization : batch process
Crude oil is taken into the refining kettle. The kettle is equipped with the agitator as well
as baffles to prevent vortex formation. The caustic solution is added into the kettle after
acid pre-treatment and the mixture is agitated at low speed. The temperature of the
neutralization  is  kept  35 - 40  ᵒC  for the  seed  oils. The free fatty  acids  should be
maximum 0.01 - 0.02 % and the phosphorous should be less than 5 ppm after the
neutralization treatment. 
The oil is next heated to 85 - 90 ᵒC and 10 - 15 % deionised water is added, agitator
speed is increased for obtaining intimate mixing between oil and water to remove soap.
Water washing and draining step are followed to remove soap. Oil is treated with 1 - 3 %
acid activated clay and bleached under vacuum at 110 - 120 ᵒC. Critical points of batch process
•Agitator speed
It must be operated at 
Low speed – for neutralisation
Medium speed – for water washing
High speed – for bleaching
•Bleaching clay
Requires higher dosage of clay as compared to continuous process. 
This is because the refined and water washed oil contains high levels of
soap. 
PL deactivate some of the bleaching clay so not all of the clay added is
effective in reducing the colour bodies in the oil. 
•Refining losses
Are  very  high  in  batch  process  as  compared  to  the  continuous
chemical refining process.
So, the process parameter etc. should be accordingly optimized and standardized. Neutralization : Continuous process
The principle in the continuous process is same as that of the batch process. Here also it
is intimate mixing of the oil with the suitable concentration of alkali, and giving proper
reaction time, then settling and removal of the soap. The crude oil undergoes a series of
the process like heating, acid treatment, caustic treatment, mixing, soap separation, water
washing etc. continuously (see Figure). 
Critical points of continuous process
•Crude oil filtrationCrude  oil  free  from  meal,  hull,  dirt  should  be  used,  otherwise  the
centrifuge or primary separator gets dirty soon.
•Crude oil pre-treatment
Proper acid pre-treatment is essential for all crude oils and especially for
those that have been derived from poor quality seeds or damaged during
storage.
Low acid treatment – cannot reduce non-hydratable phospholipids.
High acid treatment – can cause breakdown of the chlorophylls in the
crude oil, making it more sensitive to photooxidation; will need higher
caustic treat.
•Uniformity of crude oil composition
A non uniform feed quality can cause under or over refining of the oil.
•Uniformity of crude oil flow
A variation in change of flow can cause change in the oil/caustic ratio
under or over refining of the oil.
•Caustic strength and temperature  
•Higher strength than recommended can cause excessive reaction with oil
leading to hydrolysis of TG and increased refining loss.
•Lower strength than recommended might reduce the density of soap and
result in a weak emulsion formation which may cause higher oil loss.
•Temperature affects the dispersion of the caustic into the oil.•Degree of mixing between the crude oil and caustic solution  
•Poor mixing leaves excess amount of free alkali in refined oil.
•It affects the FFA content of the water washed refined oil.
•Contact time between crude oil and caustic solution  
•Affect the reaction of caustic with the nonhydratable PL.
•Refining temperature  
•Allow the soap to separate from the oil.