Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 39
Food Nanotechnology
Another important and upcoming subject in food technology i.e. food nanotechnology
will be studied.
Nanotechnology
According  to  the  British  Standards  Institution  (BSI),  nanotechnology  is  defined  as
“design, characterization, production and application of structures, devices and systems
by controlling shape and size at the nanoscale”.
•Most promising scientific fields of research in decades. 
•Manipulation of materials at macromolecular, molecular & atomic scales.
•Properties  and  functionalities  of  nanoscale  molecules  &  atoms  differ
significantly.
•Nanoscale size range is where one or more dimensions are of the order of 100 nm
or less.Building strategies in nanotechnology
They include top down approach or bottom up approach. Top down approach involves
that  nano-level  structures  are  generated  by  breaking  up  materials  through  milling,
nanolithography or precision engineering. In the bottom up approach, nanostructures are
built from individual self-assembling atoms or molecules. 
The bottom up strategy of nanotechnology is used for the development of remarkably
strong materials with precisely controlled structures and properties. They are also used
for development of high surface area particles and materials that encapsulate active
compounds. The strategies can be used for the development of smart coatings that are
self-cleaning or can change colour depending upon environmental conditions.Instrumentation for study of nanomolecules
The  use  of  this  nanotechnology,  has  been  made  possible  after  the  suitable
instrumentations were developed to study the characteristics of the material at nano-
scale. The instruments used for characterization include scanning probe microscopy or
atomic force microscopy. In SPM, techniques that provide images of surface topography
and allows quantification of surface properties down to the molecular or atomic level.
The  atomic  force  microscopy  is  the  micromanipulation  research  tool,  which  allows
amazing of non-conducting biomaterials including food materials. 
Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
•AFM operates in various modes, allowing a multitude of applications.
•When  used  in  the  contact  mode,  it  can  measure  properties  (viz.  stiffness,
hardness, friction, elasticity & adhesion) on a surface, down to the molecular
level.
•Force-distance curves can be obtained by
Extending the AFM cantilever tip down to surface of the sample, or 
Making  contact  between  the  tip  and  the  sample  surface  followed  by
retracting the tip from the surface.
•Slope of the force-deformation  curve is  used as  measure of the modulus  of
elasticity at surface.
The slope of the force deformation curve is used as measure of the modulus of elasticity
at surface.
•In  intermittent  contact  mode,  tip  of  the  cantilever  oscillates  at  a  resonant
frequency and taps sample surface lightly during each oscillation cycle.
•Non-contact  mode,  useful  in  imaging  isolated  bio-macromolecules  or
supramolecular  assemblies,  avoid  sample  disruption  or  tip
contamination.Scanning probe microscopy (SPM)
•The SPM instrumentation include
Near-field scanning optical microscope (NSOM) 
Scanning thermalmicroscope (SThM)
Scanning capacitance microscope (SCM)
Magnetic force and resonance microscopes (MFM)
Interfacial force microscope (IFM)
•In  SPM  for  analysis  of  nanomaterials,  sensors  are  used  which  can  measure
atomic-level forces between two surfaces as they approach each other and come
into contact.
Nanotechnology for the food and agricultural system
It can be used to improve the processing methodologies or processes like heat and mass
transfer, nanoscale reaction engineering, nanobiotechnology and molecular synthesis. It
can be used to develop the products in food process, product manufacturing development
in the delivery of the targeted nutrition, formulation, and packaging.
The nanotechnology can be used for the development of materials like nano particles,
nano emulsions, nano composites, nano structured materials which has wide ranging
scope in food processing industry. This has a very good application in the analysis of
food safety and biosecurity like nano sensors or nano tracers that can be used to detect
pathogen, to detect toxins in present in food etc.
Nanotechnology  can  be  used  in  food  processing  for  modification  of  macroscale
characteristics of materials like texture, sensory attributes, processability, and shelf life.
It can be used for understanding the food components structure and their interactions, for
design of healthier, tastier and safer foods. It can be used for the development of non-
polluting, cheaper and efficient processes. Nanotechnology can be used for development
of lighter and more precise food manufacturing equipment, smart packaging materials,
novel delivery methods, and for the manufacture of sensors for pathogen detections.Manipulation of molecules at nano scale
•For process improvement  
Nanoscale ECIN coating on the surface of polymer film is done layer-by-layer
(LbL) approach. 
By using purified extracellular ice nucleators (ECIN), ice nucleation temperatures
can  be  elevated,  promoting  freezing  and  reduced  freezing  time.  It  leads  to
significant energy savings.
•To functionalize microfiltration or ultrafiltration polymeric membranes by filling
pores with polymeric or oligomeric liquids with an affinity for compounds of
interest.
Nanoparticle  enhanced  membrane  that  combines  organic  polymers  with
inorganic silica.
Nanoparticles  enable  large  molecules  to  pass  through  readily
than smaller molecules.
•To purify ethanol and methanol inexpensively.Nanotubes & high surface area nanomaterials
Nanotubes and high surface area nano materials are made by winding single sheets of
graphite with honeycomb structures into very long thin tubes with stable, strong and
flexible structure. Nano tubes are the strongest fibre. In fact, 1 nano tube is 10 to 100
times stronger than steel (per unit weight). Nanotube reinforced composites with high
fracture and thermal resistance could replace conventional ceramics, alumina or metals
in  building  of  industrial  food  processing  equipment.  Nanotube  membranes  have
significant potential used in food systems. Nanotube membranes are used as a part of
sensors for molecular recognition of enzymes, antibodies, various proteins and DNA.
They are also used for the membrane separation of biomolecules like proteins etc.
Conducting polymers could also be used to develop food-packaging films. Conducting
membranes in food and associated industries can be used as membrane pervaporation of
food  flavours,  dehydration  of  alcohol  by  pervaporation,  membrane  distillation,  and
temperature-swing absorption of volatile liquid foods. 
Nanodelivery systems
Nano delivery systems is one of the very interesting application of nanotechnology in
food processing. It is the development of novel systems to deliver functional ingredients
to  the targeted  release  sites.  Precise  control  of properties  and functionalities  of the
bioactives can be found at the molecular level, by nanometre sized association colloids,
surfactant micelles, vesicles, bilayers, reverse micelles, liquid crystals and at the nano-
level. This of course, has both advantages and disadvantages. The advantages include, it
can  be  formed  spontaneously,  is  thermodynamically  favourable,  and  provides  a
transparent solution. However, it requires large quantities of substrate. There are still
some problems related to flavour, cost and legality at the process. Nanoemulsions
•Nanoscale  emulsion  droplets,  produced  using high  pressure  homogenizers  or
microfluidizers  for encapsulating functional components, enable slowdown of
chemical degradation processes.
•Nanoemulsions allow the effective delivery of target compounds.
•Multiple emulsions can be formed to encapsulate functional food ingredients
within their individual phases.
•Single delivery systems containing multiple functional components is possible.
Biopolymeric nanoparticles
•Allow better encapsulation.
•Injected directly in circulatory system.
•Produced using food biopolymers such as PLA, proteins or polysaccharides.
Self-association or aggregation of single biopolymers.
Phase separation in mixed biopolymer systems. 
•Encapsulate functional ingredients. 
•Biodegradable  starch  nanoparticles  are  used  in  mixing,  emulsification  for
imparting specific rheology to foods. 
Nanocomposites
•Nanocomposites  made  from  nanoscale  structures  have  unique  morphology,
strength and good barrier properties. They can be used to
Enhance mechanical strength, 
Improve conductivity,
Incorporate  and  efficiently  deliver  active  substances  into
into biological systems.
•Barrier properties of nanocomposites, obtained from natural materials, are useful
for  food  packaging  applications  for  enhanced  shelf  life  of  foods  such  as
processed meats, cheese, confectionery, cereals, or boil-in the-bag foods. •Packaging material made of potato starch & CaCO 3 has good thermal insulation
properties, are lightweight and biodegradable.
•Can replace polystyrene used for fast food.
Nanolaminates
•Nanolaminates  consist  of  two  or  more  layers  of  materials  with  nanometer
dimensions, physically   or chemically bonded to each other.
•Made using Layer-by-Layer (LBL) deposition technique.
•Carriers  for  functional  agents  e.g.  colors,  flavors,  antioxidants,  nutrients  &
antimicrobials.
•Used as coatings instead of self-standing films due to fragility.
•Encasing of food in nanolaminates can be done by dipping or by spraying.Nanofibers
•Polymeric strands of sub-micrometer diameters.
•Produced by interfacial polymerization & electrospinning. 
•Electrospun  polymer  fibers  have  unique  mechanical,  electrical,  and  thermal
properties.
•Application include reinforcement of 
Food-packaging materials, and 
Fabrication of nanostructured scaffolding for bacterial cultures.
Nano-biosensors
•The biosecurity of the food and water supply become a serious concern.
•Novel solutions are required for development of fast, reliable and highly sensitive
biosensors for the detection of biological agents.
•Production  of  triangular  prismatic  shaped  nanoparticles
can  detect  biological  threats  e.g.  anthrax,  smallpox,
and tuberculosis & genetic and pathogenic diseases. 
•Chip based sensors can be developed for rapid detection of biological pathogens
&  early  warning  systems  for  exposure  to  air-  and  water-borne  bacteria,
viruses, and other antigens.
Application of nanoparticles in food industry
The application of nanoparticles in the food industries is discussed; it can be used for
food  nano-packaging,  food  nano-safety,  food  nano-functionalities  or  food  nano-
preservation and food nano-preservation. For micro encapsule, i.e. the wall materials
having  desirable  release  properties,  desirable  disintegrating  rupture  properties  of
desirable strength, desirable solubility, etc. all these can be prepared using this food
nano-technology.  In  areas  of  treatment  of  water,  humidity  treatment  of  the  storage
environment etc. this nanotechnology has a lot of potential.
In  food  nano-packaging  like  intelligent  sensing  or  nano  coated  packaging,  active
antimicrobial  packaging,  these  nanomaterials  can  be  coated  on  the  interior  of  thepackaging material. They improve the interaction between the surface of the food as well
as the interior of the packaging material or they manipulate the environment that may
result into the enhanced shelf life. So, this bio based eco-friendly edible packaging can
be developed using nano technology approach.
As far as the food nano safety is concerned that is the nano materials can be developed
which are active against pathogens, they are anti-allergens or pesticides, they reduce
heavy metals, they can inhibit biofilms etc. Even this nanoparticles improve the food
functionality like enhance physical properties, protect chemical deterioration of the food
and enhance nutritive quality of the food materials. So, this has a very wide ranging
application in food industry.
Before it is made successful, there are certain challenges to overcome. For example, the
prospect of commercializing these nano applications in food sector will depend upon
their cost-effectiveness. But if the cost-effective nanotechnology methods are developed,
it can found wide use in the food processing industries. If the improvement  in the
functional characteristics and other quality attributes of the food is more than the cost
involved, obviously industry would like to use it. 
But at present, in most of the countries there are not much regulations related to the
application  of  nanomaterials  or  nanotechnology  in  food  processing.  So,  before  this
technology is made versatile and commonly accepted by the food processing industries,significant changes in the current food regulations and legislations might be required in
several countries, particularly the safety related concerns.
They  are  very  effective,  they  improve  the functionality  and other  properties  of the
material, but their safety, how they interact with other components in the body system in
the food system,  whether safe for consumption, etc. need to be established;  that is
another challenging issue. 
Another factor is the significant contributions for improvement and extension of shelf
life of the material. So, if the use of nano technology results in more extension of shelf
life then the industry will be tempted to use it. But the significant results or data are
required to be generated in this direction.
If this nanotechnology is properly conducted it might result in thorough improvement of
food and agriculture systems and the consumers will obviously, be benefited from the
advances in nano technology contributing to the improved safety and nutrition value of
the foods. 
However, more developments  of not only the process technology,  but also suitable
equipment, suitable infrastructural facilities to prepare or to form the nanomaterials and
other things are needed.