Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 35
Rancidity
 This lecture is on rancidity of oils and fats.
A very important process which takes place in fats and oils or the products containing
fats and oil is known as rancidity. Rancidity is the natural process of decomposition of
fats or oils leading to the development of undesirable flavor and odour which is either by
hydrolysis or by oxidation. In rancidity by hydrolysis or oxidation, the lipids or fats and
oils degrade to the point of becoming either unpalatable or unhealthy to ingest.Different causative factors for the rancidity include heat, light, radiation, water, enzymes,
even catalysts like metal ions, acids, alkali, salt, etc. These are the conditions or agents to
which the foods containing fats and oils or even the individual fats and oils come in
direct contact during various operations like heating, frying, etc. During storage, they
may come in contact with the light.
All  these  factors  bring  about  certain  changes  in  the  odour,  flavor,  nature  and
characteristics  of the  material.  The  rancidity  may  be broadly  categorized  into three
groups: hydrolytic rancidity, oxidative rancidity and ketonic rancidity.Hydrolytic (lipolytic) rancidity
•Hydrolysis of the ester linkage of the triglyceride is the primary event. 
•Caused by the agents like moisture, heat, light, alkali, acid, enzyme (lipase), etc.
•Results in the increase of FFA, mono & diglycerides content in the oils & fats.
A triglyceride (see Fig.) contains 3 fatty acids attached with a glycerol molecule. When
the ester linkage is hydrolyzed depending upon the extent of hydrolysis, the system will
get  more  free  fatty  acids  plus  there  may  be  some  monoglyceride,  diglyceride  and
triglyceride. In fact, generally oil or fat which was earlier a triglyceride because of this
hydrolysis, it becomes a mixture of triglyceride, diglyceride, monoglyceride and free
fatty acids. This hydrolysis may be caused by the different agents like moisture, heat,
light, alkali, acid, enzymes like lipase etc.
•When alkali (NaOH or KOH) is the hydrolytic agent, the resultant fatty acid is
converted into its Na or K-salt and soap formation takes place; the process is
called “Saponification”.  So, this alkali reacts with the released free fatty acids
and sodium or potassium salt of the respective fatty acids are formed and the
resultant product is called soap and actually that is the principal of the soap
formation in the industrial sector.
•Otherwise,  when other causative agents bring about hydrolysis,  the process is
called “lipolytic” or “hydrolytic rancidity”.
•Change in the flavour is mainly because of the increase in FFA content. •Developed  FFA  depresses  ‘smoke  point’  &  seriously  affects  cooking/frying
qualities of the oils & fats.
For example, cotton seed oil which has a smoke point of about 232  ᵒC; even 1 %
development of FFA in the cotton seed oil reduces its smoke point to 160 ᵒC means that
the cotton seed oil which was earlier able to be heated up to 232 ᵒC; with 1 % developed
free fatty acids, it cannot be heated more than 160 ᵒC.
Its frying qualities and moreover the production are hampered when they are fried in an
oil which has more free fatty acids, there is more absorption of oil or fat by the products.
Also the products tend to develop more browning and they give the cracked surfaces i.e.
smoothness on the surface may not be there. So, these are some of the problems for
which the rancidity should be avoided. 
Oxidative rancidity
Oxidation is a process where addition of oxygen takes place on the molecule; it may be a
photo  oxidation,  it  may  be  auto-oxidation  or  enzymatic  oxidation.  The  oxidative
rancidity basically is caused by oxidation of the unsaturated fatty acid in the chain and
because of the spontaneous nature of the reaction, the process is frequently referred to as
auto-oxidation and oxidation of unsaturated fat in food is generally mediated by free
radical which are formed through a complex series of reactions.Oxidation
•Oxidation is the process of addition of oxygen (O 2) or removal of hydrogen or
electrons.
•Oxidant/ oxidizing agent is an element or compound that gain electrons & get
reduced; it favors oxidation.
•In food system, O2 is the most common oxidant.
Factors influencing oxidation are
Heat,  light,  ionization  reactions,  trace  metals  (copper  and  iron),  enzymes
(lipoxygenase), and metalloproteins such as heme.
The lipid oxidation may be of two types. Actually higher the degree of unsaturation,
higher is the instability or more prone the oil will be to the oxidative processes. So,
oxidation of highly unsaturated fats may result in the polymeric end product formation
whereas, oxidation of moderately unsaturated fats results in the development of rancidity
reversion, off flavor, odours, etc.
Lipid oxidation products
Depending  upon  the  stages  and  extent  of  oxidation,  different  products  are  formed.
Accordingly,  primary  oxidation  products  are  decomposed  into  secondary  oxidation
products and which may further be oxidized into tertiary oxidation product. The primary
oxidation  products  in  the  fats  and  oil  include  hydroperoxides;  secondary  oxidation
products  may  be  aldehydes,  ketones,  dienes,  trienes,  etc.  and  the  tertiary  oxidation
products are acids, epoxide, dimers and oxirane rings and so on.Effects of lipid oxidation
The lipid oxidation has several influences on the quality of the products of lipid, fats and
oils. There may be flavor loss like rancid flavor, change in the color and texture of the
food, nutritional quality loss particularly the essential fatty acids if involved or vitamins
etc. Even this lipid oxidation end products may be sometime health risk also, there will
be  growth  retardation,  heart  diseases  etc.  sometime  reported  due  to  the  oxidation
products and ultimately the consumer acceptance of the product is adversely affected.
So, there is economic loss.
As far as the nutritional significance of the lipid oxidation is concerned, there are certain
products which might be formed as a result of oxidation of lipids or fats which haveimportant influence on the health like for example, peroxidised fatty acids. They destroy
both vitamin A and vitamin E in foods. Similarly polymeric materials may have different
effects. Oxidized sterols are thought to be involved in the causation of atherosclerotic
disease and so on.
Lipid peroxidation (Autooxidation)
•Peroxidation of lipids takes place through chain reactions of free radicals.
•Takes place in three stages
Initiation 
An alkyl radical is formed by abstraction of a hydrogen radical from an allylic
position.
 Propagation
Alkyl radical reacts with oxygen at rates controlled by diffusion to form peroxy
radicals,  which  in  turn,  react  with  new  lipid  molecules  giving  rise  to
hydroperoxides  as  primary  oxidation  products  and  new  alkyl  radicals  that
propagate the reaction chain.
Termination 
Radicals react between each other to yield relatively stable non-radical species.
This is generally the end of the process, but this is a continuous process. Once that free
radical  chain  has  started,  the  mechanism  if  not  taken  care  of  may  take  place
simultaneously.Initiation
•Molecular  oxygen  combines  with  unsaturated  fatty  acids,  producing
hydroperoxides and peroxyl free radicals, both of which are highly reactive and
unstable. 
•H  atom  at  -methylene  group  in  double  bonds  is  removed  to  form  an
alkyl radical (R).
RH -----> R. + H.
Propagation
•This is when these unstable by-products of the first stage interact with themselves
or react with other fatty molecules (lipids). 
•Starting a continuing free radical lipid peroxidation chain reaction.
•Results in continuing the oxidative degradation process breaking down the lipid
molecules.
The equations are written in slide that can be referred and understood.
So, in this  manner  the reaction  proceeds  with time  and even the  reaction  rate  etc.
increases with the progress of time if not checked or controlled.
Termination
•Is marked by the slowing or stopping of the reactions.
•Non-radical compounds are formed by combination of radicals.
•Completion  of  making  unreactive  compounds  or  when  an  antioxidant  is
encountered. 
The equations are written in slide which can be referred and understood.
Different  non-radical  compounds  hydroperoxides  and  others  are formed here in the
termination process.Decomposition
•Hydroperoxides formed by the above methods are readily decomposed by heat,
metal catalysts or enzyme activity.
•The  radicals  formed  from  the  hydroperoxides  undergo  a  series  of  reactions
leading  to  several  products  such  as  hydroxy  acids,  keto  acids  and
aldehydes.
•The short- chain acids derived by their oxidation are largely responsible for the
undesirable flavors and odour characteristics of rancid foods.
In case of hydrolytic rancidity, the changed flavor is mainly because of the development
of free fatty acid. But in oxidative rancidity, many new compounds like hydroxy acid,
keto acid, aldehydes, etc. are formed and the flavor is because of these new compounds
and at times these new compounds which are formed may be even carcinogenic or toxic.Prooxidant effect of metal ions  
There are certain agents which are prooxidant which accelerate the rate of oxidation
reactions.
•Hydroperoxides and trace heavy metals, present as impurities in lipids, act as
initiators i.e. they initiate generation of radicals.
•Transition  metals  ions (Iron and Copper) are good promoters of free radical
reactions. 
•Decompose the hydroperoxides to form peroxy and alkoxy radicals.
Equations can be referred from the slide.
Enzymatic oxidation
•Oxidation catalyzed by enzymes in unprocessed foods or elaborated under mild
conditions.
•Lipoxygenase and other enzymes catalyse oxidation of free PUFA released from
glycerides by the action of lipolytic enzymes.  Lipase enzyme is the one which
brush  the  ester  linkage  but  lipoxygenase  it  adds  oxygen  at  the  point  of
unsaturation.
•First step in enzymatic oxidation is the lipolytic degradation of TG. Unsaturated
fats are more prone to oxidation.
•Oxidation products are same hydroperoxides as produced in the autoxidation
process.
•The reaction is stereospecific and regioselective. 
Photo-oxidation
•Hydroperoxides formed in presence of light and photosensitizers such as various
pigments in foods, mainly chlorophyll, hemoproteins and riboflavin. 
•Photosensitizers  are  activated  by  absorption  of  light  and  the  excited
species. 
The activated species act as a single free radical initiator by transferring electrons
to lipid to form radicals that react with oxygen in the same way as we have
discussed in the earlier auto oxidation process.Photo-oxidation
The  sunlight  passes  through  the  food  containing  natural  pigments  like  chlorophyll,
pheophytin etc. and dye stuff like erythrosine, methylene blue etc. These are considered
to  be  photo-synthesizer.  Triplet  oxygen  is  converted  into  singlet  oxygen  by  spin
inversion  and this  singlet  oxygen  provides  oxygen that  causes  the  oxidation  of the
unsaturated fatty acids. So, that is why the ions particularly poly unsaturated ions etc.
should be stored in a dark place. Their exposure to direct sunlight etc. should be avoided
otherwise it will catalyze their oxidation and oil will become rancid.
Ketonic rancidity
•This type of rancidity is most frequently encountered as a result of action of fungi
such as Aspergillus niger and blue-green mold, Penicillium glaucum on coconut
or other oil seeds.
•The tallowy odour developed may be due to aldehydes or ketones formed the
action of enzymes present in fungi on oil. The fungal enzymes turn the oil or fats
into short chain fatty acids which are more prone to ketonic rancidity. 
•It  is  due to the  conversion of short chain  fatty  acids  by some  moulds  to a
homologous  series  of  aliphatic  methyl  ketones,  pentan-2-one,  heptan-2-one,
nonan-2-one and undecan-2-one -- one carbon atom less than the parent fatty
acid.
•The  essential  prerequisites  for  the  formation  of  ketonic  rancidity  appear  to
be  (a)  the  presence  of  moulds,  (b)  a  low  water  activity,
(c)  a  low  partial  pressure  of  oxygen,  and  (d)  the  presence  of  short
chain fatty acids in the medium.  
Measuring rancidity
One important method is just by visual observation or just by sensory (smell) whether
the  oil  is  rancid  or  not.  Direct  measurement  of  the  free  radicals  are  electron  spin
resonance  method  or  spin  trapping  methods.  Indirect  approaches  can  be  used  like
thiobarbituric  acid  reacting  substances  or gas  chromatography  can  be used  becauseduring this rancidity either in the oxidative or hydrolytic, different aldehydes and other
compounds are formed. These fatty acids and carbonyl compounds can be measured
spectrophotometrically or the peroxides can be measured using peroxide value etc. The
conjugated diene, anisidine value, lipid chromatography, fluorometric compound etc. are
also used. So, there are different methods both indirect method as well as direct approach
for  measuring  free  radicals  which  can  be  used  to  measure  the  rancidity  oxidative,
hydrolytic or ketonic.
Rancidity is most commonly detected by odour or smell and regarding the peroxide
value  or  the  measurement  of  the  primary  oxidation  product,  the  peroxide  value  is
generally  measure  of  the  peroxides  contained  in  the  oil;  the  peroxides  present  are
determined by titration against thiosulfate in the presence of potassium iodide; starch is
used as an indicator. 
Anisidine value is measured for the determination of secondary oxidation products. It
assess  the  secondary  oxidation  product  of  oil  or  fat  which  is  mainly  imputable  to
aldehydes and ketones and is therefore, able to tell the oxidation history of an oil or a fat.
Furthermore anisidine value of an oil is an indicator of excessive oil deterioration in deep
fried oil. So, anisidine value, peroxide value, thiobarbituric acid test, etc. are such other
measurements. Oxidation products of unstaturated system produce color reaction with
thiobarbituric acid. So, many alkanals and alkenals produce yellow colour compound,
dienals produce red colour pigment at 530 nm.These various approaches  apart from the rancimat system where oxidation stability,
induction period of oil or fat can be measured give the suitable idea of oxidation and
stability of the oil. Depending upon its induction etc., it can be calculated. 
Control of lipid oxidation
In  the  lipid  and  oil  or  the  food  containing  oil,  lipid  peroxidation  or  oxidation  or
hydrolysis become major problem which result to the change in their flavor, odour etc.
The appropriate methods that are followed to prevent lipid oxidation are derived from
those factors which accelerate them like oxidation prevention of pro-oxidants.
Using appropriate antioxidants, the oxidation can be avoided. Similarly elimination of
oxygen can be done by keeping the oil or fats away from oxygen either by nitrogen
flushing  or  by  vacuum  packaging  etc.  or  even  avoiding  their  contact  with
photosensitizers, direct exposure to light etc., or even by using appropriate means to
denature the causative enzymes like lipase, lipoxygenase etc. or even low temperature
and dark room storage of oil.
So, these are some of the ways by which one can minimize the rancidity of oils and fat.
In fact, the refined oil and such other oil which are available in the market for cooking
and frying operations, are extensively used to improve their stability. The industry uses
antioxidants  both  synthetic  and  natural  antioxidants  which  become  very  valuable
component in the oils and fats.