Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 31
Extraction of Oil (Part 2 – Solvent Extraction)
 
In the second part of the lecture on Extraction of Oil from oil seeds, solvent extraction
method will be studied. 
Solvent extraction
Basic principle
•The extraction of oil from oilseeds by means of non-polar solvents is, basically, a
process of solid-liquid extraction. 
The basic principle of the process is the prepared oil seed is brought into intimate contact
or direct contact with a suitable non-polar solvent.
•The  transfer  of  oil  from  the  solid  to  the  surrounding  oil-solvent  solution
( miscella ) involves three steps:
Diffusion of the solvent into the solid
Dissolution of the oil droplets in the  solvent
Diffusion  of  the  oil  from  the  solid  particle  to  the
surrounding liquid.These 3 processes actually result into the final recovery of oil. And, depending upon how
these processes are managed during the extraction process by properly selecting the
appropriate parameters during the extraction and operation of the machines etc. that will
govern these steps and the recovery of the oil.
Here an overview of the extraction process in a factory there is the material flow and
how the solvent extraction process is carried out is shown. The seed is cleaned and dried
to suitable moisture content, then it is sent to the decorticating or dehulling where hard
shells are removed, and then these dehulled materials are taken to the solvent extraction
unit either directly or through the pelletizing/flaking units. The extraction unit may be a
continuous belt extraction, horizontal box extraction or other different types of extraction
which are commonly used in the industry.
Finally, oil is obtained as miscella which is a mixture of oil and solvent. Later the oil is
recovered from miscella by flashing or stream stripping and using appropriate distillation
method; the separated solvent is again recycled.
The meal also contains approximately 30 to 35 % of the solvent. This is passed to the
desolventizer where again suitable heat treatment is given to the meal, and then solvent is
recovered, recirculated to the extraction unit, and the desolventized meal is toasted or
given some heat treatment. In fact, at present in most of the cases the meal is used for animal feed, but it has a great
potential for food applications. This can also be used for preparation of meat analogues
or meat extender. 
Factors affecting solvent extraction
•Physical characteristics of solids
An open, porous structure of the solid material is preferable, because such a
structure facilitates diffusion  of the solvent into the bed solid bed, and it also
results in better percolation and ultimately the better yield . 
•Solvent 
A  solvent  having  higher  solubility  is  preferable . A  low  boiling  point  make
the separation easier.  
•Temperature
The  rate  of  extraction  can  be  increased  considerably  by  increasing  the
temperature in the extractor. 
Higher  temperature  means  higher  solubility  of  the  oil,  higher
diffusion coefficients and lower miscella viscosity. 
*     A  number  of  processes  like  cooking,  flaking  have  been  proposed  for
increasing the porosity of oilseeds before solvent extraction. Choice of solvent
An ideal solvent for the extraction of oil from oil seeds should possess the following
properties
Good solubility of the oil.
Poor solubility of non-oil components.  As far as possible only oil should be
extracted other materials should not dissolve in the solvent
High volatility (i.e. low boiling point), so that complete removal of the solvent
from the miscella and the meal by evaporation is feasible and easy.
The  boiling  point  should  not  be  too  low,  so  that  extraction  can  be  carried
out at a somewhat high temperature to facilitate mass transfer.
Low viscosity.Low latent heat of evaporation, so that less energy is needed for  solvent recovery.
Low specific heat, so that less energy is needed for keeping the  solvent and the
miscella warm.
Chemically inert to oil and other  components of the seed flakes.
Absolute absence of toxicity and carcinogenicity, for the solvent  and its residues.
Non-inflammable, non-explosive , non-corrosive.
Commercial availability in large quantities and low cost.
Advantages and disadvantages of the   solvent extraction process  
Advantages
•High oil yield as compared to mechanical extraction.
•Spends lower production cost and requires less time. 
Disadvantages 
•The expeller pressed oil is cleaner more pure oil, higher in natural colors and
flavors compared to the solvent extracted oil. 
•Requirement of large volume of solvent, pressure requirements, etc.   
•High construction cost of extraction and refining workshop.
•High maintenance cost.
•Residual solvent content in meal.
So, that becomes very important factor if the solvent can be completely removed without
any reduction in the quality of the meal. So, the quality meal can be utilized for food
purposes.
The porous mass is fed to the solvent extractor. The proper conditions of temperature,
pressure etc. are maintained and there is an intimate contact of the prepared mass with
the solvent. Solvent flows and penetrates into the mass; the oil dissolves into it and then
it comes out along with the solvent.Solvent extractors are of two types 
B  atch   type   
In batch processes, a certain quantity of flakes is contacted with a certain volume
of fresh solvent. 
The miscella is finally drained off, distilled and solvent is recirculated through
the extractor until the residual oil content in the batch of flakes is reduced to the
desired level.
C  ontinuous   type  
Both the oilseeds and the solvent are fed into the extractor continuously .
The different available types are characterized by their geometrical configuration
and the method by which solids and solvents are moved , one in relation to the
other. 
* Continuous solvent extractors are of two types
  Percolation type
  Immersion type
However, modern extractors are also available which are of the combination type i.e.
both percolation  as  well as immersion  set up or assembly is provided in the same
extractor.P  ercolation method    
•The solvent trickles through a thick bed of flakes without filling the void space
completely. 
•A film of solvent flows rather rapidly over the surface of the solid particles and
efficiently removes the oil which has diffused from the inside to the surface. 
•This mode of contact is preferable whenever the resistance to diffusion inside the
flake is relatively low (thin flakes with large surface area, open tissue structure). 
I  mmersion m  ethod     
•The  solid  particles  are  totally  immersed  in  a  slowly  moving,  continuous
phase of solvent.
•Immersion  works  better  with  materials  offering  a  greater  internal
resistance to oil transfer (thick particles, dense tissue structure).The vertical basket or the Bollman extractor
•The extractor consists of baskets fixed to an endless chain having descending and
ascending leg enclosed in vapor tight chamber.
•Each basket has wire-mesh bottom.
•Two chambers at bottom of vessel separated by partition plate hold the extract
stream. 
•Liquids  percolating  along  the  two  leg  flows  down  to  these
chambers.
•The  solids  fed  from  the  vapour  tight  hopper  into  the  basket  at  the  top  of
descending leg and a partially enriched solvent (half miscella) is sprayed on the
solids.
•Fresh solvent is sprayed on the top bucket in the ascending leg; percolates and
collects in the bottom chamber as half miscella.
So, this is how this vertical basket type extractor works.Hildebrand extractor     (  I  mmersion type  )
•This is vertical, U shaped total immersion extractor consist of screw conveyors
with three screws – one each in vertical legs and one in horizontal section of
barrel. 
•The helical profile of the screw are perforated to allow flow of the solvent.
•The solid is fed at the top of the one leg and solvent is fed at the top of another
leg and flows counter-current to solids through perforation. 
•The  rich  miscella  is  withdrawn  through  a  strainer  for  further  treatment  and
solvent separation.
Horizontal basket extractor
•It consists of a train of horizontal baskets fitted to a drive chain enclosed in a big
chamber. 
•Each basket has a wire mesh or the perforated bottom.
•There are arrangement for feeding the solids and spraying the solvent on the
baskets. 
•As the loaded basket advances, it is sprayed with full miscella from bottom
compartment
•Before making complete turn, the nearly exhausted solids sprayed with fresh
solvent.
•The full miscella is taken out for further processing (solvent separation and oil
recovery).
Continuous belt extractor
•The solids are fed at one end of the perforated endless moving belt.
•Fresh solvent is fed at the solid discharge end.
•The liquid drains into a catch basin and is pumped to the top of the adjacent
section of   the bed. 
•The throughput rate of the extractor can be adjusted by varying the speed of the
belt.
•The height of the bed can be adjusted according to expected rate of the extraction.•Difficult percolation is compensated by the bed height.
Rotocel   extractor     (immersion type)  
•It consists of a number of cells (usually 15 to 18) fixed to a central rotor. Each
cell has perforated or screen bottom for percolation of solvent.
•The solids enters at one end of the cell and the extracting liquid is sprayed on the
top of the cell.
•Below the rotating cell is the circular tank divided into number of compartment to
receive the miscella. 
•The  interstage  miscella  is  pumped  and  sprayed  on  the  next  cell  in
the countercurrent direction.Miscella distillation
•Full  miscella  contains  typically  30%  oil.  Thus,  the  excess  solvent  must  be
removed  by  distillation.  Most  manufacturers  of  solvent  extractors  also  offer
miscella distillation systems.
•The characteristics of a good miscella distillation system are
 Good energy economy,
 Minimal heat damage to the crude oil and its components,
 Minimal solvent losses , 
 Efficient removal of the last traces of solvent from the oil , and
 Good operation safety.
•The modes of solvent vaporization include flash evaporation, vacuum distillation
and steam stripping.Apart from distillation, another important operation is the miscella filtration and it is
done to ensure the last possible fluid transport defects, like clogging of the pumps, pipes
etc. and heat transfer resistances. The miscella must be free of solid meal particles with
special closed filter presses before proceeding to distillation. 
The spent flakes contain around 30 to 35 % solvent. So, it becomes very important
operation that these solvents should be recovered from the meal which can be recycled
and reused. The meal can be used for different food purposes. So, removal and recovery
of the solvent is one of the most critical operation in oil mill.
And, a good meal desolventizing step will ensure a better recovery of the oil because the
meal should have no oil residue, and at the same time the heat treatment given for themeal desolventizing should not adversely affect the protein quality. It should not result
into the excessive protein denaturation, it should not disturb its PDI or NSI values.
Desolventizer
Desolventizer is the newest innovation in removing the solvent (hexane) from the
flakes and completing the toasting operation. And then finally, towards the last
stages of the desolventizer i.e. direct heat is given or super-heated stream is there,
and the solvent is removed at the same time the meal is also toasted.
It consists of a vertical cylindrical stack of compartments or trays. 
Each compartment is fitted with stirrers or racks attached to a central vertical
shaft. Spent flakes are fed at the top of the desolventizer-toaster. 
The desired amount of heat is supplied to remove the bulk of the solvent from the
meal.
The  pan  floor  are  equipped  with  adjustable-speed  rotating  valve  to  permit
downward movement of the material, through the pans, at a particularly desirable
rate.Supercritical fluid extraction of oil
•The supercritical fluid (SCF) shares the properties of a gas and of a liquid.
•CO2 is most commonly used as supercritical solvent. 
•The solvent capacity increases greatly and the properties of solvent change very
rapidly with changes in temperature and pressure.
•The diffusivity, viscosity and surface tension being highly favorable, the mass
transfer  characteristics  and  hence  the  extraction  rate  also  becomes
highly favorable.
•The  product  may  be  easily  separated  from  the  extract  by  reduction  of
pressure  when  the  solvent  leaves  as  gas  which  is
compressed and recycled. 
So, whatever little problems are there in the solvent extraction process relating to the
quality of the oil and meal or the residual oil/solvent content in the meal etc. can be
eliminated.
The super critical fluid extraction can result into the lesser oil losses and better recovery
of the oil with good quality. Therefore, it results in lower refining and other cost. So, this
becomes a very good economically viable method.Supercritical fluid extraction of oil
•The supercritical fluid (SCF) unit consists of three units
Extractor
Solvent separator
Recycle pump
•The extraction in packed bed is common. 
•The solute laden SCF from the extractor is cooled and goes to precipitation
chamber where the pressure is reduced to separate out the solute.
•Batch  extraction  is  more  common  since  continuous  feeding  of  solid  and
removal of the exhausted material is difficult. 
•The gaseous carbon dioxide is compressed, cooled and recycled through heat
exchanger in order to heat it to required temperature.
•The  gaseous  CO 2 is  compressed,  cooled  and  recycled  through  heat
exchanger in order to heat it to required temperature.Kinetics of soybean oil extraction using ethanol
The  kinetics  of  soybean  oil  extraction  using  ethanol  has  been  explained  by  few
researchers. Expanded soybean mass (colletes) temperatures are 40, 50 and 60 ᵒC. The
ethanol system (hydration level) was used at 0 and 5.98 % mass of water. 
The results exhibiting the kinetics of the extraction of free fatty acids or kinetics of the
extraction of whole soybean oil can be seen in Figure. It increases initially at a faster rate
up to a certain level with increase in both the soybean oil as well as free fatty acids, then
it  becomes  little  bit  slow.  And  then  finally,  it  gets  stabilized  or  becomes  constant
depending upon the material conditions, process conditions, temperature, pressures and
so on. 
•The fastest transfer of soluble components to the solvent at the beginning of the
process, followed by a decrease in this transfer rate until it became constant,
corresponding to the maximum yield of extraction.
•The  values  of  soybean  oil  diffusivity  coefficients  increased  with  increasing
temperature in both solvents and decreased with increases in the water level in
the solvent for the same extraction temperature.
•The kinetics of extraction of the free fatty acids is the same as observed for the
oil.
•The value of the diffusivity coefficient for soybean oil increased with increasing
temperature and with decreasing hydration level in the solvent.This figure commercial plant extraction facility is shown starting from the handling of
the material (whole seed) until oil and meal are obtained. It is basically for soybean oil
extraction and meal processing, but can be used for any other oilseeds or nuts. 
In fact, in most of the solvent extraction plants, depending upon the process, along with
oils certain phospholipids, gums etc. also get extracted. So, they are separated at the
extraction plant itself using water degumming. So, most of the extraction plant are
equipped  with  these  facilities  for  removal  of  gums  from  the  oil  through  water
degumming process. The oil is then sent to refining plant where it is subjected to various
other  treatments  like,  acid  degumming,  chemical/physical  refining,  bleaching,
deodorization, etc. 