Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 33
Edible Oil Refining (Part 2) Bleaching & Deodourization
Bleaching and deodorization are the major steps of edible oil refining process; this will
be studied in this lecture. 
Bleaching of   oil  
Depending upon the extraction process parameters used along with the triglycerides,
there  are  other  components  also  like  chlorophyll  which  imparts  green  colour  or
carotenoids which impart reddish or yellowish colour to the oil. They also get extracted
from the oil seed to the oil. So, this becomes necessary that these pigments or those
components which contribute to the colour other than those of the triglyceride should be
removed. 
It  is  basically  a physical  process  where  the  impurities  in  the  oil  particularly  those
pigments and other related components are removed with the help of an adsorbent. The
impurities and the active sites of the adsorbents are attracted to each other by Van der
Waal  force  of  attraction.  The  amount  of  attraction  accordingly  will  influence  the
bleaching efficiency. It depends upon several factors like the amount of electrostatic
force on each of the impurities and the adsorbent, the size of each component, the degreeof intimate mixing between the oil and the adsorbent, porosity of the adsorbent particles
and specific surface area of the adsorbent.
Benefits of bleaching
•Reduces the chlorophyll and some of the other colour bodies present in the oil.
•Reduces the trace metals such as Ca++, Mg++, Fe++, Na+, etc.
•Reduces the level of non-hydratable phospholipids in the refined oil.
•Removes decomposition products, such as aldehydes, ketones, polymers, non-
triglycerides produced from oil oxidation.
If these components are not removed, they may act as pro oxidant and this actually
reduces the shelf life of the oil. 
The different adsorbents which are used include neutral bleaching clay or commonly
known as fullers earth, acid processed clay, activated charcoal and silica.Dry bleaching system
•In this process, the water-washed and vacuum-dried oil (moisture content <0.1%
maximum) is used as the feed to the vacuum bleacher where only bleaching clay
is added. 
•The bleaching clay could be acid activated or neutral. 
•Acid  activated  clay  is  more  effective  in  removing  the  colour
bodies and trace metals in the oil.
Components of dry bleaching system
Plate heaters – Oil is heated to a temperature of 100–110 °C.
Vacuum bleacher  – Heated oil is sent to the vacuum bleacher. Oil and acid
activated clay (~0.5% of oil or less) is mixed and agitated (120 rpm) for 30-45
min.
Press leaf filter – Oil is filtered and sent back into the bleacher until the oil is
clear.
Polish  filter  –  End  filtration;  oil  is  sent  to  press  filter  to  reheat  the
incoming oil.
Oil  Cooler  –  Oil  is  cooled  down  to  40°C  by  using
cold water.
Critical control points in dry bleaching
•Incoming oil quality
When the bleached oil is high in phosphorous, soap, and moisture contents more
amount of bleaching clay is required.
Soap, phosphorus & moisture have a tendency to plug up the porosity of the filter
bed, decreasing the filtration rate.
Increased  bleaching  clay  usage  also  builds  up  the  cake  faster  in  the  filter,
reducing the filtration cycle time.
Higher soap in the oil produces high FFA.Higher  amount  of  bleaching  clay  reduces  the  level  of
tocopherols and other natural antioxidants.
•Types of bleaching clay 
     The bleaching clay must have the following properties:
High adsorption capacity to remove the impurities.
Acidic pH (for the acid-activated clay).
Numerous active sites for the adsorption of the impurities.
Appropriate porosity.
Good oil flow rate through the filter bed.
•Degree of mixing
The  oil  and  the  adsorbent  must  be  in  intimate  contact  for  better
adsorption of the impurities. 
For  this  reason,  mechanical  mixing  becomes  a  very  important
factor in making the bleaching process effective.Bleaching temperature 
•Temperature of the oil is critical in because it affects the process efficiency.
•The viscosity of the oil decreases as the oil is heated. This makes it easier to
move the oil around via agitation. 
•The temperature increases the contact between the adsorbent and the adsorbates
in the oil.
High temperature - damage the oil through oxidation and polymerization.
Low  temperature  -  the  viscosity  of  the  oil  is  high,  which  reduces
the dispersion efficiency of the mechanical mixer.
*Optimum temperature is needed for higher efficiency. Contact time between the oil and the bleaching clay
•A certain amount of time is allowed for the oil and the adsorbent to remain in the
bleacher vessel.
Short contact time   
 The adsorption of the impurities may not be complete.
Long contact time  
The  acidic  clay  may  react  more  with  the  oil,  especially  with  the
chlorophylls, and cause their breakdown.
There  may  be  a  higher  loss  of  the  natural  antioxidants  present
in the oil.
There may be formation of dimers or polymers in the oil.
Wet bleaching system
•The oil from the water wash centrifuge is treated with the bleaching clay in a
reactor.
•The oil temperature, bleaching clay dosage, mixing method, and mixing time are
similar to those in the dry bleaching process.
•After 20–30 min of contact time between the oil and the clay, the oil leaves the
vacuum  reactor  and enters  the  vacuum  dryer,  where the moisture  in  the  oil
is reduced to <0.1%.
In fact,  the  wet bleaching  system  is  better  and more  efficient  than  that  of the dry
bleaching process and it results in less clay usage. 
Critical points for consideration in wet bleaching system
•Moisture in feed oil – must be 0.2%–0.4%.
Low moisture – benefits of wet bleaching in not accomplished.
High moisture (>0.4%) - premature blinding of the filter screens.
•Absolute pressure in the bleacher reactor - Operating pressure is 500 Torr. 
Higher pressure - the oil would have higher moisture content. 
Lower pressure - the oil might be too dry to derive the benefit of the wet
bleaching process.
•Operating pressure in the vacuum dryer
The maximum operating pressure is 50 Torr. Allows the oil to be dried to <0.1% moisture before filtration.
Vacuum bleacher 
The schematic of the vacuum bleaching system has been shown in the figure. It is
basically a pressure vessel with three to four baffles provided and a top entering agitator.
The agitator is provided with the multiple sets of impellers. These are of axial blade that
pushes  the  oil  down  continuously  and  radial  blade  capable  of  shear  action  so,  the
adsorbent and the oil are brought to intimate mixing continuously. Baffles which are
provided prevent any vortex formation and the entire oil in the vessel is turned over
about twice per minute so as to ensure thorough mixing and intimate contact between the
bleacher clay and the oil in the equipment.
So, after the bleaching, the earth or clay or adsorbent which has been added into the oil
must be separated because the pigments may get adsorbed by the product. These earth or
clay particles are removed using appropriate filtration steps. 
•Because of the continuous nature of the refining plants, the bleacher is normally
supplied with two filters. 
•The oil supply to the filter and the operating cycles of the filter can then be
automated. 
•It is utmost important that the oil obtained from the bleaching earth filtration
should be clear, bright and free from the clay/earth particle as much as possible.
•Accordingly, the filtration system should be efficient i.e. screens should be of
appropriate size so that it can remove even the finest particle possible. They
generally use filters in oil refining plants. 
•The filters used in this process are 
Plate and frame filter
Vertical leaf tank or pressure leaf filter 
Centrifugal self-cleaning filter
The  filtered  oil  may  be  diverted  to  the  product  manufacturing  for  hydrogenation,
winterization, and if it is to be used for frying and cooking purpose, it is normally sent to
the deodorizer where the impurities or even the free fatty acid which are not separated in
the earlier processes, those are separated here. Thus, the deodorization is the last stage ofthe refining process of edible oils. In this process the odours and flavours of fats and oils
are totally removed resulting in a bland finished product. Deodorization of the refined
and bleached oil is carried out under vacuum and at an absolute pressure of 1 to 6 mm of
Hg. In fact, experienced tasters sometimes are not able to identify the source of the oil if
the oil is gone through deodorization.
The processing steps in the deodorization are deaeration to remove dissolved oxygen
(particularly to prevent oxidation) and moisture from the oil, heating of the oil to a
temperature of around 240 to 260 ᵒC under vacuum. Steam distillation is the blowing of
steam through the oil maintain at around 255 to 260  ᵒC under high vacuum and, it is
during  this  process, the  fatty  acids  etc.  are  removed.  They  are  evaporated  and  are
distilled to remove. In fact, since high temperature normally is used and the fatty acid
vapours  are  corrosive  in  nature.  Accordingly,  the  equipment  and  the  construction
material for the equipment should be of such nature that it can withstand the highly
corrosive fatty acids vapour. And, in fact, it might so happen by the nature of the process
conditions or processing steps used in the deodorization plant that the deodorized oil may
contain certain metal ions, carbon or even the earth particles etc. which has been used in
the process and cannot be separated in the filtration process. In the last step of the
deodorization process, citric acid is added which acts as a chelating agent. Otherwise if
the citric acid is not added, the deodorized oil would revert or oxidise rapidly and whole
purpose of the process may get deviated. Then, finally, the deodorized oil is cooled to
room temperature, properly packaged and is stored under appropriate conditions.Functions of deodorisation
Reduces free fatty acid (FFA) to <0.05%, preferably <0.03%.
Removes the odoriferous compounds, such as aldehydes, ketones, hydrocarbons,
lactones, alcohol, etc. produced from decomposition of the oils.
Reduces PV to zero. 
Any residual trace metals, picked up by the oil after bleaching, are reduced via
citric acid treatment (chelation or scavenging process). This is an essential step
and is not a substitute for the bleaching step.
There  is  some  increase  in  the  amount  of  polymers,  conjugated  dienes,  or
other oil decomposition products.
There  can  be  a  very  small  but  detectable  increase  in  the  trans  fatty
acids  content  in  the  oil,  depending  on  the  deodorizer
temperature.
It becomes very important during the deodorization step that the condition particularly
the temperature and pressure etc. should be maintained in such a way that it results in the
amount of polymers or conjugated diene etc., at the same time it should not convert the
cis to trans form of the fatty acids.Factors affecting deodorisation process
Deaeration 
•Proper deaeration should be done to remove dissolved air and moisture to
prevent oxidation of oil and formation of oxidative polymers. 
•Negative impact of oxidative polymers.
•Produce poor flavor stability in the deodorized oil.
•Cause rapid fouling of the heat bleacher and deodorizer system.
Operating temperature and pressure
•Optimum  operating  temperatures  causes  balancing  of  color  pigments
such as beta carotene and others.  
•Low operating pressure must be maintained in the deodoriser.
•A higher than the normal operating pressure reduces the ability of the
deodorizer to remove the odoriferous compounds from the oil.•Amount of stripping steam
•It creates agitation in the oil, which helps remove the volatile matters from
the oil.
•The  steam  expands  under  the  reduced  pressure,  increasing  the  specific
surface area. This enhances the contact between steam, oil, and the volatile
components in oil.
•Owing to the expanded volume, the steam can remove the volatile matter
more effectively.
•Citric acid content
•Citric acid acts as a chelating agent to complex with trace metals like iron,
calcium, and magnesium.
•At higher temperature, citric acid decomposes, leaving very little or no
beneficial effect on the oil.
•Cooling of oil
•This should also be done with care and taking into consideration of the type
of oil being processed. 
•Oils  high  in PUFA  must  be cooled  down  to  prevent  the  formation  of
undesirable flavor in the oil.Quality of deodorised oil 
Deodorized oil should possess the following physical and chemical attributes for better
organoleptic acceptability.
Physical attributes
•Odorless
•Clean taste with no unpleasant aftertaste
•Light in color
Chemical attributes
•Low FFA
•Low  PV value
•Maximum antioxidants
•Less  amount  of  decomposition  products  such  as  ketone,  aldehyde,
hydrocarbons, etc.
The  types  of  the  deodorizer  are  batch,  semi  continuous  and  continuous  method.
Accordingly,  the  deodorization  step  should  be carried  out and  parameter  should be
controlled.Batch deodoriser 
•Consist of a vessel in the form of a vertical cylinder with dished or cone
heads.
•Stripping  steam  is  injected  into  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  through  a
distributor. 
•A device for indicating oil temperature and a pressure gauge designed to
indicate  accurately  low  pressure  within  the  deodorizer  are
provided. 
•It  has  the  advantage  of  simplicity  of  design,
flexibility, and ease of operation.
(See Figure) A is the neutralised and bleach oil inlet; B is the stripping steam inlet, C is
deodorized oil outlet. Point D is where the vapours are removed from top of the vessel; E
and F are heating system inlet and condensate outlet.Semi continuous deodoriser 
•Consists of a tall cylindrical shell of carbon steel construction with five or
more type 304 SS trays stacked inside. 
•There are different trays stacked inside the cylindrical vessel. Each tray is
fitted with a steam sparge and is capable of holding a measured batch of
oil. 
•Oil is charged to the top tray where it is deaerated while being heated with
steam to about 160 to 165°C. 
•At the end of the heating period, the charge is automatically dropped to
the second tray, and the top tray is refilled. 
•In the second tray the oil is heated to the operating temperature and again
after a timed period is automatically dropped to the tray below. 
•When  the  oil  reaches  the  bottom  tray,  it  is  cooled  to  40-50  °C  and
discharged to a drop tank from which it is pumped through a polishing
filter to storage.Continuous deodoriser 
•These are based on a series of steam-agitated trays or compartments often stacked
vertically in a cylindrical shell. 
•Stripping of FFA and other volatile compounds and heat bleaching are carried out
simultaneously. 
•The retention time per tray is usually 10 -30 min.
•Typically, liquid levels of 0.3 to 0.8 m are maintained by overflow pipes or weirs.
•The counter current principle introduces efficiencies through more effective use
of the injected steam to reduce the quantity required; smaller vacuum due to the
smaller requirements of the volume of the oil treated at particular moment of
time.                                           A comparison between the batch, semi continuous and continuous deodorizers is shown
regarding the suitability, stripping steam usage, production rate, energy recovery and
cost of deodorizing per unit volume or per kg of the oil. Like for example, the batch
deodorizers are comparatively costlier processes whereas, about 30 to 40 percent lesser
cost in the semi continuous than that of the batch process and even the continuous
processes are normally 10 to 20 percent of the batch process.
The batch process deodorized oil can be used for making emulsifiers and interesterified
products etc. The deodorized oil with semi continuous process is suitable where the
frequent product change over is needed. However, they are not very good for making
emulsifier or interesterified product. The oil deodorized using continuous process is
suitable for continuous production of large volume of product with minimum number of
product  changeovers,  they  are  however,  not  suitable  for  making  emulsifier  or
interesterified product etc.
The production rate is normally low in the case of batch process; in the semi continuous
process it is 4 to 6 times more than that of the batch process and the continuous process
has 5 to 8 times higher production efficiency than the batch process. So, depending upon
the resources available, the end use, extended use, storage, level of impurities etc. that
should be removed in the deodorization process, the efficiency of the earlier processes
like bleaching, neutralization, etc. varies.Depending upon the appropriate method of deodorization, process parameter used, the
purpose here is that after the deodorization process, a good quality oil is obtained which
can be used for edible purposes for cooking, frying and for other purposes and it should
not contain any component other than the triglyceride as far as possible.
After the refining, these oils are used for convergence into different products like solid
fats for recovery of various components; even that the waste steams which are obtained
in different stages like degumming that they are used for lecithin production. Similarly
from the other steams also they can be used for extraction of the free fatty acids, alcohol
and others. So, various valuable products or by-products can be derived from the oil
refining plants.