Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 34
Modified Fats
Modification of oils and fats 
The oils and fats when extracted from various sources after refining etc., they may not be
present in their desired form or functionality to suit a specific food operation or specific
use. These fats and oils are usually modified using appropriate procedures in order to
improve  their  functional  properties  like  crystallization,  melting  behaviour  and  other
properties so as to make them suitable for specific operations or use.
By modifying the fat, their physical properties are actually altered and their stability is
improved, so that maximum economical benefits can be obtained out of fats and oils.
Commonly  used  methods  for  modifications  of  oils  and  fats  include  hydrogenation,
interesterification and winterization.Hydrogenation: 
Hydrogenation is a heterogeneous reaction process which is complex in nature where
different reactions occur between hydrogen which is gaseous phase and unsaturated fatty
acids i.e. the liquid phase. These reactions between the gaseous phase and the liquid
phase convert either all of or some of the unsaturated fatty acids into saturated fatty acid.
The valancy of the carbon is not saturated, there will be 2 or 3 or more double bond in
the chain of the fatty acid (see Fig.). So, here in the hydrogenation process these double
bonds or unsaturation is converted into saturation. By the introduction of hydrogen into
the molecule in the presence of nickel under suitable or appropriate conditions, double
bond is converted into a single bond. The unsaturated vegetable oil or unsaturated fatty
acid is converted into saturated fat or ghee and the same thing here is shown in the case
of molecular formula.
Linolenic acid has about three double bonds in its structure. If this linolenic acid is
saturated once, one double bond is converted into linoleic acid, and if the linoleic acid is
again  saturated,  its  one  double  bond  is  converted  into  single  bond  and  it  will  be
converted into oleic acid and the oleic acid after saturation will be converted into stearic
acid. So, in this process unsaturated oil or fat is converted into a saturated fat or oil.The hydrogenation process involves multiple physical and chemical reactions such as: 
•Mixing and dispersion of the catalyst by a mechanical mixer.
•Diffusion of hydrogen gas through the mass of oil to the catalyst surface.
•Adsorption of the reactants (hydrogen and unsaturated fatty acids) on the catalyst
surface.
•Partial or complete saturation of the USFA on the catalyst surface.
•Desorption of the products of the reaction (SFA) and the USFA & oil molecules
from the catalyst surface
•Release of heat due to the exothermic nature of the hydrogenation reaction. 
So, these are the different stages or different reactions  which take place during the
hydrogenation process, the same thing has been shown here in this diagram pictorially.
The purpose of hydrogenation is actually to change naturally occurring fats and oils into
physical forms with the consistency and handling characteristics required for the desired
functionality. Another important function is to improve its oxidative stability, because
unsaturated  fats  and  oils  generally  are  more  prone  to  oxidation.  So,  by  converting
unsaturated  oils  into  saturated  fat,  they  are  made  more  stable  to  oxidation  i.e.  the
oxidation can be prevented. 
Effects of hydrogenation 
The USFA become more saturated. 
The iodine value of the oil decreases - Iodine value is the measure or the degree
of unsaturation. So, more the unsaturated fat higher will be the iodine value.
The melting point of the oil increases.
The oxidative stability of the oil improves.
A  multitude  of  side  reactions  take  place,  including  the  formation  of  certain
alcohols and acids.
Isomerization of some of the polyunsaturated fatty acids takes place.
Though,  the  products  of  hydrogenations  are  very  complex  mixture,  because  of  the
simultaneous  reactions  that  occur  in  the  system  depending  upon  the  temperature,
pressure, catalyst, etc. The saturation of double bonds, cis-trans isomerisation of the
double bond and shift of double-bond locations usually to the lower energy conjugated
sides are involved. 
The  equipment  used  in  the  hydrogenation  process  is  basically  a  reaction  vessel
‘hydrogenator’.  The  reaction  vessel  is  equipped  with  all  sorts  of  necessary
instrumentation and other facilities for making the reaction to take place i.e. for addition
of the hydrogen and providing suitable temperature and pressure.
Batch hydrogenation reactor
It equipped with accessories such as:
•Mechanical agitator
•Heating and cooling coils
•Hydrogen gas sparger
•Temperature controller
•Pressure controller
•Vent valve for the spent gas
•Safety rupture disc 
•Agitator seal protector (lubricant)
•Rupture disc to protect the  reactor against over pressurizing
•Hydrogen gas flow meter with flow indicator
•Gas flow totalizer
•Vacuum ejector or vacuum pumpThe equipment is filled to its desired capacity. The oil first is heated to around 85 to 95
ºC for 15 to 20 min and then through the input assembly, is introduced into the reaction
vessel. And, then fresh catalyst (nickel) is added at a rate of 0.01 to 0.02 % of the oil into
the reactor, when the oil temperature has been reached to around 155 - 160 ºC. So, the
hydrogenation reaction then proceeds. Heat generated from the reaction raises the oil
temperature  in  the  reactor  and  the  steam  supply  automatically  cuts  off  when  the
temperature comes to the desired level. The reaction in a batch reactor is carried out
either adiabatically or isothermally.
Continuous hydrogenation process
Three such reactor vessels are arranged in parallels and all these vessels are provided
with the suitable arrangement for the continuous flow of the oil. In the first system,
catalyst and oil are fed into the reaction vessels and then hydrogen gas is introduced.
From the first vessel, it passes through the second vessel and then goes to the third
vessel. In each vessel, required temperature and pressure etc. is maintained and finally,
when it comes to the last vessel after the hydrogenation process is complete, the product
is taken out. It is then sent to the filtration unit for the removal of added catalyst from the
mixture and then oil or fat is allowed to cool down to solidify.
And, in fact, the removal of the catalyst is very important and the filter which is provided
in the system should be perfect to remove almost all the catalyst from the oil otherwise, it
will be problematic. Once after the reaction, the effectiveness  of catalyst  gets little
reduced so, it can be further activated and one catalyst can be used three or four times. 
The end of the saturation process both in the continuous process as well as in the batch
process is determined by doing certain tests. In fact, the samples are taken out at regular
intervals and analysed for different tests like iodine value, refractive index, etc. 
The hydrogenator equipment are provided at the top with some vent or valve etc. so that
head space gases etc. which are generated during the reaction should be allowed at
continuous interval to go out of the system to maintain the proper reaction rate.
Operating variables of the hydrogenation process 
Pressure 
•At low pressures, the hydrogen gas dissolved in the oil does not cover the catalyst
surface, while at high pressure hydrogen is readily available for saturation of the
double bonds. 
•The increased saturation rate results in a decrease in trans-isomer development
and selectivity to produce a flatter SFI curve due to the difference in reaction
order for different degrees of unsaturation. 
•Increased hydrogen pressure they are helpful in reducing the trans fatty acid
formation. 
•However, this practice does not result in a full elimination of trans fatty acids
formation.
Temperature 
•The reaction increases substantially with increasing temperature, so hydrogen
atoms near the absorbed double bond will react faster with the double bond. 
•Under these conditions, the reaction interface is virtually instantly depleted of
hydrogen. 
•Therefore,  with  increasing  temperature,  the  supply  of  hydrogen  towards  the
catalyst reaction surface will eventually be the limiting factor of the reaction. •As the isomerization reaction has a lower-order dependency on hydrogen than the
hydrogenation  reaction,  increasing  temperature  will  boost  the  selectivity  but
also  the  trans  formation.  So,  a proper  balance  between  the  temperature  and
pressure and suitable selection of the catalysts etc. should be maintained in the
reaction system.
•In  recent  years,  the  trend  has  been  mainly  to  lower  the  operation
temperatures,  resulting  in  a  significant  trans  reduction  but  also  a
lower capacity. 
Catalyst
•The catalyst in hydrogenation is reduced nickel (Ni) supported on natural earth,
such as diatomaceous earth. These supports have a high surface–volume ratio,
which is an evident asset for adsorption processes. 
•The high porosity additionally permits swift mass transfer from and to the bulk
phase. 
•The powder, about 2–12 μm mean particle size, is commonly formulated in solid
droplets of hard fat such as palm stearin or fully hydrogenated oil, in order to
prevent the Ni from oxidizing and to facilitate handling and dosing. Nickel is a
paraphobic material; it violately burns if comes in direct contact with air. So,
generally nickel is kept in some dissolvent some sort of oil to avoid contact.
•The type and concentration of the catalyst is quite dependent on the purpose of
hydrogenation; e.g. if an increased oxidative stability of the oil is intended, a high
selectivity towards PUFA is preferred.•A good catalyst selection can help steer a reaction towards more or less trans
formation; this is mainly true for non-selective conditions such ad high hydrogen
pressures.
•The catalyst type itself has very little impact on the (large) quantity of trans
isomers formed. The proper activity of the catalyst will facilitate the reaction at a
proper rate which may encourage less convergence of cis into trans, but so, it
need to be properly.
Selectivity
By having appropriate selectivity and choosing the process parameters, the hydrogenated
fat or saturated fat of desired consistency can be obtained.
Hydrogenation controls the degree of saturation and the ratio of cis to trans
isomers.
Molecular arrangements control the specific random distribution of the fatty acids
in the triglycerides.
In the triglycerides, linolenic, linoleic and oleic acid are hydrogenated at different
rates. 
A simplified reaction model makes it possible to define selectivity. 
In  fact,  this  selectivity  is  defined  under  the  normal  conditions,  that  is  a  highly
unsaturated fat like polyunsaturated fat, they undergo convergence into saturated fat at a
high rate than those with the less unsaturated fatty acid. There is more polyunsaturatedfatty acid hydrogenate at a faster rate than less polyunsaturated fatty acid and that is the
selectivity.
In fact, in the triglyceride linolenic, linoleic and oleic acid because they have a different
saturation, unsaturation level so, they get hydrogenated at different rates. That is if the
rate  of hydrogenation  of linolenic  to linoleic  if  we say that  K 1, that  is  the  rate  of
convergence from linoleic to oleic if K 2 and rate of convergence of oleic to stearic if it is
K3, then linolenic selectivity SL 1 will be equal to K 1/K2; K1/K2 is the convergence of
linolenic to linoleic and finally, linoleic to oleic and the linoleic selectivity will be SL 2
will be K2/K3.
However, in this model the concentration of hydrogen at the surface of catalyst is not
considered. The rate constant will thus be influenced not only by the temperature and
catalyst,  but  also  by  the  process  parameters  which  influence  the  concentration  of
hydrogen at the catalyst surface. By having appropriate selectivity, we can get the fat or
saturated fat of desired consistency for desired operations i.e. more or less soft fat with
having proper functional characteristics.
Hydrogenation process : Industrial issue
Need
Industry needs the proper stability and functionality of the oil.
Unsaturated oils oxidize easily
Leads to rancidityVery short shelf life
Saturated and unsaturated fats are a difficult consistency for food processing
Solid with high melting points.
Liquid, does not stay in product well and can give soggy texture.
Solution
Partially hydrogenated oils
Give better texture for crackers and cookies.
Extend shelf life of both oil and products containing that oil.
Easier to manipulate during food processing.
Help remove saturated fats from many products.
Interesterification (IE)
•Interesterification refers to the fats and oils reaction in which the fatty acids of
triglycerides exchange positions from one glyceride to another, thereby altering
the chemical composition as well as physical properties of the fats. 
•Efficient way for changing and controlling the melting properties of oils and fats.
•Rearrangement process which does not change the degree of unsaturation or the
isomeric state of the fatty acids as they transfer in their entirety from one position
to another.
•Under  some  conditions,  the  fatty  acids  are  distributed  in  a  more  random
manner than they were present originally.•Based  on  the  catalysts,  this  method  is  divided  into
chemical & enzymatic interesterification processes.
In the chemical interesterification process in fact, in the triglyceride (see Fig.) the first
position is the R1 second position is the R 2 and third position is the R 3. By the appropriate
selection of catalyst and having proper conditions in the reaction vessel, they can be
interchanged. So, the R 2 which was in the second position comes to the first position.
Thus, it is basically the interchange between the fatty acids group.
Effect of Interesterification
Interesterification is used to modify fats such as: •Change the overall melting profile. 
•Improve the compatibility of the triglycerides in solid state.
•Improve  the  plasticity  of  the  resulting  solid  by  changing  the  crystallization
properties. 
•Combine the properties of mixed oils and fats. 
•IE can also be used to produce a waxy translucent for coating purposes. 
•IE blends soft oils with hard fats to a desired functionality and consistency. 
•By  combining  IE  and  other  modification  processes,  many  products  such  as
shortenings,  margarines,  and  vegetable  ghee  with  low  trans  fat  or  no
trans fat at all can be formulated. 
•Satisfactory quality of confectionery fats can be produced.  
Chemical interesterification
•The interesterification process works through the use of a variety of chemicals as
the catalyst. 
•Chemical interesterification has been used to modify oils and fats into functional
products for many decades. 
•It leads to a random distribution of fatty acids on the glycerol backbone.
•Chemical  interesterification  requires  high  temperature  and  pressure  which
degrade the oils and fats and introduce impurities.
•Loss of valuable minor-components such as tocopherols.
•High oil losses (up to 10 %).•Risky operation because of catalyst.
Catalyst for chemical IE
Acids, bases and their corresponding salts and metals are used for the IE which can be
subdivided into high and low temperature groups.
•High temperature catalysts
Include metal salts such as chloride, carbonates, oxides, nitrates
and acetates of zinc, lead, iron, tin and cobalt.
•Low temperature catalysts 
Includes alkylates (methylate and ethylate) of Na and Na/K alloy.
Alkylates  of  Na  are  simple  to  use  and  inexpensive;  only
small  quantities  are  required  and  they  are  active  at  low
temperature < 50 ̊C.IE Process parameters
The quality of the product at the end should be controlled by controlling the oil quality.
Oil quality
•Should be free from contaminants; minor components or contaminants will also
consume the catalyst to a considerable degree. 
•Should be free from moisture; affects the ‘pure reaction’ and consume the classic
catalysts, such as sodium methylate, in the proportion of 1 : 20. 
•FFA content will also deactivate the catalyst, albeit less extremely, and often a
bit of caustic soda is added prior to the reaction. 
•Also,  oxidation  parameters  such  as  the  peroxide  value  will  lower  the
catalyst  efficiency  and  thereby  increase  the  cost  of  achieving
full randomization.Catalyst 
•In the light of the interesterification reaction, the active catalyst species needs to
be an electron donor. 
•Pure alkali metals such as Na or K were ideal for such reactions, and in small
scale operations these proved successful. 
•However,  for  larger  operations  alkoxides  (sodium  methoxide  or  sodium
methylate) are the principal catalyst, because of their high reaction rate at rather
low temperatures. 
•This catalyst allows for a relatively clean separation after the reaction. 
•The  applied  concentrations  of  catalysts  generally  range  between  0.05
and 1.5%. 
•The  relatively  broad  range  of  catalyst  dosage  is  due  to  the  large
influence of the feed oil purity on the catalyst activity.Commercial plant for the interesterification process 
The actual reaction system is like a hydrogenator reactor provided with all necessary
instrumentation and other facilities to maintain the temperature, pressure and to facilitate
the entry of oil and catalyst. They are provided with de-acidification, deodorization or
bleaching facilities. The bleached and neutralized ion is put to the reaction vessel where
the catalyst is sent and then the proper temperature pressure conditions are maintained
within the vessel to get the desired interesterification reaction process.
Enzymatic interesterification
•The Interesterification  process with the use of a biologically derived enzyme is
known as enzymatic interesterification (EIE).
•The  demand  of  this  method  increases  because  of  increasing  trend  to  avoid
chemicals in food processing.
•Lower capital investment cost as compared to the chemical process.
•Different  varieties  of  lipases  are  used  in  industries  because  of
their regiospecificity and stereospecifity in production of specific structures. 
Types of enzymatic interesterification
•Nonspecific enzymatic 
Used  for  the  production  of  commodity  fats  to  modify  the  overall  melting
properties, increasing compatibility within the solid phase and enhancing the
plasticity of the final product. 
•Specific enzymatic  
Used  to  produce  tailor-made  products  as  cocoa  butter  equivalents,
anti-bloom agents, breast milk substitutes, and low calorie fats.Continuous multi column enzymatic interesterification system
In this reaction setup, there are reaction vessel and oil feed tank i.e. preheated oil utilized
and refined oil is passed through these packed bed reactors. 
It is a four column reactor comprising of 
•A temperature-controlled SS feed tank of 150 kg capacity. 
•Four  temperature-controlled  enzyme  columns  each  packed
with 10 kg enzyme. 
•A  temperature-controlled  SS  product  tank  of  150  kg
capacity. 
The temperature and other conditions inside the reaction vessels are maintained by hot
water circulation system at which the reaction is allowed to proceed. At the end of the
reaction,  the  catalyst  is  removed  by  using  appropriate  filtration  and  then  this
interesterified oil is obtained.Winterization
•Winterization  is  a  thermo-mechanical  separation  process  where  component
triglycerides of fats and oils are crystallized from a melt. 
•The  two-component  fractional  crystallization  is  accomplished  with  partial
solidification and separation of the higher melting triglyceride components.
•In this process, the fat is melted and heated to eliminate any crystal memory. 
•The  molten  fat  is  cooled  down  under  controlled  agitation  and  cooling
conditions  to  produce  crystals  nuclei  formed  by  the  higher  melting
triglycerides. 
•Then, nuclei will grow to form crystals of the desired size. 
•When  the  crystallisation  has  progressed  far  enough,  the  slurry
is separated.
In fact, this process allows to get the winterization as well as tempering processes are
allowed to get the fat of desired polymer confirmations as well as desired characteristics
for suitable particular process operations.Apparently  this  process  looks  very  simple,  but  in  practice  this  physical  process  is
complicated by the fact that the formation of the nuclei depends upon foreign particles,
agitation, temperature, the triglyceride composition and the type of the pre treatment
followed by the fat.
Fat crystallization occurs in two steps
The crystallization actually occurs in two steps; one is the nucleation and then the crystal
growth. Rate of nucleation depends upon the triglyceride composition of the oil being
winterized,  the  cooling  rate  of  the  oil,  the  temperature  of  the  nucleation  and  the
mechanical power input or agitation. The crystal growth depends upon the crystallization
temperature, time and mechanical input or agitation.Another important term here is the solvent fractionation. In fact, it is the term used to
describe  a  process  for  the  crystallization  of  a  desired  fraction  from  a  mixture  of
triglyceride dissolved in a suitable solvent. Fractions may be selectively crystallized at
different  temperatures  after  which  the  fractions  are  separated  and  the  solvents  are
removed.  Solvent  fractionation  is  practiced  commercially  to  produce  hard  butters
speciality oils and some salad oils from which a wide array of edible oils.
Using solid solvent fractionation, different solvents can be used to fractionate different or
specific triglyceride and then these specific triglyceride are further modified to have
desired characteristic and properties to suit particular food process operations.
The different processes are introduced by which different vegetable oils and fats can be
modified to improve their functionalities, their usability in different food products and
food  processes  and  of  course,  improve  their  sensory,  organoleptic  and  other
characteristics.