Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 36
Natural Antioxidants
This lecture is about natural antioxidants.
The antioxidants are substances which inhibit or delay the oxidation of a substrate when
present at concentrations lower than the oxidising substrate.  They are used to counteract
the deterioration  of stored food products ; they function by interfering  with the free
radical chain reactions and reduce the primary radicals to non-radical species.
Food antioxidants are classified into two major types . They include primary antioxidants
or secondary antioxidants.  The primary antioxidants  are generally  phenols , hindered
phenols or other miscellaneous compounds. The secondary or synergistic antioxidants
include those which are oxygen scavengers ,  metal chelators and other miscellaneous
compounds.
The primary antioxidants are normally hydrogen donating antioxidant as (see figure)
they can donate hydrogen atom or electrons to free radical species . The antioxidant free
radical  does  not  initiate  another  free  radica l  due  to  the  stabilization  of  radical  by
delocalization.
The synthetic antioxidants which are most commonly used particularly in oils etc. to
extend their shelf life or the one which is in the category of primary antioxidants include
butylated hydroxy anisole , butylated hydroxy toluene,  propyl gallate and  tertiary butyl
hydro quionone.
The secondary antioxidants function by hydrogen donation to lipid radicals, quenching
of the singlet oxygen , removal of molecular oxygen , and regeneration of tocopherols.
They function by reducing the effectiveness of pro oxidants , like for example converting
ferric iron to ferrous iron forms. There are various metals and other agents which act as
pro oxidants in food material. 
The metal chelators  secondary antioxidants includes compounds like phosphoric acids ,
citric acid, ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA) , amino acids and peptides and
proteins such as transferrin or ovotransferrin etc.  
The  metal  chelators  function  by  the  formation  of  complex  ions  or  coordination
compounds with metal, prevention of metal redox cycling, formation of insoluble metal
complexes. They also function by steric hindrance of interactions between the metals and
lipid intermediates.
The oxygen scavengers secondary antioxidants include compounds like ascorbic acid ,
ascorbyl palmitate, erythorbic acid, sulphites, etc.
The antioxidants have synergistic properties . The interactions of different antioxidants
improves  the  effectiveness  of  each  other.  Synergism  occurs  when  mixtures  of
antioxidants  produce  a  more  pronounced  activity  than  the  sum  of  activities  of  the
individual antioxidants when used separately. In fact, this synergistic behaviour helps in
reducing the doses of individual antioxidants. So, it is a common practice to use mixture
of antioxidants rather than one single antioxidant. These mixtures may be a mixture of
primary antioxidants plus secondary antioxidants like for example  α-tocopherol can be
mixed with ascorbic acid.
Even the primary antioxidants like BHA and BHT we need to have 0.02% of antioxidant.
For example, it is advisable to have  0.01 plus  0.01 % of two antioxidants rather than
having 0.02 % concentration of one single antioxidant. So, the addition of antioxidants
together provides a better effect as far as the shelf life extension and other properties are
concerned.
Most of the synthetic antioxidants have one or the other problems sometimes the health
concerns and other concerns  like their effect on food constituents etc.  So, nowadays there
is a trend towards the use of natural antioxidant in place of synthetic antioxidants and
majority of the natural antioxidants are generally plant extracts like tocopherols  which
are present in oilseeds , also known as Vitamin E. Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C) present in
fruits and vegetables , β-carotene extracts of herbs and spices such as rosemary , sage,
thyme, oregano, etc. are the examples of natural antioxidants . The polyphenols present in
the plant extracts are the potential source of antioxidants.Structure of tocopherol can be seen in this figure; in the phenolic rings , there are groups
R1, R2 and R3. Depending upon the nature of these R1, R2 and R3, which are normally
methyl group and formyl group, the tocopherols are of four types . For example, when all
the three  5, 7 and 8  are methyl groups , it  becomes  5, 7, 8- Trimethyltocol; it is α-
tocopherol. When at position  5 and 8, there are methyl group and at position 7 there is a
formyl group, the resultant tocopherol becomes β-tocopherol and similarly gamma and
delta tocopherols are there and all these tocopherols have good antioxidant potentials .
They function by the transfer of phenolic hydrogen or by scavenging of singlet oxygen.
Flavonoids  are  the  group  of  secondary  antioxidant  which  are  generally  secondary
products of plant metabolism; they are metal chelators , superoxide anion scavengers andhydrogen donors, anthocyanins , catechins, flavones, isoflavones, flavonols etc. belong to
this group of antioxidants.
Fruits  and vegetables  are excellent  sources  of natural  antioxidants.  Fresh fruits  like
apple, pears, grapes, citrus fruits etc., vegetables like potato , tomato, spinach, carrot all
these contain lot of antioxidants . The common antioxidant compound in these fruits and
vegetables are phenolic compounds.  Wine is a good source of anthocyanins which are
good antioxidant potentials.
In the tea, green tea and coffee beans, the polyphenolic compounds like epicatechins ,
epigallocatechin, chlorogenic acids, etc. are the major antioxidant compounds .In herbs and spices like rosemary , sage, ginger, turmeric, green pepper, lavender etc.
they contain lot of polyphenolic and other compounds which have antioxidant properties.
Other spices  are used for their antioxidant  properties  from the time  immemorial  in
different preparations.  Some of the compounds with significant antioxidant potentials in
these materials include carnosic acid , carnosol, rosmarinic acids and  so on.
The  antioxidants  found  in  turmeric  include  curcumin , demethoxy  curcumin ,
bisdemethoxy curcumin and  so on.The soyabeans also contain good amount of natural antioxidants , phenolic acids like
chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid and ferulic acids . They are metal chelation and single
oxygen  quenching .  Isoflavones  in  soyabeans  work  by  metal  chelation  as  well  as
hydrogen donation.
The natural antioxidants are very good for use in the food materials . They are being now
encouraged. However there are certain advantages and disadvantages both for the use of
these natural antioxidants . The advantages include that they are readily accepted by the
consumers,  they are considered to be safe and  in fact, no safety tests are required by
regulatory agencies. The component being used as a natural antioxidant is a food or
extract of the material which is being generally listed in the category of GRAS i.e.generally recognised as safe. However there are certain disadvantages.  They are usually
more expensive if purified, and less efficient if not purified . For example, suppose any
citrus juice as a source of antioxidant is to be used, its antioxidant potential may be little
less, but if the ascorbic acid is extracted from the juice using standard procedures and
protocols,  then  its  antioxidant  potential  can  be  increased.  But  the  extraction
methodologies will add to the cost of them.  Its activity may vary depending upon the
differences in the concentration of the materials used.  The safety of the product often
becomes a concern.  
Other disadvantages may include that at the concentration in which the unpurified form
of  extract  might  be  required  to  give  the  desired  antioxidant  effect,  it  may  impart
undesirable colour, aftertaste or off flavour in the product. So, that becomes another
major limitation of the use of unpurified form of natural antioxidant or the plant extract
directly in the food material as a source of antioxidant.
Another important factor for consideration in the antioxidant is its polarity. In fact, the
polar  antioxidants  are  more  active  in  bulk  oil  system  than  those  of  the  non  polar
antioxidants. If the hydrophobic antioxidants are located on the interface of the oil and
water (see the middle picture) , then they are more effective , they can protect the lipid
better than the hydrophilic antioxidants . Here in the first picture, the air is inside and oil
and the hydrophilic antioxidant are present in the interface of the air and oil .In the 3rd picture hydrophilic antioxidant is present in interfere of the water and oil. So,
the one in the middle is more effective as the hydrophobic antioxidant is present at the
interface of the oil and water.
The partitioning properties or antioxidant potential of these compounds depends on the
various factors and those include the chemical structure of the compound and its polarity ,
the types of the lipid substrate , the presence of surfactants and the composition of the
phases i.e. water, air, oil and other phases.
An ideal antioxidant should have no harmful physiological effect . It  should have no
objectionable flavour ,  colour or odour. It should be fat soluble , so that it can easily
dissolve  or  mix  with  those oils  to  provide  better  antioxidant  properties.  And  moreimportantly the antioxidant should be effective in low concentrations . They should not be
absorbed by the body , they should be readily available and economical to use. 
As far as the natural antioxidants are concerned, it is better if they are used in the form of
their juice or their extracts , however it should be properly optimised, standardised , so
that at the level of concentration required to give the desired antioxidant effect it should
not impart any undesirable property to the material or affect the sensory attributes and
other functional characteristics of the component.
These  natural  antioxidants  have  a  lot  of potential .  They  can  be used  for shelf  life
extensions of food materials . In our laboratory, extraction of antioxidants from rosemary
and  turmeric  have  been  done.  The  rosemary  extracts  were  used  in  different
concentrations for studying their effect on the shelf life extension of sunflower oil. The
experiments were done to check the oxidative stability of the sunflower oil or similar oil
which has more PUFA content whether improved by addition of rosemary extracts or
such  other  natural  antioxidants.  The  study  indicated  that  addition  of  these  extracts
improve the oxidative stability of sunflower oil. It resulted in the shelf life extension , and
it improved frying properties of the oil. The products which were fried in such oil for
example, potato chips  fried in the oils, sesame oil or sunflower oil containing rosemary
extracts, they exhibited better stability during the storage.  Similarly, the natural colours
and antioxidant extracted from turmeric like curcumin and base curcumis , they were
added into the oil. It was observed from experiments that the curcumin not only extended
the shelf life of the oil, but it also added to the colour of the oil .The products fried in such oils were found to be attractive golden brown in colour and
were liked by the sensory finalists. So, these natural antioxidants extended the shelf life
of oil, and improved the oxidative stability of the products fried in this oil.
Before these natural antioxidants are used by the industry, there are certain issues which
need to be studied and checked  whether the regular use or long term use of natural
antioxidant  is  having  any  pathological  effect  on  the  consumers . The  carcinogenic
potential, the interactions with the enzymes etc., these natural antioxidants might have
with the food enzyme or with the body enzymes etc.,  the type of effects likely to have on
reproduction process are also the factors.  Even the exact nature of the mechanism in
which these natural antioxidants get metabolized in the food as well as in the human
system.  It  has  been  seen  that  its  long  term  use  will  depend  upon  more  and  more
information on these issues but ultimately it can be said that these natural antioxidants
have  a  very  great  potential  for  being  used  in  the  food  product s,  particularly those
products  which  are  likely  to  be  spoiled  by  oxidation  processes  or  auto  oxidation
processes.
These food grade natural antioxidants can be effectively used to improve their oxidative
stability and their shelf life without having any adverse effects on the sensory and other
characteristics.