Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 48
Rapid & Non-destructive Methods for Quality Analysis
Non-destructive  test  is  a determination  of quality  of a food material  or component
without losing the integrity of the sample that is analyzed as it does not need any specific
preparation of the sample to make it good for analysis. Optical spectroscopy is widely
accepted non-destructive technology for food processing or for food quality testing.
Important non-destructive methods for analyzing food quality attributes include near
infrared spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.  The Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIR) basically involves two processes such as Fourier 
Transform or Infrared Spectroscopy.
In  Infrared  (IR)  spectroscopy,  a  molecule  can  be  characterized  or  identified  by  its
molecular  vibrations,  based  on  the  absorption  and  intensity  of  specific  infrared
wavelengths. IR spectroscopy is based on the absorption of electromagnetic radiation at
wavelengths in the range of 700 nm to 1 mm. The bonds between atoms in the molecule
stretch and bend, absorbing infrared energy and creating the infrared spectrum.In Fourier transform (FT) spectroscopy, the Fourier transform decomposes a function of
time into the frequencies that make it up, and represents it by a series of sinusoidal
functions. Fourier transform is applied in spectroscopy to measure how well a sample
absorbs or transmits the light at each different wavelength. The fast Fourier transform is
required to turn the raw data into the actual spectrum and in many of the cases in optics
involving interferometers; which is based on the Wiener-Khinchin theorem. 
FT NIR and FTIR are the two most commonly used methods for analyzing various food
components.  Both  the  operations  generally  work  on  the  same  principle;  the  only
difference is the wavelength range or wave numbers such as the wavelength range for FT
NIR is generally 780 to 2500 nm or wave number up to 12000 to 4000 per cm.In the case of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), the wavelength range used
is 2500 to 15000 nm and wave numbers may be 4000 to 500 per cm. Because of these
differences in the wavelength and wave numbers, the FT NIR analysis is considered
comparatively less accurate than that of the FTIR.
Principle of operation of FTNIR or FTIR spectrophotometer has been discussed in the
above  slide.  Spectrophotometer  obtains  infrared  spectra  by  first  collecting  an
interferogram  of a sample  signal  using  an interferometer,  then  performs  FT on the
interferogram to obtain the spectrum. An interferometer is an instrument that uses the
technique  of  superimposing  (interfering)  two  or  more  waves,  to  detect  differences
between them. FTNIR and FTIR spectrophotometers use a Michelson interferometer. 
The components of FTIR or FTNIR spectrophotometer include light source (glow bar),
an interferometer, a sample cell, a detector, computer, and recorder or plotter. 
Different components present in the food materials give different spectra under different
wave number ranges at different wavelengths. Different FT IR spectral specifications
have mentioned in the above slide. For example, the group O-H stretching in alcohol is
detected by spectra generated in the wave number ranges of 4000 to 3000 cm-1with
absorption spectra pattern of 3550 to 3200 cm-1. 
Similarly, for the compound carboxylic acid monomer and C-O stretching group, the
range of absorption spectra is 1770 to 1780 cm-1and the wave number ranges 2000 to
1650  cm-1.  So,  when  this  spectrum  is  generated,  detection  of  particular  group  of
compound as well as both qualitative and quantitative measurements can be done using
the techniques. In the above slide, the spectra have been represented in a graphical manner by taking
absorbance in y-axis and wavelength in x-axis. At different wavelength, different types
of spectra are obtained. For example, spectra at wavelength range of 2500 nm and wave
number 4000 cm-1 detects combination C-H stretching and S-S stretching is also detected
by  spectra  at  wavelength  of  1300-1420  nm  and  wave  number  of  7692-7042  cm-1.
Depending on the spectra obtained and their specified wavelength or wave numbers,
identification and amount of the compound can be analyzed.
Evaluation  of  spectra  is  taken  into  account  after  generation  of  spectra.  With  the
measurement of a single spectrum, sample can be evaluated in a 3-step process. The first
step  is  identification.  Identification  of  a  sample  is  carried  out  to  determine  if  the
spectrum of an incoming raw material fits within the statistical population of authentic
and previously accepted batches. Then the sample is qualified using conformity test,
which is a more specific evaluation of the spectrum. Each data point of the NIR spectrum
is subject to a dedicated test with an individual threshold. This check for conformity at
each data point allows a real fingerprinting of the material with adjustable sensitivity.
During  the  quantification  of  the  different  constituents,  an  outlier  test  based  on  the
Mahalanobis Distance is performed. Again the analysis spectrum is compared to the
sample population in the individual quantification models. There  are  several  types  of  FTIR  or  FTNIR  systems  available,  which  have  many
applications in food processing industries. Infrared moisture meters and infrared milk
analyzers are available to determine fat, protein, lactose content in milk. This can be used
for measurement of degree of unsaturation of fats and oils. Even this technology can be
used for finding the varietal differentiation to differentiate one variety of grain from the
other variety and to detect the infestation in the cereal grains or in food grains.
FTIR in combination with GC can be used for the identification of flavor and aroma
compounds in different food materials. It can be used for identification of structural
changes in packaging films which might occur due to exfoliation. FTIR spectra for
bacteria are specific and they show the spectral characteristics of cell components of the
bacteria.  The  bacterial  cell  components  like  fatty  acid,  intracellular  proteins,
polysaccharides,  nucleic  acid  etc.  can  be  evaluated  or  analyzed  or  quantified  using
spectroscopic techniques. A case study has been discussed in the above slide which is based on FTNIR method.
The objective is to evaluate and detect insect infestation in stored wheat grain by a
standardized developed process. The infested grain samples (fresh wheat samples) are
prepared; then they are conditioned to different moisture content, because the moisture
content is an important variable which influences the grain spoilage during storage or
infestation etc. 
The  different  moisture  ranges  were  taken  from  10  to  16  %,  which  normally  are
considered as safe moisture range for storage of the grain. Then two insects S. orzyae and
R. dominica were used with counted numbers at different life stages. The insects were
inoculated with the grains which were stored at 27 0C and 65 % relative humidity. The
grain samples were prepared by collecting from the field, factory and storage godowns.
Library creation is an important task. The standard analytical technique may be chemical
or microbiological method.
In case  of microbiological  methods,  the  sample for the  creation  of the  library  was
analyzed,  and it  is  always  better  if large  number  of sample will  be present  as  the
reproducibility of the data will be better. So, the samples with known characteristics are
taken, spectra are generated, the spectral library is created that means large number of
spectra  is  processed,  and the  library  is  standardized.  So, spectral  library  for  wheat
infestation has been developed.Any grain, when it is given to FTNIR, it will generate a spectrum of that particular grain,
and it will process and compare it with spectral library which was generated earlier. So,
with the comparison, it can tell the system software whether the grain is infested or not.
Once the spectral library is generated, then finally, model validation will be carried out. 
These are the spectra library which were generated in the laboratory on Sonalika wheat
variety and Sharbati wheat variety. The difference between these spectra can be seen by
observing the nature of the spectra and obtained peaks.
Then these spectra are analyzed using different softwares i.e. chemo metric methods.
Different  analytical  features  of  different  regions  and  preprocessing  methods  for
calibration and validation of the model which were developed like moisture, protein, uricacid, 1000 kernel weight and hardness. These are some of the response parameters on the
basis of which the samples are compared. Moisture can be processed or occurred in the
wave number range of 12489.4 to 7489.3 cm-1.
The preprocessing method was used as first derivative methods, PLS factors were 4; and
the root mean square error for class validation was 0.485. The RMSECV value should be
lower; R square value should be higher, which indicates that the model is best fit and
data is good, it has a good prediction. 
These  are  the  linear  regression  plots  which  are  obtained  using  the  software.  The
measured  verses  predicted  values  for cross  validation  for different  components  like
moisture, protein, hardness, uric acid, and 1000 kernel weight were obtained. If the
predicted as well as measured values are closely related, all the data fall on the line, it
gives a good prediction.
The variability was smaller in case of protein and moisture content where as it was larger
in case of hardness, uric acid and 1000 kernel weight. By comparing the results, good
validation has achieved using the standard techniques.The important methods other than FTNIR or FTIR methods, which can be used for quick
testing of various food components which are also based on the similar principle, is the
biomimetics. This is particularly used for the attributes which use human sense organs
for analysis in the food material.
Those attributes can also be used which can be analyzed by using some instruments. The
term ‘Biomimetics’ is used for natural models in technology innovation to solve complex
human problems. Biomimetics methods mimic human senses for quality analysis. So,
different biomimetics instruments which are available like electronic nose, electronic eye
or electronic tongue, because they work like the sense organs. 
Comparison between e-nose and biological nose has been given in the slide. E-nose
operates like a human nose by containing large number of sensors. There are neurons,
olfactory bulb, and the brain. In e-nose system, the brain is the computer, olfactory bulb,
storage chips and neurons are the different sensor arrays which collect the data and take
the information. E-nose functions like the purpose of inhaling.
Basically it contains a sensor chamber where different sensors are there. There is a
sample preparation assembly i.e. the sample holder. Different samples are prepared and
an auto sampler which takes the volatile sample in the volatile forms and sensors detect
the volatile compounds. Finally these data which are recorded by the sensor are sent to
the computer for processing, identification and quantification. 
There is nitrogen or some other gas, samples are evaporated, the components in the form
of vapors are taken to the analyser. These volatile vapors are sensed by the different
sensors, and the data is sent to the computer.The sequential steps in the e-nose data analysis are the pre-processing i.e. first the sensor
array which collects data, then it is pre-processed or normalized, then feature extraction,
finally classification and decision making. So, these are the four major steps in the e-
nose analysis.
In the pre-processing step, it compresses transient response of the sensor array; reduces
the sample to sample variation. Feature extraction reduces the dimensionality of the
measurement space; extract useful information by pattern recognition; it is performed
with the linear transformation viz. PCA, LDA etc.In the classification, it is trained to identify the pattern that are representative of each
odor and then these odor is identified by comparing with the trained one. Finally, the
decision making which is used for application specific knowledge, determined whether
the given data belongs to anyone in the data base or not. 
like FTIR or FTNIR, e-nose also has lot of applications such as analysis of fruit ripening
which  is  associated  with  an  accumulation  of  aromatic  volatiles,  detection  of  food
spoilage, detection of Insects  infestation  in stored cereal grains, detection  of fungal
growth and presence of mycotoxins foods, analysis of milk adulteration, detection of
rancidity in oils and fats, monitoring the fermentation and identification of bacteria,
characterizing coffee beans, dates, chocolates, etc.In this slide, the sensor data by e-nose has been shown. Then it gives the radar chart; it
has 18 metal oxide sensors. Finally, the third stage i.e. the data is processed.
Different spectra showing the infestation results i.e. infested wheat sample of 45 days, 90
days, 135 days, and 180 days have been represented in the slide and the difference in the
different spectra can be observed.It shows the better fit as the predicted and experimental values are positively correlated
with the higher value of R in case of number of insects as compared to protein and uric
acid.
After  the  prediction,  the  next  step  is  the  classification  of  the  data  using  principal
component analysis which shows the prediction of infestation and classification. In this
case, high hierarchical cluster analysis can be used depending upon the types of response
parameters. For example, to test the quality, attributes or flavor of mangoes, whether it is
good or spoiled can be sensed by the E-nose. From hierarchical cluster analysis, different
clusters are used to classify the different attributes of mango or levels of infestations.There are several usefulness of an E-nose such as the human sniffers are costly when
compared to electronic nose, speedy, reliable new technology of the gas sensors are used
in the electronic nose, detection of hazardous or poisonous gas is not possible with a
human sniffer, human sensing involves subjectivity. An E-nose overcomes problems
associated with the human olfactory system.