Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 42
Active Packaging
This lecture deals about active packaging.
Active packaging 
•Active packaging changes the condition of the packed food to extend the shelf-
life or to improve safety or sensory properties, while maintaining the quality.
•All active packaging technologies involve some physical, chemical, or biological
action for altering the interactions between the package, the product, and the
package headspace to achieve certain desired outcome.Modified atmospheric packaging is basically because of the natural process i.e. interplay
between  the  food  product  as  well  as  vapour  transmission  and  other  transmission
properties of the packaging material.
In the case of active packaging, some active agents are used to manipulate the gaseous
composition inside the package to the desired level. Different absorbers or emitters are
used in this case may be ethylene absorber, carbon dioxide absorber or moisture absorber
depending upon the type of the food material, its respiration rates, its transpiration rates
etc. These absorbers or emitters are put in the required quantity inside the package which
help in maintaining the desired gaseous composition. The ethylene is a ripening hormone
that is released by the fruits. Ethylene absorber may help in controlling the ethylene
concentration in the packet. Therefore, to control the ripening process, similarly CO 2
absorbent  or water absorbent can be used.  Potassium  permanganate  is  used as  an
ethylene absorber. When it is put, the ethylene reacts with KMnO 4 and gets MnO2, KOH
and  CO2.  If  ethylene  absorbent  is  used,  the  chemical  reaction  shows  that  the
concentration  of carbon dioxide  will also be increased.  So, may be carbon dioxide
scrubbers and carbon dioxide absorbers also might be required to be used. When soda
lime  (calcium  hydroxide)  is  used,  it  reacts  with  carbon  dioxide  and  gives  calcium
carbonate and water. Similarly, silica gel or many other moisture absorbers are there
which can be used. Silica gel actually is a physical adsorption process.Components of active packaging 
•Active scavenging systems (Absorbers) 
•Releasing systems (Emitters)
•Controlled release  systems (Antimicrobials)
Oxygen absorbers (Iron powder)
Ethylene absorbers (KMnO 4)
Sulphur dioxide pads
Ethanol releasers
Carbon dioxide producers
Water vapour removers
Moisture absorbers
•Moisture control is required to prevent condensation when fresh horticultural
produce respires. The condensed moisture may provide vector for microbial /
fungal attack.
•The moisture control inside the package / storage facility should be precisely
regulated. 
•Excessive moisture loss can lead to the shrinkage and toughening of texture. 
•In  MAP,  the  moisture  control  is  done  by  the  natural  interplay  between  the
permeability of the packaging material and food, which is a time taking process. 
•In the AP, process of obtainment  of proper moisture content is hastened by
using moisture controlling sachets or films containing moisture absorbers. 
•Desiccants  are  being  successfully  used  for  AP  of  a  wide  range  of  foods,
such as cheeses, meats, chips, nuts, candies, gums and spices.
Oxygen absorbers / scavengers
•O2 concentration can be lowered with the MAP or vacuum packaging; these
technologies are often slow and imprecise.
•The process of eliminating oxygen from the package can be enhanced by the
addition of oxygen scavengers. 
•The mechanism of action of these scavengers is based on the oxidation of one or
more of the materials like Iron powder, ascorbic acid, photo-sensitive dyes; 
Enzymes such as glucose oxidase and ethanol oxidase;
Unsaturated fatty acids such as oleic, linoleic and linolenic acid; 
Rice extract, etc. 
•These scavengers can reduce the oxygen content to as low as 0.01%.
Oxidation of iron and iron salts
4Fe (OH)2 + O2 + 2H2O→4Fe(OH)3
Iron powder and ferrous salts (provided in the packet) reacts with water provided
by the food to produce a reaction that moisturizes the iron metal in the product
packaging and irreversibly converts it to a stable oxide.
The iron powder is contained within small oxygen permeable bag that prevents
its contact with food.Carbon dioxide absorbers / releasers
•The  produced  CO 2 has  to  be  removed  from  the  package  to  avoid
deterioration of food i.e. CO 2 injury and/or package destruction.
•Required  amounts  of  CO 2  absorbers  or  releasers  such  as  freshly
hydrated  lime  [Ca(OH) ],  activated  charcoal,  magnesium  oxide, ₂
etc. can be used to maintain required CO 2  level.
•The O2 absorbers/ CO2  generators are mainly used in products where package
volume and appearance are critical e.g. in peanuts or potato crisps. 
•Snack  food  products  (nuts  and  sponge  cakes)  have  been  the  main
targets  for  these  dual-action  O 2 scavenger/CO 2  emitter
sachets and labels. 
Ethylene absorbers
•To prolong shelf-life and maintain an acceptable visual and organoleptic quality,
accumulation of ethylene in the packaging should be avoided.
•A lot of C2H4-adsorbing substances are reported such as KMnO 4, which oxidizes
ethylene to acetate and ethanol. 
•Products based on KMnO 4 cannot be integrated into food-contact materials; are
supplied in the form of sachets because KMnO 4 is toxic and has a purple color. 
•Activated  carbon  has  also  been  used  for  the  adsorption  and  breakdown  of
ethylene. 
•Charcoal containing PdCl as a metal catalyst is effective in reducing the rate of
softening in kiwifruits and bananas and in reducing chlorophyll loss in spinach
leaves but not in broccoli by scavenging ethylene. 
Flavour and odour releasers/absorbers
•The odor and flavor absorbers can be used to remove the undesirable flavour
substances that are produced due to various oxidative and biochemical processes
occurring in the food. 
•By the removal of such undesirable flavour components acceptability of the foods
can be improved. 
•Two types of taints (amines & aldehydes) are amenable to removal by AP.
Amines are formed from the breakdown of proteins.
Various  acidic  compounds  can  neutralize  unpleasant-smelling
alkaline  volatile  amines,  such  as  trimethylamine,  which  is
associated with fish protein breakdown.  •The flavour and odour scavengers have been utilized for the debittering of citrus
fruits juices / grape juice. 
The causes of bitter taste in grape juice are naringin (a glycosidic flavanone) and
limonin (a triterpenoid lactone). 
Limonin is formed as a result of the heat treatment of the juice during processing
and chemical action in the acidic medium. 
An active thin cellulose acetate layer is applied inside the packaging material
for the removal of the limonin.
This  layer  consists  of  fungal  derived  enzyme  naringinase  (having
α-rhamnosidase  &  β-glycosidase)  which  hydrolyses  naringin  to
naringenin and prunin; both are non-bitter compounds. 
Preservative / antimicrobial releasers
•To control the growth of undesirable microbes in foods, antimicrobials such as
nisin & natamycin (pimaricin) can be incorporated in or coated onto the food
packaging materials.
•Antimicrobial packaging helps to extend the lag phase and reduces the growth
rate of microbes resulting into prolonged shelf life and better food safety. 
•Antimicrobial active packaging film releases the antimicrobial agent on the food
in a controlled way and maintains its concentration on the food surface above the
minimum inhibitory concentration for the target microorganism.  
•On the basis of the localization of the antimicrobial compound, antimicrobial AP
systems can be classified in four groups.
The  antimicrobial  is  released  to  the  package  headspace  to  interact  with  the
produce surface,
The antimicrobial compound is included in the packaging material and is released
to the product through migration,
The antimicrobial compound is immobilized in the package surface, and
The package material has inherent antimicrobial activity.  There is a continuous
interaction between the surface of the food as well as the surface of the packaging
material and its antimicrobial agent do not allow the microorganism to grow.
•They  are  applied  mostly  to  meat,  fish,  bakery,  and  cheese
products; fewer results exist for fruits and vegetables. 
Temperature control packaging
•One  suitable  approach  to  prevent  temperature  changes  in  the  produce  is
application of temperature control packaging.
•Usually, the temperature control AP is classified as insulating materials and self-
heating / self-cooling cans.
•Self-heating containers and cans, such as self-heating aluminum and steel cans
and containers for coffee, tea, and ready meals, are commercially available. They
basically use exothermic reactions, for example, lime and water are positioned in
the base of the container which when mixed heat the contents. 
•Self-cooling cans use an endothermic reaction, such as dissolution of ammonium
nitrate and chloride in water, to cool the product. 
Humidity regulators and absorbers
•Moisture absorbers/ humidity regulators are manufactured in the form of sachets,
pads, sheets, or blankets.
•Moisture-absorber sachets are generally used for humidity control in packaged
dried foods.
•Moisture-drip absorbent  pads, sheets,  and  blankets  are used for liquid  water
control in high aw foods such as fruits, vegetables, meats, fish and poultry. 
•Absorber  papers  and  desiccant  pads  are  used  to  wrap  one  or
more fruits. •The absorbers are basically made of two layers of a microporous nonwoven
plastic film, such as polypropylene or polyethylene, and superabsorbent polymer,
which is placed between layers and can absorb water upto 500 times its own
weight. 
•Polyacrylate  salts,  CMC,  and  starch  copolymers  are  typical  superabsorbent
polymers, which have a very strong affinity for water.
•There  are  various  types  of  moisture  scavengers  such  as  silica  gel,  CaO,
CaCl2 and modified starch, etc. which can modify package humidity. 
•Microporous  sachets  of  desiccant  inorganic  salts  such  as  NaCl
are reported to be used for the distribution of tomatoes.
Selection of the scavengers/emitters
The factors that need to be considered while selecting the absorbers and/or releasers for a
food package are
The size and weight of the product.
The temperature and RH to which the food will be exposed,
Permeability  (water  vapor  permeability  and  gas  transmission  rate)  of  the
packaging material,
Water activity of the product,
Sensitivity of the scrubber and product to moisture,
Absorption capacity and kinetics of the scrubber, and
The desired shelf life of the product.
Case study : EHP              Transpiration rate measurement & modeling
If there is a humidity gradient inside and outside the package,  loss of water as vapor
takes  place from the product area exposed to the air, through the cuticle, lenticels,
stomata, etc.
In the picture, the transpiration rate of the banana which is stored at different relative
humidity from 70 to 90 % and temperature at 10 ᵒC is shown. The figure shows how the
transpiration rate varies with the relative humidity as well as with the storage time.The study of transpiration rate (TR) helps to quantify rate of water evaporation from the
fruit surface.
Measurement of transpiration rate:
Freshly harvested materials are sorted and washed. Then it is packaged and kept in a
suitable environment. The weight loss at a regular interval is taken and this weight loss
data is used to calculate the transpiration rate. There are few models for the calculation
of the transpiration rate which are suggested in the literature. The model is based on the
mass transfer i.e. the weight loss or one can also calculate the transpiration rate on the
basis of the energy balance.The transpiration rate measurement is very important. (See picture) There is a package
where there was a humidity gradient inside and outside the packet and it resulted into
condensation of the moisture. In another case where the modified atmosphere package
was properly designed, there was no humidity gradient, there was no condensation of the
moisture. 
Experiments were conducted, the transmission rate was measured and these data can be
used to calculate the moisture absorbers required. Similarly the required mass of ethylene
scrubbers to be kept inside the MAP can be calculated by the equation. The TR is the
rate of water vapour evaporator per kg of fruit. Then WVTR can be used if areas of the
water vapour transfer rate of the selected packaging film are known. 
Mass of water vapour and ethylene scavenger is estimated to be incorporated in banana.
The data can be measured experimentally from the literature and accordingly one can
calculate. So, depending upon the type of fruits and vegetable, the moisture absorbers
required will be the ethylene scavengers, carbon dioxide releasers or oxygen scavengers
depending  upon  the  permeability  of  the  packaging  material,  temperature  and  other
factors.
Determination of OTR, CTR and WVTR required for packaging of guava and banana
The rate of O2 consumption and rate of CO 2 evolution and transmission rate for the
banana can be calculated using these equations i.e. OTR, CTR and WVTR are required
for the packaging of guava and banana. 
The  mass  of  water  vapour  absorber  to  be  incorporated  in  the  EHP  of  banana  is
determined. When the water vapour transmission rate of the available film i.e. WVTR
available is lower than the WVTR required, water vapour would condense inside the
package and some moisture absorber needs to be added. The mass of moisture scavenger
can be calculated using equation provided. This is needed to allow the interchange of the
water  vapour  from  inside  to  outside  or  outside  to  inside  so  that  the  humidity  is
equilibrated.
Active packaging technology 
The material has to be washed, graded and then the next aspect is packaging. Proper
selection of the packaging films should be made like PVC, PPC, PP film, poly propylene
or any others. One should know the permeability of all these films gas permeability,
water permeability, etc.
Accordingly depending upon the permeability, material depending upon the food, fruits,
vegetables etc. one need to select the scavenger which may be either moisture scrubber
or other scrubbers. They are to be put in form of the some sort of sachet. 