Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 41
Modified Atmospheric Storage (MAP)
In this lecture, a very important topic i.e. modified atmospheric packaging (MAP) for
extension of shelf life of either the fresh produce or the processed food products where
biological processes are likely to continue or even chemical process like oxidation etc.
may take place after processing is discussed. 
Respiratory behaviour of fresh produces
For the packaging and shelf life extraction of such products a very useful technology is
modified atmosphere packaging. The basic principles or application aspects of modified
atmosphere packaging is discussed.
•Different commodities have different metabolic activities and, therefore, di erent ﬀ
respiration rates. 
•A  proper  combination  of  O 2 (low)  and  CO2  (high)  concentrations  should  be
maintained  in  the  package  or  in  the  storage  facility  in  order  to  allow  the
commodity to respire aerobically but at a minimum possible rate.
•The required O2 / CO2 concentrations  for the minimum respiration rate differ for
different commodities. •Even the different varieties of the same commodity might need different O 2 / CO2
concentrations.
In this slide, the tolerance to oxygen and carbon dioxide for different fruits is given. The
minimum O2 tolerance limit for different fruits ranges from even 0.5 % to as high as 5 %
concentration. The maximum carbon dioxide gas tolerated by the fruits may vary from 2
to as high as 15 %. Maximum CO 2 tolerance for some of the fruits like golden delicious,
apricot, grape, olive, pear etc. is 2 %. Whereas the fruits like strawberry, raspberry,
blackberry,  cherry  and  fig,  they  can  tolerate  maximum  carbon  dioxide  in  storage
atmosphere inside the package as high as 15 %. Similarly, the minimum oxygen the tree
nuts and dried fruits can tolerate oxygen as low as 0.5. And the citrus fruits mango etc.
they may be stable as they can tolerate up to 5 % oxygen. Modified atmosphere packaging (MAP)
The MAP involves the modification of the headspace gases in a package in order to
prolong the shelf life of the product.
MAP is a technique used to lengthen the shelf-life of processed food products or
fresh produce.
Composition of the air surrounding the food in the package is modified to reduce
the rate of ongoing biological or physiological processes in the food. 
MAP is used for fruits, vegetables, meat, fish, etc. 
Equilibrium  modified  atmosphere  packaging  (EMAP)  is
commonly used for cut fruits & vegetables.
The packaging allows a control permeation of gases i.e. carbon dioxide, oxygen and
water vapor. And using a packaging material of suitable characteristics, the modified
atmosphere packages are formed. Principle of MAP
Lowering the oxygen density may be up to 5 % restricts the vegetables respiration. It
creates  state  of  hibernation  and  maintains  the  freshness  of  the  fresh  produce.  It  is
important  to  maintain  freshness;  package  must  have  a  specific  oxygen permeability
balanced with the vegetables respiration rate. The atmosphere or gaseous composition
inside the package or inside the storage facility can be modified in two different ways;
active modification or passive modification. 
Active modification (AM)
The atmosphere is modified by creating a slight vacuum and replacing the packaging
atmosphere within the desired gas mixture.
•O  absorber₂
Iron  compounds  (FeO,  Fe O ,  Fe O )  are  used  as  the  active  oxygen ₂ ₃ ₃ ₄
absorbents.                                       
•CO  absorber₂
Lime (freshly hydrated high calcium lime [Ca(OH) ], activated charcoal, ₂
magnesium oxide, etc.
•Ethylene absorber
Potassium  permanganate,  builder  clay  powder,
hydrocarbons, silicones.
Passive modification (PM)
Modification is achieved by respiration of commodity within the package and depends on
the characteristics of the commodity and the packaging film.
Steady state equilibrium is achieved when O  consumption equals to the O ₂ ₂
diffusion  into  the  package  and  CO  production  equals  to  the  CO  diffusion ₂ ₂
out of the package.
The  packaging  material  should  have  proper  permeability  to  respective
gases to allow quick achievement of this equilibrium.The commodity will be safe till equilibrium is maintained.
Relative  changes  in  oxygen  and  carbon  dioxide  concentrations  during  passive
modification and active modification are shown in this figure. 
MAP methods  
Regarding the methods of modified atmosphere packaging, whether it is a respiring
commodity or it is other commodity, where the spoilage of the food might be because of
the chemical oxidation etc. Depending upon the characteristics of the food, and other
changes which may likely to take place in the material resulting its spoilage, different
packaging methods can be used. Vacuum packaging is particularly more suitable, where for those products spoilage is
likely to occur due to oxidation. Of course, it may be beneficial for respiring materials
also because the oxygen can be lowered down selectively, but for the vacuum packaging
the oxygen or air particularly oxygen is mechanically removed from the package before it
is sealed. Whereas, in the second method flushing with gases, air inside the packet is
replaced with either inert gas like nitrogen or mixture of gases may be nitrogen, carbon
dioxide, etc., before packaging and sealing in the barrier materials.
The main gases used in the MAP include oxygen, nitrogen and carbon dioxide. And these
three gases are used in different combinations according to the product and the needs of
the manufacturer or the consumers. The choice of a particular combination is influenced
by ongoing biological or chemical processes in the food materials, even sensitivity of the
food material to these gases, and finally the stability of the food components like colour
stability or flavor stability and other such requirements. The effectiveness of the gas is influenced by various factors such as original and final
concentrations of the gases that is maintained inside the package, stage of maturity of the
commodity, the type of the product being packaged, water activity of the food material,
ongoing biological processes inside the food, storage temperature, partial pressure of
carbon dioxide, bacterial population, acidity of the material and so on. So, all these need
to  be  considered  while  selecting  either  the  suitable  packaging  material  or  the
methodology for suitable packaging technology method. 
MAP considerations for fruits and vegetables
During  storage  and  handling,  the  fruits  and  vegetables  are  actively  respiring.  The
biological agents like enzymes are the major culprits which bring about textural changesor cause softening of fruits and vegetables. Pectin esterases, polygalacturonse, pectin
methyl esterases, etc. are the enzymes which play major roles, because the pectins are the
structural material that provide texture to the fruits and vegetables. 
During post harvest, once the fruit or vegetable is plucked from the tree, enzymes act on
the pectin and such other component; they may hydrolyze it, remove the calcium from
the pectin molecules etc. Many such changes may take place which ultimately convert
the insoluble form of pectin into soluble form of pectin and many other changes which
ultimately result into the softening of the texture of the material. The respiration rate can
be reduced by decreasing the concentration of oxygen around the fresh produce. 
So, the packaging material, gaseous composition inside the package, should be effective
in controlling the ethylene production. The blockage of the synthesis of ethylene will also
control the activity of these enzymes. Therefore, ripening process of the fruit is delayed
or textural changes in the vegetables etc. is delayed, and its shelf life is extended.
In MAP, an atmosphere with a gas composition different  from that of air is created in the
package.  The gases mainly used are: 
CO2  : Antimicrobial effect
O2  : A reduced concentration in the package head-space 
A package below 1-2%  O2 (even as low as 0.2% for some products) is maintained by
replacing the oxygen with nitrogen and /or carbon dioxide.
N2 : Inert gas (equilibrium of atmospheric pressure)Systems for gas packaging
•Horizontal  FFS  machines  for  rigid  and  semi-rigid  packages  (Deep-draw
machines).
Suitable for the retail packaging of meat, poultry, fish,      cooked meats, bakery
products, cheese and nuts.
•Horizontal and vertical FFS machines for flexible ‘pillow-pack’ pouches (Flow-
pack machines)
These kinds of packaging systems are mainly suitable for the retail packaging of
bakery products, snack foods, coffee, cheese, nuts, meats, fish, salads and fruits.
•Vacuum chamber machines
These  types  of  packaging  systems  are  suitable  for  both  retail  and  catering
packaging of meat, fish, nuts, and prepared meals.
•Gemella packaging systems
These machines can be used for packaging of meat, poultry, fish, cooked meats,
fruits, vegetables, cheese, bakery products, salads and ready meals.
•Fibrelam system
These  systems  can  also  be  applied  to  meat,  poultry,  cooked  meats,  fruit,
vegetables, bakery products, salads and ready meals.
•Bag-in-carton system  
These are used for making consumer size packs of dry powders and granules such
as coffee, tea and dried potato powder.
•Bag-in-box system  
     This system has the advantage that a conventional unit pack can be produced and
then gas is flushed.
•Walki-vent system  
     The system can be applied to pack raw meat, chicken and fish.The films which are suitable for making MAPs for different food materials are polymeric
films like LDPE, HDPE, PP, OPP, metalized polyester, PVC; both perforated, micro
perforated  or  non-perforated,  having  less  permeability,  having  more  permeability.
Similarly, edible films like biopolymers, emulsions, laminates etc. can also be used for
modified  atmosphere  packaging  of  different  materials.  Smart  packaging  films  like
temperature responsive films, films coated with the scavenger or emitters, the polymeric
material containing ethylene absorbers, oxygen absorbers, carbon dioxide absorbers etc.
are also used. 
Functional films are prepared using nanotechnology and such other methods. Even the
functional films are made antimicrobial by applying suitable coating in the packaging
material. When food materials are packed in such type of packages or polymers, then it
causes  the  surface  system  realization  of  the  food.  Wasabi  based  polymers  etc.  are
examples of this. Packaging material requirements
•Integrity of sealing
The adequate integrity of the seal is important in order to maintain the correct
atmosphere in the package.
•Type of package
The type of package to be used (rigid or semi-rigid, lidded tray or flexible film
pouch) should be taken into consideration while choosing a packaging materials.
•Fogging
The polyethylene in the packaging laminates can be specially treated to prevent
condensation of water, which fogs the package and affects the visibility of the
product inside the package. •Microwaveability of packaging materials
It  is  an  important  factor  that  should  also  be  considered  in  gas  packaging,
particularly in the case of RTE products. 
•Biodegradability and recyclability
A  major  challenge  for  the  materials  manufacture  is  the  natural  hydrophilic
behaviour of many bio-based polymers.
•Thermal and mechanical properties
The mechanical properties in terms of modulus and stiffness should not be very
different to those of the conventional polymers.
•Compostability
The  compostability  is  highly  dependent  on  the  type  &  composition
of the material.The advantages of MAP
•Increased shelf life and reduction in retail waste.
•Improved  and  better  presentation  of  the  product  for
clear visibility of the product inside the package.
•Hygienic  stackable  pack,  sealed  and  free  from  product
drip and odour.
•Little or no need of chemical preservatives.
•Increased  distribution  area  and  reduced  transportation  costs
due to less frequent deliveries.
•Reduction  in  production  and  storage  costs  due  to  better
utilization of labour, space and equipment.The disadvantages of MAP
•High  cost  of  gas  packaging  machinery,  maintenance  of
gaseous environment and packaging materials.
•Cost  of  analytical  equipment  to  ensure  that  correct  gas
mixtures are used.
•Cost of quality assurance systems to prevent distribution of leakers.
•Increase  of  pack  volume  which  will  adversely  affect  transport  costs
and retail display space.
•Benefits  of  MAP  are  lost  once  the  pack  is  opened  or  if
it leaks.
•MAP  is  a  very  effective  technology  for  the  packaging  of  fresh  produces,
particularly for extending the shelf life of whole or cut fruits and vegetables.
•It is useful both for extending the shelf life and maintaining the quality of the
produce. 
•The application of other preservation techniques in combination with MAP is an
interesting area of R&D.
The work should be done in these regards so as to increase the benefit or advantage of
this technology to the consumer as well as to the processers.