Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 43
Edible Coating
Another  important  method  of  extending  shelf  life  of  wide  ranging  food  materials
including fruits, vegetables, chocolates etc. to manipulate the processes like respiration,
transpiration, oxidation etc. is edible coating which will be discussed in this lecture.
Edible coating  
Primary purpose of food coating is to provide a barrier to microorganisms, to moisture,
to gas and to solute migration in food.  
Edible coating is normally applied on food surface where a thin layer of edible film is
formed directly on surfaces or between different layers.Edible coating can extend the shelf life of the food by inhibition of the microbial growth
and by the improvement of the quality of the food system. It can also preserve bioactive
nutrients  present  in  the  food.  It  can  inhibit  deteriorative  chemical  processes  like
oxidation etc. Edible coating can preserve physico-chemical characteristics of the food
such  as  texture,  colour  and  organoleptic  properties.  And  it  is  also  used  to  protect
probiotic  bacteria  viability  or  application  of  probiotic  bacteria  during  storage  and
processing.
Drivers for edible coating innovations
•Increasing consumer demand for RTE foods and fewer or no additive based food
preservation.
•Environmental  issues  such as  recycling  and  biodegradability  of  conventional
packaging films.
•Changes in the retail and distribution practices associated with globalization.
•Stricter regulatory requirements regarding consumer health and safety.
Mechanism of action of edible coating
There are various agents like microbial or biological agents etc. with which the product
comes in contact. Edible coating provides barrier to moisture, oxygen, microorganism,
antioxidant etc. Accordingly their contact, their growth, their activity on the food surface
is checked which results into the extension of the shelf life of the food material.Active edible coating
Refers to the incorporation of functional additives or extracts from natural sources such
as antimicrobials, antioxidants, etc. into the coating systems to 
Improve functionality of the edible films, 
Increase the shelf life of foods, and
Provide a high-quality products (fresh / safe).
Problems associated with edible coating
•Modification of internal atmosphere can increase disorders associated with high
CO2 or low O2.Waxing of apples & pears - ripening & respiration rate inhibited, but
alcoholic flavours developed due to anaerobic fermentation.
Apple coated with sucrose fatty acids esters had few detrimental changes
in terms of fruit firmness, yellowing & weight loss but had increased
incidence of core flush.
Tomatoes coated with 0.6 mm zein films produced alcoholic off flavours.
Wax & SFAE are the most widely used coating materials.
•Consumers dislike wax coatings which impart waxy taste.
•Need for developing alternative coating materials that do not impart waxy
taste or any undesirable taints, odours, etc.
•Effect  of  EC  on  internal  gas  composition  &  their  interaction  with
quality parameters must be determined.
•Colour  change,  loss  of  firmness,  ethanol  fermentation,  decay
ratio  and  weight  loss  of  EC  fruits  and  vegetables  are
important quality parameters.Success of edible coating of fruits and vegetable depends mainly on selecting films or
coatings which can give a desirable gas consumption that is appropriate for a specific
product. 
Selecting edible coating materials
•If  coating  is  too  thick,  detrimental  effect  can  result  because  internal  gas
concentration is below a desirable and beneficial level and there is an associated
increase in CO2  concentration which is above a critical level. These conditions
lead to anaerobic fermentation. 
•This can be remedied by
Developing several edible coatingsControlling wettability of EC
Measuring gas permeation properties of selected coatings
Measuring diffusion properties of skin & flesh of selected fruits
Predicting internal gas compositions for the coated fruits
Observing effects on quality changes of the coated fruits
Gas permeation properties of edible coatings
The permeability of O 2, CO2 & H2O can be calculated as 
P = Q X / (A t Δp)
    Where,  P  is permeability (g or ml m /sq m/s/Pa),
       A  is the area of film (sq m),
                    t   is time (s),
                   Δp is partial pressure difference of the gases (Pa) across film, & 
        X  is thickness of the film (m). Wettability & coating effectiveness
•Effectiveness  of  EC  depends  primarily  on  controlling  the  wettability  of  the
coating solutions which affects the coating thickness of the film. 
•EC formulations must wet & spread on the fruit surface uniformly and upon
drying form a coating that has adequate adhesion, cohesion and durability to
function properly.
•Wettability of a solid by a liquid is determined by the balance between adhesive
forces  (Wa)  of  the  liquid  on  the  solids  and  cohesive  forces  (Wc)
of the liquid. 
•Wa cause the liquid to spread over the solid surface while Wc cause it to shrink.•The  equilibrium  spreading  coefficient  (Ws)  is  defined  as  follows  and
it can only be negative or zero.
Ws = Wa – Wc = Ysv – Ylv – Ysl
Where,  Ysv,  Ylv  &  Ysl  are  solid-vapour,  liquid-vapour  &  solid-liquid
interfacial tensions.
Chitosan
•A good quality coating material
•Natural polysaccharides, the second most abundant after cellulose
•Poor mechanical properties, lack of water resistance
•High water permeability
•High gases barriers
•It has a broad antimicrobial spectrum
•Effective carriers of many active compoundsChemical modification of chitosan
N-acylation of chitosan
•Functionalization of chitosan with fatty acid derivatives improves
Hydrophobicity and emulsifiying properties 
Stabilization of active compounds in chitosan (encapsulation matrix)
So, the modified chitosan is used is a good edible coating material.
Modified chitosan based coating on strawberries
Appearance of strawberries coated with modified chitosan based formulation containing
limonene and emulsifiers is shown in figure which can be seen and understood. Methods of coating application
The  application  method  will  greatly  influence  the  thickness  and  uniformity  of  the
coating.
•Dipping
•Brushing
•Spraying
•Fluidized bed
•Panning
Here in this slide, a flowchart for the preparation of edible coating material and its
application  in  tomatoes  by  dipping  method  is  depicted  which  can  be  read  and
understood. 
Spray technology of coating application
The spray technology of coating application consist of
•A set of nozzles used in the formation of the droplets.
•Sprayer tank to facilitate liquid pressure.
•Heating jacket nozzle for temperature control of the liquid before injection.
•Conveyor belts to move the products.
•Data  logger  to  control  physical  parameters  such  as  pressure,
temperature  (ambient  air,  liquids),  flow  rates,  and  liquid  level  for
the sprayer tank.
•The  air  system  to  participate  in  both  the  production  of
droplets in the nozzle and the circulation of the liquid flow.
So, these are the accessories or instrumentation system required for the spay drying
system.Basic installation for spray coating in food engineering
Spraying patterns improves with 
Increase in operating pressure
Increase in fluid temperature 
Spraying pattern deteriorates with increase of fluid viscosity.
The coating is applied from one side or two sides to make sure that this material is spread
uniformly over the surface of the fruit or vegetable. So, by controlling the operating
pressure,  fluid  temperature,  fluid  viscosity  and  having  a  proper  optimization  of
experimentation;  one  can  control  here  the  thickness  and  other  characteristics  and
definitely achieve a much better process than the manual dipping process. 
Fluidized bed coating
•Fluidized-bed coating process consists of
A coating material, either in the form of a solution or suspension.
A set of nozzles to spray the coating materials onto the surface of fluidized
powders to form a shell-type structure.
•Three different configurations of fluidized beds
Top spray
Bottom spray
Rotating-fluidized bed
•Top spray method is the more popular one which is used in the food industry for
coating of various material like chocolate or fruit.
The schematic of top spray fluidized bed coating is shown in figure. The material gets
fluidized and then the coating solution is sprayed on the top with the help of nozzles. The
major difference between the spray technology and fluidized bed coating is that it may
result in better or uniform coating.Pan coating 
Pan coating process consists of 
•Depositing the product to be coated into a large, rotating bowl, referred to as the
pan. 
•The coating solution is then ladled or sprayed into the rotating pan.
•The product is tumbled within the pan to evenly distribute the coating solution
over the surface of the food material.
•Forced  air,  either  ambient  or  at  elevated  temperature,  is  applied  to  dry  the
coating.
Some of the pictures of experimental sample are shown. Experimental results reveal that
edible  coating  technology  has  a vast potential  in increasing  the  shelf life  of fruits,
vegetables while maintaining their quality.
Edible coating can be used 
To protect food quality
To carry natural antimicrobial compounds
•The functionalisation of the polymer can improve the protection and the release
rate of the immobilized active compounds.
•Crosslinking  reaction  of  natural  polymers  can  improve  the  physico-chemical
properties  of  the  films  and  their  stability  during  storage  period  of  the
packaged food.
•Edible  active  coating  could  be  used  in  combination  with
MA  packaging  and  pasteurization  treatments  to
reduce bacterial growth rates and to assure food safety.
So, this edible coating has a very good commercial application with respect to shelf life
extension. 