Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 04
Role of Water in Food and Its Shelf Life
In this lecture, the role of water in food and its influence on the shelf life of the food
materials is discussed. 
Water is an important component of life, next to oxygen. A person can live for a few
weeks without food, but it becomes very difficult to live a few days without water. Water
is an integral part of all the animal and vegetable tissues. It is the medium through which
different cellular reactions  take place. Water helps in almost all body processes like
digestion, circulation, excretion, etc. It helps in maintaining the electrolyte balance of the
body and plays an important role in the maintenance of the body temperature. Water is
not only a solvent, but it also participates or takes part in the several reactions either as a
reactant or as a product.It is one of the widely distributed compounds in the world and is found in all three states
of matter i.e. liquid, solid and gas or vapour. It is one of the most important chemicals
present  in food and drinks. In fact,  sometimes it  is  said that  food is  a mixture  of
chemicals or biochemicals in water. The foods contain wide-ranges of water in it. There
are certain foods which contain water as low as may be 1 or 2 % e.g. crackers, 18 to 20
% e.g. figs, raisins, etc. On the other hand, there are certain foods which contain water
contents as high as 96 or 98 % in case of fruits or vegetables like cucumber, tomato, etc.
The water content influences appearance, texture, flavour and other characteristics of the
food.  It is not only the water content but the manner in which water is present in the
food material gives its desired characteristics. Water is involved in most of the changes
that take place when the food is cooked or processed. In fact, food spoilage also is
related to the water content.   Even some of the desirable or undesirable changes that take place when the food is
cooked are due to the property of water as a solvent. The characteristic colour and
flavour in the coffee brew and tea brew is because of the ability of water to dissolve the
colourings and flavourings. There are many  water-soluble vitamins which are leached
out during the cooking or washing processes depending upon their solubility in water. 
Water  also acts as a dispersion medium in food. Too much water in foods can be a
danger, as it favours the growth of undesirable bacteria and other microorganisms. So,
the aim of modern food technology is to keep the water content of foods as low as
possible to maximize the shelf life of food. 
Physical properties of water
The  physical  constants  of  water  are  very  different  when  compared  with  the  other
molecules of similar atomic composition and molecular weight such as H 2S, HF, NH3,
etc. Water has unusually different or sometimes higher values for physical constants such
as melting point, boiling point, surface tension, specific heat, and dielectric constants,
etc. Even the heat of fusion, vaporization, sublimation values for water are also high.
Another unusual property of water is that it has a maximum density at 4 C and not at 0
C which is the freezing point of water. On the contrary, other materials of the foods
normally are maximally dense at their freezing point. The two forms of the water i.e. the
liquid  form  and  solid  form  shows  variation  in  their  characteristics.  The  thermal
conductivity of ice at 0  C is approximately 4 times than that of water at the same
temperature. It  indicates that ice conducts heat at a  faster rate than the immobilized
water. And, this can be observed in the case of freezing and thawing. Freezing processes
accomplish  at  a  faster  rate  than  the  thawing  process.  During  the  freezing  with  the
progress of time, the ice phase enlarges, which becomes the medium for heat transfer.
Therefore, the freezing process can be conducted very quickly. But in thawing, with the
progress  of  time,  heat  transfer  medium  becomes  water.  Water  has  less  thermal
conductivity than ice. So, it  conducts energy at a lower rate which  slowers down the
thawing process in comparison to freezing. 
Structure of water molecule
Water is formed with 2 hydrogen atoms and 1 oxygen atom. The properties of the water
are closely related to its structure. Its unusual properties suggest that there is existence of
strong attractive forces among the water molecule. The observed differences between the
properties of water and ice also indicate that the structure of water and ice are not
common e.g. water and ice have different thermal conductivity properties. In a  water
molecule, two hydrogen atoms connected by a covalent bond with oxygen atoms and the
bond angle is 104.5 ᵒ.
Although the water molecule is considered to be an electrically neutral molecule, there is
an imbalance of the charge because of the arrangement of atoms. The hydrogen atoms
are placed on the same side of the oxygen atom. So, the side where hydrogen atoms are
located  is  slightly  more  electropositive  whereas,  the  other  side  is  slightly  more
electronegative. That means, in the water molecule, both positive and negative charges
are present at the oxygen atom. This imbalance of the electrical charge, in fact, attracts
the other water molecule.  In other words, it can be said that  oxygen of one water
molecule attracts the hydrogen of the other and joints it with the help of hydrogen bond.
This type of attraction leads to multiple hydrogen bonds. This type of multiple hydrogen
bonding  on a  three-dimensional basis actually  gives  the  logical  explanation  for  the
characteristics of the water. In this structure (see Fig.), one water molecule can make a  hydrogen bond with four
other water molecules at the same time. The higher values of the physical constant are
basically the energy required to break these hydrogen bonds and this provides a logical
explanation for unusually higher physical constants of water molecule. 
Theories of water structure
There are two theories explained in this connection: 
(1) Homogeneous model 
The homogeneous model explains that intermolecular hydrogen bonds are uniformly
distributed throughout the water so that each water molecule has essentially the same
environment.
(2) Mixture model 
Mixture model explains that the intermolecular hydrogen bonds are concentrated at any
given moment, in localized multi-molecular clumps or clusters of a water molecule. In
fact,  the  mixture model  is  the  most  widely  accepted  and  valid  model.  This  model
explains the characteristics or reactions, etc. which are normally seen in the processes. Structure of ice
There is some structural difference between water and ice. The hydrogen bonding in
water determines the structure of ice. The hydrogen bonded structure of water is an open
structure. But, the structure of ice is a closed structure. When water is frozen, then a
regular hexagonal pattern of  hydrogen-bonded closed structure results. This structure
actually accounts for the properties of the ice.
In the structure of ice, there  is ample amount of empty space which makes the ice
structure less dense, lower in weight than water. Therefore, the ice floats in water and
this is in fact, a natural defence mechanism provided by nature particularly to the aquatic
lives. Otherwise, the situation would be different, if the solid water i.e. ice is not floating
on water in seas, in rivers, etc. during the winter season, when the temperature drops, this
enables the aquatic lives to comfortably live in the warm water below the blanket of the
ice on the surface of the water. Effect of solutes on structure of water 
Water is called  as the universal solvent and there is  considerable justification for this.
Because the substances that are themselves polar or ionic are readily soluble in water e.g.
sodium chloride or such other components when put into water, it may dissociate into
sodium ion and chloride ion. 
There might be an other type of solutes like inert solute or the solute which can form a
hydrogen bond. Different types of solutes when  come in association with water, they
influence the characteristics of water differently. Normally, hydrogen bonded structure
of pure water is disrupted by the association of dissociable solutes. Some ion in dilute
solution break the hydrogen bonds of pure water whereas, the other have a net structure
forming effect. 
Ions which are normally smaller and/ or multivalent (mostly positive ions) like lithium,
sodium, potassium, hydronium, calcium, etc. are net structure formers. On the other
hand, the large and monovalent ions (mostly negatively charged ions and large positive
ions) such as potassium, rubidium, ammonium, chloride, bromide, and iodide are the net
structure breakers. In a concentrated salt solution, the structure which is common in the
vicinity of ions is likely to predominate.Solutes capable of forming hydrogen bonds such as urea may be expected to enhance or
at least not to disturb the normal structure of water. However, the distribution and
orientation of the solutes’ hydrogen bonding sites may be geometrically incompatible
with the normal hydrogen-bonded structure of water. This may cause disruption of some
of the hydrogen bonds of water like water-water hydrogen bonds.
However,  a  total number  of  hydrogen  bond  per  mole  of  the  solution  will  not  be
substantially changed  because the solute has the capacity to form  hydrogen bond. So,
when it is introduced into water, the water-water hydrogen bonds might be replaced with
the water-solute hydrogen bonds. This newly formed water solute hydrogen bonds are of
particular  importance when macromolecules are involved. If in a macromolecule, the
hydrogen bonding sites are uniformly distributed on the surface, then it is conceivable
that,  a  structured  zone  of  water  exists at  the  macromolecule  water  interface.  A
considerable number of carbohydrate, proteins, steroids, hormones, etc. appear to have
hydrogen bonding sites. Solutes which are inert in nature such as hydrocarbons and the non-polar groups of
compounds like fatty acids, amino acids, protein, etc. have a structure forming action
when introduced into water. Solutes of this nature situate themselves at the boundary of
the bulky  hydrogen-bonded cluster of the  water molecule and thereby encourage the
formation of more extensive water-water hydrogen bond.
This causes the solute to become partly surrounded by water with a greater than normal
amount of structure. In most proteins, about 40 % of the total amino acids have non-polar
side chains. These non-polar groups have a structure forming action on the adjacent
water and the interaction between the water and non-polar groups has an important
influence  on  the  reactivity  of  the  proteins  as  well  as  on  their  native  tertiary
conformations. Bound water
Food and living systems contain bound water molecules due to their biological structure
or the presence of solutes. The intensity of binding varies, but only those molecules of
water that are mobile and bound least firmly determine the observed water activity. In
fact, bound water behaves differently from that of pure water. The type of water or the
form  of  water  present  in  food  determines  its  availability  for  the  chemical  and
microbiological processes.
Depending on the extent of boundness, water is grouped into four types such as type IV,
type III, type II and type I bound water. Distinct boundary might not be there, but in all
the four types of water, there is presence of intermediate stages of boundaries. 
(i)Type IV bound water
Type IV bound water is the one which has full activity and it does not exist except in the
free state. The other types such as type III, type II and type I bound water are found in
biological matter. 
(ii)Type III bound water
Type III bound water is present physically entrapped in tissue matrix as well as in
solutions.  This type of water represents the majority of water in plant and animal food
tissues. The activity of this type of water is only slightly reduced than normal water or
water  in  the  free state.  This  type  of  water  is  actually  available  for  the  growth  of
microorganism, enzyme activity (hydrolytic and oxidative) as well as non-enzymatic
browning. The water content of the food can be brought to about 15 to 20 %, if type III
bound water is removed,  depending upon the type of the food.  If type III bound water is
removed, it indicates that the growth of the microorganism, enzymatic activity, non-
enzymatic browning, etc. will be eliminated. 
(iii)Type II bound water
Type II bound water is more firmly bound than the type III, and its activity is further
reduced substantially. It permits enzymatic activity (only hydrolytic enzymatic activity)
and non-enzymatic browning. Removal of this type of water eliminates the possibility of
microbial growth and greatly reduces most of the chemical reaction processes .  (iv)Type I bound water
Type I bound water is more firmly bound than type II and the water activity of this is
further reduced. Even only partial removal of this type of water can be accomplished by
the conventional dehydration processes. The degree of binding, in this case, is such that
any reaction depending upon the solution is so slow that it becomes very difficult to
measure.  At this  stage, there is  an acceleration  of the lipid  phase reaction  such as
oxidative rancidity.
Water activity (aw)
By considering the nature and type of water, another parameter which actually plays an
important role in food is water activity. 
The ratio of partial pressure of water above the sample to the ratio of the vapour pressure
of pure water at the same temperature is defined as water activity. Mathematically, it is
expressed as:
Where p is the partial pressure of water above the food sample and p 0 is the vapour
pressure of pure water at the same temperature. 
Water  activity  can  also  be  defined  as  equilibrium  relative  humidity  expressed  in
decimals. 
Water activity is the intrinsic property of the food sample whereas; equilibrium relative
humidity is a property of the atmosphere in equilibrium with the food sample.
To find out the water activity in terms of equilibrium relative humidity, the experiment
has  to be conducted which becomes  generally  time-consuming and tedious. Even a
smaller sample (1 g) takes a very long time to equilibrate the humidity of the food with
that of the environment. In the case of larger sample, it becomes completely impossible.
The latest instruments made it possible to measure water activity within a short time. 
Water activity and food stability
The water activity influences the stability or storage life of the food material. Food
stability and aw are closely related in many (but not all) situations (Figures A-F). Here,
there are plots of reaction rate against  aw indicating the rates of the microbial growth
processes, enzymatic reactions, oxidation reactions, Maillard reaction like brown colour
development, lysine loss and sorption isotherm, chlorophyll loss, vitamin B 1 loss, etc.
In figure C, the oxidation reaction in the lipid (potato chips), deserves comment. It can
be observed that the lipid oxidation reaction is running or taking place at a comparatively
faster rate when water activity is very low. When water activity increases or addition of
water up to the boundary layer of zone I and zone II, the lipid oxidation comes to the
minimum, and further addition of water or increase in the water activity results into the
increase in the reaction rate of lipid oxidation. When it comes to the boundary zone II
and zone III i.e. intermediate moisture food (IMF) a w range, the rate reaches to themaximum. Although it is not shown in the figure, further increase in the water results
into the decrease of the lipid oxidation reaction.
It has been suggested that, water added in this region of the isotherm may accelerate
oxidation by increasing the solubility of oxygen and by allowing macromolecules to
swell, thereby exposing more catalytic sites.  At still greater aw values (more than about
0.80) the added water may retard rates of oxidation and the suggested explanation is that
dilution of catalysts reduces their effectiveness.
In figure A, D and E which are basically microbial growth, Maillard reaction and other
miscellaneous reaction like chlorophyll loss and vitamin B 1 loss, exhibited the maximum
activity towards the intermediate a w level (0.75 to 0.85).
Two possibilities have been advanced to account for the decline in reaction rate that
sometimes accompanies increase in a w in foods with moderate to high moisture. 
(i)For those reactions in which water is a product, an increase in water
content can result in product inhibition.
(ii)When the water content of the sample is such that solubility, accessibility
(surface of macromolecules), and mobility of rate enhancing constituents are no
longer rate limiting, the further addition of water will dilute the rate enhancing
constituents and decrease the reaction rates.
Further, in almost all chemical reactions shown in Figures A, B, C, D, E, & F, it can be
observed that the typical minimum reaction rate is present towards the first zone i.e. the
interface of the zone I and zone II of the isotherm ( aw   0.2 – 0.3). That means, at this
water activity, the reactions are typically occurring at a very low rate. At this stage, all
the reactions remain minimum. So, this water content of the food corresponding to this
first encountered minimum desorption is called as monolayer moisture content. This
monolayer moisture content provides a good estimate of the water content providing the
maximum stability of the dried product.The following equation can be used to compute the monolayer moisture content
Where m1 is the monolayer moisture content, m is the initial moisture content (g/g dry
matter) of the food and C is a constant, and a w is the water activity.
From the equation, a plot of [a w/m(1-aw)] vs aw known as BET plot should yield a straight
line.
In addition to the chemical reaction and microbial growth, a w also influences the texture
of dry and semi-dry foods . The aw and water content must be maintained to the desired
level. For example, suitably low aw are required if crispiness of crackers, popcorn, potato
chips are to be retained, if caking of granulated sugar, dry milk and instant coffee is to be
avoided, and if stickiness of the hard candy is to be prevented.
The maximum aw that can be tolerated in dry materials without incurring a  loss of
desirable properties range from 0.35 – 0.5, depending on the product. Suitably high a w of
soft textured foods are needed to avoid undesirable hardness.
These two aspects need to be looked into simultaneously i.e. the control of water activity
(increasing, decreasing or maintaining) and its effect on the food quality such as textural,
sensory and organoleptic qualities.