Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 45
Grain Storage
This lecture is on grain storage.
Food grain production in India grew at an average 2% in the last 2 decades, which is
higher than the average rate of population growth of 1.5% in the country.  Total food
grain production in India during 2017-18 was estimated to be 277.49 million tonnes.
Approximately 60 - 70% of food grain produced in the country is stored at home level in
indigenous  storage  structures.  Rest  enters  the  urban  market  channel  and  public
distribution system.  About 10 - 12% of the total food grain produced in India is lost
during storage.  There is a need to take appropriate measures to reduce these losses. To achieve this goal,
proper storage conditions should be maintained to minimize the losses. The various
factors operating in the total value chain of the grains i.e. starting from harvesting, to the
processing and packaging may cause losses. The different types of losses that occur in
case of harvesting include shattering, losses due to molds and birds attack; in transport
include spillage and breakage losses etc. During storage period, the losses may include
insect attack, mites attack, moths, rodents, molds, birds, sprouting, moisture migration,
etc. 
In  stored  grain  ecosystem,  various  conditions  prevail  which  include  the  ambient
conditions, conditions inside the storage atmosphere and conditions of the grain. Thereare different interactions which may facilitate or cause problems in the growth of the
insect and microorganisms etc.
Basically it becomes an important aspect to study about the grain ecosystem i.e. how the
interactions  take  place  between  various  components  including  wind,  solar  radiation
ambient air temperatures. Inside the storage structure, the interactions will influence in
building  up the  favorable  or unfavorable  conditions.  Accordingly  storage facility  is
selected and then desired environment is provided to control the growth of insects, mites,
microorganisms etc. 
Quality before storing the grain, type of the storage bin, use of pesticide and fumigants,
mechanical loss factors, general conditions and location of the storage godowns etc., are
the factors which influence the grain losses in the storage ecosystem. So, it is very
important to maintain a proper ecosystem inside the storage facility to minimize the
effect of factors on the grain loss.
In the above slide, the conditions for safe storage of cereal grains have been shown i.e.
how the shelf life or storage life of the grain varies with the temperature, as well as its
moisture content. If the temperature is more, it has comparatively less shelf life. If
temperature is relatively less, the humidity is also reduced and shelf life will be more. At
12 to 13 % moisture content, shelf life is more than 1 year even over a temperature
ranges of 30-35 C.So, 12 -13 % is safe moisture level for the storage of the cereal grains. To maintain the
storage ecosystem aeration is one important process which involves forcing air through
grain to reduce its temperature in order to prevent them from deterioration. Perforated
ducting on the floor through which air can be blown into the grain can be called as
plenum chamber.
Depending upon the temperature, ambient conditions, etc., one has to have a cold air
system or warm air system. Easy movements of the air facilitate the proper control of the
temperature and therefore, it prevents the insects and mold growth etc. So that becomes
very  important  to  consider  the  storage  ecosystem  as  well  as  the  conditions  for
minimizing the losses or increasing the shelf life.
Appropriate  steps  should  be  taken  like,  the  storage  structures  should  be  used  for
maintaining proper ecosystem in the storage facility. The storage structures should be
elevated and away from the moist places so that the proper maintenance of the safe
moisture inside the storage facility can be facilitated. The storage structures should be air
tight even at loading and unloading ports. It should be rodent proof and clean, and it
should be plastered with an impervious clay layer to avoid termites or insect attacks. The
points that one should remember for safe and scientific storage of food grain are the site
selection that is the proper site conditions in the storage facility etc. The type of storage
structure, cleaning and fumigation, aeration and regular inspection of the grain stock are
important  considerations.  That  is  how  the  quality  is  maintained  inside  the  storage
facility. There are different types of grain storage structures in India; storage structures which are
used traditionally as well as scientific storage structure. The grains are generally stored
either in bags or in bulk. The major types of structures for storage of grains, include
traditional storage structures, improved storage structures, modern storage structures and
farm silos.
The traditional storage structures normally include morai, bukhari, kothara, mud kothi,
muda, kanaja etc. Improved storage structures include pusa bin, brick cement bin, bunker
storage, CAP storage and so on. The modern storage structures include shallow bin and
deep bin. Shed and farm silos include tower silos, horizontal silos, pit silos etc.
Under Indian traditional grain storage structures, one category is the underground storage
structures. Underground storage structures with their local name, the state where they are
popular has been mentioned in the presentation. For example, khani or patra are the
underground  storage  structures  which  are  popular  in  states  like  Orissa  and  Andhra
Pradesh.  They  are  dug  out  with  sides  plastered  with  cow  dung,  they  may  be  of
rectangular shape having the depth of 150 centimeter, sides of 150 to 200 centimeters
and the capacity may vary from 2 to 3 ton.
The khai is popular in Rajasthan. It is some sort of well dug under the ground; it is lined
with stones or sand cement, it may be circular or rectangular,  its depth may be 600 cm,
diameter of 600 cm in case of circular well. The capacity may be up to 60 ton.
Above  ground  traditional  structures  include  the  Khothi  which  is  popular  in  Bihar,
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh etc. They are made from unburnt clay mixed with straw and mud
cow dung or brick and masonary work. They may be cylindrical or rectangular in shape,
their capacity may be varied from 1 to 50 ton and accordingly dimensions may also vary.
Kanagi is popular in the Karnataka or Mysore region or in Maharashtra state, they are
made with Bamboo plastered with clay. They may be cylindrical; their capacity may be 1
to 20 ton. Similarly Kotha is the popular above ground storage structure in the states like
Punjab and U P. They are made from small shed built with brick and masonary work,
they may be cylindrical in shape and its capacity may vary from 5 to 100 tons and
accordingly dimensions vary.The other Indian traditional structures may be gunny bags in which the bags of different
sizes ranging from 35, 50, 75, 100 kg are used with or without plastic lining. They are
mostly used for short term storage of grain, the grains are packed in the bags which are
stacked one above the other as shown in figure. They are normally made with clay, straw
and cow dung.
These  three  materials  in  the  proportion  of  3:3:1  are  used  for  making  them.  These
structures are made of sun dried and then burnt in fire, their life may be 8 to 10 years.
During rainy season, they might develop cracks and the moisture absorption inside the
grain is followed with insect and mold infestation. The other type of Indian traditional
structures may be bamboo structures, split bamboo woven in the form of a cylinder with
wide base and narrow mouth.
Their life span may be 4 to 5 years. The wooden structures are made by using local wood
and they are painted black at the top about 30 cm to 20 cm inlet. At the bottom about 30
cm to 15 cm outlet is provided. The life of these wooden structures may vary from 15 to
20 years depending upon the conditions of the localities, surroundings and their use; they
are neither airtight nor moisture proof.So, other traditional grain storage structures may be kothar, morai, bukhari, mud bins etc.
which are common or popular in different parts of the country. In the above figures, their
layout, how they are made and their dimensions etc. are provided. The bamboo splits or
timber ceiling may be provided, some inner and outer frame works are made of bamboos
and bamboo splits and mud bin made of muds and clay. 
There are different types of Indian traditional structure, but of course, these structures are
not very effective. There are many demerits like the moisture maintenance, aeration are
difficult and then accordingly the grain quality which is kept in these structures is not
very good or sometimes they do not have very good shelf life.The drawbacks of these Indian traditional structures, have been overcome or removed by
suggesting means of the improved storage structures like the pusa bin as shown in the
picture. In this structure, LDPE (low density polyethylene) sandwiched mud bin and
moisture migration during storage is minimal  because of the good insulation properties.
In CAP storage structure, the word 'CAP' is used for cover and plinth, plinth from the
bottom and cover from the top. This type of open storage is considered as transit storage
and serves the purpose of storage of food grains in bags for short period. They are
covered with some plastic or some tarpaulin etc. This type of open storage is considered
as transit storage and serves the purpose of storage of food grains in bags for short
period. 
The other type of storage structure is bunker storage, this type of storage structure is used
for long term storage and comparatively larger volume of the grain is required for
storage. So, from this point of view bunker storage becomes a good structure. 
The coal-tar drum bin is an improved structure made of low cost and easily available
material  coal  tar  drums.  It  was  developed  by  Central  Institute  of  Agricultural
Engineering (CIAE) and the dimensions are provided in the slide. Domestic Hapur bin is
developed  by  Indian  Grain  Storage  Institute  and  made  of  galvanized  iron  and/or
aluminium sheets with capacity 200 to 1000 kg.Modern storage structures are normally used not only in our country, but also in several
other  countries;  globally  they  are used for bulk  storage of grains  and  they include
conventional godowns i.e. sheds designed for bag storage. Godowns side walls are made
of brick or stone and have sloped roofing in asbestos or corrugated galvanized Iron
(CGI) sheets over steel trusses. 
Silos are constructed from steel or reinforced concrete. They may be of 2 types: shallow
bin or deep bin. Squat silos come under shallow bin which has a wall height to diameter
ratio of 0.5 or even less. The vertical silos come under the categories of deep bin. The
line of rupture in case of shallow bin crosses the opposite wall before it touches the free
surface whereas in the case of deep bin the reverse occurs.
The bulk storage of food grain normally in India is covered by various agencies like
Food  Corporation  of  India,  Central  Warehousing  Corporation,  State  Warehousing
Corporations, Grain Marketing Cooperatives, and other state government agencies. The
bulk storage has certain benefits like low running cost as well as maintenance cost of the
grain inside the storage facility etc.
There are various benefits of bulk storage including low running costs, low loss through
spillage  &  rodents,  efficient  and  effective  fumigation,  less  land  area  &  labour
requirements, complete control of aeration, possible to store the grain for longer periods,
possible  to  store  moist  grain  for  short  periods,  possible  to  mechanize
various operations etc.
The layout of the stacks of grain inside the godowns is shown in this figure. There may
be 8 stacks per pile. In this first pile there is 8 stack in other 5 stacks. The manner in
which the stacks are arranged provide the proper strength and also there is proper space
for the aeration inside. Proper space is needed not only for the movement of the air, but
for  the  personal  and  the  machinery  for  the  loading  and  unloading.  It  should  be
maintained leak proof.On-farm storage structures include pit silos, which is a permanent silo of circular deep
well that is lined all around the side and sealed from the bottom so that water may not
rise into it. A 22.5 cm thick wall can be used satisfactorily up to 15 m depth. Corrugated
metal sheet dome or half pitch roof with ample overhang on all the sides are provided.
Trench silos are made in the farm or the field where the soil is deep and water table is
generally low. Tower silos are of cylindrical shape made of masonry wood or metal.
Generally mechanical loader or a large capacity blower etc. might be required to fill the
material or to blow the air etc. to maintain the proper air and temperature inside.Aeration and fumigation is the process of moving air through stored grain at low flow
rates to maintain or improve its quality. Aeration can provide three major benefits in the
storage of grains: it cools the grain and slows down insect activity; aeration prolongs the
effectiveness of pesticides and aeration can provide an appropriate drying function as
well. 
The set of basic design parameters suitable for cooling of dry grains by aeration are: the
air flow rate may be the in the silos point maybe 0.8 liter per second per ton, air flow rate
might be required in the case of shed it may be just double or more than that; the
maximum duct velocity may be 10 meter per second, maximum entry velocity of air intothe grain may be kept as 0.15 meter per second. The most common air flow rate for
aerating paddy ranges from 0.07 to 0.28 cubic meter per minute per ton.
Depending upon the different types of grains, their condition and humidity levels, the
aeration and fumigation system should be decided accordingly.
Then another important aspect is the controlled atmosphere storage (CAS) of grain.
CAS is the method of regulation of the concentrations of atmospheric gases as well as
the temperature and humidity of a storage room and controlling throughout. MAP is a
practice of modifying the composition of internal atmosphere of the packaged grain.
So, if the oxygen chamber is low, respiration is less. At lower rate of respiration, heat
generation will be less and the grain can be cooled for longer time. Similarly in the
modified atmosphere packaging, different bags like poly bags can be used where inside
the bag the atmosphere is maintained and these bags are kept in some sort of storage
environment.In CAS/MAP storage of grains at a temperature of 20 to 290 C is effective in controlling
almost all stages of the 12 most common insect species. From the table I, it is observed
that  oxygen  content  less  than  1  %  controls  all  the  common  insects  and  pests  and
exposure time required to control may be 20 days.
Similarly, among the concentrations of carbon dioxide (40, 60 and 80 percent), 80% CO 2
is most effective in controlling insects and pests for exposure period of 16 days; So,
pressurized carbon dioxide at more than 20 bar for exposure period of 15 days controls
the common insects. CAS/ MAP of grains provides atmosphere lethal to storage insects
and pests within the reasonable time. There is no harmful effect on the grains and
extended period of storage is obtained without any fungal infection.
The various characteristics like genetic characteristics of the material like gelatinization
temperature,  gel  consistency,  aroma,  grain  shape  and  size  bulk  density,  thermal
conductivity,  equilibrium  moisture  content,  color  and  chalkiness,  purity,  damage,
cracked grain, immature grain or milling characteristics particularly in the case of rice
like head yield, whiteness, milling degree are taken as criteria to adjust the quality of the
stored grain or quality of the grain. How these parameters  are changing during the
storage and how they are maintained that should be analyzed properly. Major quality
changes during storage involve loss/gain of weight, changes in physical appearance, loss
of nutritional value, loss of culinary properties.
Different grain quality measurement methods are available such as Visual inspection,
Chemical & microbiological analysis, Insect detection probes, Machine vision system,
Near infra-red (NIR) system, Electrochemical sensors, Electronic nose, Acoustic method
etc. Then  visual  inspection  methods  are  normally  used to  detect  cracked  immature  and
discolored  grains or even to find out insect  infested grains  during storage or other
conditions. 
Foreign matters can be detected by screening the grains in sieves consisting of perforated
metal plates. The foreign materials such as stones, iron pieces which may come from
different harvesting and drying machines can be removed by using magnetic separators.Similarly, there are different types of moisture meters are available in the market like
NIR based moisture sensors, infra rate based moisture rate sensors and other sensing
probes etc. as well as some chemical methods are also available. Although the chemical
methods provide good reliable data which is used commonly in the laboratory, but it is a
time consuming process.
Some factors should be considered in selecting a moisture meter such as resolution
repeatability,  reliability,  stability,  range  of  commodity,  range  of  moisture  content,
sample size, sample weighing, ambient effect etc.