Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 46
Disinfestation of Grains
In this lecture, disinfestation of grains will be studied.
There are different ways by which grains can be disinfested like physical methods,
chemical methods as well as biological methods. The physical methods generally are
costlier process, biological methods are not very useful for bulk storage of grains, they
can be done for small quantity grains. 
The most commonly used methods for disinfestation of grains include chemical methods,
i.e. the contact of the infested grain with the some chemicals, insecticides or it may be
gas fumigation. But, these chemical methods also have certain disadvantages like they
are effective on fully developed insects, they have very little or almost no effect on the
eggs or larvae of insects. Insects become resistant to the use of chemicals particularly
upon repeated use. Some residues of the product though not highly toxic may linger in
foods for some time.There is a continuous hunt for new fumigants which are environmental friendly, which
are highly efficient on all the stages of insects, which have no cross resistance to existing
fumigants, and which cause effective suppression of progeny and all the forms of insects
whether it is larvae, egg, pupae and so on and ultimately it should be cost effective.
In this regard, ozone becomes a very potential fumigant for use in grain for the killing of
insects or disinfestation of grains. Ozone or trioxygen is an inorganic molecule with the
chemical structure O 3. Ozone is created in the atmosphere when the sun’s rays split
oxygen molecule into single atoms. These atoms combine with the oxygen to form a
three oxygen molecule which is called ozone. Why ozone has been promoted? Because it is the most powerful oxidizing agent, it
instantly  destroyes  microbes  and  insects,  it  is  environment  friendly,  it  has  higher
oxidation reduction potential than that of general chemical oxidants like chlorine etc. It
does not affect product taste and it is not harmful to anyone; does not give harmful by-
products.
Milestones in ozone treatment of food products: In the year 1893, ozone was first time
used as a disinfectant in drinking water, in 1909, it was used as food preservative for the
cold storage of meat. In the year 1939, it was discovered that ozone prevents the growth
of yeast and mold during the storage of fruits.In June 2001, food and drug administration of the United States approved the use of
ozone as an antimicrobial agent for the treatment in storage and processing of foods in
gas and aqueous phases. Same year in the month of December, the US Department of
Agriculture Food Safety and Inspections Service which is commonly called as USDA
FSIS, it approved the use of ozone in contact with meats and poultry.
Ozone is now seen as a very effective alternative to chemical and other fumigants in the
grain because it is considered to be a non thermal method, it results into the maximum
retention of nutrition i.e. disinfestation by the ozone does not have any significant effect
on  the  nutritional  components  present  into  the  food.  It  has  worldwide  acceptance,
provides good safety attributes to the treated materials, maintains quality and health
attributes  and  of  course,  more  importantly  it  is  considered  to  be  an  environmental
friendly technology. Ozone is a tri-atomic  oxygen formed by addition  of a free radical  of oxygen to a
molecular  oxygen.  It  is  partially  soluble  in  water  and  its  solubility  varies  with
temperature; the half-life of ozone is about 20 to 30 min in distilled water at 20 ᵒC. It is a
potent antimicrobial agent against bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoa and also effective
against the bacterial and fungal spores. So, all sorts of microorganism including their
spores can be inactivated or destroyed by ozone.
In this table, the detailed characteristic properties of the ozone is given. Ozone generation methods
Since ozone cannot be stored or conveniently purchased by gram, pound, gallon or tons
etc. it must be produced on site as needed where needed and when needed.
There are different methods for the ozone generation or production of ozone and those
include corona discharge method, electrolytic method, photochemical method and radio
chemical method. And among all this, the corona discharge is the most acceptable and
cost effective method which is used commercially for generation of ozone for various
food and other applications.
The photochemical method of ozone formation is shown in this picture. It is the natural
production of ozone either by lightning or UV radiations. UV rays of the solar radiations
split oxygen molecule by lightning and convert O 2 into (O + O). These O combine with
another O2 and gives the O3 molecule. So, this is how this photochemical method results
into the formation of ozone naturally.
In the corona discharge method, the dust free, oil free or an oxygen containing gas
mixture or even pure oxygen is passed through the space of a high energy electrical field
between two electrodes and these two electrodes are separated by a dielectric material
and which is usually a glass. One electrode is high tension electrode, the other electrode
is a low tension electrode and there is a tube through which the oxygen is passed and
discharged. This O 2 in the discharge tube is converted into O 3 and the heat released is
dissipated from the system. One electrode is a grounded medium and the other is a
dielectric one, so in this way the ozone is generated from the O 2 gas or pure gas mixtures.The ozone formation reaction during electrolysis of water can be seen from the slide. By
electrolysis or electrolytic splitting of water, ozone is generated.
The radio chemical method has high energy irradiation of oxygen which produces ozone,
this is not yet used commercially for potable or waste water treatment. In the future there
may be conceivably a good use of excess fissionable material but, currently there is
much more fear of irradiation than that of bad water. The excess fissionable materials are
considered to be just a hazardous waste instead of a potentially valuable resource. 
May be in the days to come this can become popular when the radiations hazard etc. are
taken care of or it is made sure that by radio chemical methods, i.e. ozone will be
generated and the generated ozone is safe from radio activity point of view.Components of an ozone generation unit
The components of an ozone generation unit are an oxygen tank, ozone monitor or
analyzer, ozone generator chamber and then a flow rate meter. This is a set where ozone
generated from this system is allowed to pass through an assembly or in a column which
contains orange juice or some other samples.
The ozone comes in contact with some other biological material may be organic or
inorganic molecules. The O part of the O 3 which is quite unstable combines with the
other organic or inorganic molecule with which it comes in contact and causes the
oxidation of that molecule. And this oxidation causes the destruction (see figure) i.e. the
O part attaches itself to the bacterial cell right and the O 3 reverts to O2.It rather affects the physiological and other processes and may be it causes the lysis of
the cell components and ultimately after sometime the cell dies. Similarly when the
insects etc. inhale ozone, their respiratory tracts are destroyed and because of this, they
die.
Here in this picture, the rice grain observed with a stereoscopic microscope subjected to
atmospheric air in the case of A and then subjected to ozone gas for different periods of
exposure time and the effect can be seen.
The ozone has been reported to be effective against almost all varieties of insects which
cause infestation of food grains like wheat, paddy, rice, maize, etc. Ozone has much
higher oxidation potential, than those of the common chemical oxidants or pro oxidants
like peroxides, hyper chlorides, free chlorine etc. and because of this, it is effective in the
microbial inactivation as well as insects killing.In this slide, dose and exposure time of ozone for disinfestation of major food grains
reported  in  various  researches  are  summarized  in  a  table.  Several  researchers  have
reported that doses from 50 to around 120 ppm of ozone from may be 1.2 to 4 days
resulted in the mortality of various insects from about 67 to 100 % in the grains like
wheat,  corn,  paddy,  etc.  The  different  insects  even  can  be  treated  and  disinfested
successfully by optimizing or by using different combinations of ozone. And considering
other factors like moisture content of the grain etc., one can get desired mortality.
Here it is a system proposed for arrangement of ozone fumigation in grain bin is taken
from the literature. In the lower part of the picture, there is an ozone generation unit.
Then, the generated ozone gas is sent through pipe to the storage bin from the bottom.From both the sides of the bin the air is blown; this turbulence of air mixes the ozone
well with the air and then this air and ozone mixture passes evenly through the grain that
ultimately disinfests and kills the insect. The ozone and air safely exits the grain bin. So,
this type of set ups can be effectively utilized for disinfestation of grains, in larger
storage bins or silos etc.
Ozone treatment of wheat : A case study
This is a case study shown using the results of experiments conducted in our laboratory.
Some common insects of different stages/life cycles; eggs, pupae, larvae and adults in
different concentrations were grown in grains conditioned to particular moisture content
under controlled conditions. Counting the number of insect etc. by appropriate methods,
the level of infestation was known i.e. the number of insects initially present in the
known weight of wheat grain. The wheat grain samples infested with known level of
infestation were treated with the ozone gas (see figure). The mortality rate was calculated
using formula:
100 (%)
00




NNN
MortalityfResponse surfaces showing mortality of insects by ozone treatment are shown in slide.
The effect of ozone concentration and moisture content of the grain and exposure time
and  ozone  concentration  on  egg  mortality  is  depicted.  All  these  responses  have
significant effect on the mortality of the egg.
Similarly the effects of ozone concentration, moisture content of the grain, exposure time
on the larvae mortality are significant. Depending upon the conditions of the grain its
temperature, moisture content, concentration of ozone and exposure time, varying degree
of mortality up to 100 % were found.This response surface graph shows the effect of ozone concentration, moisture content
and exposure time on adult mortality.
The response surface shows the effect of ozone concentration, moisture content and
exposure time on pupae present in wheat grain.Regression  models  for  prediction  and  validation  of  responses  like  mortality,  adult
mortality, pupae mortality, larvae mortality and egg mortality of ozone treatment are
given  in  slide  which  can  be  referred.  The  predicted  values  are  close  with  the
experimental values. In fact, residuals are very less ranging from 0.4 to 2.9 maximum.
So, this shows that the models are highly accurate and their prediction level is very high.
Case study 2 : (Mason et al., 2012)
Mason et al. in 2012 reported that 5 ppm ozone was applied for 5 days to different
species of insects in maize; some time 100% mortality was achieved in 3 or 5 days
depending upon level of infestation of grain, conditions and type of the life stages of the
insect.Ozone  was  applied  between  10 to  50  ppm  continuously  in  order  to verify  it  after
exposure to ozone, whether insects manage to reproduce or not. In sample 1, 4 days in
contact with 10 ppm ozone resulted in 100% mortality means the insects were not able to
reproduce once after they were treated with ozone. Similarly in other case also in second
sample one day in contact with 50 ppm of ozone resulted in 100% mortality. So, ozone
treatment of grains was found to be effective in disinfecting them.
Effect of ozone treatment on grain (wheat) quality
•Ozone treatment modifies starch and protein properties by oxidation.
•Ozone reduces starch concentration, 1000-grain weight of wheat.
•Ozone enhances concentration, but reduces yield of several minerals and protein.
•Ozone treatment under suitable conditions strengthens the dough.
•Ozone treatment enhances shelf-life of grain products.
•Some baking properties are positively affected by ozone.