Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 40
Shelf Life Extension of Fruits & Vegetables (Respiration & Ripening)
This lecture is devoted to the principles of shelf life extension of fruits and vegetable
particularly the respiration and ripening processes.
In this slide, an overall picture or current scenario of fruits and vegetables in India is
given. In the first picture, production in million metric ton is given from 2009 and
onwards. Total production in the year 2016-17 of vegetables in India was 176177 million
metric tons and this accounts for 4.2 % rise over the production that was in 2015-16.
Similarly fruits total production was 93707 million metric tons in the year 2016-17 and
this was about 3.9 % rise over the production that was in 2015-16.
So,  the  production  scenario  shows  that  the  availability  of  the  fruits  and  vegetable
calculated on the basis of the production projected availability is much higher than that
which is recommended for consumption. So, as far as the production is concerned, we
are self-sufficient; we have sufficient amount of fruits and vegetable even which is
required for our daily consumption. But the data says that the actual consumption is less
than that of the recommended consumption.So, the main reason for this  is the losses which occur in fruits  and vegetables  i.e.
according to the data, on an average around 18-20 % of the horticultural produced fruits
and vegetables get destroyed in the value chain. It results into the significant loss in the
economy of the country. The data says that more than 50000 crore rupees worth fruits
and vegetables are annually lost from the country. Export is significantly less of course,
in the recent years there have been increase in the exports of fruits and vegetable and
their products. But at present the major focus is to bring down the losses of fruits and
vegetables and then, it may result into availability of the more material. So, the actual
consumption as well as the export of the processed or even whole fruits and vegetables
will increase. 
Respiration
The major processes controlling the fruits and vegetable  their shelf life include the
respiration and ripening. 
•Respiration is a metabolic process that provides the energy for plant biochemical
processes.
•Various substrates used in important metabolic pathways in the plant are formed
during respiration.
•Aerobic  respiration  consists  of  oxidative  breakdown  of  organic  reserves  to
simpler molecules, including CO 2 and water, with release of energy.•The organic substrates broken down in this process may include carbohydrates,
lipids, and organic acids. The process consumes O 2  in a series of enzymatic
reactions.
•Glycolysis,  the  tricarboxilic  acid  cycle,  and  the  electron  transport
system are the metabolic pathways of aerobic respiration.
Respiration rate
The respiration rate is the rate at which the respiration process is taking place that will
influence both the ripening process as well as the shelf life of the fruit or the changes
which take place in the fruits and vegetables. The study of respiration rate becomes an
important  aspect.  So,  the  rate  of  respiration  is  expressed  either  in  terms  of  O 2
consumption i.e. the consumption of oxygen rate at which the plant materials consume
oxygen or CO2 production i.e. the rate at which they produce carbon dioxide. So, the
usual  methods  of  respiration  rate  determination  include  the  closed  system  or  static
system; the flowing or flushed system and the permeable system.Closed system method
•A gas-tight container of known volume is filled with product and the container,
having ambient air as the initial atmosphere, is closed. It is made air tight and it is
connected to the head space gas analyzer.
•Changes in the concentration of O 2 and CO2 over a certain period of time are
measured  and  used  to  estimate  respiration  rates  as  per  the  equation  that  is
provided here in the slide.          
Flow through system
•The  product  is  enclosed  in  an  impermeable  container  through  which  a  gas
mixture flows at a constant rate.
•The  respiration  rates  are  calculated  from  the  absolute  differences  in  gas
concentrations between the outlet and the inlet when the system reaches steady
state. 
There are expressions for respiration rate of O 2 or CO2 given; they are calculated from
the absolute differences in the gas concentration.
Permeable system
•A package of known dimensions and film permeability is filled with product.
•The steady-state concentrations of O 2 and CO2 are determined and a mass balance
is performed on the system in order to estimate the respiration rates.Respiration quotient
•The ratio of CO2 produced to O2 consumed is known as the respiratory quotient
(RQ).
•The RQ is normally assumed to be equal to 1.0 if the metabolic substrates are
carbohydrates.
The total oxidation of 1 mol of hexose consumes 6 mol of O 2 and produces 6 mol
of CO2.
•If the substrate is a lipid, the RQ is always lower than unity, because the ratio
between C and O in lipids is lower than the ratio in carbohydrates.
•If the substrate is an acid, the RQ is higher than unity. 
•The normal RQ values in the literature are reported as ranging from 0.7 to 1.3
•The RQ is much greater than 1.0 when anaerobic respiration takes place.
•In  fermentative  metabolism,  ethanol  production  involves
decarboxylation of pyruvate to CO 2 without O2 uptake.Horticultural  produces  can  be  divided  into  two  major  groups  according  to  their
regulatory mechanism underlying their ripening process which majorly govern their shelf
life. On the basis of their respiratory behaviour and the rate at which they respire, the
fruits and vegetable or other horticultural produces are grouped into climacteric and non-
climacteric.
The  climacteric  commodities  continue  to  ripen  after  harvest.  Examples  are  banana,
mango, papaya, avocado, guava etc. Non-climacteric horticultural produces generally do
not ripen after harvest and example of this category are citrus fruit, strawberry, grapes
and almost all vegetable.
Factors affecting respiration
•Vegetables  include  a  great  diversity  of  plant  organs  (viz.  roots,  tubers,
seeds,  bulbs,  fruits,  sprouts,  stems  and  leaves)  that  have  different
metabolic activities and consequently di erent respiration rates. ﬀ
•Even  di erent  varieties  of  the  same  produce  can  exhibit  di erent ﬀ ﬀ
respiration rates. 
•Various  factors  that  affect  the  respiration  rate  of  include
temperature;  type,  variety  &  maturity  of  the  commodity;
climacteric  behaviour,  presence  or  absence  of  O 2,  CO2 &  C2H4;
growth  regulators  and  other  factors  such  as  stress,  injuries,
etc.). 
•In general, non-climacteric commodities  have higher respiration rates  in the early
stages of development that steadily decline during maturation. 
•Respiration rates of climacteric commodities also are high early in development
and decline until a rise occurs that coincides with ripening or senescence. 
•Climacteric products exhibit a peak of respiration and ethylene (C 2H4) production
associated with senescence or ripening.Ripening
•Ripening is a phase in maturation process of fruits and vegetables. 
•As the fruits mature, their tissue undergoes innumerable changes ranging from
texture, color, aroma, composition and/or nutritional changes. 
•The  terms  ripening  and  maturity  are  sometimes  used  alternatively  and  are
regarded as the state when the fresh produce becomes appropriately suitable for
harvesting as well as for eating. 
•Though the degree of ripeness has remarkable clarity in terms of visible changes
including color, it is sometimes ambiguous to define the right stage of desired
ripeness of the fresh produce, depending on the human choice. 
•As in the case of a fruit like tomato, ripeness may depend on the degree of
sweetness or acidity an individual may find attractive. Some people might like
sweet taste of the tomatoes, some people like good red color of the tomato, while
others may like that acidity of the tomato. So, depending upon the individual
perceptions, one can accordingly define the correct stage of ripening.
•In  contrast  to  the  fruits,  vegetables  do  not  possess  any  obvious
changes and maturity is exceedingly difficult to define. 
•However,  vegetables  during  the  maturation  period  exhibit
changes in the chemical and physical structure; textural changes like softening,
lignification or hardening of the vegetable also may take place.
Changes that occur during ripening are 
Changes in colour.
Softening and associated alteration in texture.
Production of volatiles and flavour compounds.
Changes in sugar and organic acid metabolism.
Changes in membrane permeability which releases compartmentalized enzymes,
that facilitate the ripening process or other physiological processes.Increase in enzyme  synthesis; new enzymes  or hormones  etc. also might be
produced during the ripening process.
Other  changes  associated  with  the  ripening  may  include  changes  in
carbohydrates, pectin, organic acids.
The respiration rate is directly related to the shelf life of the materials. In this graph, the
shelf life of some fruits or vegetable and their relationship with the respiratory behavior
is shown. The mushroom which has got a high rate of respiration, it has comparatively
lower shelf life. The potato which has a comparatively lower rate of respiration among
all these commodities has a high or long shelf life.
Problems in post harvest storage of fruits
In this slide, graph between respiratory behaviour and days after harvest is shown. This
has been explained earlier. If the rate of respiration can be decreased, the shelf life of
products can be extended. The farmers treat crops with some growth regulators i.e. the
hormones which are ripening hormone like ethylene, etc. In the process some time even
synthetic fungicides like benomyl, thiabendazole etc. are treated. These are carcinogenic
material and they produce some undesirable changes. Shelf life may increase, but the
commodity  may  not  be  safe  for  the  consumption.  So,  the  normal  formula  is  to
manipulate  the  rate  of  respiration  by  other  means  such  as  gaseous  composition,
temperature, etc. Particularly the respiration rate of the fruit decreases with the decrease
in  storage  temperature  and  oxygen  concentration  and  increase  in  carbon  dioxide
concentration of the storage environment. So, by manipulating the carbon dioxide and
oxygen compositions in the environment surrounding these fruits and vegetables as well
as by manipulating the temperature lowering down the temperature, the respiration rate
can be reduced, the slope of this curve can be reduced and accordingly shelf life can be
extended.  And that is the basic principle which is followed for the extension of shelf life
of fruits and vegetables.
Chilling injury
If the fruits and vegetables are not stored in proper manner, it may result into different
metabolic disorders and one major disorder is the chilling injury.•The exposure of climacteric fruits to low-temperature storage (below 13 °C)
causes  chilling  injury.  For  example;  blackening  of  banana  when  kept  in
refrigerator.
•The primary injury is caused by two mechanisms,   
Excess production of ROS including superoxide anion (O2−), hydroxyl
radical (OH)   and hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2), which further increases the
production  of  O2−.  The  accumulated  ROS  changes  the  membrane
organization, such as decrease in unsaturated fatty acids of membrane
lipids  and  accumulation  of  membrane  lipid  oxidation  related
malondialdehyde by-products.
Enzymatic  oxidation  of  phenolic  substrates  by  PPO  to  form  black
or brown products.
In this slide, the different storage disorders of fruits like soft scald, low oxygen injury,
internal CO2 injury, superficial scald, low temperature breakdown, external CO 2 injury
etc. can be seen. Extension of shelf life of fruits & vegetables 
There are different methods for manipulation of the rate of the respiration of fruits and
vegetable. Methods for extension of shelf life include modified atmosphere packaging or
controlled atmospheric storage, intelligent packaging, active packaging, edible coating
etc. 
Controlled / modified atmosphere storage
Control atmosphere is the alteration of the natural gaseous environment and maintenance
of this atmosphere at pre specified conditions throughout the storage time whereas, themodified atmosphere is the initial alteration of the gaseous environment in the immediate
vicinity of a stored and packaged product.
Modified atmosphere packaging: When the commodities respire, they consume oxygen,
give carbon dioxide and also some water is produced. So, it means in the atmosphere i.e.
in the vicinity of the fruits and vegetables, the environment changes; oxygen normally
becomes less, carbon dioxide and water concentration becomes more.
In modified  atmosphere packaging, suitable  packaging material like semi permeable
films etc. are taken to pack these fruits or vegetables. They need to be selected in a
proper manner having suitable permeability to oxygen, carbon dioxide and water vapor
so that they allow the controlled transport of these gases and a desired O 2, CO2 and water
composition is maintained inside the environment around the packet.The combination technology is another novel concept i.e. the combination of active
packaging and controlled atmospheric storage. Figure can be seen and understood.
For the controlled atmosphere, carbon dioxide has to be increased from 0.03 to 10 % and
oxygen has to be brought from 20.9 to 10 %. The concentration gradient is very high; it
may take long time for the establishment of desired environment inside the package. It
may take even longer time for equilibration and during this period itself the fruits and
vegetable may have significant changes; their quality might change. There is a condition where by other mechanical means like the atmosphere surrounding
gaseous composition in the storage atmosphere is changed. So, it takes comparatively
lesser time and the required equilibrium gaseous composition is achieved.
Edible coating
In the edible coating some food grade materials are applied on the surface of the fruit or
vegetable. The basic principle here is to make sure that the movement of the gases i.e.
oxygen  from  outside  to  inside  and  CO 2 from  inside  to  outside  is  controlled  and
accordingly the rate of respiration is controlled and so is the shelf life. 
Equilibrium  humidity  packaging  
Another  important  concept  is  equilibrium  humidity  packaging.  When  the  fruit  is
respiring, water is getting released and if the outside humidity is also more, then water
from inside may not go out. So, from outside it may come in also, it may result into the
condensation of the moisture inside the packet and this condensed moisture may act as a
vector for the bacterial growth and fungal growth etc. resulting into the spoilage of the
fruits and vegetable.
So, to design equilibrium humidity packaging for fruits and vegetable, it is essential to
have the information about the rate of water evaporation from the fruit surface, water
vapor transmission rate of the packaging film, equilibrium between inside and outside
environment, etc.