Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 49
Detection of Spoilage in Food Grains
Detection of spoilage in food grains will be discussed in this lecture.
The  grains  are  harvested  from  the  field  at  different  conditions  depending  upon  the
agronomical practices and other environmental conditions at the time of harvesting. The grain
may contain  less or more moisture, also may contain  loads  of microorganisms  such as
bacteria, mold and theirs spores, etc. and all of these spoil the grain.
The molds associated with the cereal grain spoilage, which are the major causative agents
field mold are those which invade the grain, before its harvest, they attack the grain in the
field. Storage molds, generally invade the grain during its post harvest operation like drying,
handling, storage, if they found, the conditions in the grain favorable for their growth. 
The  Fusarium and  Penicillium, are the two important molds which attack and grow in the
cereal grains and thus spoil their quality. Fusarium is a field mold that normally invades and
affects the grain in the field itself before harvest. Penicillium is a storage mold. Apart from
this mold growth, the food grains are also spoiled due to insect infestation. These mold,
bacteria,  insect etc. may invade them in various  factors might facilitate  their growth or
multiplication in the grain.Considering the various factors, the major one is the moisture level in the grain, the physical
damage to the grain, if any and importantly the temperature of the grain in the storage
environment. They bring about different changes in different attributes of grain. So, these
attributes many a times are quite often used to detect and identify the spoilage level in the
grain.
As earlier discussed, the grain spoilage vectors are rodents, bird, insect, fungus, moisture and
temperature etc. The picture describes that the storage month that is starting 0 at the top and
12 months in the bottom. And x-axis with the grain moisture content, may be initially it may
be 15% at the time of harvest. Then the grain moisture content may increase from 15 to 22%
and range is taken and the storage month 0 to 12.When there is a high moisture content in the
field at the time of harvest, the field mycoflora, fusarium, which is indicated by the green line
also increases. Then in the drying operations etc. after it is harvested, when the moisture
content is brought down the other conditions  in the grain are the factors, they may be
controlled. Some other intermediate flora, which is shown here in the white box of the
various microorganisms etc. also affect the process. 
Then  finally,  when  during the  storage  period,  further  again  starting  from  less  moisture
content to higher moisture content that is when the grain is put inside the storage bin, it may
have  comparatively  lower  moisture  content.  And  then  during  the  period,  if  the  proper
conditions are not maintained inside, the grain moisture content may go high. All this will
influence the storability of grains. This gives the microbial ecology system present inside thestorage environment, and which ultimately multiply in the grain and produce undesirable
changes.
According to the Canadian Grain Commission, the five common mistakes which is done
which results into the grain spoilage include the point of too much grain loaded in the bin to
properly dry and store i.e the density of the grain is high. Otherwise, the removal of the heat
of the respiration may not be proper, even or uniform throughout. The grains which are on the
top or on the sides may have different environment than those which are in the interior.
The grain temperature should not be very high, otherwise it may result in to the scorching of
the grain. When the grains form a dome instead of settling level in the bin, then again is not a
good practice.
Another points includes the grain harvested in hot weather and stored without aeration. If the
aeration is not proper, then it may serve as a vector for the mold growth or other. The bins are
left uninspected for weeks at a time. The maximum grain drying temperature for different
purposes that is for the seed purposes, for the commercial use food and seed purposes have
recommended storage temperature.When the grains are stored in the storage facility, the proper aeration and proper temperature
should be maintained. This could be done by appropriate fumigation or disinfestation method
which means the proper conditions, inside the storage facility must be maintained to keep the
grain for longer period of time.
Depending on outside atmosphere, one has to make the arrangement either blow hot or cool
air inside the storage facility. And the grains should be kept in such a way that at least almost
individual  grains should have a similar environment.  If proper conditions  are not there,
insects may grow and produce heat by respiration. Also the grain respires, they produce heat
which causes hot spot. This hot spot means that grain temperature at the interior or inside the
grain becomes high.
This high grain temperature causes some moisture to evaporate. The moisture evaporates, and
although the surface of the outside temperature is lower for the grains which are in the side, a
temperature gradient is formed, this may lead to the condensation of the moisture. And the
moisture content increases with the condensation. The higher moisture content may result
into more humidity resulting into the sprouting of the grain. So, the sprouting or the damage
due to moisture form hot spot and ultimately grains may spoil either by fungus or insects.The effects of spoilage factors on grain quality are presented in the slide. All these changes
may lead to grain degradation which may lose its marketability, and even rejected by seed
germinators. It may not be accepted by the factory for its conversion into different products.
One  should  take  appropriate  measures  to  maintain  proper  conditions  inside  the  storage
environment.  By  intermittently  taking  samples  and  analyzing  and  using  proper  control
measures, maintenance of proper conditions should be ensured. 
For example, maintaining and monitoring the changes caused in the grain due to the change
in the temperature,  moisture,  color, etc. There may be even carbon dioxide  production,
certain physiological changes in the grain, even reduction in germinability, changes in the
proximate composition, presence of visible insects like mold colonies, fungi, etc.Microbiological changes can be found out; even mycotoxin molds etc. may grow, they may
develop some toxin in the food material, like mycotoxins which are common problems in the
biology of the oilseeds. 
The temperature sensing devices are used for spoilage detection. For sensing the changes in
the grain these sensors are based upon the temperature changes or the maintenance of the
proper temperature inside the storage facility of the grain. Different thermo temperature
sensing  and  maintenance  devices  which  are  available  include  thermostat  sensor,
thermocouples etc. Different digital temperature sensors etc. are used  for silos, bins, and for
small  scale,  or  large  scale  measurement  and  even  for  online  measurements.  These  are
available plenty in the market, and they have various application.
There  are  bin  thermometers,  thermocouples,  thermistors,  temperature-sensing  cables,
thermography, temperature sensing paint and label or even vertically inserted rods sometimes
used to measure the increase in the temperature by insertion of the rod or just some other
device to measure the temperature inside the grain. So, there are various method, they can be
used to make sure that the desired level of temperature is maintained; and once if the desired
temperature is maintained, obviously the spoilage can be prevented.Thermal  imaging  for  spoilage  detection  in  the  stored  grain  is  another  major  upcoming
technology  which  is  now  being  practiced  by  agencies  in  various  countries.  Like
thermography, by taking the images of the grains or of the materials, which are changed due
to effect due to the temperature variation is detected. So, thermography is the science of
producing pictures from invisible thermal radiations. There is a temperature variations in
stored products within storage environment and are converted into images and viewed and
recorded by photography. The given pictures clearly shows the difference in the temperature.
Regarding the food storage and grain storage there are different types of moisture sensors
available. Even quick moisture meter that is online monitor meter probes are there which can
be directly inserted, and it gives the details about the moisture content of the grain.NIR or IR moisture analyzers are used as quick moisture meters. Normally drying ovens are
used for moisture determination. If the moisture content is not up to the mark; obviously it
will lead to the spoilage.
For selecting the type of moisture meter to be used there are different factors, which one can
take into consideration include resolution, repeatability, reliability, stability, moisture content,
atmospheric condition, sample size and weight etc.
Then another parameter which can be used to detect the spoilage by color measurement.
Insect or fungal growth is indicated by colour changes in the food material. Because even the
heat produced in the grain can cause the change in the color. This color change can be
detected  various spectrophotometers, color analyzers  and hunter lab calorimeter etc. Fordetection of the color calculating the l, a, b value and then on the basis of this one can find the
visible change in the grain. Change in the quality of the food is indicated by changes in color,
for example the dullness of the seeds indicate the likelihood of mold growth or such other
spoilage problems.
If the grain becomes brown or black accompanied by a tobacco like odor indicate the bin-
burn that is the grain temperature inside the bin was too high and thus the grains got an
undesirable  burnt  color.  Similarly,  black  vacuolated  seeds,  usually  fused  together  and
accomplished by a fire color indicate the fire-burn inside the grain. So, by measuring the
color of the grain one can find out whether the quality of the grain is good or bad or there is
any deviation in the quality or the spoilage level. 
Similarly, the odor measurement can be another criteria for detection of the spoilage e.g by
E-nose which basically analyzes the flavor volatiles etc. When the microorganism grow and
insect  consume  the  grains,  they  produce  secondary  metabolites  and  even  the  moisture
changes etc. They may cause hydrolysis of the products either by chemical or bybiological
means led by enzymatic action and many secondary metabolites may be produced in the
grain, and which gives different colors and many a times foul smells are sensed or noticed.
The volatiles generated during the storage are generally aliphatic alcohols, amine compounds,
ketones, another carbonyl compounds, may be some cases in little more or less. These odor
compounds can be analyzed qualitatively or quantitatively using systems like E-nose, the
recent  studies  which  has  metal  oxide  sensors  or  there  are  certain  systems  which  usepiezoelectric sensor or MOSFET or gas sensors in the case of gas chromatography is a newly
developed era. So, they can be used to realize the flavor or flavoring compounds, and then
deviation in the flavor might indicate the spoilage of the grain. E-nose are now commonly
used for detecting the odor.
Similarly, the carbon dioxide sensing devices can also be used to detect the spoilage. Like
when the grains respire, the carbon dioxide is produced, and the level of carbon dioxide in the
storage facility may go high. So, this high level of carbon dioxide, if it goes beyond a certain
level, it may cause the spoilage or it may lower down the oxygen and can adversely affect the
respiration leading to spoilage.
CO2  level, and its detection can be used as indicator for the grain spoilage. For example, in
the atmospheric air the carbon dioxide levels, which are normally 0.03 percentage. So, if the
level of CO2 inside the storage atmosphere is found to the range of 0.08 to 0.1 percent means
that is a slight accumulation of carbon dioxide. So, this is a stage where the spoilage might
get initiated at a low level. But, if this CO 2 grows in the storage atmosphere more than 2%, it
might indicate there is a serious spoilage, similarly the CO 2 level 5 to 7 % indicates that the
hot spots are generated inside the grain and it is further problematic. One of the techniques is by measuring the physiological changes in the grain or such other
materials  to  detect  the  spoilage,  because  deterioration  of the  seeds  can  change  in their
physiology and physiological reactions, even some of these changes are readily detectable
and are indicative of the occurring spoilage in the grain. For example, fat acidity value (FAV)
is a measure of the chemical changes occurring within the deteriorating seed. If the FAV goes
beyond that standard limit, it indicates that is the grain is going to spoil.
Electrical conductivity is a measure of the condition of the cell membrane of the seeds,
headspace  condensation  can  also  be  monitored  to  detect  the  grain  spoilage.  When  the
microorganism grow or other factors cause, it may bring about certain physiological behavior
and which ultimately may result into various process, this can be analyzed by  standard
laboratory methods or probes.One of the major physiological change is the germination. In spoiled grain, the germination
ability may get reduced, the test is important. If the grain is stored for seed purposes, its
viability should be tested, its germination should be intact. The presence of the sprouted
grains often with green vertical source, and the center surface of the bulk indicate that the
seed moisture content is more particularly in the uppermost layer. So seed germination is
more than sufficient to support mold growth.
Sprouted grains also indicate poor air circulation in the bin and leaking groups, and are often
associated with the development of an upper bridge across the bin. The presence of such a
bridge can be detected by grain probes. There are different tests which are used to find out,
whether the seeds are viable or its viability is completely lost and then it can be asserted that
the seed is spoiled.When the grains are infested, contaminated, microorganisms grow and the insects eat away
that starch components which bring about changes in the grain and nutritional value. The
protein both quantitatively and qualitatively can be changed, sugars may get changed that is
oligosaccharides, polysaccharides, etc. The changes in their proximate value like moisture,
protein, fat, ash and carbohydrate of the fresh grain is different from those of the spoiled
grain and all these are analyzed by lab standards. If the free fatty acids present in the oils and
fat and triglyceride level changes, it indicates that the acid goes beyond a certain level and the
grain can be considered spoiled.
Similarly if the moisture content increases beyond a certain level, it becomes good vector for
microorganism. Like for example, 14% is the safe storage moisture content. When the sugars
are present in the form of starch in the grains, the microorganism cannot consume that starch,
but when grain moisture content increases to more than 16% then the starch is hydrolyzed
into glucose, and then this glucose can be easily consumed by the microorganisms, and then
various  product  like  alcohol  and  other  products  are  formed.  The  starch  composition  is
changed, the alcohol content increase. There are different standard methods, and standard
analytical  procedures  discussed in the earlier  class. FTIR and FTNIR methods  or other
methods can be used to quickly determine the characteristics and give a good idea of the
quality of the grain.There are various methods in the entomology. There are different traps which are available
now for use, for the detection and identification of the insects. Like pit fall traps, TNAU
insect trap, TNAU insect removal bins are used by which the insects can be removed. And
then the bins can be used for quantification of the level of infestation that is the amount of
insects present in the grain. The pheromone traps, bucket insect trap UV-light traps, barlese
funnels, etc. can be used to detect the infestation level.
Then acoustic methods are there which even some agencies use it that has a good potential of
use for detection of insect infestation level. This acoustical detection methods use insect-
feeding  sounds to automatically  monitor both internal  as  well  as external  grain feeding
insects. Insects hidden inside kernels can be detected acoustically by amplification and filtering of the
movement  and  feeding  sounds.  The  general  acoustic  sensors,  which  are  used  may  be
accelerometers, piezoelectric sensors, microphones, ultrasonic transducers etc. that is some
sound attract the insects. And the insects will come out from their hidden places inside the
grain and they can be detected.
The different acoustic probes for insect detection are thickness shear mode resonator or
surface acoustic wave sensor, shear horizontal acoustic plate mode or flexural plate wave
sensors and so on. 
X-ray imaging works in the similar principle of hyperspectral imaging. In the hyperspectral
imaging the image is taken of the surface of the grain. X-ray because of its penetration power,it can take the image inside the grain. When the insects attack the grain, they make hole and
infest the cereal grains and they reside inside the holes. So, they are not visible. X-ray
imaging facilitates the inspection of the infestation of the insects, which might be hidden
inside and the holes can be evaluated. It is a promising technology to determine the insect
infestation inside the kernel.
This picture describes different stages which are a, b, c, d by x-ray imaging or X-ray images
showing small larva or medium larva, large sized larva, and pupae. Even different stages of
the insects and their life stages can be found out showing the insect infestation in the paddy
etc. 
There are different microbiological tests which one can perform in this case that is the yeast
and mold count i.e Fusarium and Gramineum identification. Similarly, these are the standard
laboratory protocols like, preparation of media culturing of the bacteria, inoculation, then
incubation and finally counting the colonies, by help of various sensors and the usage of the
microorganism detection kits etc.
The insect detection is now based upon the Nano sensors. They can even identify or quantify
the microorganisms present and they can be used for detection of spoilage.The principle of detection of bio sensor is the specific binding of the analyte of interest to the
complimentary  bio  recognition  elements  like  tissue,  microorganism,  organelles,  cells
receptors, enzymes, antibodies, nucleic acid etc. All this can be immobilized on a suitable
support or medium and then can be sensed.
Specific interaction results in a change in one or more physico-chemical properties like pH
change, electron transfer, mass change, heat transfer, uptake or release of gases etc. which are
detected, and they can be measured by using these sensors.
Different  biosensors  which  are  available  for  grain  spoilage  detection  they  may  be
amperometric  enzyme  biosensors,  amperometric  immune  sensors,  conductimetric  and
impedimetric immune sensors or optical immune sensors and so on.The sample is taken, evaluated for a particular quality. This can be done in both ways one by
using the visible change in the quality, and investigation of the spoilage can be done.
Accordingly the particular conditions or causative factors can be controlled. There might be
some variations depending upon the conditions and grain components etc. So, obviously
these need to be standardized for grain to grain, for one food to the other. 
In the literature, many standard practices are available, and one can develop these practices
depending upon ones requirement, but the use of measurement techniques may be physical,
online or chemical measurements etc. The attributes as well as the changes which are brought
into the grain that may be color change, flavor change and all those things give a quite good
idea about the status of the spoilage of the grain. So, this should be taken care and the
purpose of the whole study is that is the proper conditions should be maintained so, as to
make sure that the shelf life of the grain is increased, and the undesirable changes do not take
place.