Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 44
Multiproduct CA/MA Storage Unit
In this lecture, the multi product controlled atmosphere or modified atmosphere storage
unit is studied. Basically  in this  part of the lecture,  various  aspects  of design of a
controlled atmosphere storage facility will be discussed. 
Controlled atmosphere (CA) storage
•In CA storage O2 and CO2 levels are continuously maintained different from
ambient air.
•High  end  technologies  are  used  to  adjust  the  O 2 and  CO2 levels  to  the
predetermined set value. 
Predetermined  set  value  means  the  particular  concentration  of  oxygen  and  carbon
dioxide that is required for maximum shelf life of a commodity. Components of CA unit
A  facility  for  the  controlled  atmosphere  storage  should  include  the  required
instrumentation  and  other  support  units  which  are  needed  for  manipulating  or
maintaining the environmental conditions. 
Air tight compartment.
Refrigeration unit/ heating element  to maintain the temperature.
Humidification system to maintain the humidity.
Nitrogen  purging  facility  to  displace  O 2 and  create  desired  low  O 2
concentration.
CO2 purging facility to maintain the desired CO2 concentration.
Venting  facility  to  prevent  accumulation  of  unwanted
gases in the system.
O2, CO2, C2H4, Temp and RH sensors .There are generally two types of controlled atmosphere chambers; one is palliflex unit,
the other is the air tight compartment. 
Palliflex unit contains
•A special plastic pallet
•A plastic cover for gas-tight sealing
•Bottles of nitrogen (N 2) for O2 reduction
•Bottles of CO2
•Gas inlet and outlet hoses
•A fully automatic measuring and regulation system with a built-in O 2/CO2 meter.The major advantage of the palliflex unit is that different gas conditions can be set as per
the requirement i.e. in different pallets, different conditions can be maintained, and all
these pallets can be kept in the same chamber. So, it provides little flexibility of even
storing different commodities requiring different conditions in the same chamber. 
Gas tight storage chamber
•The capacity of the storage cell depends upon
Total tonnage of fruit
Bulk density of fruit
Volume of storage accessories
Free volume inside storage facility required for material handling
•In  a  commercial  CA  storage  room,  65%  of  the  total  volume  should  be
kept free.
•Total volume required,  V = V SA + VF  +  Fv
  Where, VSA = Volume occupied by storage accessories
                VF   = Volume occupied by fruit = (Weight of fruit/ Fruit density)
                Fv     = Recommended free volume (0.65 V)Design of refrigeration unit
•The  heat  load  added  by  the  product  to  be  stored  is  important  in  designing
refrigeration capacity of CA storage. 
•The following three types of heat load should be considered.
Chilling load
Heat of respiration
Heat conducted through the storage walls
So, consideration of all these three loads finally will decide the total load that is required
in the storage facility.
Chilling load
Chilling load (Qc) considers the amount of heat required to be removed from the product.
 Where,  Qc  =  Chilling load (kJ/h)
m  =  Mass of product (kg); 
            Cp  =  Mean specific heat of product (kJ/kg K); 
        T1 – T2   =  Initial and final temperature difference (K); 
                   t   =  Chilling time (h)
Heat of respiration
•Biological products generate heat even when they are stored in cold atmosphere
due to heat of respiration by living tissue and heat of reaction of chemical
components of food materials.
• The amount of heat generated by food materials is 
           Where, QR = Heat of respiration (kJ/h)
                           m = Mass of food (kg)
             hg = Heat generated  by food  (kJ/kg h)
    t = Time (h)
Heat conducted through storage walls
•The steady state heat flow by conduction from the walls and ceiling  is calculated
based on Fourier’s law of heat transfer
Where,   A   is the area perpendicular to the direction of heat transfer,
               ∆T  is temperature difference between inside and outside the chamber,
             U  is  the  overall  heat  transfer  coefficient.  It  is  calculated  based  on
insulation and  wall  thickness (∆x), 
 Kw and  Kin  are  the  thermal  conductivity  of  wall  and  insulation
[Usually   polyurethene  foam  (PUF)  or  polyisocyanurate  (PIR)
are used as insulating materials].
 h0 and hi    are outside and inside convective heat transfer coefficients.
Oxygen control in CA chamber
•The concentration of O 2 inside the CA chamber can be decreased by purging-in
the inert gas N2. 
•Nitrogen is separated from air in a nitrogen generator.
•Pressure swing adsorption system technology is used to separate nitrogen from
other components of air i.e. O 2/CO2/water vapor, etc.
•The  separation  of  nitrogen  takes  place  in  an  adsorber  vessel
filled with carbon molecular sieve.
Operating principle of nitrogen generator
•The separation of N 2 from air takes place due to the faster kinetic diffusion of O 2
molecules  into  pore  structure  of the  carbon  molecular  sieve  (CMS) than  N 2
molecules because O 2 molecule is smaller than N2 molecule.
•CMS adsorbs O2, CO2, moisture in compressed air in a short period of time and
compressed N2 gas is available at the outlet.
•When  the  pressure  decreases  to  the  atmospheric  or  vacuum
level,  the  CMS,  which  has  adsorbed  O2 gas  and  others,
easily desorbs them and is regenerated.
Nitrogen generation
Nitrogen generator is shown in the picture. Green color is referred to as the nitrogen gas,
red color indicates compressed air. Adsorption and regeneration operations are done
alternatively  between  two  adsorption  columns  and  nitrogen  gas  is  made  available
continuously from the air. The waste gases are allowed to escape to the atmosphere. Capacity of nitrogen generator
•The volume flow rate of N 2 in the CA chamber depends on
O2 concentration set point in the CA chamber, and 
Free volume of the CA storage. 
•To  develop  relationship  between  the  amount  of  N 2 required  and  different
operating parameters of the CA chamber, it is assumed that.
The chamber is leak proof and perfectly well mixed.
The  change  in  gas  composition  due  to  respiratory  metabolism  of
stored produce during nitrogen flushing is negligible.
Concentration  of  O 2 present  in  N2 is  the  same  throughout
the flushing.Equations for the determination of capacity of the nitrogen generator can be referred
from slide. 
The equation for volume flow rate of nitrogen in the CA chamber can be referred from
the slide. Humidity control
•The  moisture  loss  of  stored  product  inside  the  CA  chamber
reduces if the RH levels are kept above 90%.
•A humdification system maintains RH up to desired level.
•The RH in the storage facility can be controlled by the fine water spray or steam
or appropriate atomization system generally disc atomizer which sprinkles finedroplets of the water in the system. The system accordingly can be maintained.
Determination of capacity of humidifier
Final humidity inside the CA chamber is determined based on the principle of mass and
energy balance.
Let, the flow rate, humidity ratio and enthalpy of the 
Initial air stream  in the CA chamber be m 1, h1, H1 
Saturated air stream from the humidifier be m 2, h2, H2 
Finally desired air stream  in the CA chamber be m 3, h3, H3 
The mass balance is done by balancing the air flow rate. The equations solving can be referred from slide.
CO2 control in CA facility
•Air contains 0.03 % CO 2
•Target value of CO 2 set in CA chamber is usually greater than that present in air;
it varies with product. For example, 5 % CO 2 is required for CA storage of guava.
Rate of CO2 accumulation in the CA chamber due to product respiration
        CO2 accumulated (cc/h) = (Mass of stored product) × (Rate of CO 2  production per kg
product)
Rate of CO2 flow in the CA chamber from cylinder       CO2 required (cc/h) = (Target value of CO 2 set, % - 0.03) / (100 × Free volume inside
CA chamber)
•If CO2 required  > CO2 accumulated 
    Then CO2 gas is purged in the CA from CO 2 cylinders.
•If CO2 accumulated > CO2required
    Then the CO2 level inside the CA is maintained by using CO 2 scrubbers. 
•Air from the storage area is removed by the CO 2  scrubber, and the CO 2 purified
air is then fed back in. 
•The CO2 scrubber has a cycle of two activities
Absorption - Removal of the CO 2 by using an active carbon filter.
Regeneration - Cleaning of the active carbon filter. Ethylene control 
Ethylene gas may be added to the CA chamber to induce ripening.
Required flow rate of ethylene in the CA chamber
Ethylene  decomposers  remove  it  from  cold  stores  based  on
catalytic combustion.
The  C2H4 decomposer  uses  O 2 to  combust  ethylene  to
form CO2 and water.
This  enables  C 2H4 to  be  kept  at  the  required
(ppm or ppb) levels.The  capacity  of the  ethylene  decomposer  can  be  estimated  based on the  following
equation which can be referred from the slide.
Sensors used in CA chamber
Oxygen sensor
•Zirconia sensors are used for measurement of oxygen.
•Zirconia ceramic cells only allow oxygen ions to pass through at high
temperatures.
•With  reference  gas  on  one  side  and  sample  gas  on  the  other,
the  oxygen  ions  move  from  the  side  with  the  highest  concentration
to that  with the lowest concentration.•The  movement  of  ions  generates  an  EMF  electromotive
force  (EMF)  which  can  be  measured  to  determine  the
oxygen content.
Similarly  carbon  dioxide  sensor,  when  a  light  source  is  exposed  to  a  gas  stream
containing carbon dioxide, energy from the infrared region of the spectrum is absorbed
by the gas. The amount of the light absorbed by the gas stream is directly proportional to
the CO2 content in the gas. Ethylene sensors are normally silicon carbide based gas
sensors, which are used for the detection of ethylene. 
By  taking  all  these  components  into  consideration,  one  controlled  and  modified
atmosphere storage unit has been developed and installed. This unit has a capacity tostore  1000  kg  of  the  fruit.  All  the  instrumentation  for  controlling  and  maintaining
environment and gaseous compositions including nitrogen generator, ethylene cylinder,
carbon dioxide cylinders are provided. There are four storage chambers having storage
capacity of 250 kg fruits. These chambers can be opened and closed individually or also
they can be opened and closed by a centralized system. All the data i.e. respiration,
weight loss and other data can be directly transferred to the computer.
The inner view of one chamber comprises of trolleys where different materials, bagged
or whole can be loaded. Individual chambers  are provided with the indicators. The
temperature range is from 0 to 50 ᵒC, oxygen from 0.1 to 25 %, CO 2 from 0.1 to 25 %,
relative  humidity  10  to  95  %,  and  ethylene  from  1  to  1000  ppm.  The  gaseous
composition, temperature, relative humidity, etc. can be controlled as per the desired
level, whether one wants to accelerate or delay the ripening of the food and increase the
shelf life. It is provided with the automatic record keeping facility also. 