Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 57
Gluten Free Products (Bread & Pasta)
In this lecture, gluten free products will be studied. 
Gluten free products have gained popularity in American markets, European markets and
also in India. The gluten is a protein found in cereals like wheat, rye, triticale and barley.
It has two protein strands called glutenin and gliadin. When wheat flour containing
glutenin  and  gliadin  are  mixed  with  water  they  give  mechanical  force  during  the
kneading process. The glutenin and gliadin interact with each other and a coherent
network structure of gluten is formed. The characteristic protein of wheat makes a wheat an ideal ingredient for preparation of
bakery products like bread, pasta, biscuits, etc. When wheat flour is added with water
there  is  interaction  between  these  molecules  and  gluten  proteins  develop  a  sticky
network that has glue-like property. This glue like property makes the dough elastic and
gives the product the ability to rise when baked.
It also provides a chewy and satisfying texture to the product. The bread making quality
of the wheat flour depends on both the quantity and quality of the wheat protein. The
gluten proteins contribute around 80-85% of the total wheat proteins and they are the
major storage protein of wheat.
The functionally distinct groups of gluten proteins are the monomeric gliadines and
polymeric glutenins. These are largely insoluble in water or in dilute salt solutions. The
gliadin fraction has been reported to contribute to the viscous property and extensibility
of wheat doughs. The glutenin has been considered to have a prominent role in elasticity
and strengthening of the dough.
The above slide shows the structure of gluten. The gluten has a unique amino acid
structure and they contain a high content of hydroxyl amino acids and glutamines which
contributes to its water binding properties.
Hydrogen  bonding  between  glutamine  and  hydroxyl  residues  of  gluten  polypeptide
contributes to its cohesion and adhesion properties. For the development of bread the
gluten should have the glutenin and gliadin properly mixed in 1:1 proportion with proper
kneading conditions and proper amount of water.Gluten is an important component which makes the wheat flour unique and important
ingredient for the preparation of bakery products. The gluten is responsible for the visco-
elastic properties, dough handling characteristics, and dough water absorption in bakery
products. 
There are various wheat products which are liked by the consumers and they have very
high acceptability. These are even prepared in our homes throughout the world. Large
population  of  the  world  consume  wheat  products.  But  accordingly  to  the  research
reports, the gluten results into some sort of diseases or malfunctions of the system in the
body. Amongst  them,  celiac  disease is  a  common  disease  which  is  because of the
autoimmune response of individual to the gluten.
Similarly,  certain  individuals  may  have  gluten  intolerance,  sensitivities  or  allergic
immune response to the allergens. AD/HD and autism has a problem in digesting protein
found gluten and casein causes an opiate-like effect on the brain. There may be some
other autoimmune development issues including thyroid issues due to the consumption
of diet containing gluten.Celiac  disease is  an inflammatory  autoimmune  condition  of the small  intestine  that
damages the small intestine and interferes with the absorption of nutrients from food,
triggered by gluten in genetically susceptible individuals. The people suffering from
celiac disease, do not tolerate gluten and are advisable to completely avoid gluten in their
diet.
Gluten  free  products  are  needed  for  individuals  who  have  problem  with  gluten
consumption. Gluten free formulations are developed using maize and rice flours often
combined with corn, potatoes or cassava starches along with proteins and hydrocolloids
for binding agent. The important property that lacks in gluten free raw materials is the
development of visco-elastic  properties  or cohesiveness which is contributed  by thegluten in the wheat products. This attribute is achieved by adding certain additives,
hydrocolloids which can mimic the properties that are provided by the gluten. Gluten
free products generally they have lower fiber and micronutrients in comparison to its
wheat-containing counterparts.
As it is made from refined flour or starches that are not generally enriched or fortified, a
number of nutrient dense alternative raw materials, in combination with conventional GF
flours and starches are added which increase variety and improve nutritional quality of
the GF bread.
This slide depicts the conventional and alternative raw materials used for the preparation
of gluten free products. Conventional raw materials include refined flours and starches of
rice, corn, flour or potato, cassava whereas alternative non-gluten raw materials include
cereals like rice, maize, sorghum, millet. Pseudo-cereal such as buckwheat, amaranth,
quinoa, roots and tubers. Legumes include soya, chickpea, beans, lentil pea or grains like
flax seed, chia seeds, chest nut, unripe banana (others) etc.There are challenges in the preparation of gluten free product development because, the
absence of gluten often results in a liquid batter rather than dough. Rice is traditionally
used for preparation of the gluten free products. But, from the rice it is not possible to
prepare a dough similar in consistency and visco-elastic property as achieved from the
wheat dough, because in the wheat, gluten contributes to this property. In rice we get a
batter which result in baked bread with a crumbling texture, poor colour and other post-
baking defects.
Bread dough without gluten can only retain gas if another hydrocolloid replaces the
gluten. Gluten provides the unique texture and has a proper gas retention characteristic
during fermentation or leavening process. The carbon dioxide gas which is produced
during baking process is retained in the structure which gives the bread its unique crumb
and other texture.
Unlike wheat gluten, gluten free raw materials are not able to form visco-elastic network
upon hydration although it can be made functional at a higher temperature. In products
from gluten free raw materials, the starch needs to be gelatinized to act as a glue.The development of good quality gluten free bread is a serious task. Therefore, many
researchers have investigated the substitution of gluten by ingredients which are able to
mimic its functional properties. The majority of the commercially available gluten free
breads are inferior in the quality to their gluten-containing counterparts. The gluten free
bread has a relatively shorter shelf life. The crumb is wet after baking; it sticks together
and quickly becomes dry. It becomes rough, crumbly, and disintegrates. In the gluten
free bread these are some of the issues which need to be taken care of by appropriate
processing and use of the hydrocolloids.
Rice flour is increasingly popular as a substitute for wheat flour in the preparation of
products consumed by wheat intolerant or celiac patients. It is the most suitable cerealgrain flour for the production of GF products due to its bland taste, white colour, its
digestibility and hyper allergenic properties.
In order to achieve a suitable consistency of bread making, rice flour dough requires a
very high hydration. The addition of large quantities of water leads to considerable
improvement in the dough behavior during mixing. Hence, it provides higher stability to
the dough.
Blends of buckwheat and rice flours in the presence of hydrogenated vegetable fat also
have the potential to give good gluten free bread, having good sensory attributes.
Soya flour and soya products have been used to increase the protein content as well as to
improve the structural properties of gluten free products. Soya has a positive impact on
gluten free bread quality. The inclusion of soy increases the nutritional value and water
absorption characteristics of the gluten free bread dough.The  production  of  gluten  free  bread  differs  significantly  to  that  of  wheat  bread.
Traditionally, wheat dough is bulk fermented by mixing water, yeast and salt. During
fermentation, yeast acts and carbon dioxide gas is liberated causing rising of the dough.
After fermentation, the dough is divided or molded of proper size and then, it is finally
baked. Most of the gluten free breads tend to contain a high water levels and have a more
fluid-like a structure. In addition, they require shorter mixing, proofing and baking times
than their wheat counterparts.
It is a comparison of the wheat based bread with a non-wheat or gluten free bread. For
the wheat flour bread, flour, water, salt, fat, yeast and some improvers are added and
mixed properly. They are given a rest at 30-40 °C, 80-90 % relative humidity for about15-20 min for the rising of the dough. Thereafter, it is divided or molded and finally
proofing (second fermentation) is done at 30 °C, 85 % relative humidity. Lastly, it is
baked at appropriate temperature, cooled and packaged. 
In the case of gluten free bread preparation, the gluten free flour like rice flour is added
with water, salt, sugar and hydrocolloids. The hydrocolloids and yeast act as improver.
After a very short mixing of about 2 min, around 500 g of formulation is taken and put in
a pan at 30 °C and 85 % relative humidity for 30 min. These conditions help the yeast to
act and finally, it is baked. Lastly, the baked bread is cooled and packaged.
The above slide shows the images of developed gluten free bread using rice as a raw
material.  Rice  flour  is  given  some  microwave  treatment  to  modify  its  starch.  The
microwave treatment  of rice flour provides improvement  in the functionality of the
material. In addition to it some citric fiber is mixed to improve the water retention ability
of the batter.  A unique combination  of hydrocolloids  and modified  starch which is
partially gelatinized rice flour is added to the formulation for structure binding. This
formulation gives an improved crust and crumb structure. And finally, it is baked under
usual conditions like those of the normal bread. This process involves the development
of bread from batter instead of dough and it has a good gas retaining capacity.Pasta is the simplest cereal based product. It is increasingly gaining popularity among the
masses in our country. Younger people like pasta more than the bread and chapattis.
Pasta consists of a mix of flours or semolina with water, it may also contain egg. It can
be classified according to the water content, processing type or shaping. High protein
content, as well as a strong gluten network, is required for obtaining pasta with good
consistency and proper cooking performance. The key factor for the quality of the pasta
is the rapid stiffening of the well-developed gluten network which is able to entrap
swollen starch granules.
Pasta is prepared by 4 steps. First is the hydration step, where the flour is mixed with
water. Second is the mixing which helps in the development of the gluten network. Thenext step is the shaping and cutting of dough. Single screw or twin screw extruders are
used for products like pasta. Water diffusion inside pasta and temperature rise during
extrusion  lead  to  starch  gelatinization  which  gives  the  desirable  strength  and  other
desired cooking characteristics to the pasta.
And the last step is the drying. During the processing of pasta, mixing, extrusion, and
drying help pasta to undergo complex modifications in the protein structure caused by
heating as well as water uptake.
This  shows  the  images  of  conventional  wheat  pasta  and  gluten  free  pasta.  In  the
conventional wheat pasta, the wheat gluten acts as glue which provides the characteristic
elasticity. The protein network provides the framework of pasta. The starch granules are
embedded in protein network which acts as a filler. Whereas, in the case of gluten free
pasta, starch provides the glue. This glue property of the starch is suitably modified to
provide the functionality. There are small protein patches embedded in the starch gel
forming the network frame.Flours and starches of gluten-free cereals consists of rice or corn and pseudo-cereals like
Amaranth, Buckwheat, Millet or Quinoa are used. Traditionally, gluten-free pasta is
made from rice flour. Pasta of good technological properties has been obtained by using
this flour. Usually, flour obtained from long grains is preferred since it presents high
amylose content. When rice flour is used as the only ingredient for pasta production, it
requires additives or particular processing techniques to modify in a suitable way the
properties of macromolecular components (starch and proteins) relevant to the structure
of the final product.
This is a process flowchart for the preparation of gluten free pasta. The standardized
formulation  consisting  of  rice  flour,  water,  chickpea  flour,  hydrocolloids,  glutenalternatives and xanthan gum are mixed properly. This formulation is passed through 200
mesh size to ensure the uniformity of the mix. And then, these material is passed through
twin screw extruder, where the feeder speed is maintained at 100 rpm, feed barrel runs at
300 rpm and the temperature inside the extruder is maintained 60 °C.
There are different types of dies and cutter to get the desired size and shape of the GF
pasta. The above slide shows the picture of the ribbon type gluten free pasta. This pasta
is then dried at a temperature of about 55-65 °C for 24 h so that the final moisture
content is reduced 10-12 %.  As a prime factor, low temperature and long drying time for
pasta is recommended. After drying, a suitable packaging materials is selected such that
it does not reabsorb moisture during storing. 
There are many novel technologies for preparation of gluten free products. One of them
is the enzymatic approach. It is a relatively new trend of utilizating proteolytic enzyme to
detoxify gluten by cleaving the peptide bonds next to proline- and glutamine-residues,
with the action of prolyl-endopeptidases (PEPs). Unlike human gastrointestinal protease,
PEPs can degrade gluten to amino acids or nontoxic peptides (less than nine amino acid
residues). In addition, cereal germination can also degrade immune stimulatory gluten
peptides and thereby diminish its toxic effects. Lactic acid bacteria (lactobacilli) (LAB)
are known to possess a complex protease system, which can hydrolyse various proline
residues  of  gluten.  These  enzymatic  approaches  are  reported  to  be  a  good  step  in
reducing the toxic effect or allergic effects of the gluten. It also has an effect on visco-
elastic and other characteristics of the dough. Another approach may be sour dough fermentation. Sour dough is a mixture of flour and
water fermented with starter culture of lactic acid bacteria and yeast, which are either
deliberately  added  or  they  originate  as  a  contaminant  in  the  flour.  Sour  dough
fermentation  enhances  dough  property.  It  improves  volumes,  texture,  flavor  and
nutritional values. Sour dough fermentation can be successfully applied for improving
the dough handling characteristics of the gluten free batters.
This shows the schematic sequence of the protein degradation during fermentation of
sour dough. Lactic acid bacterial culture can be added to the flour which causes gradual
acidification of the dough.This  process activates  endogenous enzymes, finally resulting into the proteolysis  or
breakdown of the flour proteins and releases peptides. Intracellular peptidases of lactic
acid bacteria can also directly cause hydrolysis releasing the peptides. This ultimately
results into the formation of precursors for flavor compounds and modifies the visco-
elastic properties of the dough.
Apart  from  enzymatic  approach  and  sour  dough  fermentation,  the  high  pressure
application can be another potential way for improving the functionalities of the starch. 
High pressure can be one of the promising technologies which can be used to improve
the gluten free dough structure. High pressure in the range of 100 to 1000 MPa can be
applied to modify functional properties of proteins and starches in gluten free flours. The
high pressure causes starch to swell and gelatinize without the disruption of granule
integrity, which is normally seen during the heating process. The extent of swelling
depends upon the applied pressure, treatment time, temperature, concentration and type
of the starch.
These  are  some  of the approaches  by which  the  functionality  can be improved by
lowering the toxic effects. The functionality of the starch and proteins can be modified to
mimic the properties exhibited by the gluten in the wheat flours.