Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 56
Algae Based Health Foods
In this lecture, algae based health foods will be discussed. 
Algae is defined as a heterogeneous assemblage of organisms that range in size from tiny
cells  to  giant  seaweeds.  Algae  mostly  are  photosynthetic  species  which  include
eukaryotes and prokaryotes like cyanobacteria, blue green algae and they live in aquatic
habitats. To meet the nutritional requirements of the rising populations, researchers are
looking for alternate sources for food, which are easy to cultivate, cost effective and
produce large amount of bioactive compounds, which are useful for preventing major
health diseases. In this regard, algae has a great potential for its utilization in health or
functional food development. The algae on the basis of the bioactives present and colours can be characterized into 4
major groups like blue green algae (cyanobacteria) is a photosynthetic prokaryote; the
red algae (rhodophyta), eukaryotic algae is found in the freshwater lakes. The green
algae which is called as chlorophyta, has unicellular and colonial flagellates and the
phaeophyta or brown algae is branched and have filamentous thallus. So, these are the
major types of algae and their specific characteristics.
The nutritional and medicinal importance of algae lies in its high protein content, good
carbohydrate material, vitamin, mineral, pigment and fatty acids etc. which are contained
in these different algae. These algae enhance immunity, they are the hub of variousantioxidants, and they consist of antimicrobial compounds and anti-cancers compound
and also reduce cholesterol level. This algae is very beneficial from health point of view. 
In different countries, different types of algae are commonly used in the food as food
ingredients or for cooking purposes like Spirulina or the blue green micro algae with a
long history of use as a food source because of its  high protein content  and other
nutrients. In fact, now in Indian market also,  Spirulina based products in the form of
powder, capsule and tablet etc. are available. 
Dulse is a red species of algae which is sold particularly in Ireland and Atlantic Canada.
Chlorella,  it  is  a  popular  microalgae  which  has  similar  nutritional  values  that  of
Spirulina and Dulse. The purple laver grown in Ireland, is collected and made into a jelly
by stewing or boiling. Irish moss is the source of carrageenan for the stiffening of instant
puddings, sauces, and dairy products. Sea lettuce is used in Scotland where it is added
into soaps and salads. So, different types of algae in different countries are used for
various food purposes.Algae as a source of biochemical is now a days being used for various applications e.g.
Dunaliella has  a  good  amount  of  beta  carotene;  Spirulina contains  phycocyanin,
chlorophyll  and beta carotene  and  Haematococcus is  a good source of astaxanthin;
Chlorella has lutein, chlorophyll, and beta carotene;  Porphyra contains phycoerythrin
and chlorophyll etc. So, various bioactive compounds are available in various algae
species. 
Algae is regarded as a source of biochemicals or bioactives because algae has a short life
cycle, easy to manipulate for desired biochemicals and at stressed conditions in the
environment, algae can be easily encouraged to get more and more bioactive. They have
a simple structure and hence adaptable to different climatic conditions and also are rich
sources of mixed vitamins, minerals and proteins etc.Algae for its use in the food and food supplements need proper cultivation followed by
standard practices like drying etc. The nutrients or other facilities required like light,
water, carbon dioxide and different organic sources of nutrients etc. should be provided
in the media and then the algae should be given required environmental conditions like
temperature etc. 
After cultivation, the grown algae is needed to be harvested i.e. taking out the algae from
its cultivation medium e.g. aquatic media which is a liquid media containing lot of water.
It needs to be processed which includes dewatering, thickening, filtering and finally
drying of the algae. Ultimately the cultivated algae is taken from its cultivation pond or
photo reactor, then water is removed, filtered and it is dried. The dried biomass which is
an algal biomass is available for food utilization.
For its food utilization two approaches can be made, first one consist of algal biomass
directly  being  used  in  food  preparation  and  food  formulation  which  might  have  a
disadvantage of disliking by people due to its strong flavour. For the other approach the
bioactives may be extracted from these algal biomass and these extracted bioactives can
be used for the formulation and preparation of the functional foods to provide targeted
benefits.For  both  the  approaches  the  steps  and  procedures  of  extraction  technology,  and
methodology etc. should be properly standardized and optimized. For the extraction one
drawback is present i.e. in commercial production large amount of biomass might be
required to get the desired amount of bioactive. Both approaches can be followed and
could be employed.
For the micro algae two methods are there for cultivation, one is the open pond system
and other is the closed photo bioreactor system. There are different types of open pond
which are used e.g. raceway ponds, shallow big ponds, circular ponds or tanks and
closed  ponds.  But  for  these  the  environmental  conditions  i.e.  the  temperature  and
sunlight etc. should be provided for the algae to grow.
From  that  point  of  view,  photo  bioreactor  system  appears  better;  the  controlled
environment of the photo bioreactor allows a higher productivity to be achieved. The
productivity  is the most important indicator  for success of the technology behind a
bioreactor. Photo bioreactor comes in different designs and ranges e.g. tubular type
which considered to be more appropriate for outdoor cultivation or flat plate type which
require appropriate reactor design to obtain the maximum cell mass, although the flat
plate type bioreactor is favorable due to its low pressure energy consumption, high mass
transfer capacity and high photo synthetic efficiency. 
After the cultivation and dewatering of the micro algae, there are 3 methods which can
be used that include flocculation, centrifugation and filtration. The flocculation method is
used to amass micro algae cells from the broth and the type of flocculating agents which
are used for this purpose include aluminium sulphate, ferric sulphate, ferric chloride and
poly electrolytes etc. Centrifugation is generally preferred method for the harvesting of
algal cells and it is the most efficient method for biomass recovery as compared to other
techniques such as dissolved air floatation and drum filtration. 
The filtration is the most competitive method compared to other harvesting options.
Different types of filtrations can be used for getting the biomass; the most commonly
used  filtration  methods  include  dead  end  filtration,  micro  filtration,  ultra  filtration,
pressure filtration, vacuum filtration and tangent flow filtration etc. But centrifugation is
considered as a better method as it is an easily adaptable method. Depending upon theinfrastructure any of this method can be adopted but the important thing is that as far as
possible the water should be removed to get a concentrated algal biomass. 
The next step is drying up the biomass after recovery or harvesting through separation of
the algae from the support media. The dewatered slurry or the concentrated slurry of the
biomass is dried for its stability which is easy to handle, store and use in extraction or for
further processing. 
There  is  a  need  for suitable  drying  method  because  the  drying process  should  not
adversely  affect  the  bioactives  and  their  functionality.  The  selection  of  the  drying
technology accordingly depends on the production scale and also the purpose for which
the biomass is being dried.
There are different drying methods and dryers which includes rotary dryers, spray dryers,
solar dryer, cross flow drying, vacuum shelf dryers, flashing dryer or incinerator drying
etc. The important thing is that the drying process should be optimized and bioactives
should remain intact in the dryer algal biomass.The dried algal biomass can be sent further to extraction of the bioactives and then
extracted bioactives as well as spent biomass after extraction both can be used in the
food preparation or whole biomass can be used in food preparation and food formulation.
The extraction depends upon the bioactive agent and their solubility in different polarity.
For phycocynin extraction various solvents are being used, distilled water or phosphate
buffer or calcium chloride solutions etc. can be considered because they are soluble in
water and other polar mediums. Phosphate buffer, sodium phosphate or sodium chloride
solutions  etc.  can  be  used  for  extraction  of  phycoerythrin.  Organic  solvents  like
chloroform, methanol or acetone because of its solubility for chlorophyll, can be used for
extraction. Astaxanthin can be solubilized or extracted using ethanol, ethyl acetate or
acetone. Similarly lutein, zeaxanthin and β- carotene can be extracted in acetone and
hexane. There are different methods for extraction, may be conventional methods can be used
like soxhlet extraction, freezing and thawing or hydro distillation methods. There are
advanced technologies available like ultrasound assisted extraction, microwave assisted
extraction, enzyme assisted extraction, pressurized liquid extraction, or supercritical fluid
extractions.
The advance methods provide better functionality of the bioactives and are rapid. The
ultrasound assisted method is easy, rapid and economical method, it gives more recovery
of  the  bioactives.  On  the  other  hand,  freezing  and  thawing  method  causes  less
denaturation of the protein or enzymes, but it is a time consuming method. 
Microwave assisted is a rapid method, but some heat generation takes place and this heat
may have some influence or effect on functionality of the bioactive. Supercritical carbon
dioxide is also considered as a very good method pertaining to green technology, it is a
rapid inexpensive method, but has some issues regarding the polar molecules which are
present in the solvent. So, one has to cautiously choose the appropriateness of extraction
methodology,  standardize  the  process  parameters  for  maximum  recovery  of  the
bioactives  and  once  these  bioactives  are  extracted  and  recovered  using  appropriate
method, then they need to be characterized.Regarding the extraction of lutein and zeaxanthin from Chlorella, for recovery first the
cell needs to be disrupted with alumina, then it is given alkali treatment with KOH for
breaking up of cell membrane and then it is followed by solvent extraction using food
grade hexane. In the study ethanol gives the highest extraction yield of 90% as compared
to  other  solvents  like  acetone,  hexane,  water  and  various  concentration  of  aqueous
ethanol. 
The  extraction  of alginate  from  Sargassum muticum consists  of  collection  of  dried
Sargassum using  suitable  technologies  and  then  soaking  of  the  dried  algae  in  2%
formaldehyde solution for 24 hours at room temperature. After which they are washed in
distilled water and addition of water containing 0.2 M HCl is done. This is followed byextraction with 2% sodium bicarbonate for 3 hours at 100 ⁰C and finally, collection of the
soluble fraction by centrifugation, precipitation in the ethanol and then drying at 65 ⁰C
until it reaches the constant weight. So, in this way alginates are extracted from the
Sargassum and this process yields 13.5 % alginate weight by weight.
The biomolecules or bioactives should be characterized analyzing the purity level and
availability of desired bioactives in the solution. Different characterization techniques
can be used like HPLC, UV-Vis detector, HPLC DAD or HPLC equipped with the
fluorescence detector, HPLC-ESI-MS or GC-MS or GC fitted with a flame ionization
detector or thin layer chromatography.Some of the food products which are developed using these extracted bioactives as well
as different biomass in FCTL Lab are discussed as follows e.g. RTS Spirulina beverage.
Spirulina has been given GRAS status for its use as an ingredient in food at a small level
of 0.5 to 3 g per serving in form of whole Spirulina powder and tablet etc. which are
available in the market. The regular consumption of  Spirulina fortified food improves
immune system by increasing phagocyte activity of macrophages and stimulating the
production of antibiotics and cytokines.
The  common  ingredients  used  in  the  preparation  of  beverage  include  sugar  as  a
sweetener, salt, citric acid and some preservatives and flavor components (0.01 v/v)
along with different proportion of pectin as well as aloe vera. The pectin and aloe vera
concentrations were varied with 1, 2 % and 0%. Different combination and permutation
were used to standardize the beverage making Flowchart I describes the schematic process of beverage preparation using  Spirulina,
plantensis, variant lonor which was grown in some bioreactor. CFTRI medium was used
for inoculating containing sodium nitrate, magnesium sulphate, calcium chloride, pH was
10. It was grown for 16 days at temperature 33 ⁰C. 
There is 67.5 µm/ m2/s light intensity maintained and the biomass was cultivated. It was
harvested,  and then  this  biomass  was  sent  to  the  extractor  i.e.  the  bioactives  were
extracted with non-polar solvents like hexane, ethanol mixtures and other components
and  followed  by  vacuum  concentration,  pre-freezing  and  freeze  drying  and  then
Spirulina extract powder was obtained. So, the  Spirulina  extract powder has 0.47 %
moisture and was used in the preparation of or formulation of RTS beverage. 
Two hundred ml of the beverage contains 0.2 g of the extract powder, 1 % pectin, 0.1 %
salt, 20 % sugar, 0.25 % citric acid, 0.5 % sodium benzoate and they were stored for 2
months at 5 ⁰C or at 30 ⁰C and 45 ⁰C for 30 days.The prepared RTS beverage has TS content around 0.6 %, coliform count nil, β-carotene
0.22 mg/100 ml, chlorophyll 1.18mg/ 100 ml and its energy value per serving was
around 160 Cal.
Sensory evaluation was conducted and its changes during the storage etc. were found
good. This powder has anti cancerous and anti mutagenic properties that are analyzed
and it was found to have a very good health promoting effect.
The other product is the Spirulina fortified shrikhand which is an indigenous fermented
and  sweetened  milk  product.  It  is  regularly  consumed  in  Indian  states  of  Gujarat,
Maharashtra and certain parts of even Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. It has
a  typical  semi  solid  consistency  with  a  characteristic,  smoothness,  firmness  andpliability.  It  is  consumed  directly  after  the  meal  or  even  sometimes  some  people
consume it with chapaties or fried chapaties, purees, bread, etc. 
The process flow chart for the preparation of the  Spirulina incorporated shrikhand is
mentioned. Shrikhand is prepared as per the usual standard procedures and then this
shrikhand once is obtained, a study by incorporating Spirulina powder was conducted.
Dried Spirulina powder whole biomass at different levels (0, 0.5, 1 and 1.5 % weight by
weight) were properly blended and a homogeneous blend was made and they were stored
at 5 ±1 ⁰C for different period of time to study their effect.
In the control sample, no addition of Spirulina, but b, c and d contains Spirulina by 0.5
%, 1 %, and 1.5 % weight by weight. The storage studies and effect of these addition onsensory and other characteristics were done. And it was finally found that shrikhand with
1 % added  Spirulina was the most liked by the consumers because beyond that it has
undesirable colour and flavor which the consumers did not like. So, 1 % addition of
Spirulina was  found  sufficient  and  it  did  not  have  any  adverse  effect  on  sensory
characteristics. It contained 1.34 mg/100 g β-carotene and phycocyanin and chlorophyll a
and b contents also were very good. Addition of  Spirulina into shrikhand resulted in
increase in pH. 
For the preparation of  Chlorella fortified pasta where the pasta was prepared using
durum semolina flour, 2 % Chlorella biomass and water. The extrusion method was used
and standard procedure of pasta making was followed. The temperature at the extruder
were 50⁰C, feeder speed was kept at 25 rpm and the pasta was obtained, and it was
finally dried.The cooking characteristics and other characteristics of fortified  Chlorella pasta were
studied. The experimental results depict that the optimum cooking time, cooking loss,
swelling index and water absorption was little bit higher or almost similar in the different
samples of Chlorella fortified pasta as compared to control sample. Chlorella biomass
fortified pasta contains xanthophyll 0.65 mg/100 gram and β-carotene 0.163 mg/100
gram of pasta. 
The β-carotene  was extracted  from Chlorella  biomass  and it has  been used for the
fortification of apple jam. Apple jam is prepared using a standard method and towards
the end before filling in the jar i.e. just before setting point (when temperature reached to
around 55 ⁰C), β-carotene extract is added and mixed properly. The  physico-chemical  and  sensory  characteristics  of  apple  jam,  like  adhesiveness,
hardness, deformation at hardness, colour like L* a* b* values, overall sensory colour
and appearance, sensory scores, flavor and overall acceptability were studied. It was
found that the hardness was almost non-significant by addition of β-carotene and the
deformation at hardness values were almost similar to that of control. L* a* b* values
were  not  very  significantly  changed  i.e.  colour  and  appearance  are  not  much  in
difference  than  the  control  sample.  The  flavor  and  the  overall  acceptability  ranged
between 7.6 and 7.8. The vitamin A content in the control was observed to be negligible
whereas, the sample with the extract addition had 5 mg/100 g jam i.e. the content 0.13
mg vitamin A per 100 g of jam. The pro vitamin A content of the jam was significantly
increased.
The few products which have been discussed in the lecture are the indicative of various
processes and products that are developed, they can be commercialized and this will
increase the production and popularity of algal based food products. 
A variety of algal based food products are available for food industries. The natural
products  derived  from  algae  which  may  include  proteins,  pigments,  sulphated
polysaccharides, alginates, carotenoids, polyphenols, flavonoids, ω-3 and ω-6 fatty acids,
minerals  and other essential  nutrients. So, microalgae derived additives  like luteins,
zeaxanthin, β-carotene have a huge application in pharmaceutical industries and food
industries  as  natural  colorant  and  natural  antioxidants.  Alginates  produced  from
macroalgae are widely used in bakery, ice cream and pharmaceutical industry.
During addition of algae or algal extract, the level of incorporation should be such that
the product’s unique sensory characteristics should not be compromised; the technology
of fortification should be economical. Some marine algae contain some toxic substances
which create adverse effect to human being. So, the selection of algae for food purpose
should be scientifically examined. The algal biomass represent a potential source for
neutraceuticals, or antimicrobials and antioxidants.
If the industries commercialize the extraction technologies as well as there are proper
systematic approaches for the mass cultivation of the algal biomass; a major challenge of
availability of large amount of dried biomass to be available for the extraction to the
industries will be solved. So, having a proper well planned systematic approach of algalcultivation, its dewatering and drying, and then extraction, and finally, use of these
extracted bio-actives or the biomass obtained after extraction or even whole biomass as
such they can be used to prepare various functional food products, health food products
or food containing various algal based  ingredients.