 Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 52
Nutri Dal & Fortified Noodles
Products like nutri dal and fortified noodles are very important from nutrition and health
improvement point of view. Pulses are one of the most important food crop or food
categories that have been extensively used as staple food to cover basic protein and
energy needs.
India is the world’s largest producer of pulses, but at the same time, also it is world’s
largest  importer.  Over  the  last  50  years,  it  has  almost  remained  stagnant,  but  the
population is increasing, so this has resulted in per capita decrease of the availability of
the pulses for which the government has to import these pulses.There is a continuous need to find out some substitute of these regular pulses to provide
protein supply. In this slide, nutritional composition of the major pulses, which are
grown across the country i.e., Bengal gram, black gram, green gram, etc. having protein
ranging from 7.2 % in pea to as high as 40, 43 % in soya bean.
They are abundant in protein, and have around 5 % fat e.g., soybean has as high as 20 %
fat,  groundnut  has  around  that  40  %  fat,  also  they  have  significant  amount  of
carbohydrate ranging from 15 or16 % to 60 % or 65 %.
In addition to this protein, fat, and carbohydrate contents, they result into the significant
energy contribution also, hence becoming a good source of energy. Apart from that they
also have adequate amount of crude fiber, calcium, iron, and other minerals etc.As far as the pulses are concerned, they are made up of the various amino acids. There
are  certain  amino  acids  which  are  essential  to  human  beings  like  glycine,  leucine,
isoleucine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and valine as they are not
synthesized by the mammalian bodies.
Dietary  essential  amino  acids  are indispensable  part, because these are required  for
various functions in the body or body growth. These amino acids must have to be
provided to the body through dietary sources. Similarly, the histidine and arginine are
two semi-essential amino acid as they can be synthesized in the adult body, but they
cannot be synthesized in the child or infants body. 
This table gives the essential amino acids, semi-essential amino acids content of the
important pulses like Bengal gram, black gram. All pulses do not contain all essential
amino acids in required proportion in adequate quantity. That is why, it is one of the
common practices recommended in the group people those who are vegetarian. Pulses
provide a major source of protein and energy. It is commonly recommended by dietitians
or  nutritionists  that  the  vegetarian  people  should  consume  mixed  pulses  instead  of
consuming one single pulse, so as to balance the essential amino acids.
 Pulse milling (Dal)  
•Dal refers to the dehusked pulse split (cotyledon) and it is highly popular as it
improves the texture, appearance, palatability and bioavailability of nutrients.
•The milling process yields a sizeable amount of broken pulses from the pulse
mills.
•Milling losses are about 10-15% in the form of broken and powder.
•This  broken  pulses  do  not  find  any  good  market  and  are  listed  as
losses  of  pulse  processing,  generally  disposed  of  cheaply,  only
to  be  used  as  animal  feed  or  to  act  as  a  raw  material  for
manufactures of other complementary product.Pulses can be consumed in the different products in different form. The unit operations
include harvesting from the field, cleaning, dehusking, sorting, grading etc. They are
conditioned  and tempered  before dehusking. These pulses are then spitted  into two
cotyledons, depending upon the conditioning during the husking operations some of the
pulses get broken. On an average about 10 to 15 % broken are produced. 
Thereafter it is polished to give surface finish, and this is used as dal. The broken which
are obtained here can be sent to the fractionation unit for obtaining different fractions
depending upon the size etc.
They can be alternatively sent to the milling units, where the pulse flours are obtained,
but these dals are mainly used in the form of dehusked pulses. There is a sizeable amount
of broken are produced, these broken pulses do not fetch good price in the market. So, in
the millers, they have to ultimately sell it at inferior prices or they have to send it to the
product manufacturing.Pulses in the form of dal provide a major source of energy and protein for the body, but
all the essential amino acids needed by the body are not present in a particular pulse.
Sulfur containing amino acids are distinctly lower in legumes, and threonine is lower in
cereals compared with the amounts of proteins from animal origin.
Depending upon the amino acid content, they are either incomplete or partially complete
proteins. Egg protein is an only complete protein which has all the essential amino acid
in required proportion or in sufficient quantity.
The table shows the different sources of legumes and cereal and their protein content,
LLA score, and lysine sources including the essential amino acid content.The per capita availability of pulses is decreasing although the production is more. So,
government is forced to import pulses.
In order to overcome this problem, there are certain strategies to be adopted like the
legume analogue for preparing dal like material e.g., lentil analogue and bean analogue.
Lentil analogue, a wheat and soybean extruded product that is similar in its properties to
lentils in terms of nutritional and sensory properties, and is able to be prepared within a
short time. Amino acid balance is not taken in consideration for these kinds of products.
The other product is the bean analogue; it is a newly developed navy bean like product
made from extrusion of combined ingredients like sorghum, soybean, wheat, which areexcellent sources of proteins. These soy based analogues do not render the taste of dals
and other pulses, but they may provide the amino acids etc.
There  are  very  few  literature  available  on  the  formulation  of  dal  by  the  use  of
combination of pulses to imitate  the texture and flavor of the cooked dal which is
important from the nutrition point of view. 
It will be more appropriate to utilize the broken of the pulses as byproduct utilization. A
process technology for making nutri dal has been developed in IIT Kharagpur, where
combination  of  pulses  used  in  appropriate  quantity,  and  its  amino  acid  content  is
balanced using linear programming.
These dals are obtained as shown in the picture having all essential amino acids in
balanced form which resembles the natural dal in physical and sensory characteristics. It
has improved nutrient delivery, reduced antinutrients, and requires comparatively less
time  to  cook,  because  and  it  contains  all  the  ingredient  of  the  pulses  used  for  its
preparation.
It  is  a  value  added  product  made  by  utilizing  the  broken  dal  and  also  provides
economical benefits to the dal millers as well as to the farmers. The broken dal is a
valuable byproduct from dal milling industry. This nutri dal will be prepared by the
extrusion technology.Just like the iron fortified rice preparation, the same facility is utilized for making this
product just by simple changing of the die. In that case, we are having a die which gives
a rice shaped material whereas in this case, a die which gives a dal shaped product is to
be used. The ingredients are changed from rice flour to pulse flour for nutri dal. The
process parameters and extrusion conditions also need to be changed. 
Different types of pulse broken are used for the formulation of nutri dal in a balanced
form. From the literature, the selection of pulses has been done, which have a good
source of all those essential amino acids. A blend of formulation is decided with the
quantity of the individual pulse flours, so as to get a final blend with the balance of
essential amino acids. In this case, egg protein is used as a reference protein and a
mixture of such dals which has an amino acid similar to that of the egg protein has been
chosen.This is chart showing estimated average requirement of amino acid based on WHO,
FAO, and ICMR recommendations for infant, for children, for school boys, for adults.
The process technology which has been developed provides enough flexibility to prepare
pulses having the essential amino acid requirement for the infants, school boy etc. as
well as designated nutritional value.
The raw material for this product is the dal blend which is formulated depending upon
the requirement, but some other protein source is also required to be supplemented like
soya protein, isolate in order to balance all the essential amino acids. Starch sources are
also to be used, because only dal source will not bind the material. The formulation is prepared using linear programming method. Two dal formulations are
prepared.  One  is  the  chickpea  based;  another  is  a  lentil  based  formulation.  These
formulations are balanced with those of the essential amino acid present in the egg
protein.
This table gives the different essential amino acid content of different pulses which are
used in formulation of the nutri dal, and its comparison with the essential amino acid of
complete protein egg. The data generated is in mg/g of the pulse flour.
Linear programming has certain constraints, objective function or a decision function.During setting the constraint the upper lower limits are given to the software. It can be
seen that X, Y, Z are the value of the essential amino acid contents in the pulses, and A,
B, C is the cost. The objective function is to minimize the cost and to obtain the balanced
amount  of essential  amino acid.  The equations  used in the linear  programming  are
provided in the slide.
The manufacturing steps are shown in the figure. Different dals broken are taken at
proper proportion. These dal flours are blended in proper proportion and conditioned.
Like in similar manner as that of iron fortified rice preparation, where rice flour was
being blended with the micronutrients. Here different pulse flours blending are required,then it is passed through the extruder with the designed nutri dal die. The picture shows
the photographs of the prepared nutri dal and cooked dal. 
These are the essential amino acid in the two formulations. The nutri dal resembles the
natural dal in physical and sensory characteristics. It delivers adequate quantity of all
EAA  in  one  single  product  (dal).  Cooking  characteristics  of  Nutri  dal  are
similar to those of natural dal.
Noodles are safe and nutritious product that conforms to the set food standards of various
countries.  With the increase in Asia pacific economy, the demand for quality noodle
products  among  consumer  gets  higher.  Since  ancient  times,  noodles  in  various
formulations and shapes have been used as staple food in many parts of Asia. Noodles
may either be served by frying and mixing with vegetables and meats or served as a soup
noodle by boiling in a broth.
The  noodles  are  classified  into  different  types  on  the  basis  of  the  raw  material,
processing methods, salt composition, size of the noodle strand and form of the noodles
in the market place. On the basis of their origin, the noodles are classified like Chinese
noodle, Japanese noodle, Korean, and Italian, Thai noodle etc.
On the basis of their colour, they are classified as white or yellow noodles. On the basis
of flour that they are wheat flour or rice flour accordingly rice noodles or wheat noodles.
On the basis of the form of the product in the market place,instant, boiled, steamed,
frozen boiled, instant cup etc. are available.Rice  noodle  is  very  important  product,  commercially  important  and  nutritionally
important product. It is the most consumed form of rice product next to cook the rice
grain in Asia. Rice noodle is the next important product which is consumed by the
people, after the natural normal rice. So, rice noodles are commonly prepared by two
methods. One is the sheeting of dough to develop flat noodles or extruding to develop
products like vermicelli.
The ingredients for the preparation of the rice noodle raw include rice flour with high
amylose concentration, high gel consistency, and low gelatinization temperature.
Intermediate amylose content produces soft noodles which lead to the high solid losses
during cooking. Low amylose noodles lead to a very poor texture. The optimum watercontent for preparation of rice noodle is generally the range of 30 to 35 %. It is used in
preapring the dough, as it hydrates the flour for making do a proper consistency. But, the
water content should be optimized, it should not be more, it should not be less, because
more water content or excess water results in soggy dough, while too little water creates
difficulty in dough formation and sheeting. So, water acts a medium for accomplishing
the  biochemical  and  physicochemical  reactions  in  transforming  the  raw  component
present in the rice into a finished noodle form or compacted form.
The other ingredients include salt, oil, and some improvers, and preservatives. Salt may
be to the tune of 1 to 3 % on the flour weight basis. It is used for tightening and
strengthening the dough, it has inhibitory effect on proteolytic enzymes, it enhances
sheeting properties of the dough, and improves the texture and flavor.
Oil, normally 20 % of the noodle weight is added. It is generally used to fry the instant
noodle, it influences the flavor and color of the noodle. The improvers may be 0.1 to
0.05 % of the flour weight, and they include hydrocolloids and polyphosphates etc.,
which are used to improve the overall quality of the noodle e.g., gums, guar gum. They
are added to enhance water absorption properties and texture. Use of a poly phosphate
increases the gelatinization of starch and water retention ability during cooking.
Preservatives like antioxidants such as BHA, TBHQ, BHT and Propyl gallate etc. are
added to avoid the rancidity of the oil.This is the method of rice preparation, and fortification of the rice noodle. Broken rice is
taken and converted into flour, the rice flour is conditioned and micro nutrient premix is
added, they are mixed with appropriate quantity of moistures. Thereafter, the conditioned
flour, is put to the extruder.
In the extruder, the specific design of die is used which gives the material in the former
step, so the noodles are obtained, then the added moisture is dried, fortified rice noodle is
obtained. The fortification level used is as per the recommendation of FSSAI for rice.
The  micronutrients  like  iron,  folic  acid,  and  vitamin  B 12 are  also  used  as  per  the
guidelines for the prevention or eradication of the iron deficiency anemia.
There are some unit operation for the manufacturing of the rice noodle such as grinding
and sieving. 
Grinding may be wet grinding and dry grinding. Wet grinding uses a wheeler grinder
with provision to add water. Here it produces rice slurry with a smooth consistency,
whereas the dry grinding produces rice flour of a proper particle size i.e., may be 60 or
80 mesh sieves, this grinding can be done either in the slurry form or in the flour form.
The next step is molding. The molding is done in two steps i.e., cutting and extrusion, it
can give appropriate  sheeting  and cutting or it can be passed through the extruder.
Noodles in rectangular shape and 1-3 mm thick sheets are prepared and then fully
steamed. The steamed sheets are cut into noodles. In extrusion step, noodles are with
round shape and continuous feeding, heating and molding is possible simultaneously.
Size and shape can be adjusted as per the need.The next step is dehydration. Dehydration is to make the product room temperature
stable, because earlier about 30, 35 % moisture had been added. This moisture should be
reduced to about 15 to 25 % of the moisture, or lower than 15 to 25 %, but this should be
done with care, because too faster drying may result into curling and development of
cracks. Too slow drying may result in mold infestation of the product.
Therefore dehydration of noodles is done in two ways. One is using continuous drying
cabinets, where steam is used for heat exchange. Heat is exchanged between the heated
steam and air in the cabinet. To achieve satisfactory quality, rice noodles should be
turned over manually one or two times during the drying process. Although, drying at the
low temperature < 50 ⁰C takes a longer time, but it produces a good quality product as
the high temperature drying results in some problems. So, low temperature drying is
recommended for noodles which results in good color, good transparency and uniform
size noodles.Other steps are heating and steaming or boiling. The purpose of this is to completely
gelatinize  the  starch  in  the  rice.  Heating  occurs  in  two  steps:  steaming,  which  is
performed before molding, followed by boiling. Cooling involves placing steamed or
boiled rice noodle in cold water at 0 to 10 ⁰C water to rapidly decrease their temperature
to 24 to 26 ⁰C which form a stronger gel. The cooling procedure facilitates in noodle
suppression and creates a smooth, slippery noodle texture. This step takes about 1.5 to
2.5 minutes.