Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 58
Food Powders & Premixes
Food Powders and Premixes will be discussed in this lecture. There are several types of
food powders and premixes which are available  in the market either they are used
directly for various purposes or used as an ingredient in different food formulation and
preparations.
Powders are particulate solid state materials containing distinct particles of sizes ranging
from nanometers to millimetres. The bulk powder properties are the combined effects of
particle properties, food products in solid or liquid states are converted to powder form
for the ease of use, processing or for the benefit of keeping quality or storeability. The
powder industries are growing tremendously around the globe aligned with the growth of
the industries that manufacture new products and powder premixes.
Powders or premixes become the ingredient or raw material for preparation of several
products in industry. So, they have various terms which indicate the particulate solids in
bulk such as powder, granules, flour and dust.The table I describes the terminologies, their particle size, types and characteristics of
food powders. For example, the particle size of powder generally ranges between 50-200
µm and they are fine particles. Examples of powder are milk powder, coffee powder or
other colorants powders etc. and they are more cohesive and comparatively have higher
bulk density.
The granules are little bit coarser in size, they have the particle size in the range of 200 -
4000 µm, examples of granules are instant milk, instant coffee and semolina etc. They
should have a free flow nature and low bulk density. The flours have a particle size range
from 100-5000 µm and examples of this category include cereal flours, nut flours and
soya flours etc and they have irregular particle shape, larger size and low fluidity.
The dust have particle size somewhere between 5 to 100 µm and it may include any
powder that are finer than the desired size, normally fly during processing and handling.Various methods are used to prepare different types of powders, depending upon the raw
material and depending upon the characteristics desired in the powder; different unit
operations are used for the liquid and paste. Liquid or paste type raw materials can be
converted  into suitable  quality powder by using processes like  spray drying, freeze
drying, drum drying, belt drying and crystallization. Each of these processes require
special parameter, special unit operation and special preparatory step etc. 
The solid raw materials can be converted into particles or powders by having appropriate
size  reduction  process,  such  as  crushing,  grinding,  milling,  polymerization  etc.  or
granulation and mixing also may be used to prepare the powder of desired characteristics
and desired sizes.
In general the properties of the powders can be grouped i.e. desirable properties or
functional properties and undesirable properties or defects. There are some basic or
fundamental properties of the powders which should be considered i.e. moisture, content,
shape,  surface  composition,  surface  morphology,  size  distribution  of  the  particles,
internal molecular and microstructure, bulk density, angle of repose, glass transition and
melting characteristics. These are the fundamental characteristics  of the powder and
analyzing them depicts the analysis of the powder for specific operation in specific food
products  as  many  a  times  these  characteristics  play  major  role  in  determining  the
usability of the powder.
Similarly,  the functional property like flowability,  compressibility  and reconstitution
properties etc. play an important role in deciding the usefulness of a particular food
powder in a particular food product for a specific purpose. At same time the powders
may have some defect, if not stored properly or mishandled which depends upon the
material properties.
The powder made during grinding and pressing become dust which may fly due to over
crushing. So, handling of these fine dust may be a difficult task and if the material used
are hygroscopic, the task becomes quite complicated. During grinding, spray drying
process, or even  during storage the  material  may  absorb moisture.  They may  stick
together and form cake and specks etc; which means the free flow nature, their handling
and other characteristics may be adversely affected.
Even if the defective powders are mixed with the other ingredients, they may adversely
affect  them  as  well.  So, during  handling  and  storage,  care  should  be  taken  during
manufacture i.e. the desirable properties should be maintained in the powder.There are certain issues and challenges in the preparation of food powders; because most
food powders are not directly consumed, they are usually mixed with water or other
liquids or even they are mixed with solids to produce either wet or dry formulations, like
premixes etc. And these formulations can be further processed to produce either ready to
eat, ready to cook and ready to serve products etc.
The prevention or contamination with microrganism or with other undesirable chemical
components  is  a  huge  issue  in  the  food  powder  manufacture  i.e.  environmental
contamination  and  maintaining  the  desirable  composition  and  characteristics  of  the
powder, is an important issue.
Other issues while delivering the food powders include the ability to handle and transport
ingredient powders, dust problems, dust fire and explosion hazards, allergy problems,
creation  of  desirable  powder  particle  properties.  And  the  ability  to  dissolve  these
powders when required i.e. their instantization & their solubility behavior is another
functional property to maintain. These are very important issues and challenges to be
taken care of during powder manufacturing, handling and storageFood premixes, comprise of a mixture of processed cereals, pulses, condiments, spices or
other foods in varying composition. Different food powders can be mixed in a proper
proportion  to  get  a  desired  premix  of  a  particular  food  of  desired  characteristic;
preparation premixes are used for the preparation of various dishes conveniently in a
very short span of time. 
The ingredients are first individually maybe roasted or heat treated or given some sort of
suitable pre-process treatment and then they are pulverized. The processed ingredients
are then mixed in predetermined proportions as per the formulation and are packed in
pouches of different weights and sizes or in various convenient pouches in convenient
form or convenient sizes.
 In most cases the ingredients are subjected to instantization treatment to improve the
functionality  such as  solubility,  wettability  or even to reduce the cooking time and
improve the digestibility of the material etc.Different methods are used for drying or preparation of premixes powders may include
like drum drying, spray drying, freeze drying, microwave and dialectic drying, spouted
bed  drying  and  pneumatic  bed  drying.  So,  depending  upon  the  raw  materials  and
sensitivity of the material component one can choose a suitable type of drying e.g. foam
drying, or belt and tunnel drying or fluidization bed and flash drying etc.
Instantization is an important process in the preparation of food powders as well as in the
premixes.  Instantization  describes  various  processes,that  make  a  powdered  product
instant e.g. instant tea, instant coffee, instant premixes etc are made by the process of
instantization.The  term  instant  means  the  solubility  of  the  material  in  the  water  with  improved
reconstitution  property  resulting  in  quick  dispersion  of  material  in  water,  better
functional properties and are easily digestible. Instant material like instant rice, instant
noodles also have a reduced cooking time and water absorption characteristics may be
improved. So, instant powder is characterized to be prepared quickly and is more soluble
in medium. The quality of the instant materials are evaluated by their physical properties
such as granule distribution, wettability, dispersion, solubility and apparent density. It
causes an increase of the size of the particle by porous granule formation, or it results in
reducing the apparent density of the products. Instant rice, instant noodles like
Agglomeration is the process which may result in to the instantization of the material and
for making granules of the instant coffee granules or milk powder granules etc. The
agglomeration process during spray drying, takes place and it i.e. may occur in three
stages, in zone 1 and zone 2 and zone 3, in the spray dryer number. At zone 1 weak
agglomerates are formed by droplet coalescence and contact between wet droplets and
fine particles. Then in zone 2 particles recirculate before exit so that, the sticky and dry
particles can collide and form agglomerates. And finally in the zone 3 the formation and
stabilization of the agglomerate take place.
So,  air  temperature  and  velocity  of  the  particle  inside  the  drying  chamber  are  the
important parameters and they can be manipulated to affect and agglomerate structure
through further granulation.The different agglomerate structures may have an appearance of onions, raspberry or
compact grape or lose grapes. By having proper process conditions e.g. temperature or
particle velocity one can get the structure appearance; e.g. onion is formed when small
droplets of high moisture content with fine particles and spread over the surface.
Raspberry structure is formed when large droplets of high moisture, collide with large
amount of fines; these fines were hard to the surface, the fines add up or adhere to the
surface,  but  they  do  not  penetrate  the  droplet.  Grape  appearance  is  formed  by  the
collision of similar quantities of droplets and fine particles.
Higher  moisture  content  droplets  result  in  compact  structure  and  high  mechanical
strength. The optimum dissolvable powder are generally obtained between compact and
the loose grape region and they have better solubility.In  addition  to  agglomeration,  there  are  some  other  means  of  improving  quality  or
instantization of the materials; like use of surface active agents. The typical surface
active ingredients such as, polysorbates, propylene glycol and lecithin etc; can be used to
improve wettability and provide instant abilities to fat rich powders. Lecithin is widely
used in dairy industry for instantizing whole milk powder. The surface active agents in
combination with agglomeration gives excellent instantization of the protein powder. 
Apart from this, there are some other innovative processes such as microwave treatment,
irradiation, high pressure processing or heat treatments etc. which may also be applied
for improving the functionality.
Irradiation  and  heat  treatment  may  cause  the  larger  polymers  to  break  down  the
polysaccharide  linkages  which  results  in  formation  of  large  polymers  into  smaller
polymer. The material which have smaller polymer proportion is more soluble or they
get  instantized  as  water  absorption  is  improved.  Various  methods  are  employed  to
improve the material characteristics for the instantization purpose depending upon the
requirements and facilities available.Various types of food premixes are available in the market, like gravy mixes, ethnic food
premix, instant milk shakes, instant soup premixes, instant drinks, instant tea premix,
instant chutneys, tea premixes, coffee premixes, instant cake mixes etc. So, various
starting from that its containing from various raw material like fruits, vegetables, cereals,
grains, dairy etc.
Few common type of products particularly those of Indian origins e.g. cereal and legume
based premixes will be discussed. Cereal contain water soluble fibers and starch and thus
have  been  suggested  to  fulfill  the  prebiotic  concepts  as  some  of  the  cereal
oligosaccharides have a prebiotic effect.Cereals  are  suitable  subtext  for  probiotics  as  well  as  cereal  grains  are  globally  an
important source of protein, carbohydrates, vitamins, minerals and fibers They represent
a  cheap  way  to  obtain  rich  substrate  that  sustains  the  growth  of  beneficial
microorganisms and they can be manipulated. Thus, a large number of cereal based
premixes available in the market.
IIT Kharagpur had also worked, and developed cereal based drink powder and powder
premix. In the cereal based drink mix, Bengal gram, maize and ragi are used. The cereals
are roasted and the roasted grains were ground into particles or powders of desired sizes
by milling. Finally, passed through sieves of 250 µ size; the purpose of this is to have a
proper proportion of mix.
The flour is mixed which have a desired size and uniform particle size distribution.
Finally, the formulation is fed in a colloidal mill with water and the mixture is converted
into paste. Then freeze dried, the freeze dried flakes are ground into a beverage powder.
Thus, by roasting, grinding, colloidal milling and freeze drying process results into the
instantization of grain based premix with improved solubility as well as functionality.Similarly, maize and germinated green gram is used and are roasted for formulation of
another RTD grain beverage. This is followed by grinding and sieving the powder and
then addition of sugar powder and soya protein isolate in desired proportion. Finally the
grain beverage premixes is prepared, and in order to get Ready-to-drink grain beverage it
is mixed with portable drinking water in 1:3 (w/v), and we get ready to drink grain
beverages.
These beverages have good prebiotics, so they become a good substrate for fortification.
The  beverage  premix  is  pasteurized  and  inoculated  with  probiotic  bacteria,  like
Lactobacillus plantarum  10% (v/v) as starter culture. Finally, incubated at 45 ⁰C for thebacteria to grow; and then the material is freeze dried at -49 ⁰C.  Probiotic beverage mix
should have more than 106 cfu/ ml/ g of probiotics.
In the market instant cake mixes are available which contains all the ingredients which
are normally used for of the preparation of cake. In the premix all the ingredients that are
taken in the required proportion and by suitable way they are blended and mixed.
These premixes can be purchased and in the home cake are to be prepared by addition of
the required quantity of hot or lukewarm water by which batter is made and the batter it
put into the oven for baking. So, it eliminates the preparation time and purchasing of
different ingredients and weighing them and creaming the batter. Thus, cake premixes is
a more convenient way of baking a full-fledged cake.
Similarly  instant  dosa  mix  is  also  available  commercially  in  the  markets.  In  the
standardized processes, the grain which are used for making dosa in homes, are taken
and soaked in water for 6 to 8 hours, ground to thin batter and then these batters are
allowed to ferment for 8-14 hours after which they are dried at 65 ⁰C for about 12 to 15
hours and ground coarsely. 
And after grinding they are further dried in order to reduce the moisture and facilitate
further reducing the size of the particle. After drying for 3 hours at 60  ⁰C, they are
ground to fine powder and packaged.
Similarly instant kheer mix, is another product which is now available. Some of the dairy
industries are working on this product and instant kheer mix powder is a value added
convenient product from dairy industry. Kheer is a very popular product in India in
which a heat desiccated  cereal  normally rice is used, i.e. a cereal based sweetened
indigenous milk product. Kheer is a rich source of proteins, minerals and other nutrients
and contains a good amount of calcium, phosphorus, thiamine, vitamin A, nicotine and
riboflavin etc.A process has been reported in the literature to manufacture an instant rice based kheer
mix. It consists of separate drying cum instantization of milk; and rice phases of the
product. Then dried and instantized milk powder and rice phases are packed into bag-in-
bag or in a small polythene pouch of the rice been carried in a bigger bag containing the
powder. So, the mix is pack in a metalized polyster or LDPE pouches which have a shelf
life of 6 months at 37 ⁰ C.
The reconstitution of kheer mix involves hydration of instant quick cooking rice in
boiling water for 10 min followed by dispersal of the powdered component into the rice
water mixture. The reconstituted product could be suitably flavored and enriched withdry fruits etc. The powdered milk fraction has better flowability and higher bulk density
as compared to whole milk powder or skim milk powder.
Instant kulfi mix is another popular product available in Indian market. The mix is
formulated from milk fat, sucrose, MSNF and isabgol husk (soluble fibre) or such other
material which provide soluble fiber into the mix and the mix is manufactured using
spray drying technology. The concentration of solids is adjusted in the mix and about
25% of the total sugar is required in the formulation is added.
The mix is then homogenized and heat treated in a tubular heat exchanger followed by
spray drying in the spray drier. After that, this dried mix is added with the remaining
powder sugar i.e. 75 % of sugar is added to the mix. The mix is thoroughly blended for
getting a uniform blend of sugar powder and kulfi and then is packed.Similarly, powdered eggs are also prepared. Powdered eggs are completely dehydrated
eggs made by using spray drying technology and are made in the similar manner in
which milk powder is made. The eggs are made into thin slurry and this  slurry is
atomized in the spray drier, and powder is prepared. This product have a wide array of
application in baking and cooking.
The process of drying of egg to make powder oxidizes the cholesterol, which has been
shown to be helpful by reducing aortic atherosclerosis in animal trials etc. Powdered egg
have  storage  life  for about  5 to 10 years  when  stored without  oxygen in the cool
environment.
The conversion of egg into powder is an effective method, as the powder require less
storage energy, less space, easy to handle and easy to use. These can be conveniently
used as a protein powder if the food formulation in product has a different ingredient.There are several instant soup mixes available in the market, these different types of
soups powder are designed for fast and simple preparation. Some soups are homemade
and some are mass produced on an industrial  scale and treated  in various ways to
preserve them. A wide variety of types, style and flavor of instant soups exist in market
including those in India. Commercial instant soaps are manufactured in several types,
they are usually dehydrated, canned and they may be freeze dried.
The process for manufacture of soup mixes may similar where different materials in the
liquid formed are converted into powdered form. They are blended with the spices and
salts etc. The powdered materials are mixed uniformly or the liquid materials can be
freeze dried or they may be dried by other conventional method or advanced method of
drying to get the desired characteristics.Some instant soup mixes consist of a packet of dry soup stock, these do not contain water
and are prepared by adding water, and then heating the product for a short time. Just
adding  water  to  the  dry  soupy  stock,  they  can  be  converted  into  soup  by  adding
lukewarm water or hot water into the mix.
A multitude of instant soup varieties having flavor of different types like onion soup,
vegetable soup, tomato soup, cream of spinach soup, mixes etc. are available in the
market. They are produced commercially by several companies and represent a huge
market segment. 