Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 54
High Energy RTE Food Paste ( Part 2 )
This lecture is on high energy ready to eat food paste (Part 2). 
Severe acute malnutrition (SAM)
•Malnutrition is a global public health problem, contributing to 50% of child
deaths.
•SAM is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in children. 
•Up to 15% children with SAM require inpatient management (without medical
complications).
•The remaining 85% can be managed through a community and/or home-based
care approach 
•The  treatment  of  SAM  occupies  a  unique  position  between  clinical
medicine  and  public  health.The body becomes deficient to protein and energy, this protein and energy malnutrition
normally causes kwashiorkor or marasmus etc. i.e. it may result into stunting or very less
body weight.
Once the child recovers from severe acute malnutrition, it may come under medium
acute malnutrition. For the recovery of the child, therapeutic feeding for the management
of SAM is needed whereas, the moderate acute malnutrition can be taken care of by
supplementary feeding.
RTE food paste (FP) for management of SAM
WHO and FAO have recommended specific formulation for therapeutic food for the
management of SAM children. The food should have the moisture maximum 2.5 %,
energy 520 to 550 kCal per 100 g. About 10 to 12 % of the total energy should come
completely from protein, 45 to 50 % of the total energy should come from fats etc.
•RTE therapeutic food is a high energy fortified food suitable for SAM children.
•It contains oilseeds, cereals, oil, sugar, milk powder and micronutrient premix.
•Is consumed directly without prior dilution or cooking.
•Smooth, homogenous texture and pleasant flavor.
•Low moisture content (<2.5%).•Can be given safely for home consumption. 
At  FCTL,  5  formulations  with  different  raw  materials  and  ingredients  have  been
developed to prepare high energy ready to eat food paste. (Refer table) PN stands for
peanut, PT for potato, BG for Bengal gram, these are the main ingredients that are used;
supporting ingredients may be skimmed milk powder, sugar, glucose, soybean oil, maize
flour  or  soy  protein  isolate.  On  an  average  basis,  the  milk  powder  in  all  these
formulations can be up to about 30 %. It contains peanut butter on an average about 25
%, sugar around 28 % ,vegetable oil 50 % ,and vitamin and mineral premix about 20 %. 
A pilot scale manufacturing unit for production of peanut based RTE food paste has been
developed  at  FCTL.  Raw  materials  are  peanut,  maize  and  soybean  and  processedingredient are skimmed milk powder, sugar, vegetable oil, vitamin mineral premix and
some emulsifier and stabilizers.
The  schematic  of  process  flow  chart  for  preparation  of  RTE-FP  in  5  different
formulations is shown in slide that can be read and understood. 
The RTE-FP manufacturing process operations ingredient wise can be referred from
slide. Roasted peanuts are passed through Herschel mixture to convert it into paste, so
peanut butter or peanut paste is obtained. After roasting, they are ground and passed
through zyro sifter. The peanut butter, soybean, maize flour, vitamin mineral premix,
sugar powder and skimmed milk powder are mixed in the plough share mixer. Finally, inthe colloidal mill, they are homogenized; this gives uniform mixing. Then it is sent to the
packaging machine.
The equipment selected for different unit operations based on respective criteria are
tabulated. 
Similar information as before is tabulated.Roasting gives thermostatically controlled and dry heating. Peanut, maize, and soybean
are roasted using optimized conditions viz. grain   moisture, temperature & time.
Functions of roasting
Improves colour, texture.
Enhances flavour through caramelization and Maillard reaction.
Improves digestibility.
Effect of roasting on protein digestibility & browning index
Grain: Maize
Equipment: Roaster 
Experiment design: CCRD
Independent parameters:
Time (10 – 35 min)
Temperature (170 – 200 °C)
The redness (a*) and yellowness (b*) value were increased while the lightness
(L*) value decreased with increase in combinations of time and temperature in a
pilot scale roasting which ultimately increased the browning index.
The  protein  digestibility  significantly  increased  from  59  to  87%  within  the
experimental limits.
Effect of roasting on granular morphology
SEM images of raw and optimally roasted maize samples at 750X, 1500X and 3000X
magnification levels are shown. In the picture, it is clear that raw maize flour had more
compact and tightly packed and smooth structure than roasted samples. In the roasted
sample, the starch granules were largely deformed, swollen and became fragmented
along with structural collapse, but of course, they were well distinguishable. So, this
indicates that the roasting causes the structural change into the material.Deskinning
Drum cooling unit 
Consist rotary cylinder provided with baffles inside.
Cools the warm peanut with countercurrent air flow.
Lowers the temperature and loosens the skin of peanut.
De-skinner  
Removes skin and splits the peanut.
Skins are separated and collected in a cyclone separator.
The effect of speed of drum on temperature drop is shown in the figure. Both the feed
rate of the material in the cooling unit and speed of drum have the important influence in
the temperature drop i.e ∆t.Grinding of cereals
•Generally,  attrition  mill/hammer  mill  is  used  for  the  grinding  of  the  cereal
& legume grains.
•Higher  speed  and  feed  rates  produce  more  fine  particles  as  compared  to
lower peripheral speed and feed rate. 
•The  particle  size of the  flour  influences  greatly  the  water  &  oil  absorption,
and flowability of the flour.
•The flour are sifted in Zyro sifter to maintain uniform particle size.
Continuous processing & packaging
The peanut butter added with stabilizer and antioxidants are converted into fine paste,
and the dry ingredients like roasted soybean flour, roasted maize flour, sugar powder,
vitamin mineral premix are all added as per the formulation and passed through colloidal
mill. 
Grinding of de-skinned peanuts
This  is the picture of the Herschel mixture  which is used for peanut grinding cum
mixing. The response surface graphs show the effect of time, temperature as well as
batch size on viscosity of the peanut paste and particle size. The blend of the peanut
refined oil and food additives after grinding-cum-mixing has smooth granular particles.Homogenization 
•Colloidal mill is used for the homogenization of the peanut paste.
•It is mainly to reduce the solids which are present in the suspension or emulsion
or the reduction in the suspension droplet size. The paste also may have a little
higher consistency. When they are mixed together, there may be some lump
formation. 
•The particle size of the peanut paste is reduced as much as possible (~ < 200 ).
•The energy consumption (EC) increases as the recirculation time increases, which
is indicative of reduction in particle size.
Effect of recirculation time on viscosity, paste particle yield and energy consumption is
shown in figure. 
Mixing     
Ploughshare mixer
Feed 1 is the paste and feed 2 is the powder; it is basically the solid and liquid mixing.
Feed 1 will be roasted peanut paste containing vegetable oil, emulsifier and stabilizers.
Feed 2 is the roasted maize, soy flour, sugar powder, skim milk powder, vitamin and
mineral  premix  blend.  These  two  feeds  are  mixed  as  per  the  formulation  in  the
ploughshare mixer. It is basically to make sure that all the ingredients again are properly
mixed.
•Mixing of all ingredients are done in ploughshare mixer. 
•It provides three dimensional movement of the product.
•Homogenous mixing of the material with varying densities, particle size, flow
properties  and  structures  are  carried  in  lesser  time  with  almost  95-98%
homogeneity. Optical microscopic images showing homogeneity of RTE FP
•In  ploughshare  mixer,  the  oil  particles  were  spread  on  the  surface  of  solid
particles during initial stages of mixing.
•Later  on, the  solid particles  were surrounded with oil  globules  and  network
formation occurred after 40 min of mixing. 
•This was a water-in-oil emulsion (inverted emulsion) due to the low (<2.5 %)
water content of the RTE FP.
These are the pictures showing 5 formulations; 3 peanut paste samples, potato based
sample and Bengal gram based sample prepared in the pilot scale unit.Packaging 
A picture of form-fill-seal (FFS) machine is shown. 
•FFS machines are used to fill the packages of different sizes (50 & 100g) in
laminated LDPE with metallic foil sheet.
•Proper sealing of the package is important. 
•Temperature has important effect on the seal strength.
Bar graph between seal strength and sealing temperature for both vertical and horizontal
sealing is shown. In the case of vertical sealing, the seal temperature of 110-114 ᵒC gives
seal strength of about 20-25 N/mm2. Whereas in case of horizontal sealing, the seal
temperature of 110-114 ᵒC gives seal strength of about 26-28 N/mm2. 
Storage & shelf life
•The results of the storage study revealed that all the five RTE food paste packed
in metallized polythene had acceptable qualities up to 4 months under accelerated
storage (40 ± 1 °C &  90 ± 1 % RH). 
•According to the standard kinetic models available, a product with a shelf life of
4 months under accelerated storage is predicted to have a shelf life of more than
15 months under ambient conditions . 
This is the layout of the ready to eat food pilot scale unit as per GMP (interior design)
shown. All the ingredients which enter the main plant, they are sterilized, surface treated
so as to avoid any contamination. Change room facilities are provided for the persons
entering the plant area. The material is processed in the processing hall and then it is
automatically sent to the packaging line. Samples are taken intermittently and sent to the
laboratory for the testing. Pilot plant equipment 
Construction material: SS 316 & SS 304.
Equipment should be sited in appropriate location  for easy dismantling and
cleaning of integral parts. 
All equipment selection is based on minimization of any risk of microbiological
contamination reducing the possibilities of inaccessible areas for cleaning and the
accumulation of residual material.
The  surface  of  equipment  should  be  smooth,  seamless,
scratch  free  and  safely  accessible  for  cleaning  and
visual examination. GMP compliance
Natural light as well as luminous flux (Lux) as per GMP/ GHP norms
No cross contamination between raw material  and finished products              
Separate rooms for primary and secondary packaging of finished products
HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) system in the processing room
Change room, washing station, air curtain and air shower
Dehumidifier facility for raw material and finished product
Laboratory for chemical and microbiological analysis             
This is an actual photograph of a pilot scale unit shown. The grains are roasted using a
drum roaster; once it is roasted, it is sent to the cooling unit and then finally, cooled
down at DSK. All the material pass through some trolley fitted with UV facility.  
Here it is the main processing section of RTE food paste pilot scale unit. Peanut butter
added  with  stabilizer  and  antioxidant  are  added.  The  paste  is  collected  in  a  tank.
Thereafter it is sent to the packaging section. There is a metal detection unit and bias
coating. This pilot plant facility is provided with the GMP facility and CIP unit. For CIP
cleaning,  hot water cleaning  is followed  by rinsing, then hot acid-alkaline  cleaning
followed  by  hot  water  rinsing,  then  acid  cleaning  followed  by  hot  water  finally,
sanitization and then dry air cleaning are done.
The batch PLC control continuous processing unit is there. It is an automatic process, i.e.
grinding,  mixing,  homogenizing,  conveying  and  packaging  all  these  are  done
automatically  by  PLC  control  process.  And,  through  software  the  problem  can  be
indicated and remedial corrective measures can be taken.
If manufacturing and distribution can be provided through proper channels and feeding
mechanism  to  the  affected  children,  this  will  go  a  long  way and this  will  help  in
eliminating or eradicating the problem of severe acute malnutrition.