Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 55
Functional Foods and Nutraceuticals
This lecture is on functional foods and nutraceuticals.
The concept about food in earlier days was that the food was being taken as a source of
energy and nutrients and the focus was on balanced diet. 
Nowadays, the food is expected to provide health benefits. The food is taken with an aim
to have a weight control in the body, the food is thought to have no chemical additives, it
should be fresh and be minimally processed. It should have good shelf life, and safe to
consume. It should not contain any chemical or microbiological toxins in it and more
importantly it should require minimum preparation at home. It means that the food
should be in ready to eat or ready to drink form etc. So, the earlier concept about the
food which was eat to live now has changed to eat for good looking and well being.
The WHO reports state that the epidemic of cardiovascular diseases, stroke, diabetes and
metabolic diseases will hit the poor nations particularly the low and middle income
groups. By the year 2020, they will carry 80 % of the mortality from cardiovascular
diseases, and 85 % of the burden of diseases.
In this bar diagram, the material is taken from the literature to show how the deaths of
high-income group, middle group or low income group are affected by various diseases
in different nations. Free radical mediated pathologies
When the body gets exposed to various stimulating agents like smoking, ischemia, drugs,
light, UV radiation, etc., all these stimulants cause generation of free radicals in the body
and these free radicals if they are not taken care of they start initiating the chain reaction.
They attack the target molecules like lipids, proteins, sugar, DNA, etc. in the body. 
The chain oxidation reaction will proceed, it will propagate and ultimately it will dictate
the process of those target molecule and their normal functioning get affected. The target
molecules  get  damaged  which  ultimately  is  finally  manifested  in  terms  of  various
diseases like cardiovascular diseases, cancer, arthritis, ageing etc. There are different
remedial measures like radical scavenger antioxidants. They can be used at any stage in
the  process  either  to  suppress  the  radical  formation  in  the  beginning  itself  or  that
radically scavenger antioxidants can suppress the chain reaction or finally, repair and de
novo antioxidant. They can repair some of the damaged cells or reconstitute membranes,
etc.
In functional foods or nutraceuticals or health food, some bio actives or antioxidants or
other such health promoting factors are added in food so that they will not allow the free
radicals action. Some of the antioxidants which are present naturally in various foods eaten daily are
listed  like  vitamin  A,  vitamin  C,  vitamin  E,  zinc,  selenium,  N-acetyl-cysteine.
Carotenoids are the precursors of vitamin A, they are available in most of the yellow
colored fruits and vegetable and vitamin C is present in all citrus fruits.
Functional (Health) foods 
Various bio actives and antioxidants which are present in the food like omega-3 fatty
acid,  phytochemicals,  probiotics  etc.  are  manipulated  or  managed  by  some
methodologies/technologies in such a way that they can develop a functional food.
•Designed to provide health benefits to the consumers.
•Foods whose inherent health benefits go beyond basic nutrition, including the
prevention of disease and the promotion of wellness through nutrition. 
•Similar in appearance to conventional foods and are consumed as part of the
usual diet.
•Often are associated with bioactive compounds in small quantities.
Antioxidants
Omega-3 fatty acids
Phytochemicals 
Probiotics  By proper management of those bio actives and antioxidant, the functional food can be
developed  to  provide  specific  functions  like  anti-inflammatory,  anti-microbial,  anti-
diabetic which can reduce the risk of cancers, coronary heart disease, or cardiovascular
diseases  which slows  the  ageing effect  and  reduces  oxidative  stress. Various  foods
claiming such functional benefits are available now in the markets.
Basis of functional claims and disease risk reduction claim for functional foods 
Any food consumed has some marker of exposure to functional food. There should be
certain bio active components which have some desired targeted effect.Markers actually result into the modulation of target functions in the body. It may result
in to the improvement of the biological process, reduction of risk of pathological process,
or modulation of the pathological process. 
Categorically there have to be marker of the target functions like biological response and
safety assessment. Also, one has to identify the markers for biological response, markers
for intermediate endpoints or marker for safety assessment. So, on the basis of this data
generated as results, one can have a functional claim like improvement of biological
process or have a disease reduction claim in the food as the case may be.
But any claim which is made on the food should be on the basis of certain supportive
evidences may be clinical studies or such other study and this should confirm to the
regulations prevailing in those nations. 
Claims as functional foods
Most of the food which is eaten have certain active ingredient that can be taken as a basis
for making the functional claims. For example, in the rapeseed the phenolics having very
good antioxidant potential or such other health promoting functions are present.
Other active ingredients which can be taken as a marker for claiming the functionality of
the foods are phytosterols  in vegetables, lignans  in flax seed, beta glucan which is
soluble fiber in oats and barley, flavonoids, limonoids etc. in citrus juices flavonoids in
the green tea, anthocyanins in wine or omega-3 fatty acids in salmon, tuna fish etc. A list of certain functional components which are present in the various food sources and
their respective health benefits is tabulated that can be referred.  
When  these  products  are  processed,  the  processing  parameters  of  the  applied
technologies  should  be  optimized  in  such  a  manner  so  that  the  health  promoting
functionalities of these bioactives are improved or remain intact during processing. 
Probiotics are live beneficial microbes like yeast, lactic acid bacteria etc. added to the
diet; in yogurt, a thermophiles group of bacteria, lactobacillus planetarium etc. have
beneficial effect. For dairy or such other products which claim their beneficial probiotic
effect, at least 107 live bacteria should be present. And they should grow inside theintestine of the stomach which is necessary for providing the health benefit regulation of
the body process and immune improvement in the human functions. 
Similarly prebiotics are non-digestible components that help the growth of beneficial
bacteria in the gut. They are usually carbohydrate, oligosaccharides, resistant starch etc.
The benefits include enhanced immune functions and reduction in blood cholesterol
level. 
Glycemic Index (GI) is a measure of the rate of carbohydrate digestion. Ranking of food
based on their immediate effect on the blood glucose level (0-100) is given in a table.
There is now trend towards the consumption of low GI food (=<55). When GI is 56-69 is
considered as medium GI food and the food containing GI >69 is taken as high GI food. 
Trans fats
Most of the vegetable oil have unsaturated fatty acids. These unsaturated fatty acid
including polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) are beneficial from the health point of
view. 
These  vegetables  oils  either  during  refining,  hydrogenation,  heating,  frying  or  any
processing, cis form is converted into trans form. This trans form is rather more harmful
than the cis form. Because they are not removed from the body, they get accumulated
and their deposition in the body creates CHD, CVD and such other problems. The higher
risk of heart diseases are posed by this trans form rather than those from the saturated fat.
The foods like margarine,  spreads, potato chips, cookies, crackers  etc. they contain
substantial amount of the trans fat.
Acrylamide is another chemical which is formed by chemical reactions between some
sugar  like  asparagine  at  high  temperature  usually  above  120  ᵒC.  When  the  food
containing reducing sugar are processed or heated, then this acrylamide is formed. And if
it is processed at a lower temperature, the food safety may be an issue, quality risk might
be there. Thus, it seems to have no simple solution. Items like fried potato chips, toasted
bread, baked pastries, coffee, roasted coffee, cocoa products have significant amount of
acrylamide.The list tabulated provides some of the functional foods which are available in the global
market like probiotics, prebiotics, functional drinks, nutritional beverages, energy drinks
etc. can be referred. 
Technology of formulation
Processed by modification 
•A particular food may be made more functional by increasing or adding a
potential health promoting entity.
•Alternatively concentration of adverse components may be reduced or
there  may  be  a  partial  interchange  between  toxic  and  beneficial
ingredients.The definitions of the terms can be read from the slide.
Microencapsulation
•Disperse core material into liquefied encapsulant and dry.
•Deliver bioactive components to target release sites.
•Masks undesirable flavours.
•Applications
 -3 fatty acids (milk).
An interesting application of this micro encapsulation technology is making functional
milk, i.e. heart plus. In general, the milk contains mostly saturated fatty acids. They donot contain omega-3 or omega-6 fatty acids, which are present in fish like cod liver oil or
tuna fish etc. The omega-3 fatty acid can be extracted from these fish sources or even
vegetable source etc. but, they have a strong flavor. If they are added as such into the
milk, the flavor of the omega-3 fatty acids may interfere with the natural flavour of the
milk  resulting  in  fishy  flavour.  These  omega-3  fatty  acids  and  a  suitable  liquefied
encapsulant are taken and the material is encapsulated. Microcapsules containing omega-
3 fatty acids can be put in the milk. It will not dissolve in the milk, but when consumed
the milk will get dissolved in the capsulant. 
Probiotic vegetable beverage with anti-diabetic potential
At FCTL, probiotic vegetable beverage with anti-diabetic potential has been prepared
using fermentaion technology. Bottle gourd, carrot and bitter gourd juices are mixed in
proper proportion. And they were inoculated with probiotic bacteria like lactobacillus
planetarium and others. After inoculating the juice mixture with these microorganism in
a controlled fermentation chamber they are provided with all the conditions needed. The
process was standardized and the study indicated that these probiotic bacteria can grow
well in the vegetable juices.Study design to assess functional food
First thing is to decide whether it is food for diabetic person, food for CHD person, food
for weight gain or food for any other purpose.
Food or food component should be characterized.
Minimal dose defined
Mechanism of action useful but not essential
Should comply with existing regulation
Safety
Stability
Interactions 
For instance a food with added mineral might be eaten with high fiber or
phytate foods lowering bioavailability. 
How will cooking affect it (e.g. DHA and high temperature cooking).
How will storage affect it?
Organoleptic properties (Multimicronutrients, fish).Functional food research
Strong evidence
Substantial scientific agreement of a diet-disease relationship.
Supported by clinical trials.
Examples
Fortified margarines – Sterols and stanols
Psyllum – soluble fiber
Soy
Whole oat products
Fatty fish, n-3 fatty acids
Moderate evidence
Scientific evidence supporting diet-disease relationship is not conclusive.
Examples
Catechins in green tea – reduce risks of certain types of cancers.
Lycopene in tomato products – reduce prostate cancer.
Probiotics in dairy products – support GI health.
Low evidence
Some scientific evidence suggest a relations ship but is limited or not
conclusive.
Examples 
Garlic – reduction of total and LDL cholesterol.Lutein  in  spinach,  kale,  collard  greens  –  reduction  of  macular
degeneration.
The various regulations for functional foods defined by European and other developed
countries are outlined in the slide that can be read. 
Similarly,  directive  2009/39  of  European  commission  on  general  rules  of  food  for
particular nutritional uses; regulation no. 609/2013 on food intended for infants and
young children, foods for special medical purposes and total diet replacement for weight
control etc. are listed.In this regard, the European Commission in many other countries have framed clear cut
guidelines  and  regulations.  As  far  as  the  formulation,  processing  and  sale  of  the
functional food is concerned, the claim for the functional food can be made by any
manufacturer.
The labeling of the functional food conforming to the prevailing regulations of particular
countries is shown in slide. 
Challenges in functional food development
There are certain challenges that people make any claim, but really whether that claim is
established  or  not  that  has  to  be  seen.  Both  by  appropriate  formulation,  propertechnology and proper processing and packaging etc., manipulation of the ingredient can
be made. 
The influence of processing parameters and aids on the functionalities of components
should be taken into consideration and well-defined. The stability of components within
the ingredient matrix is important.
Creation
Genetic modifications use of under-utilized or unconventional natural sources
(e.g. algae, seaweeds)
Optimization
To modify function, to increase their bioavailability
Effective monitoring