Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 51
Iron Fortified Rice (IFR)
In this lecture, one of the important products from nutrition point of view i.e., Iron 
Fortified Rice will be studied.
Malnutrition  is  a  major  concern  for  young  children  and  women  nowadays  and
particularly the micronutrient malnutrition. The micronutrients malnutrition is because of
the deficiency of various micronutrients, like minerals and vitamins. About more than 30
% or over 2 billion of the world’s population is anaemic, mainly due to iron deficiency
anaemia, according to WHO report. 
Iron  deficiency  anaemia  is  becoming  a  major  concern,  a serious  problem  in  India.
According to the latest government survey about 58 % of children, 53 % of women and
around 23 % of men are anaemic in India.The iron deficiency anaemia is mainly because of the low levels of RBC in the blood.
The seriousness of IDA-Iron Deficiency Anaemia depends on the type and level of the
RBC in the blood. It can be divided into different categories like mild anaemia, moderate
anaemia, severe anaemia or any anaemia. 
The major micronutrients iron, vitamin B 12 and folic acid have very important role in the
formation of blood or RBC. Iron helps in formation of haemoglobin. Vitamin B 12 and
folic acid has a role in multiplication and maturation of the red blood cells in our body.
Therefore, adequate supply of iron, folic acid and vitamin B 12 (cyanocobalamine) can
cure this problem. 
Different types of IDA risk factors are shown in this figure viz., demographic factors,
dietary factor, and sociological or physical factors. In a nutshell, these risk factors cause
people the iron, folic acid and vitamin B 12 deficient. 
The  major  victims  of  iron  deficiency  anaemia  are  pregnant  women,  women  of
childbearing age,  infants & children, people with poor diet ,  people who donate blood
frequently, and the vegetarian who doesn’t replace meat with other iron rich food. 
Iron deficiency anaemia has major influences on the health, as it adversely affects the
cognitive performance and behaviour of the persons. It adversely affects the physical
growth of infants,  pre-school children,  and school children,  it  adversely  affects  the
immune status and morbidity of infections of all the age group. 
The physical activity and work performance of adolescents and adults of all age groups
are also adversely affected by IDA. Besides, increase in risk of haemorrhage, sepsis,
maternal mortality and low birth rate etc. are the other risk factors because of the IDA.
There is the prevalence of anaemia which makes it necessary to develop sustainable
strategies to alleviate this problem of iron deficiency anaemia from the nations. There are different strategies for the prevention of anaemia, which may be through
dietary  diversification,  food  fortification,  iron  and  folic  acid  supplementation  with
biannual de-worming or providing improved health services, so that adequate intake of
the required nutrients B 12, folic acid and iron can be done. 
One of the most effective  aspects  is  the food fortification.  The combination  of the
different strategies may be an effective solution for the prevention of iron deficiency
anaemia. 
Rice is an important vehicle for iron fortification, because rice is a staple food in most of
the countries worldwide as more than 3 billion people eat rice. Milled rice is a good
source  of  energy,  but  it  is  a  poor  source  of  micronutrient  because  most  of  thesemicronutrients like iron, zinc, thiamine, niacin, vitamin, B 6 etc. are present in the bran
layer of rice. 
Milling causes the bran layer to be removed in the polished rice which leads to the
removal of almost all micronutrients. The milled raw rice is basically a starch grain, it is
a  starch  endosperm  which  is  normally  eaten.  This  figure  shows  the  micro  nutrient
contents of white rice, brown rice, parboiled rice and fortified rice during parboiling
method. 
Some of the micronutrient diffuses out of the kernel or starchy endosperm. Therefore,
parboiled rice has least amount of micronutrient in comparison to the raw rice or raw
milled rice. Fortification is one of the important ways to infuse the desired amount of
micronutrients. So, the rice fortification with different micronutrients can become an
effective solution for micronutrient deficiencies. 
There are different means of rice fortification using different forms of micronutrients.
Different iron fortificants are the compounds of iron which have the potential to be used
as fortificant include iron pyrophosphate, ferrous sulphate, iron-ethylene-diamine tetra
acetic acid sodium salt or ferrous fumigate or elemental iron. They have their particular
characteristic e.g., ferric pyrophosphate, is a water insoluble and has poor solubility in
dilute acid. It is naturally white or off white, it has low solubility at the normal pH of the
rice. The interaction with the rice components and other nutrients of the grain is low and it has
minimum effect on colour as well as smell, whereas the ferrous sulphate is water soluble,
it has an effect on colour and imparts metallic taste.  The fortificant level should be
selected in such a way that it should not have any interaction with the constituent of the
food it should not impart any undesirable colour and flavour. 
Being a water soluble fortificant, ferrous sulphate when used in the fortification, chances
will be there that the major portion of this ferrous sulphate will be washed away. Ferric
pyrophosphate is an option in such case, because it is water insoluble as well as the
chances of its retention in the rice during cooking, and washing operations is more.
Among  these  fortificants,  most  commonly  used  fortificant  for  rice  is  the  ferric
pyrophosphate. 
Among the rice fortification techniques, the common methods include dusting, coating
and extrusion. In the coating and dusting, the chances of losses of nutrients viz., Fe, B 12
and  folic  acid  are  higher.  Losses  occur  during  washing  and  cooking  in  the  above
mentioned  techniques.  Micronutrient  are  infused  inside  the  kernel  in  extrusion
technology, whereas in coating and dusting processes,  the micro nutrients are present on
the surface of the rice grain which leads to more losses. Therefore, extrusion is the most
promising technology for rice fortification.Dusting causes more losses as micronutrients in the form of fine particles are blended
with the bulk rice, which makes use of the electrostatic forces between the rice, surface
and the micronutrients.
The main disadvantages of this method are that washing and/or cooking in excess water
that is then drained leads to significant losses. In those countries where intensive rice
washing is practiced, dusting is not recommended for fortification. 
In case of coating method, high concentration of micronutrients is added to the rice
followed by water resistance edible coating. Several coating layers, usually alternated
with layers of coating material alone are added by spraying. This micronutrient layer is
put on the surface of the rice. Coating may include even coating material like waxes,acid, gums, starches or cellulosic polymers which may be used as a carrier for the
coating of these micronutrients. 
Disadvantages of the coating technology include that it results in loss of colour, taste and
micronutrient during washing step. Majority of the water soluble micronutrients are lost
during washing, because in this case also the micronutrients are present on the surface
only. The coating layer of the kernel makes them highly visible in the rice blend. So, the
colour of the rice also gets somewhat affected. 
Extrusion  is  one  of  the  promising  technologies  for  fortification  of  rice  with  the
micronutrients. Different unit operations during the extrusion processing of fortified rice
kernel, include that rice is to be converted into powder, then powder is mixed with
additives and premixes, and finally, it is conditioned to suitable moisture content. After
conditioning,  it  is  passed  to  the  dough  formation,  shaping,  stabilizing,  and  drying
sections. The dough formation and shaping takes place inside the extruder barrel. Finally,
the  extruded  rice  is  dried,  and  hence,  a  rice  kernel  of  desired  dimension  and
characteristics is obtained. 
Both cold and warm or hot extrusion can be applied to produce reconstituted rice kernels,
sometimes these fortified rice kernels are also called as rice analogues or extruded rice
kernel or fortified rice kernel (FRK). The ingredients for this process are the rice flour of
different granulation, vitamin and mineral (V&M) premix, additives such as binders,
moisture barrier agents or emulsifiers, water and steam.The mixing and conditioning step ensures the uniform mixing of rice floor with vitamin
and  mineral  premix.  Better  results  can  be  obtained,  when  the  particle  size  of  the
ingredients are micronized. The hydrated mixture is then fed to the extruder where it is
mixed, kneaded, sheared and produced to a paste like mixture inside the extruder barrel.
Thereafter, the barrel temperature, and pressure are adjusted.
The shaping process inside the barrel is responsible for the appearance of the rice kernel
and makes the analogue similar to that of the natural rice. So, for this purpose this
material is moved i.e., from inside to outside of the barrel through a specially designed
die. A suitable die and a suitable cutter assembly are the most important component of
the extrusion process. A rice shaped die is used to give the shape to the final product.
The temperature  and pressure inside the extruder is  generally  high but, outside the
extruder, temperature and pressure is low. A proper balance has to be made by adjusting
the temperature and pressure inside the extruder barrel, so that when material comes out,
it should not expand too much and should give a proper shape of the material. In the conditioning  process, some  moisture  is  added in order to facilitate  a proper
formation, give a proper shape to the material. When the fortified kernels come out of the
extruder, it has come with little higher moisture content. So, to make it stable at room
temperature, it has to be dried and its moisture content should be brought to the range of
that of the normal rice.
The type of dryer used for this purpose are fluidised bed dryer, tray dryer, conveyor belt-
type dryer, tumble dryer, and rotating cylindrical drum dryer. The fluidized bed dryer
appear to be a good dryer for the large scale online manufacture and for continuous
production, conveyor belt-type dryer may be used. 
The slide shows the effect of extrusion process parameter on fortified rice kernels.There are three types of extrusion effects: cold, warm, and hot extrusion depending upon
various ranges of temperature applied.
Depending upon the temperature of the material inside the extruder barrel, there might be
different changes, it influences the characteristics of the rice paste inside, and starch
gelatinization becomes important characteristics. In the cold extrusion, the gelatinization
is not there, it is almost nil. In the warm extrusion, there is partial gelatinisation like 60
to 75 % and in the hot extrusion, high degree of gelatinization i.e., 65 to 85 % may be
there. 
The starch gelatinisation is again an important aspect, which influences the cooking
characteristic or other characteristics of the fortified kernels in the cooking section of the
extruder. The dough is subjected to extrusion temperatures to substantially gelatinise the
starch molecules and denature the protein.
In the case of rice analogues, gelatinisation of starch is very important, because it affects
the quality in terms of physicochemical, cooking, textural and structural properties.  The
critical parameters that directly influence the gelatinisation and final product quality are
moisture content,   mechanical energy input,  thermal energy input,  and  residence time
(retention time) in the extruder barrel.During the milling processes, on an average 10 to 12 % of the rice gets broken due to
which the rice millers have to sell at lower prices, because of its lower market value.
Broken rice is ground into fine powder and this powder is added with the vitamin and
mineral premix. 
Uniform mixing and conditioning is done for both the micronutrients and the rice flour
along with moisture. Thereafter, the mix and conditioned rice powder is fed to the
extruder. 
The conditions inside the extruder should be properly maintained and the material is
passed through a proper die. Three different types of die have been designed at IIT
Kharagpur depending upon the sizes; long rice grain, medium rice grain and small rice
grain. The micronutrients used for fortification are as per the FSSAI-Food Safety and
Standards Authority of India guidelines. 
The pilot plant facility include the equipment required for the production of iron fortified
rice which comprises of micro pulveriser, blender & conditioner, twin screw extruder,
tray dryer, and rice polisher. Fortified rice kernel is then finally taken to the packaging
machine. The capacity of the developed pilot scale unit is to produce 100 kg of fortified
rice  kernel  per  day.  All  the  machineries  required  for  this  pilot  plant  is  fabricated
indigenously in the country. These are the pictures of the fortified rice kernels (both raw as well as cooked rice),
which have been produced in the pilot plant. 
The physico chemical, structural, cooking and sensory characteristics of this fortified rice
kernels are quite similar to that of normal rice. 
These are the long, medium and small rice kernels produced by the die through the
extruder for both cooked and uncooked rice kernels. In extrusion process, the added nutrients are embedded in the kernel matrix and are thus
largely unaffected by post processing treatments, such as transport, storage, washing, and
cooking. However, the structure of recomposed rice kernels is significantly different
from natural rice kernels. Extrusion cooking modifies the starch and protein structure.
The FRK had a compact and hard structure as compared to normal rice (crystalline
structure).
It  is  important  to  find  the  bioavailability  of  iron,  folic  acid  and  other  important
micronutrients, its working inside the system and how it is helping to improve iron stores
in the blood. Different  researchers  have  confirmed  through  their  studies  and  provided  a  strong
evidence that the fortification process was found effective in controlling or improving
the iron stores. 
Another important aspect is the production supply and distribution of iron fortified rice.
This is a pictorial distribution showing the FRK manufacturing unit. The produced FRK
is added with 100 times of the required micronutrients. Therefore, these fortified rice
kernels are mixed with the natural rice in the proportion of 1 to 100 to reduce the cost. 
This slide is related to the blending of the iron fortified rice kernels with the natural rice.
There mixing of fortified rice kernel is made with the milled rice obtained separately
from the rice mill. They are weighed and then fed to the blender mixer. The fortified riceis  obtained  by  blending  the  fortified  rice  kernel  and  natural  rice,  which  is  finally
packaged. 
In the continuous mixing, both the fortified rice production unit, and rice milling unit are
connected  by  appropriate  conveying  lines  and  metering  mechanisms  which  can  be
continuously fed to the blender by means of screw conveyer. 
This is the slide showing the FRK supply chain models. 
In  scenario  1,  this  is  a  consolidated  supply  scenario  with  large  mills  having  high
individual production volumes. Here, the fortified kernels production and blending can
occur at the rice milling facility itself. It can be a continuous production or of iron
fortified rice and including packaging. But, here the capital investment cost may be high
and use efficiency of the fortified rice kernel manufacturing unit may not match with the
rice mill as it is mixed in the proportion of FRK to normal rice ratio of 1:100.In the scenario 2 medium and large-size rice mills can incorporate blending facility
easily. They can source FRK and blend at the specified ratio with non-fortified rice.  For
many  medium-and  large-sized  mills,  it  may  not  be  cost-effective  to  invest  in  the
production of fortified kernels.
In third scenario, blending can be done at the storage warehouse. Alternatively, blending
can  be  done  by  the  rice  millers  responsible  for  supplying  to  the  social  safety  net
programs.   Depending  on  the  product  specifications  and  the  quantity  of rice  to  be
distributed, fortified kernels may be sourced domestically or else imported.In  the  scenario  4,  the  consolidated  rice  can  be  blended  with  fortified  kernels  at  a
consolidation  point  in  the  supply  chain.  For  example,  if  rice  from  many  mills  is
consolidated at a wholesaler or trader, then the fortified kernels can be blended with the
non-fortified rice before the rice is transported to the retailers. The fortified kernels can
be sourced from an external supplier (local or imported). 
In a nutshell, iron rice fortification is an important technology having lots of advantages.
Fortification of rice with micronutrients can provide major breakthrough into nutrition
and health improvement as well as in tackling the problem of malnutrition. 
Iron fortified  rice has  a  great potential  to  eradicate  the  problem  of iron deficiency
anaemia from the nations. Fortification using extrusion offers benefits of utilisation ofthe broken rice, so it becomes a part of value addition. Therefore, it provides economic
profit both to the rice millers as well as to the consumers. So, this becomes a very good
technology for the nutrition and health improvement programs.