Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 50
Food Fortification
This lecture focusses on food fortification. This is highly important particularly from the
point of view of nutrition and health.
Fortification
The addition of one or more essential nutrients to a food, whether or not it is normally
contained  in  the  food,  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  or  correcting  a  demonstrated
deficiency of one or more nutrients in the population or specific population groups.
Fortification  is  the  increase  of  a  level  of  particular  nutrient  or  group  of  nutrients,
particularly micro nutrients in food material to tackle some nutrition related issues. There  are  some  interrelated  terms  in  fortification  like  enrichment,  restoration  etc.
Enrichment is increasing the level of nutrients present to make the food a ‘richer’ source.
It has frequently been interchanged with the restoration and fortification as a general
term.  There  may  not  be  very  clear  cut  differentiation,  but  are  defined  for  general
understanding.  Example:  vanaspati  is enriched  with vitamin  A. Here the level  of a
particular nutrient is raised to the desired concentration, and normally these enrichment
programs  are  controlled  by  governmental  regulations.  Restoration  involves  the
replacement, in full or in part of the losses incurred during processing. Example: when
we heat or concentrate orange juice or any citrus juice using thermal processing, some of
the nutrients particularly vitamin C etc. get destroyed. After the processing, the ascorbic
acid or vitamin C from some natural sources can be added into that to make up the loss
incurred during the processing.Standardization  is  used  to  mean  additions  to  compensate  for  natural  or  seasonal
variations in the nutrient composition. Substitution is another term which means nutrient
addition to substitute product to the levels found in the food which resembles the food
and which it is intended to replace partially or completely. 
Advantages of food fortification
The  advantages  of the  food  fortification  programs  include  lowering  the  risk  of  the
multiple deficiencies, supply of micronutrients in appropriate amounts, requires neither
change in existing food patterns nor individual compliance. When properly regulated, the
fortified  food  carries  a  minimal  risk  of  chronic  deficiency  or  chronic  toxicity.Fortification is often more cost-effective than other strategies for improving the nutrients
content in food. 
Characteristics of fortified foods
The fortified foods should be commonly consumed by the target population and linked to
energy intake. Fortified food should have a constant consumption pattern with low risk
of  excess  consumption.  They  should  have  a  good  stability  during  storage  and  be
relatively low in cost. They should be centrally processed with minimal stratification of
the fortificants. They should have no interaction between the fortificant and the carrier
material. And it should be contained in most meals with availability unrelated to socio-
economic status.
Different fortification programs, which are run in the countries by various agencies are
mass fortification program, targeted fortification program or market driven fortification
program.
Mass fortification
• Addition  of  one  or  more  micronutrients  to  staple  foods
consumed  by  population  that  has  an  unacceptable  public
health risk of  being deficient in these micronutrients. 
    Examples: Flour fortification with iron and folic acid, and salt iodization. 
•Usually led by governments but may be voluntary or mandatory. 
•Reaches all sections of the population including the most at risk groups.
 Disadvantage
Creates possibility of excess intake. 
Potential negative health consequences if not well controlled. 
Additional cost of the micronutrient premix.Targeted fortification
•Refers to fortified foods that are designed and targeted at specific population
group such as infants and young children, sport persons, etc.
•Fortified  with  micronutrients  for which  the  targeted  population  is  at  risk of
deficiency  like  iron  deficiency  anaemia  (IDA),  vitamin  A  deficiency  night
blindness, etc.
     Examples
Complementary foods for young children.
Iodized salt.
Vitamin enriched vanaspati (Dalda).
Market driven fortification
•Refers to manufactured foods which are fortified both for marketing advantage &
benefit of the targeted population groups.
•Food  manufacturers  use  nutritional  benefit  of  the  consumer  as  a  marketing
advantage.
        Examples: Breakfast cereals and chocolate drink powders.
•Commonly fortified with micronutrients at around 30% of the daily requirement.
•Cost  is  generally  not  an  issue  in  higher  socioeconomic
groups in developing world.
Methods  of  food  fortification  are  commercial  and  industrial  fortification,  home
fortification, bio-fortification, synthetic biology approaches. Bio-fortification
The  process  of  increasing  the  density  of  vitamins  and  minerals  in  a  crop  through
conventional plant breeding, or using transgenic techniques, or agronomic practices. 
Plants translocate minerals from the soil to edible portion of crop.
And/or, synthesize the vitamins in the seeds before harvest at the initial point in
the value chain.
In fact, various efforts are made by researchers to increase the iron content in the paddy
by genetic engineering approach. 
Advantages of bio-fortification
•Long-term cost-effectiveness.
•Ability to reach underserved rural populations.Food to food fortification
•Fortified  blended  foods  (FBF)  are  used  as  food  aid  for  millions  of  people
worldwide, especially malnourished individuals and vulnerable groups.
•The most common FBF are corn-soy blend (CSB) and wheat-soy blend (WSB).
Wheat is deficient in lysine but soya bean is rich in lysine. Soya protein has less amount
of sulphur containing amino acid, whereas wheat protein has more sulphur containing
amino acid. Soya protein and wheat proteins are complementary to each other. So, if they
together soya flour and wheat flour are taken, then the weakness of one becomes the
strength of the other. 
Potential foods for the fortification may be staple food that is one very good approach as
they are consumed by large population and should be taken for the food fortification
programs. Other than that, the process foods like bread, biscuit, packaged cereals and
flours, dairy product are in the category of potential foods. The products which are more
likely to be consumed in huge quantities can be fortified. Also the convenience, and
ready to eat foods are the other lot for the fortification, and this may be for the targeted
or  market  driven  fortification.  So,  fortifying  less  expensive  staple  foods  results  in
broader dissemination of micronutrient through the population. 
The selection of fortificant and fortification vehicle depends upon the different factors
like  prorated intake  by the target  group, safe dosages, cost, bioavailability,  sensory
acceptability and storage stability. Micronutrient premix
A premix is a mixture of a micronutrient(s) and another ingredient, often the same food
that is to be fortified, is added to the food vehicle to improve the distribution of the
micronutrient mix within the food matrix and to reduce the separation (segregation)
between the food and micronutrient particles. An important aspect is to improve the
distribution of micronutrient mix within the food matrix and to reduce the separation
between the food and micronutrient particles.
These fortificants as per the requirement of the fortification programs, their suitable
forms need to be selected, and they should be properly mixed. Excipients like carriers,
fillers etc., fortificants and free flow agents are mixed together in the desired formulation
to prepare micronutrient premix. All these materials should be food grade. The production process for micronutrient premix is shown which can be referred. 
It involves the selection of appropriate source of the fortificant, deciding quantity and
level of particular fortificants or group of fortificants, then bringing them to desired
particle sizes. Then mixing homogenously or uniformly and parallely packing, and of
course wherever possible, and wherever needed quality test should be performed for
various characteristics. 
The benefits of the premix preparation are easier to test the bio-availability, easier to
feed,  uniform  nutrient  distribution  and  less  expensive.  Instead  of  adding  separate
nutrients and in a separate process, if a mixture of these micronutrients are prepared and
if they are added, it generally becomes cost-effective or less-expensive. Design and composition of premix
The  premix  are  designed  to  meet  the  fortification  standard  or  to  add  the  desired
micronutrient. The label added is to make up for the difference between the natural level
and the standard prescribed standard. Then overages  necessary to make up for any
processing or storage losses and to ensure that the final level will be minimally achieved.
Then nutrient concentration is adjusted on the basis of the concentration of the nutrient
sources  that are used. Small  manufacturing  overage is  usually about 2 % which is
included to ensure the premix meets the label claims by the assay.
The rate of the addition that determines the final formulation, when addition rate is to be
set in the whole unit. Then free-flow agents like tricalcium phosphate or precipitatedsilica etc. like silicon dioxide are added to avoid clumping or to maintain the free-
flowing nature of the micronutrients premix.
The remainder may be starch (wheat or corn), maltodextrin or such other inexpensive
mineral like calcium carbonate or calcium sulphate in cereals. Whatever carrier is to be
selected is to match with the food material in which the micro nutrient premix is added
with characteristic properties. And overall premix should not impart any colour or favour
in the fortified food. 
Three aspects are important here like quality, packaging, and storage. Every premix
manufacturer or the manufacturing company is supposed to have proper quality tests, and
this should rather provide a quality assurance certificate. The periodic analysis of the
micronutrient is performed to make sure that there is no change in the micronutrient
content or its  availability.  It should be packed in air and water tight, tamper proof
container during its handling, transportation, storage etc. Exposure to light should be
avoided as certain chemicals might get oxidised. In the storage, re-assayed periodically
for  the  micronutrient  content  to  ensure  that  it  continues  to  meet  the  required
concentrations until the end of its shelf-life. The government of India at present is taking very effective measures by initiating food
fortification programs in an organised way. Food Safety and Standards Authority of
India have identified certain foods mainly staple items which are the items included in
daily diet at both rural and urban for intrusion into the fortification programs to tackle the
health  related  issues  and  to  improve  the  nutritional  status  of  the  masses.  The
commodities considered in this include salt, oil, milk, wheat atta, and maida, and raw
rice. 
The iodine content, manufacturer level, level of nutrients, source of the nutrient are given
in table that can be referred. In the case of fortified oil, the vitamin A and vitamin D are the micronutrients, their
levels have also been specified and the source of vitamin A may be retinal acetate or
retinal permitted. And for vitamin D, cholecalciferol or ergocalciferol from the plant
sources are to be used as fortificants. Similarly, the level of nutrients for fortified milk
can be seen in the table.
Type of nutrient and level of fortification for fortified atta can be referred from the table. Type of nutrient  and recommended  level  of fortification  for fortified  maida can be
referred from the table. The plus sign is the symbol of fortification.
Type of nutrient and level of fortification for fortified raw rice can be referred from the
table. Depending upon the choice of the manufacturer, the rice may add be added like
zinc, vitamin A, B1, B2, B3, and B6. Impact of processing technologies on fortification procedures
Thermal processes
Agitator & retorts used in the sterilisation of materials in flexible packages &
flame sterilisation processes affect fortification procedures.
Packaging materials
Vitamin  losses  in  aseptically  processed  foods  attributed  to  dissolved  and
headspace oxygen.
Light  permeability  and  barrier  properties  of  plastics  and  laminates  influence
nutrient losses during storage.
In  the  preparation  of  any  fortified  food,  these  parameters  must  be  given  due
consideration. Process parameters as well as packaging material, interaction between the
micronutrients, food and the packaging materials or polymers are very important. Irradiation and microwaves
Loss of vitamin B1 during irradiation of whole grains is small.
Vitamin B1 loss is more during irradiation of milled grains.
Losses of vitamin can be reduced by exclusion of oxygen during irradiation and
storage.
Increased use of microwave cooking on cook-chill foods does not have a major
effect on vitamin.
General recommendations for food fortification
A multi-sectoral approach should be adopted in food fortification programs.
National  legislation  concerning  fortified  foods  should  be  harmonized  with
international standards or codex alimentarius. 
International guidelines on acceptable and safe fortification practices should be
adopted.
Relevant nutritional information should be provided through adequate levelling.
Levels  of  fortification  also  should  be  evaluated  and  adjusted  according  to
bioavailability of the nutrient. 
Food control systems based on even good manufacturing practices, good hygienic
practices or analytical method should be developed and adopted.  
Impact  of  food  fortification  on  nutritional  status  should  be  monitored  for
appropriate corrective action. 