Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 53
High Energy RTE Food Paste (Part 1)
High energy and protein foods are the foods that provide high calorie in the diet to fuel
individuals with increased energy and proteins requirements. An increased energy and
protein diet may be taken to encourage weight gain and catch up with growth, to meet
increased needs due to illness, or during times of poor appetite.
High energy ready to eat food paste are energy dense and micronutrient enhanced pastes
which are commonly used in therapeutic feeding. These soft foods are homogeneous mix
of lipid  and  protein rich  foods  containing  essential  micronutrients.  These  foods  are
suitable for the treatment  of malnourished children particularly those suffering with
severe acute malnutrition problems. 
Advantages of the high energy ready to eat food pastes include that these foods; have
high calorific value and they are fortified with needed micronutrients. They contain
oilseeds, cereals, oils, sugar, milk powder and micronutrient premix. They have low
water activity and because of low moisture content and low water activity they do not
support the microbial growth. So, they have comparatively longer shelf life.
They are smooth homogeneous paste with smooth texture. They have particle size is
generally less than 200  µ. Important characteristics of ready to eat high energy food
paste include pleasant flavour, convenience in using and can be safely used for home
consumption. They do not need any prior dilution or cooking or any preparation before
consumption.The ideal characteristics of a ready to eat food paste include the following; 1) It should
contain good nutritional value i.e., protein, energy and micronutrient contents of ready to
eat food paste should be up to the appropriate levels, 2) It should provide amino acid
complementation for maximum protein quality i.e. amino acid from different sources like
milk sources or vegetable sources such that they become complementary to each other in
providing essential amino acids to the body. 3) The texture should be smooth; they
should be uniform in their size and characteristics, there should be no grittiness, no
lumps or no oil separation. 4) It should be easy to squeeze out of the sachet, 5) It should
have a light cream or brown colour, 6) It should have adequate shelf life and stability, 7)
It should be resistant to bacterial contamination and highly palatable with good taste. 
The ingredients of ready to eat food paste may be broadly categorised into four groups;
First group include those ingredients which provide energy such as fats, oils or sugars,
they  are  used  as  energy  supplement.  Second  set  of  ingredients  includes  protein
supplement  like  legumes,  pulses,  oilseeds  or skim  milk  powder. Third  set  includes
micronutrient premix containing required vitamins and minerals. Fourth group is the
staple food ingredient preferably containing cereals which is used as a base material for
the preparation of the ready to eat food paste. 
Some common ingredients for ready to eat food paste are the peanut butter, vegetable oil,
sugar, cereal powder, milk powder, vitamin & mineral premix, antioxidant, emulsifying
agents and flavouring. For peanut butter, the raw peanut has been roasted, split and
ground, without added oil, salt or preservatives. Vegetable oil like sunflower oil, soybean
oil is another important ingredient of ready to eat food paste. Rapeseed oil and soybean
oil are preferred as they have the advantage of providing a good balance of essential fatty
acids. The desired granular size of white sugar or brown sugar should be less than 200 µ.Cereal powders include cereal based formulation such as Bengal gram, maize, etc.  Skim
milk powder, full-cream milk powder, whey protein powder can be used as a protein
complimentary sources. Bioavailability of vitamins and minerals should be insured while
preparing  the  vitamin  and  mineral  premix.  The  premix  should  neither  alter  the
characteristics of the product nor have any a specific flavour or colour.
Antioxidants  are  added  to  stabilize  the  product  and  prevent  oil  oxidation.  Some
emulsifying agents are also added to avoid the separation of oil and improve the binding
properties  of  the  material.  For  example,  lecithin  (max.  0.5  g  /100  g),  mono  and
diglyceride (max. 2 g / 100 g) can be added without any adverse effect. In case of
flavouring, natural flavours are preferred for taste masking.According to the UNICEF or WHO program, the nutritional composition of ready to eat
food paste for severely acute  malnutrition children should contain moisture about 2.5 %
maximum, energy 520 – 550 kCal/g, protein 10 to 12 % of the total energy and 45 to 60
% of the total energy should come from the lipid sources.
For microbiological safety, it should have less than 10000 CFU/g, yeast count less than
10, mould less than 50 and E.coli should be negative.
Similarly, the micro nutrient requirements for these foods are also recommended. It
should have potassium 1100 - 400 mg / 100 g, phosphorus 300 - 600 mg / 100 g, vitamin
e should be minimum 20 mg / 100 g and biotin should be minimum 60 mg / 100 g.
Similarly, other vitamins and mineral composition is recommended. The quality control in selection of raw ingredient is very important factor as the growth
of fungi or mold may cause the production of toxins.  Aflatoxin is produced by an
Aspergillus species of fungus (molds), which contaminates the peanuts after they have
been harvested. Consumption of aflatoxin can result in hepatic oxidative stress, and
predispose the individual to hepatic cancers. Very high doses of aflatoxin can produce
acute intoxications and moderate doses may depress child growth.  Therefore, care must
be taken to store peanut in cool and dry environment or treat peanut with fungicide.
The raw  ingredient  must be free from any bacterial  contamination  which might  be
dangerous to health.  Increasing water content allow bacteria, mold to grow, promoting
product degradation. Rodent/insect contamination of the stored ingredients should beavoided. Contamination through unhygienic handling of the ingredients should be taken
care of.  Hence to avoid any type of contamination a good manufacturing practices or
good hygienic practices must be followed in the processing plant and in the storage
facility.
Pesticides and heavy metals cause acute and delayed health effects, ranging from simple
irritation of these skin and eyes to more severe effect such as affecting the nervous
system, mimicking hormones causing reproduction problem, and also causing cancers.
So, analysis of the content of pesticides and heavy metals will resolve the further health
related issues. Similarly, the oxidation of oil could be an issue in affecting the quality
of paste. One of the possible reason may be the loss of vitamins during storage.
There  are  three  steps  for  the  formulation  of  RTE  paste.  Step  1,  selection  and
identification  of  the  ingredient.  Firstly,  the  target  group,  type  of  malnutrition,  and
geographical area has to be decided. Then second step is optimisation of the formulation
using linear programming tool. And then finally, the comparison with lab testing and
sensitivity analysis has to be done. The flowchart for formulation of RTE paste can be
referred from the above slide.
MATLAB 7.1 can be used to perform linear programming. The steps involved in solving
includes defining of the objective function and constraint (bounds, upper bounds, lower
bound, equality, inequality). Then assigning the variables, calling the linprog solver, and
finally evaluation of the result. 
On the basis  of objective  function  and constraints  the optimum  solution of various
ingredients  (x,  y,  z)  is  obtained.  The  result  obtained  should  be  cross  checked  in
laboratory testing before proceeding further. The primary unit operations include processing like cleaning, sorting, grading, washing,
dehulling  etc.  In  cleaning,  sorting,  grading  and washing some  dirt,  damaged  grain,
foreign grains, noxious seeds, insects and insect etc. are removed. 
Then the next step is dehulling; dehulling of the pulses, legumes, oilseeds, cereals, is
done by using a suitable dehulling machine where the outer hull or seed coat is removed.
Dehulling facilitates or reduces the fibre content of the material to acceptable levels. It
decreases or if possible it eliminates phytates, tannins, and phenolic materials. It also
removes chymotrypsin inhibitors which can lower the protein digestibility, amino acid
bioavailability and minerals absorption.
Milling is used to minimize the loss of nutritional value and avoid undesirable changes in
ingredients. It increases the  feasibility to mix the ingredient properly according to the
formulation and maintain uniform particle size of the ingredients. The major benefit
obtained from the milling is easy mixing of the different ingredients and formation of
smooth paste.
Formulation  containing  cereals,  legumes,  pulses, or starchy roots  (potato  and  sweet
potato) require adequate boiling to gelatinize the starch and to eliminate anti-nutritional
factors. Boiling also improves the digestibility and absorption of nutrients. 
Roasting of cereals and legumes improves colour, texture; extends shelf life and reduces
the  anti-nutrient  factors.  It  enhances  flavour  through caramelization and Maillard
browning on the surface of the food. It improves digestibility and contributes to reduce
the bulkiness  of formulated  food. It reduces  microorganisms  and enzyme  activities;
destroy insects and increases the nutrient level of grains. 
Roasting process contribute to the formation of characteristic aroma and flavour that may
be through mallard reaction or due to the interaction with sugar. 
For example, in the case of potato, amino butyric acid reacts with sugar and give rise to
the characteristic caramel flavour or nutty flavour. Similarly, in the peanut or cocoa bean
there  are  the  different  enzymes  which  contribute  to  the  characteristic  flavour
development.Sprouting, malting and fermentation can induce hydrolysis of phytates and decrease its
effect on absorption of minerals. Action of natural amylases results in pre-digestion of
starch protein. It may also improve the vitamin content. During germination, the seed
coat of the grain splits which can be easily removed by washing. Therefore, care should
be taken to eliminate the growth of mycotoxin producing microorganisms. 
The above slide shows the process flowchart for the preparation of ready to eat food
paste. The pre-processed raw ingredients like roasted floor, peanut etc. are added to
processed  powder  ingredients  like  milk  powder,  sugar,  vitamin  mineral  premix,
emulsifier, stabilizers and liquid ingredient (vegetable oil).The above mixture is weighed by appropriate metering unit or weighing unit. The next
step is the mixing of the ingredients which include both liquid and solid ingredient by
using suitable equipment to form a paste. This paste is further homogenised to obtain a
uniform particle size. And the last step is the packaging of paste in appropriate packets. 
This slide shows the schematic or operation wise process flow chart for the preparation
of the RTE paste. There is a primary grinder where roasted oil seeds like peanut are
added. The liquid ingredients, solid ingredients along with some stabilizers are mixed
with the help of dozing tank. This mixture is further passed to the colloidal mill where
the flour, sugar and milk powder are homogenised. Finally, the paste produced is sent to
the packaging unit to be packed in appropriate packets.
The next operation is the packaging. Packaging is in the form of sachets of different
sizes, moisture, oil and air proof materials (ALP, PET). This packets should be totally
impermeable to air or moisture.
Normally ALP, PET are considered suitable material for the packaging of such type of
product. The ink and glue used should be food contact approved. The proper sealing is
very important to prevent leakage. It should be hermetically sealed and sealing should be
minimum 2 mm to ensure no entry of air. The seal should be free of impression or design
on  the  seal  surface  that  would  conceal  or  impair  visual  detection  of  sealed
effects.
Finally, after packaging the labelling becomes very important. It should contain the
proper information about the ingredients under regulatory agencies in different country.
The labelling should conform to the existing regulations of the nation in which the food
is prepared and to be consumed. In general, the information that are clearly printed on
the label should include product generic name, raw materials listed in descending order
of quantities, clear pictorial instructions, manufacturing date, best before date, batch or
lot number, storage conditions. A leaflet should be included in each carton with detailed
nutritional composition of the product, and composition of mineral and vitamin premix.Cleaning  and  sanitization  is  another  important  aspect.  It  can  be  automated,  semi-
automated and integrated CIP systems. Integrated CIP system is preferred because this
CIP system allows the cleaning and sanitization of the closed or open circuits without
dismantling the equipments.
In the CIP system, different consumables are water which is used for preparation of
chemical, hot water solution or rinsing steps; time for preparation of the CIP solution,
disinfection steps, rinsing steps; chemicals like alkali, acid, disinfectants; and energy for
heating and cooling. 
The above slide shows the flowchart of the CIP process. In batch system, after the
completion of each batch all the equipment are pre-rinsed, alkali cleaned to eliminateaccumulated organic matter, rinsed with hot water to wash off residual caustic, acid
cleaned to eliminate mineral deposits and neutralize any residual caustic, rinsed with hot
water to push out residual acid and salts, disinfected to kill or inactivate microorganisms
and finally post rinsed to eliminate the CIP chemicals. 
Safety
The ready to eat food paste should be free from any objectionable matter. It must not
contain any toxic substance originating from microorganisms or any other poisonous or
deleterious  substances  including  anti  nutritional  factors,  heavy  metals  or  pesticides
etcetera.
In this table, there are shown the maximum levels of different objectionable content in
RTE  paste.  The  tolerable  limit  of  aflatoxin  is  maximum  5  ppb.  Similarly,
microorganisms content, CFU, coliform test, yeast, mould etc. are provided in this table.