Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 59
Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)
In  food  processing  industry,  Good  Manufacturing  Practices  (GMP)  is  an  important
aspect.  GMP  is  defined  as  the  procedure  which  provides  the  basic  environmental
conditions and management system structure for the production of safe foods.
GMP  is  needed  to  assist  the  organization  to  implement  and  operate  effective
management practices, to produce and process product as per the specifications and to
reduce the risk of contamination. It is very important as far as the safety of the customers
are concerned. It is required to maintain manufacturing consistency as well as it is
needed for the image and reputation of the company.There are four major pillars in GMP process i.e. management responsibilities for the
GMP, food processing resources, measurement analysis and improvement to make sure
that the GMP is fully applied or implemented, and then another aspect is the product
realization.
Any food processing industry not only deals inside the factory, but also deals with the
raw material like how and when the raw material  is produced. The overall holistic
approach  starting  from  the  primary  production  of  the  raw  materials,  transportation,
storage and finally retail etc. is taken care of. It involves all the suppliers, raw materials,
packaging  material,  processing  aids,  pesticides,  fertilizers,  cleaning  chemicals  etc.
involved in the chain.
So, good agronomical practices and horticultural practices should be followed and good
environmental practices must be ensured to get good quality raw material.The role of organization as far as the implementation of the GMP is concerned, has very
important role. The organization should set up a GMP team, then formation of the SOPs
i.e.  Standard  Operating  Procedures,  and  its  documentation;  setting  up  of  a  quality
assurance system for production as well as service, then communication both internal as
well as external, proper hygiene and sanitation, proper training of the personnel, periodic
evaluation  and  update  and  documentation.  All  these  come  under  the  role  of  the
organizations. 
The organizational responsibility of GMP is to plan, to document, to implement, to
operate, to validate, to maintain, to improve and to upgrade i.e. to create a GMP system
to ensure the quality products. 
HACCP (Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point) is an important aspect of GMP. It
can be a part of the GMP and is a systematic program to assure food safety. HACCP is
designed to be applied to every aspect of food industry from farm to table including
growth, harvest, processing, distribution, and sales etc.
HACCP  requires  the use of SOPs  or clearly  written  instructions,  the  generation  of
accurate, accountable records for all the process steps and measurements as well as the
employment of the appropriately trained staff. A basic GMP program is a prerequisite of
HACCP accreditation. HACCP is a vehicle to ensure safety for human consumers and
eliminate  as  much  risk  as  possible  from  a  food  processing  or  food  manufacturing
perspective.
There are seven steps in HACCP, and these seven steps must be implemented in the
chronological order. The first step depends upon the type of food i.e. being produced, the
process value chain and this step conducted hazard analysis i.e. in the process line, what
are  the  chances  for  the  hazards  or  for  the  deterioration  or  the  contamination  by
microorganism etc.
 Conducting a hazard analysis is the first point, second is the determination the CCPs
(critical  control  points)  in the  process  line  and  then  establishing  the  critical  limits.
Establishment of a system to monitor control of the CCPs, and then establishment of the
corrective action to be taken when monitoring indicate that a particular CCP is not in
control.  This  step is  followed by establishment  of the  procedure for verification  toconfirm that the HACCP system is working efficiently or effectively and finally the step
of establishment of documentation concerning all procedures and records appropriate to
these principles and their application. 
The standard operating procedures is basically, a fixed methodology i.e. a production
team should be provided with SOPs, where the SOPs should have a clear purpose and
frequency. There is a need to maintain uniformity i.e. operating manual for the operating
personals.  It  should  have  clear  cut  description  of  the  procedures  which  should  be
properly documented, in fact documentation give the proof of work. 
It also helps to correct the action i.e. if SOPs are present, one can easily find that whether
the SOPs or the standard protocols have been followed or not. If not, what is the CAR
i.e. the Corrective Action Request. In CAR, each deviation from the SOP could be
determined.
Objective evidence is used to state the deviation, then action plan to prevent deviation
reoccurrence i.e. to make sure in the future that such deviations are not occurring, then
setting a deadline and verify that the action plan has been effective, and finally review
and documentation is done. These steps set the corrective action request.Documentation is the proof of action taken. If it is not documented, it means that it did
not happen. Good documentation practices (GDP) should be followed to maintain the
document and the records should be readily available. Document must be legible, readily
identifiable, retrievable, and they should be accurate and consistent with the SOPs.
The  control  of  documents  is  important;  they  are  reviewed  and  controlled  prior  to
implementation,  updated  and  reapproved  as  and  when  necessary.  Changes  and  the
current revision states of the documents are to be identified. Obsolete documents are
prevented  from  users  i.e.  the  document  which  had  become  old,  they  should  be
appropriately removed from the system.
GMP team is very important which has to be separated from the manufacturing team. It
is basically a member of multidisciplinary knowledge and experience that should have
the people, who have knowledge of all aspects of the product, product manufacturing,
and its packaging. The GMP team is responsible for the maintenance of the records of
the process.
The team’s knowledge and experience also should be properly recorded. The GMP team
drafts the policies fulfilling the statutory and regulatory requirements and also maintains
the integrity of the policy. It access team’s efficiency as well as conducts proper reviews,
and submit reports to the top management that GMP is properly being implemented. The
GMP  team  maintains  proper  communication  i.e.  the  communication  with  the
management, communication with the production, and team communication with the
other teams involved in the process.
Resources are very essential for the implementation of GMP. The resources include both
the human resource as well as infrastructure resource. They must strictly adopt hygienic
and sanitary SOP’s to attain GMP.
Human resource consist of the personnel which are appointed in the factory, whether in
the production team, market team or GMP team etc. They should have proper education.
adequate  training,  proper  skill  and  experience.  Even  personnel  must  be  assessed
periodically.There should be proper awareness among the personnel regarding food safety and food
uses during the storage, transportation and handling. The training programs should be
routinely  organized,  it  should  be  reviewed  updated  and  documented.  The  human
resources should be always updated and should have the current knowledge about the
product and the process.
The GMP infrastructure i.e. the premises; the location of the premises is an important
aspect of GMP. Food processing industry should be established away from polluted areas
and industries. Areas subjected to floods are prone to infestation by pests. The food
industry should not be established near the areas where solid waste or liquid waste
cannot be removed effectively. The locations should be good with easy communication
or directly linked and more importantly the nearby surrounding should be contamination
free.Both the external as well as internal food industry building should be designed with
extreme accuracy and attention. An area of 45 cm width should surround the exterior of
all production and storage buildings. The trees should be at least 10 m away from the
production and storage facility.
The facilities for disposal of sewage and wastewater should be provided in the building.
The building materials or walls should have proper protection from weather. For the
outside building proper light arrangements should be made; lighting should be yellow
sodium lamps or such that they should not invite any insects etc.
The internal building design consists of internal raw material storage, processing, and
product storage. There should be separate movement of the material for inlet and outletand should be unidirectional. The waste generated at any stage of processing should go
out, and the material enters in the actual processing room, heating room, packaging room
etc. Inside the packaging area, the packaging materials should be stored, and finally the
material moves and comes to secondary packaging and loading should be done. 
In outside there should be clear cut passage for truck that comes to unload the material,
and load the finished product, and go out. The interior surface of walls, doors and floors
should be smooth, easy to clean, and they should be impervious.
Floors should be free from cracks and open joints as well as there should be adequate
drainage for cleaning. Ceiling and overhead fixtures should be such that can be cleaned
easily. The cables and pipes should be fixed above ceiling or 40 mm away from the
surface to enable their cleaning. Glass windows should be protected against breakage. 
Food handling facilities: As per WHO guidelines, potable water should be used both for
manufacturing and well as hand washing etc. Non-portable water can be used for pest
control or steam generation etc.; the lines should be clearly marked. Personal hygienic
facility, lavatories, and changing facilities should be provided with hot water (at least 40
C). 
The  natural  and  mechanical  ventilation  facilities  should  be  provided  like  even  air
handling  units  etc.  should  be  given.  Proper  ventilation  and  temperature  control
mechanism should be provided in the processing facility, adequate natural as well as
artificial lighting should be provided.GMP  equipment:  The  proper  SOPs  should be  available  for  every  equipment.  They
should be easy to dismount, they should be made from inert material i.e. the material of
construction of equipment should not react with the food component. This should be
inclined, they should have round edges, which are easily accessible for cleaning etc.
They should be covered or protected to prevent contamination, this will be installed at a
distance of 60 cm from walls and 30 cm from the floor. This should be cleaned and
disinfested after every use. All interior surfaces in contact with the product must be self-
emptying.  Final  product  handling  stations  must  be  fitted  with  metal  detectors  of
appropriate sensitivity.
The pest control and prevention is an important aspect i.e. all holes, drains, and places
etc. must be sealed. There should not be any chance of any pest contamination or pest
growing. Food sources should be kept away from the walls and above the ground and the
doors should have self closing facility and curtains.
The use of poisons is strictly prohibited in the raw material as well as in the production
area. Insecticides and pesticides used should be of low toxicity and should be approved
by the regulatory agencies for using at food factory as well as plant inspection and
surveillance programs must be conducted and documented properly.
GMP cleaning consists of removing gross debris from the surfaces, applying a detergent
solution to loosen soil and bacterial film and adding to the piping and to the container
surfaces. Rinsing the equipment and all pipe with hot water and dry cleaning has a prime
importance.  Where  necessary,  disinfection  by  alcohol  or  by  other  disinfectant  with
subsequent rinsing should be done and hygienic storage and handling of the cleaned
portable equipment and utensils is to be done. GIP cleaning includes the cleaning of the
equipment, utensils, rooms and surfaces.Cleaning  and  sanitation  defines  that  procedure and  frequency must  be documented.
Cleaning  products  which  are  used even the cleaning  solutions, acid  solution,  alkali
solution, detergent etc. should be recommended for the use in food industry and should
be properly labeled and kept outside the production area.
The  litter  bins  should be  covered  and  fitted  with  plastic  inserts.  A  central  rubbish
collection point, preferably outside of the raw material and production building should be
provided. Silos must be capable of totally emptied and cleaned. Adequate prevention and
corrective maintenance to facilitate cleaning operations must be done.
Personal hygiene, both for staff as well as for the visitors is very crucial. The people
suffering from injuries and illness should not be allowed inside the production area or inthe factory they should not be allowed to visit. Hairs, moustache, beards etc. must be
properly  covered.  Uniform  must  be  kept  clean  and  must  be  replaced  frequently,
whenever necessary. Jewellery, watches, pins, earrings etc. are not allowed inside the
production area except for the plain wedding rings and the stud earrings. Hand must be
properly washed and handling of finished product must be minimized.
Smoking, chewing, sneezing over the unprotected food products or in the production
area should be prohibited. The smoking and eating areas must be segregated from the
storage and production areas. Visitors must adhere to the personal hygiene requirements.
Proper training should be provided to the employees to be cautious regarding the GMP,
and  must be documented  about the standard practices  for the  cleaning  and for the
personal hygiene etc. Regarding the product realization; organization shall plan and develop the processes
needed  to  manufacture  the  product.  This  is  again  very  important,  this  involves  the
characteristics of the raw material i.e. whether the raw material which is obtained in the
factory, it is of good quality or not. Then control of operations, process operations,
storage operations and handling operations etc.
Characteristics  of  the  end  product  required  i.e.  final  processed  product  should  be
considered. Quality management, storage, transportation, labeling, lot identification and
traceability,  recall  procedures,  and  verification  and  validation  also  are  involved  in
product realization.
The raw material, process ingredients to be used in the product manufacturing, product
contact material and packaging material etc. shall be described in the document of the
SOPs.
The  information  include  biological,  chemical  and  physical  characteristics  of  the
materials. Composition of formulated ingredients, including additives and processing
aids should be checked. The origin of the material for example, whether it is an animal
food or plant food, method of production, packaging and delivery methods, storage
conditions and shelf life is to be mentioned. The preparation or handling before use are
processing along with food safety and quality related acceptances must be attached. All
these information regarding the raw material should be properly documented, and it
should be provided on the label.
Raw material should be inspected routinely, laboratory testing is to be done to evaluate
the fitness, stocks should be subjected to effective stock rotations and the descriptions
are to be kept up to date. The role of the authorities should be defined and the rejected
materials are to be identified, and kept away from the accepted materials as well as
parallel records are to be maintained properly.The control of operations includes the identification of any point in the operations, which
are critical to the safety and implementation of effective control procedures should be
there, and it should be reviewed periodically. Temperature control systems should take
into account which consists of the nature of the food, intended shelf-life of the product,
method of packaging and processing and even intended use.
Similarly the characteristics of the end product is also important. The information which
are needed listed for end products include the product name or similar identification,
type of packaging, method of distribution, storage, proper labeling, different physical,
biological or chemical hazard specification and allergens relevant for food safety. The product information consist of labeling, because adequate label information on the
product enables the next person in the food chain to handle the product safely. Labeling
should be provided on the food and is controlled by regulatory agencies in different
countries.
The general information like product description, composition, serving size, or any other
instructions or any permitted colour, flavor or additives etc. are to be mentioned on the
label. The best before date, batch number, lot number or any instructions required before
consumption should be provided on the label of the product.
The quality management is not only limited  to laboratory operation, but  also it is
included  in  all  activities  related  to  processing  and  product  quality.  The  qualitymanagement is independent of the production and has the right to reject the components
related to process, packaging and finished products.
Food industries should have a quality management team and quality checking team. The
quality management has the right to change and approve process changes, sampling
procedures,  specifications  for  process  control  and  reprocessing  of  the  rejects.  The
finished products should be analyzed and proper laboratory environment and practices
should be followed for the quality analysis  conforming to the written specifications .
Product will not be available for sale/dispatch until all tests are complete, confirming
product quality.
GMP  storage:  Good  practices  in  the  storage  room  describe  that  the  raw  material,
processing material and packaging material etc. are stored separately at ideal storage
conditions of temperature, relative humidity, and air velocity depending upon the type of
the material. Then chemical, packaging, bagged raw material should be stored in sound
pallets. Storage area must be free from pests or any other contaminants. Materials and
products stored must be regularly inspected.
Both the raw material as well as the finished product must be rotated on the basis of First
in-First (FIFO). Accordingly the stocking of the raw material and products should be
done in such a way that the material which enters first inside the storage facility should
go out first.In  GMP,  the  recall  information  should  include  the  information  like  amount  of  the
product produced, in inventory and distributed. Name, size, code or lot number of food
recalled. Area of distribution, reason for the recall and final disposition of the product i.e.
rework, discharge etc should be checked.
Good transportation practices should be followed, the designing and construction of the
vehicle, cleaning and/or disinfect are to be taken care of. A separate facility in the
vehicle  should  be there  for food  and  non-food item,  proper  temperature  should  be
maintained and verification of the temperature is to be done. The vehicle must ensure
during transportation there is no damage to the product, there is no contamination to the
product, and the quality of the product is maintained.The verification procedure includes proper inspection of vehicle. The vehicle should
restrain  the  transportation  of  non-food  item  in  the  same  vehicle  i.e.  design  and
construction of the vehicles should be proper, so that it meets with the requirement and
loading and unloading should be checked. The materials used in the vehicle for food
transportation should be permitted material which can be in contact with the food.
During GMP  verification,  the  internal  audits  must be carried out at least every six
months. Audits determined whether the GMP confirms to the plant arrangements and as
per  the  required  standards.  Audits  determine  whether  the  GMP  is  effectively
implemented and updated. All procedures for auditing like responsibilities, requirements,
results, and records are to be defined in a documented process. The follow up action
based on the results of the audit should be taken up, and must be reviewed, and properly
documented.Continual improvement regards that management should ensure that the effectiveness of
the GMP system is continually improved through communication, reviews, both internal
as well external audit action and corrective action etc. The evaluation and updating
activities should be based on input from communication external as well as internal
communication, input from other information concerning the suitability, acceptability,
and effectiveness of the GMP system and output from the management review. All the
activities are to be recorded, documented, and reported.
The production of fortified blended food by extrusion is described for application of
GMP and HACCP. The raw material is soybean and maize i.e. the soy maize blended
fortified food. During the raw material intake and loading, the CCP has to be maintained,because maize is susceptible to growth of microbes and even in soybean, mycotoxins or
molds may be present. 
The moisture content of the grain is an important factor which can encourage the growth
of the mould. So, it is important that the raw materials are free from mold or toxin or
below the maximum permissible level of 20 ppb. The moisture content for maize and
soya should not be more than 13.5% and 11.5% respectively. This is a critical control
point because the excess moisture will encourage the growth of the mold and mycotoxins
etc.
The samples should be taken immediately to laboratory and tests should be performed
for determination  of aflatoxin  and moisture.  After that in other operations  like  raw
material storage, cleaning, weighing and blending with soy in horizontal mixer, the GMP
should be followed.
Then finally after the grinding, there is an important step of cooking. As soy contains
some  anti-nutritional  factor,  which  could  be  removed  by  extrusion  cooking.  The
temperature range of 135 ⁰C to 160⁰C or the optimized 145 ⁰C must be ensured which
will ensure that the temperature inside the extruder is sufficient enough to remove the
antinutrients. The CCP is to be maintained and accordingly the samples should be taken
for analysis.After the exclusion, it should be analyzed for other tests to ensure that the trypsin
inhibitors are completely inactivated. Then again the cooling of the extruder becomes a
GMP.
Then grinding of the extrudates i.e. after extrusion the products comes in different shape
and sizes which should be blended into flour. This become a CCP i.e. the grinding must
ensure that it should not absorb moisture and the proper particle sizes etc. If  the  blend
absorbs moisture during grinding the contaminants will grow.
Then weighing of the cooked maize, soy, sugars and micronutrient premix should be
done  according  to the  GMP. Then  blending  cooked  maize  soya  with  vitamins  and
minerals have a critical control point. The vitamins and minerals should not exceed the
maximum limit i.e. the length of the mixing cycle to obtain homogeneous mix should
have CV of 10% or lower.
If they are added in more, there may be some excessive consumption of vitamins or
excessive consumptions of certain minerals show some undesirable or toxic effects in the
long run. Thus, it becomes a critical control point. Then bagging, weighing, stitching,
product storage dispatch and in all the cases, GMP should be followed. 
In the process value chain which is the step, where there is a chance of the contamination
with a biological agent or physical agent or which may ultimately lead to the safety
hazard has been marked. All these points are designated as the critical control point, andfor them, the control measures should be taken, so that the chances of contamination are
omitted.
The record sheet facilitates good documentation practices about tests, analysis and CCP,
GMP steps as well. The test results should be properly recorded.
An overview  is  described  in  this  lecture  about good manufacturing  practices,  good
hygienic practices and how it should be followed. GMP, GHP and HACCP are very
important aspect in any food processing industries. All care needed should be taken to
make sure that the product starting from the raw material, processing, handling, storage,
till it reaches to the consumer table for the consumption, it becomes the responsibility of
the industry to ensure food safety. 