Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 06
Browning Reactions
Browning reactions are important phenomena that occur in many foods when they are
exposed to different conditions during processing, handling or storage. 
Browning reactions are complex reactions which occur when many foods are processed.
In some cases, the brown colour developed becomes highly desirable and are intimately
associated with a delicious high grade product. For example, in case of coffee, bread and
other baked products. During baking the crust of bread has developed brown colour. In
potato chips and many other products, controlled browning is desired. Yet in other foods,
browning reactions are undesirable, because, the flavours and colors which are formed in
these products as a result of these reactions may sometime produce a foul smell or they
may give objectionable colour. In case of drying of fruits or vegetables and in canning or
concentrating  of  fruit  juices,  it  is  highly  desirable  to  retard  or  to  avoid  browning
reactions.Types of browning reactions in foods
There are two types of browning reactions which generally occur in food. 
(i) Non-oxidative browning reaction
Caramelization
Maillard reaction
(ii) Oxidative browning reactions.
Enzymatic
Ascorbic acid oxidation
Non-enzymatic browning  
The non-enzymatic browning reactions are mainly responsible for the colour and flavour
of many foods like dates, honey, chocolates and so on. In fact, the presence of reactive
reducing sugars is responsible for these types of browning reactions in food. When the
foods having reactive reducing sugars are heated as in the case of cooking or in such
other  processes;  these  sugars  undergo  ring  opening,  enolization,  dehydration  and
fragmentation and, as a result of these processes, the unsaturated carbonyl compounds
are formed. These unsaturated carbonyl compounds produce brown colour or brown
polymer or flavoured compounds in foods. These non-enzymatic browning reactions are
generally  heat-induced reactions  and  they  can  be  categorized  into  two  groups;  i.e.
caramelization and Maillard reaction. 
Caramelization
Sugars in dry conditions or in their concentrated syrup form, when heated, undergo a
number of reactions  depending upon the presence of  catalyst or temperature  of the
heating process. Generally, there are reactions leading to equilibration of anomeric and
ring forms. There may be an  inversion of sucrose, condensation and polymerization
reactions leading to the formation of oligosaccharides and polysaccharides.
Several reactions like isomerization, dehydration, and fragmentation, take place leading
to  the  formation  of  unsaturated  polymers  with  brown  colour.  In  fact,  during  theseprocesses conjugated double bonds are introduced in sugars; furan derivatives or other
unsaturated compounds that absorb light and produce colour.
However, with the use of proper catalyst, it would be possible to conduct caramelization
in a controlled manner to provide either flavouring or colouring caramel for food uses
e.g. for flavouring purposes, sucrose in concentrated syrup is caramelized. 
For the manufacture of caramel colour for use in beverages, glucose syrup treated with
dilute sulphuric acid, partially neutralized with ammonia are used. Sucrose is heated in
solution with acids or acidic ammonium salts to produce various products for use in
foods, candies and beverages.
Caramel colors
Commercially there are three types of caramel colors are produced.
(i) Acid-fast caramel 
It is the most abundant form of caramel color available in the market and these are made
with ammonium bisulphate catalyst to produce the color for cola drinks.
(ii) Brewer colors 
These are made by heating sucrose solution with ammonium ion and these  colors are
used in the brewing industry. 
(iii) Baker’s color
These are produced by direct pyrolysis of sucrose to give a burnt sucrose color. These
colors are used in bakery products. 
Caramel flavours
Certain pyrolytic reactions produce unsaturated ring systems that have unique taste and
fragrances in the materials. For example, maltol and isomaltol contribute to the flavor of
many baked products particularly the baked bread.
On  the  other  hand,  2-H-4-hydroxy-5-methyl-furan-3-one  is  a  compound  which  is
produced during the process of the browning reactions. This gives the burnt flavor in the
overcooked meat or such other materials. The flavor is because of the generation of this
compound or related compounds.Maillard reaction
The Maillard reaction is generally a complex group of many reactions. In caramelization
reaction, only the free aldehyde group or free ketone group of the reducing sugar is
responsible whereas in the Maillard reaction, the interaction between the aldehydes and
ketones of the reducing sugar with the free amino groups of the proteins, peptides and
amino acids are involved.
The interactions of carbonyl group of the sugar, with the amino group of the protein
result in the formation of sugar amines. The set of various reactions that sugar amines
undergo resulting in browning is known as Maillard reaction. The sugar amines form a
brown  color at  a  lower  temperature  than  that  of  the  formation  of  the  color by
caramelization and therefore, Maillard reactions’ products generally dominate in brown
foods.Steps in Maillard reaction
The first step is the formation of glycosyl amine that undergoes rearrangement, generally
known as  amadori rearrangement or reverse  amadori rearrangement depending upon
whether  aldose  sugar  or  ketose  sugar  is  involved.  These  amadori compounds  then
undergo rearrangement or get decomposed. The condensation products of sugar and
amine  undergo  enolization  and  rearrangement.  It  then  undergoes  condensation  and
polymerization forming  red-brown or dark brown compounds. These brown to black
compounds, amorphous unsaturated heterogeneous polymers, which are produced as a
result of the Maillard reaction, are generally known as melanoids or melanoidins.
Formation of glycosylamine from aldose
So, as discussed in the earlier slides, the carbonyl carbon of the reducing sugar (see
figure) i.e. D-glucopyranose in the open-chain form, first undergoes nucleophilic attack
by the amino nitrogen lone pair electron. This is followed by dehydration, ring closure
and diglycosylamine is formed in the presence of excess sugar.
The glycosylamine formed undergoes amadori rearrangement and results in -1-amino-
2-keto sugar. 
Formation of glycosylamine from ketoseIf  the  initial  sugar  reactant  is  a  ketose,  a  glycosylamine  is  produced  in  a  similar
mechanism as it is produced from aldose sugar. However, it can undergo a reverse
amadori arrangement  which  is  commonly  known  as  Heyne's rearrangement  and  it
produces 2-amino aldose. 
Decomposition pathways of amadori compounds to produce melanoidin pigments
The amadori products or reverse amadori may be decomposed or degraded at least in two
ways (see Fig.). One way is proceeding through a pathway leading to the formation of 3
deoxyhexosone intermediate and  the  other  is  through  the  formation of  methyl  -
dicarbonyl compounds.
Both  the  pathways  at  the  end  undergo  amino  dehydration  reaction and  ultimately
produce melanoidin pigments which have pyrazine and imidazole rings in addition to
hydroxyl  methyl  furaldehyde  and  reductones.  These  melanoidins usually  give  the
undesirable color or flavor in the materials.Effect on Maillard reaction on amino acids
In the Maillard reaction, it has been seen that the reaction takes place between the free
amino group of the amino acids or proteins and an aldehydic and ketonic group of the
reducing sugars in free form. It is obvious that if the amino acid involved in the Maillard
reaction is an essential amino  acids like lysine, histidine, arginine, etc. then definitely
there will be some loss of nutritive value of the food.
However, the absence of Maillard browning does not ensure that there is no loss of
nutritive value has occurred. This is because the amino acid destruction even occurs well
before the development of colored pigment. The colored pigment development actually
is the last step of the Maillard browning reaction wherein the amino acid interacts in the
very beginning of the process and sugar amines are formed. So, the Maillard reaction is
not the only pathway for the destruction of amino acids in  food processing or food
preparation.Strecker degradation
There  are  some  other  pathways  through  which  the  nutritive  value  of  a  protein  is
degraded. One very prominent among these is the Strecker degradation which involves
the interactions of  -dicarbonyl compound to  -amino acids. It can be seen in this
reaction (figure) that the amino acid, L-valine interacts with the -dicarbonyl compound
i.e.  2,  3-butanedione  undergoes  the  decarboxylation  reaction  and  produces
methylpropanal and 3-amino-2-butanones.
Two molecules of 3-amino-2-butanone compounds, in the presence of oxygen, condense
and  give  tetramethylpyrazine  which  results  in  the  loss  of  amino  acid  properties.
Therefore, it is indicated that the Strecker degradation might result in the loss of nutritive
value of the food.Similarly, there might be other complex reactions depending upon the nature of the
dicarbonyl compounds and the nature of the amino acid involved. Volatile products such
as aldehydes, pyrazines and sugar fragmentation products from the Strecker reactions
may contribute to aroma and flavor.
In fact,  sometimes these Strecker degradation products are highly desirable and used
commercially to produce the distinctive flavors of chocolate, honey, maple syrup, bread,
etc. But at times, Maillard reaction products, as well as Strecker reaction products are not
desirable.
In short it can be said that, the Maillard reaction products or Strecker reaction products
may be desirable in some cases or may be undesirable in other cases. So, it needs to be
properly understood that in which product these reactions are required or in which they
are  not  required  and  accordingly  the  processing  parameters  should  be  properly
controlled.  One  important  thing  needs to  be  considered  here  is  that  some  time
premelanoidin products may be formed due to these reactions like  nitrosoamines and
such  products  might  be  carcinogenic  or  mutagenic.  They  may  have  certain  health
concerns, so care should be taken about these products.
In  either  case,  it  is  desirable  to  understand  the  effect  of  reaction  variables  like
temperature, pH, moisture, presence or absence of metal ions and the sugar concentration
on both the reaction. That will be helpful to control these reactions to get the desired end
product.Effect of pH on Maillard reaction
The pH has a significant effect on the Maillard browning reaction rate. In strongly acidic
solution, it becomes insignificant because under  strongly acidic conditions the amino
group of the protein is protonated and consequently the glycosylamine formation is
prevented.
The alkaline conditions in the food favor the Maillard reaction and therefore, the pH in
the range of 7.8 to 9.2 is the most optimum for the Maillard reaction to occur.
Effect of moisture content on Maillard reaction
The moisture content of the food also has a significant effect on the Maillard reaction
rate.  Various  experiments  have  been conducted  by researchers  and a  lot of data  is
available  in  this  regard  in  the  literature.  In  general, it  shows  that  the  intermediate
moisture favours the browning reactions. Maillard browning reactions can be avoided in
completely dried  food or  completely diluted  food. So, 30 % relative  humidity  was
reported to be maximum or optimum where the browning reactions occur at the fastest
rate.
Controlling non-oxidative browning reactions in foods
At times, it becomes necessary to control non oxidative browning reactions in the food.
Obviously, this can be done by controlling the process variables or the factors which
accelerate these reactions. As discussed earlier, temperature is the important parameter
which influences these reactions. If the temperature in the system during processing is
kept as low as possible then the browning reaction can be avoided.
Similarly, these  heat-induced browning reactions can be controlled by keeping the pH
below the isoelectric pH of the amino acid, peptide and proteins and by decreasing the
moisture to a very low level near dehydrating conditions or to the critical moisture
content level. If the food is a liquid, then it would be diluted as much as possible which
retard the Maillard reactions.Many  times,  sulphur  dioxide  and  sulfites  are  added  in  the  food,  particularly  in
dehydrated foods, fruits, vegetables, etc. to extend their shelf life. These sulphur dioxide
and sulfites also inhibit  browning reactions. However, they do not prevent the loss of
nutritive  value of the amino  acid  involved in the Maillard  reaction.  This  is mainly
because of the utilization and subsequent degradation of an  amino acid such as lysine
which occurs well before the point of action of sulphur dioxide in browning inhibition.
Sulfites have their little effect on Strecker degradation. The possible mechanism of the
use of sulphur dioxide or sulfites in the prevention of browning is that it interacts with
the free aldehydic group or free ketonic group and blocks the formation of sugar amine
and ultimately the chain reaction is stopped.
Enzymatic (oxidative) browning
Another set of the browning reaction is the enzymatic or oxidative browning reactions.
These are also known as phenolase browning reaction or  enzyme-catalyzed oxidative
browning reactions. These are of commercial significance, particularly in the fruits and
vegetables in which phenolase enzymes are common. 
The  fruits  and  vegetables  like  apple,  banana,  potato,  etc.  they  contain  the  enzyme
phenolase and also contain the substrate phenolic compounds, but, in the intact tissue
phenolic substrates are separated from the phenolases or polyphenolase. So, they cannot
come in contact and do not interact. Therefore, the enzymatic oxidation reaction does not
take place. But, when the tissue of these vegetables or fruits are damaged for example,
when apples or potatoes are peeled, these substrate phenols and the enzymes phenolases,
get released from their cells, come in contact with each other and in the presence of
atmospheric oxygen, an instant or very fast oxidative reaction takes place. 
A series of complex processes are followed which produce brown coloured compounds
which are generally known as melanins. 
Reactions in enzymatic browning
The enzymatic browning reactions occur in two ways i.e. phenolase catalyzes two types
of reactions – (i) Hydroxylation A 
It is referred to as phenol hydroxylase of cresolase activity. This reaction results in
orthohydroxylation  of a phenol.
(ii) Oxidation B 
It is referred to as polyphenol oxidase of catecholase activity. This reaction results in the
oxidation of diphenol to an orthoquinone. 
If tyrosine is a substrate, phenolase catalyzes its hydroxylation to dihydroxy  phenyl
alanine that is called DOPA and, subsequently DOPA is converted into or oxidized into
DOPA  quinone.  The  remaining  portions  of  the  reaction  sequence  involve  non-
enzymatic  oxidations  and  ultimately  polymerization  of  5,  6-quinone
to brown melanin pigments.
Reactions in enzymatic browning
The reaction pathway of the tyrosine is shown in Fig. The substrate, tyrosine in the
presence of oxygen and phenolase enzyme undergoes hydroxylation reaction that forms
DOPA.  Further, the  DOPA  is  converted  into  DOPA  quinone  through  oxidation  in
presence of the  enzyme. In absence of enzyme, the oxidation of DOPA results into
hallachrome.  DOPA  quinone  is  converted  into  LEUCO  compounds  which  is  then
oxidized into hallachrome.
This  hallachrome may  go  decarboxylation  reaction  and  get  changed  into  5,  6-
dihyroxyindole and  5,  6-dihyroxyindole-2-carboxylic  acid  and  ultimately  both  areconverted into various unsaturated carbonyl compounds which are collectively known as
melanins. These are responsible for the brown color of the food materials or such fruits
and vegetables.
Controlling enzymatic browning reactions in foods
These enzymatic browning reactions may be undesirable in the fruits because it might
influence the marketability of these products. Sometime if it is not controlled, these may
become unhealthy. So, it is needed to control the factors which accelerate these reactions
e.g. phenolases activities may be inhibited or may be controlled by removing one or
more components in the food like oxygen . Similarly, these enzymatic oxidation reactions
are catalyzed by certain agents like metal, ions, etc. So, if these metal ions are removed
from the system or even the substrate like phenolases that can inhibit the browning
reaction. Heat treatment or the application of sulphur dioxide or sulfite is commonly
used  for the  inactivation  of  polyphenolase, polyphenol  oxidase  enzymes.  Also at  a
certain temperature, these enzymes get inactivated, therefore, many of these fruits and
vegetables  are given mild heat treatment which is called blanching. The purpose of
blanching is to inactivate the enzyme; so, as to control these browning reactions during
their subsequent drying and dehydration processes.
Phenolases can also be inhibited by the addition of sufficient amounts of acidulants in
the system such as citric acid, malic acid, phosphoric acid or such other acid and by
bringing down the pH 3 or lower; under the extreme pH  conditions, these enzymesbecome inactive. However, this should be done with caution because lowering down the
pH might increase the acidity and affect the sensory characteristics of the food.
These acidulants like citric acid, phosphoric acid, etc. also act as chelating agent. They
bind metal ion making them unavailable for the oxidation reaction. Oxygen can be
excluded from the system by either vacuum or nitrogen flushing or immersing the plant
tissue in a brine solution or in syrup solution. In fact, during the preparation of potato
chips or even during peeling operations, it is commonly used to avoid these enzymatic
browning. 
However, the same set of enzymatic browning reactions like phenolases and polyphenol
oxidase and the substrate like phenols, catechol, catechins, etc. are highly desirable in
products  like  tea  as  they  are  involved  in  the  formation  of  coloring or  flavoring
compounds. During the tea processing, particularly in black tea processing, enzymatic
oxidation  by  phenolases  are  very  important.  In  black  tea  manufacturing,  during
fermentation or oxidation, tea leaves are exposed to suitable conditions to encourage the
enzymatic oxidation reaction in a controlled way so that the desirable  coloring and
flavoring compounds are produced.
In the nutshell, it can be said that browning reactions are the very important reactions in
food. They may be desirable in some foods or may be undesirable in the other foods.
Therefore, a clear understanding of the desirability or undesirability of the reaction in
food is needed.  Accordingly, the proper control of the processing conditions or the
parameters should be taken to get the desired results.