Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 60
Food Processing Overview & Course Summary
In this lecture, an overview of the current status of the food processing in the country and
the course summary is presented.
There are significant opportunities in India; it is being considered as a global sourcing
hub. India has 52 % of the cultivable land compared to 11 % of world’s average. All 15
major climates in the world exist in India. It has 46 out of 60 soil types, there are 20
agro-climatic regions. Sunshine hours and the day lengths are ideally suited for round the
year cultivation.
This situation has been exploited by our scientists, farmers very well. There is the largest
livestock population in the country. India is the largest producer of milk and cereals;
second largest producer of fruits and vegetables. It is among the top high producers of
rice, wheat, groundnut, tea, coffee, tobacco, spice, sugar and oilseeds in the world.There is, however, an alarming note i.e. 20 to 34 % of population is undernourished.
One important factor is the wastage of agricultural produces. Huge wastage across the
supply chain leads to lower level of processing and low value addition. In our country,
the high losses of the products are towards the initial part of the value chain. The
different stage to which the food has to pass from the harvest in the field till it reaches to
the consumer and the table.
The food passes through the different stages, like in the field, then in the processing
factory, transport, storage, marketing and finally, in the home. Losses might occur at
every stage. If comparison is made among the developing and the developed countries, it has been
observed that in the developing countries like India, there are relatively high losses in the
produce in the initial parts of the value chain; where as in the rich countries more losses
are towards the end of the value chain.
Regarding the level of processing across the segment if we look at our country, still the
perishable items like fruits and vegetables are processed only to the tune of 2.5 to 3 % at
present;  whereas  the  countries  like  US  process  65  %  of  their  produce,  Philippines
processes 78 to 80 %, China processes 23 to 25 % of their fruits and vegetables.
Regarding marine products, poultry, buffalo meat, etc., the range of processing in our
country is 6 to 26 % whereas; in developed countries they process about 60 to 70 % of
these products. Only 35 % of the total milk production in the country is processed in both
organized as well as in unorganized sectors whereas, in the developed countries about 60
to 75 % of their products are processed.
There is a need to give attention as per the post-harvest management; processing and
value addition is concerned. A paradigm shift is needed in our approach to provide
nutrition and health security to people i.e. from crop production alone to reduction in
post-harvest  losses  and  value  addition;  from  self-sufficiency  in  food  production  to
providing food items needed for meeting all the nutritional needs and from food security
at the state level to nutrition security at the individual level.From the point of sustainable food and nutritional security, there are two major areas
which need attention of food processors, engineers, and technologists are: 
(i) Minimization of waste by applying good post-harvest practices and management, and
(ii) Processing & value addition through appropriate product & process innovations.
Regarding product development, one must ensure that the product is microbiologically &
enzymatically stable and it has a good nutritional & sensory profile and of course, it has
a good shelf life and should be economically viable.
Consumer acceptability is the most important thing that should be kept in mind. If the
product will not be liked by the consumer, then all the efforts will be wasted.
There are a lot of opportunities in food processing, particularly if we look at the business
opportunities  in  the  food  processing  both  in  the  domestic  sector  as  well  as  in  the
international  markets.  In  the  domestic  market,  the  business  opportunities  in  food
processing include up gradation from commodities to packaged and branded products.
There is a lot of market for convenience foods, like ready to eat, ready to drink, ready to
serve, ready to cook product which offer value for the money.
There is a lot of market nowadays for the products which are focused towards children
and young adults. There is a lot of scope for development and marketing of health foods
and beverages. From the point of the international market nowadays, Indian traditional
foods are becoming popular in global market. A number of Indian food products are now
globally competitive, but only important consideration for our product in international
market  is  the  quality.  Proper  quality  and  safety  should  be  maintained  as  per  the
international regulations.
Indian food processing industries is still now facing certain constraints, like the right
quality of raw materials is still not available. If the good quality raw material is not
available to the industry, industry cannot do miracle; so availability of good quality raw
material is a must. The high prices of the initial raw material result into the high product
prices.  The  industry  is  dependent  on  wholesale  market,  which  is  controlled  by  a
middleman.Another important constraint facing the food processing industry is the lack of year
round availability of raw material. Lack of cost effective packaging technology and
untrained  manpower.  These  are  some  of  the  important  concerns  most  of  the  food
processing industries in the country are still facing. There are so many infrastructural
constraints and the market is highly price sensitive. 
Some key factors for success in food industry have been taken from the constraints. A
successful food entrepreneur should get good quality of product with good market. One
should ensure a supply of quality raw material at economical prices which is one of the
important aspects.
Another aspect is to develop linkages with the cultivators by taking appropriate measures
to reduce the wastages of the raw materials and to increase the shelf life of the farm
produce and therefore, making more farm produce available for the processing. Even
some of the primary processing, like grading, storage of farm produce, etc. should be
such that the availability of the raw material to the industry is increased. Some strategies to improve export involve ongoing export promotion programme should
be  strengthened,  marketing  intelligence  should  be  streamlined,  marketing  research
should be strengthened, development of standards, testing facilities and enforcement
mechanism, and training of farmers/ entrepreneurs is required.
Suitable  supply chain management  strategies  should be used for all the agricultural
produces. The produce can be collected from different collection centers or collection
yards and they can be taken to the primary processing center. These primary processing
units may be located near the production farms or near the agricultural farms. 
In primary production unit, these produce can be exposed to different primary processing
conditions, like sorting, grading, cleaning, packaging, etc. and a sub part of the productwhich can be sent to the fresh food supermarket, and the remaining can be sent to the
secondary processing unit for processing and value addition. And these processed and
value added products, may be then sent to the processed food supermarket. 
An end to end holistic approach is needed from farm to fork i.e. from harvest till it
reaches to the consumer. As an industry or as the processor, one has to make sure that at
each and every step in the value chain like handling, grading or sorting, proper post-
harvest  management  and  primary  processing  steps  or  even  temperature  control
distribution are strictly followed.
One should ensure that the product, which is delivered to the processing line of the
factory, is of good value and good quality; may be computer vision system or RFID
distribution system etc. Other than that there are many such approaches which can be
used to make sure that the quality of the produce is maintained during transportation,
storage and primary processing, etc. So, one should ensure that the good quality material
is delivered in the processing and packaging plant by following or by utilizing HACCP,
as well as good manufacturing practices and good hygienic practices etc. 
Finally, in the product distribution, product packaging and retailing,  good condition
should be maintained and by this one can ensure that the product by the time it reaches to
the consumer table, it is maintained in good quality and it is a safe product which is
delivered to the consumer.Course Summary
In this 12 week course, various novel approaches for processing and preservation of food
were discussed. In the initial weeks, the components of the food, food structure and the
different reactions like gelatinization, protein denaturation etc., which influence both
quality and safety of the food during processing handling and storage were studied. 
This was followed by lectures on novel methods of food processing like high pressure
processing;  membrane  technology,  irradiation,  dielectric  heating,  supercritical  fluid
extraction, freeze drying, extrusion technologies, microencapsulation, aseptic processing
and  packaging,  hurdle  technology,  food  nanotechnology,  etc.  The  processing  of oil
seeds, extraction, refining of the vegetable oils and their storage were studied.
Lectures on shelf life extension of grains, fruits and vegetables, modified atmospheric
packaging and controlled atmospheric storage, edible coatings etc. Quick methods for
analysis  of  the  grain  storage  infestation  and  other  quality  attributes  in  the  fruits,
vegetables, like hyper spectral imaging, FTIR, electronic nose etc. were introduced.
Finally, the manufacturing of a few commercially important health food products like
high  energy  RTE  food  paste,  RTC/RTD  health  foods  and  beverages,  algal  based
products, fortified foods and Nutraceuticals,  iron fortified rice, extruded snack food
products, etc. were detailed.World has become a smaller place and bigger market. Changes in the technology used to
prepare foods have been influenced by substantial increase in the cost of both the energy
and  labour.  Food  processing  can  make  major  contributions  to  the  economy
through optimal use of resources & energy. Latest food processing equipment now allow
increasingly  sophisticated  control  of  processing  conditions  by  reducing
processing  costs  and  damage  to  the  sensory  and  nutritional   qualities  of  foods
(particularly heat damage).
Energy savings is an important feature in most of the latest or new food processing and
packaging equipment and technologies. Control of the equipment and process operations
through automation now makes it possible to prepare better quality and safe to consumefood products. The higher capital investment by manufacturers in the automation from
reception of raw material through processing and packaging to warehousing, is now a
reality. This reduces production costs, by using less energy and often fewer operators,
and generates new revenues.
Food Chemistry & Technology Laboratory, IIT Kharagpur
Acknowledgements
