Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 07
Food Proteins 
(Denaturation, Foaming & Gelation)
An important process relating to protein foods including the chemistry of processes like
denaturation, foaming and gelation, and the influence of processes on the characteristics
and properties of the food materials in different operations will be discussed in this
lecture.
Proteins  are  macromolecules  of  great  size  and  complexity.  They  are  of  colloidal
dimensions, and as such they cannot pass through semipermeable membrane. They are
amphoteric in nature; i.e. they behave both as an acid and as a base. In their polymeric
forms, they possess a regular specific folded 3-dimensional  confirmation.  About 20
amino acids are coded genetically, which make up food proteins. These amino acids are
linked covalently by α-carboxyl group of one amino acid and α-amino group of the other
amino acid through peptide linkage. Food proteins  are important to texture,  colour,
flavor,  and  functional  properties  of  food.  Proteins  function  as  buffering  agents,
emulsifiers, and fat mimetic agents.Structure of protein can be categorized into four levels: Primary structure; which implies
the linear sequence of amino acids, i.e. how these amino acids are sequenced. Even the
specific position of the amino acid is very important. So, number of amino acids and
linear sequence is taken in the primary structure. 
Secondary structure of a protein involves regular structural patterns, such as α-helical or
β-sheet  configurations  which  a  protein  might  take  up.  In  the  tertiary  structure,  3D
arrangements  of the atoms in the polypeptide chains are understood. That is how a
specific  random  coiling  takes  place  and  then  folding  in  the  secondary  and  tertiary
structures.
So, these three primary, secondary and tertiary structures normally deal with about single
polypeptide chain which are called subunits. And it may so happen that, in a food protein
there might be more than one subunits. So, how these different subunits interact among
each other to give the final shape of the protein molecules are understood in quaternary
structure.When  these  food  proteins  come  across  different  agents,  different  conditions  during
processing and handling, certain changes take place in the characteristics, structure and
properties of the protein. This is called as “denaturation”. So, the denaturation of a
protein may be any non-proteolytic modification of the unique structure of a native
protein, giving rise to definite changes in its chemical, physical or biological properties.
There are no proteolytic decomposition, no proteolysis, there is no breakage of that
peptide  linkage  during  denaturation  process.  It  may  be  unfolding,  uncoiling  of  the
organized protein structure. 
It can be seen from the picture that, the normal protein is structured; during denaturation
process, the organized structure is opened or unfolded. In some cases, it may again
renature to get the structure. So, actually in denaturation there is loss of secondary,
tertiary, and quaternary structure of protein, but definitely not the primary structure.Thus, there are various factors which influence the denaturation process. These factors
may be the physical factors, like temperature, high pressure, irradiation, sound waves,
and shear forces etc. to which the proteins come across during processing or handling.
The chemical  factors  like  pH, polarity  of solvents  or additives,  even the biological
factors such as enzymes influence the rate of denaturation process in protein foods.
There may be two types of denaturation reactions  or processes depending upon the
factors, food characteristics, and the severity of the process to which these food proteins
are exposed to. It may be a reversible denaturation or irreversible denaturation. In the
reversible  denaturation,  the  effect  of  denaturation  reagent,  if  they  are  removed  by
processes like dialysis  etc. then the protein may again renature. But in the case of
irreversible denaturation, there is formation of an insoluble substance called generally as
coagulum. As happens, when the egg is boiled, while heating the egg white above a
certain temperature may be 50-60 ᵒC, the coagulation of protein takes place; this is an
example of irreversible denaturation process.The  different  changes  that  take  place  in  protein  characteristics  during  denaturation
include: decrease in its solubility, there will be loss of biological activity of the protein, it
might not be possible to crystallize the protein. Once it is denatured there might be
increased reactivity of constituent groups. There may be a change in the molecular shape
of the protein or it may become more susceptible to enzymatic hydrolysis.
Denaturation often improves the functionality of the protein, like digestibility, it also
inactivates  sometimes  the  anti-nutritional  factors,  it  might  inactivate  deteriorative
enzymes, and may also provide method to monitor processing of food.
Functional characteristics of the protein food:  
The function of protein is to provide and stabilize the characteristic structure of an
individual food. The ability to form or stabilize networks i.e. gels, films, foams, and
emulsions etc. or the sols are described as functional properties of the protein. Various
characteristics that govern the protein functionality include shape of the protein, its size,
amino acid composition and sequence, how the protein interacts with other components,
and how the molecular flexibility or rigidity is: its secondary, tertiary or quaternary
structure. Even the net charge on the protein molecule or the distribution of the protein
molecule or even hydrophobicity ratio of the protein will influence its functionality. 
Descriptions about functional properties like hydration, textural attributes (mouth feel,
smoothness, grittiness, cohesion, chewiness or turbidity), binding property, structural
characteristics, rheological properties like elasticity, viscosity, gelation etc. of the food
proteins  are  provided.  Solubility,  wettability,  water  absorption,  swelling,  thickening,
gelling, all these characteristics might be influenced by the hydration characteristics of a
protein. Even the enzymatic properties i.e. there might be coagulation, like in the cheese
making, the rennet enzyme coagulates the protein. There may be certain enzymes which
may cause tenderization of the protein. Example: the papain enzyme causes the softening
of the hard tissues of meat i.e. meat becomes tender, there might be mellowing etc.The different mechanisms that decide a food’s functionality can be seen here in the table.
Few examples like, in beverage and foods like milk, whey protein etc., hydrophilicity of
the  protein  will  ultimately  influence  its  solubility.  Similarly,  the  water  absorption
characteristics of the protein may be influenced by its ability to bind with water i.e. to
form hydrogen bonds with water. This happens generally in the case of meats, sausage
cakes, breads etc., where these different proteins bind with the hydrogen bonds and give
the desired characteristics. Similarly, the other processes like gelation, emulsification,
foaming,  elasticity  etc.  influence  the  functionality.  In  case  of  gelation,  the  water
entrapment and immobilization which might ultimately result to the network formation is
the  mechanism.  The  mechanism  of  emulsification  might  be  adsorption  and  film
formation at the interfaces. Elasticity may be because of the hydrophobic bonding or
even formation of disulphide cross linkages. So, this explains briefly how these different
functional characteristics of the proteins are influenced.A foam can be defined as a two phase system consisting of air cells separated by a
continuous liquid layer which is generally called the lamellar phase. Small air bubbles
impart body, smoothness, and lightness to milkshakes, whipped cream, ice cream, cake,
snacks and bread, etc. There are two important characteristics of the foam: whippability
and foamability. When the protein containing materials are whipped or blended by some
mechanical means, some foam is generated. A good example is the foam formation
during  beating  of egg  yolk. Another property is  the  foamability  in which,  foam is
prepared  by  injecting  air  or  gas  through  the  protein  solution.  So,  foamability  and
whippability are the two important characteristics which govern the formation of foam
into the food materials.
Foaming properties of the food proteins are influenced by source of protein, method and
parameters of processing, like temperature, pH, concentration of protein, mixing time,
and the method of foaming; whether it is whipping or other method. The main basic
functions of protein in foams are to decrease interfacial tension, to increase viscous and
elastic properties of the liquid phase, as well as to form strong films.
How the foam formation takes place? Generally the soluble globular proteins diffuse to
the air water interface, they concentrate and reduce the surface tension. Proteins unfold at
the  interface,  and  hydrophilic  as  well  as  hydrophobic  groups  reorient.  Even  the
polypeptides with possible partial denaturation form a stabilizing film around the bubbles
which promote the foam formation.
Protein foamability is correlated with its capacity to decrease surface tension at the air-
liquid interface. The continuous film is formed through the protein-protein interactions
as  well as  through  electrostatic  and hydrostatic  interaction,  or even hydrogen bond
formations also influence to some extent the film formation characteristics of a protein.The foams once formed it is desired that it should be stable, and should not collapse. An
important process in the foam mat drying, where by foaming process, the surface area is
increased and the liquid foods are put into the dryer in a thin sheet of the foam which
reduces the drying time. But the important consideration or characteristic of the foam
should be that it should not collapse during the drying process. So, the stability of foam
is a very important characteristic. 
Stability is a measure of the ability of the product to keep a foam once formed and
prevent it from collapsing.  And, there might be various reasons for the collapse of the
foam. It may be because the large gas bubbles grow at the expense of smaller bubbles.
The stability of the foam may also depend on the strength of the protein film and
permeability of gases; i.e. how this film is permeable or impermeable to different gases.
Even proteins absorbed at the gas liquid interface form a protective film around the
bubbles. Foaming capacity is a measure of the ability of the protein to form a gas filled
cellular system under specified conditions. Foaming capacity and stability are important
characteristics of foam forming system.
Ideal foam forming and foam stabilizing proteins are characterized by low molecular
weight, high surface hydrophobicity, good solubility, small net charge in terms of pH of
the food, and easy denaturability. If a protein is denatured easily, it may be a good source
for providing a good foaming ability, as well as a good stable foam formation.A food gel can be considered as the structural matrix holding liquid and can be formed
spontaneously by swelling at a high protein concentration. Gels behave as a solid like
material and they possess many characteristics of a fluid. Specific properties of the gel
are due to the presence of 3D networks of proteins. Textural properties of food gels and
juiciness are determined by the gelling capacity of the proteins. Protein gels may be
utilized to simulate the textural properties and mouthfeel of the lipids in the food system.
How gelation takes place? Gelation is defined as protein aggregation phenomenon in
which polymer-polymer and polymer-solvent interactions and forces are so balanced that
a network of matrix is formed. In a gel, the liquid prevents the 3-dimensional matrix
from collapsing and the gel matrix prevents the liquid from flowing away. This matriximmobilizes  extremely  large  amounts  of  water.  The  random  aggregation  in  which
polymer-polymer  interactions  are favoured over polymer  solvent interaction  may be
defined as a protein coagulation.
There are two types of gel: polymeric networks or aggregated dispersion. Polymeric
networks are the gel formed by gelatine and other polysaccharides as agarose. They are
normally lower polymer concentrations; transparency and texture are generally better in
this  type of gels. On the other hand, aggregated dispersions are the gel formed by
globular  proteins  after  heating  and  denaturation.  Partial  denaturation  results  in
thermoplastic character of the gel; these thermoplastic gels do not liquefy when heated
but they can soften.
These gels are formed when partially unfolded proteins develop uncoiled polypeptide
segment. Interactions at specific point to form a 3-dimensional cross linked network also
result in the formation of gel. Partial unfolding of protein with slight change in secondary
structure, partial unfolding of the native structure can also be related to the action of
various  factors.  The  gelation  process  is  dependent  on  the  formation  of  a  three-
dimensional protein network as a result of protein-protein, protein-solvent interactions.
Gel matrix is an interconnected cage like unit structure saturated with continuous solvent
like phase. So, these are the processes or mechanism of gel formation in various food
systems.
The protein gel formation may be of two types. It may be heat induced gel or calcium
induced gelation. In the heat induced gelation, an initial step involving the unfolding or
the dissociation of the protein molecules takes place and an aggregation step in which
association and aggregation reactions type of heat induced gel structures are formed. It
may be thermo set or reversible, or thermoplastic or irreversible gels.
The calcium induced gelation is easily seen in the food. When the milk proteins are
coagulated,  i.e.  calcium  paracasein-phosphate  gels  are  resulted  from  the  enzymatic
disruption of casein in the manufacture of cheese. They are characterized by low gel
strength and rapid syneresis.Different factors that influence the protein gelation processes include the extrinsic factors
of the protein. Like, character of the solvent, temperature to which the proteins are
exposed,  pH, ionic  strength,  divalent  cations,  and  even  presence  or absence  of the
denaturants,  other  macromolecules,  lipids,  enzymes,  etc.  So,  these  are  some  of  the
factors which are considered extrinsic factors and which influence the gel forming ability
of the proteins.
Other factors, say primary factors, include the composition of the amino acids; it may
also influence the acidic and basic nature of the protein. So that also might influence the
gelation characteristics. Sequence of the amino acid residues, molecular weight, tertiary
and quaternary structure of a protein, its hydrophobicity or the net charge and charge
distribution on the protein, its isoelectric point, flexibility of the protein molecules etc.
are the other important factors which influence gelation of a food protein.
A brief overview that how different processing conditions to which food proteins either
in their native form or isolated/precipitated forms are exposed has been provided. The
changes in their functional characteristics, their behaviors, denaturation, gel formation,
foam formation, their usability in various food formulations, food preparations etc. are
explained.