Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 08
Principles of Food Preservation
In this lecture, the Principles of Food Preservation and Processing are briefly discussed.
Food  preservation  techniques  have  a  long  history  of  its  use.  It  was  probably  first
practiced soon after our ancestors developed from hunter gatherer society to initiate
primitive farming producing food surpluses and then necessitating extended storage in
order to avoid wastage. The earliest used technologies certainly included, for example,
drying, curing, fermentation and cooking. Later even simple chemical preservatives,
such as burning of sulphur to generate sulphur dioxide to decontaminate fruits prior to its
fermentation,  were  used.  Though  these  processes  are  more  sophisticated  and  better
controlled,  they  are  still  being  operated  based  on  those  empirically  derived  old
procedures.
There is a need to find out the required application oriented effects so as to understand
the preservation of the food from spoilage as well as from the risk of the food poisoning.
If the different factors that govern the spoilage of the food, that pose a risk to the food
safety  around  food  consumption  is  properly  understood,  then  the  process  of  food
preservation gets simplified.The aim for any food preservation process is to extend the time for which the food can be
kept before spoiling. The preservation therefore, may be defined as the treatment of food,
to prolong the time for which it can be kept before spoiling. While most of the food
preservation  techniques  are  primarily  based  upon the prevention  of growth of food
spoilage and food poisoning microorganisms, the preservation of other attributes of the
food like quality attributes and the sensory characteristics become of additional concern.
All foods, following harvest, may lose quality at some rate or the other in a manner
which are very dependent on the type of the food, its composition, formulation, storage
and so on. This quality loss may be accelerated or may be minimized at any stage. Total
preservation of a food, therefore, is highly multi component that it seldom relies on only
one factor. There are different factors which influence the growth and multiplication of
microorganisms. In the earlier lectures, it was discussed how different reactions of the
food can change its characteristics, resulting into generation of new compounds which
may influence the sensory characteristics of the food.
The two different quality loss reactions become a principal target of food preservation
technology. One is the microbial quality loss reaction and other is the general quality loss
reactions. Whatever techniques are applied it should not result in the quality reductions
of food.This slide gives an overview of different types of quality loss reactions that may occur in
food.  It  may  be  microbiological,  enzymatic,  chemical  or  physical  in  nature.  The
microbiological quality loss reactions may be because of the growth or presence of toxin
producing microorganisms or bacteria in food or the growth or presence of infective
microorganisms or growth of spoilage microorganisms.
The enzymatic processes which influence the quality of the food may be hydrolytic
reactions  catalysed  by enzymes  like  lipases, proteases, etc.  It may  be lipoxygenase
initiated reactions or enzymatic browning. In earlier lecture on browning reactions, the
activity of phenolase enzyme causing the browning of the fruits and vegetable has been
discussed.  Chemical  reactions  like  oxidative  rancidity,  oxidative  and  reductive
discoloration, non-enzymatic browning or even nutrient losses due to leaching or other
losses may influence the quality of the food. Mass transfer, movement of low molecular
weight components, loss of crispiness, loss of flavor, freeze induced damages etc. can be
included in the physical factors or physical reasons for the quality reduction in food
materials.The quality loss due to one or the other reasons mentioned earlier can result in different
consequences. It could be just simple loss of the marketability of the food.  For example,
due to one or the other change in its attributes like color, flavor, texture, etc. which is not
appealing might result in economic loss or lower marketing ability of the food. 
On the other hand, if the spoilage of food or quality loss is due to the microbiological
processes, and if the food is contaminated with toxic or pathogenic microorganism and
proper preservation technology is not adopted to remove the contamination then it may
cause health hazard to the consumers. Similarly in other case, where the food is spoiled
by the spoilage organism it will be deemed that the food is unfit for consumption but
may not cause any potential health hazard to the consumer.
It is important to identify the causative agent in the food, the type and nature of the
microorganism and/ or the changes it is likely to bring in the food materials. This will
enable one to decide appropriate processing technology for food preservation.What is food spoilage? Spoilage is the process in which food deteriorates to the point at
which it is not fit for consumption. It becomes inferior in its quality and its edibility
becomes reduced. There are different factors responsible for the spoilage of the food.
The spoilage of food due to the growth and multiplication of bacteria is one of the major
concerns to the food processers and even the consumers.
There  are  different  types  of  microorganisms  that  cause  spoilage  of  food.  Some
microorganisms while growing in food, consume the nutrient because incidentally the
microorganisms  also require similar types of chemicals or nutrients for its survival.
Microorganisms consume food for their survival. It grows on food, multiplies and in the
process,  certain  secondary  metabolites  are  produced  by  them  which  may  cause  the
change in sensory and textural characteristics of the food. These changes do not render
the food toxic and it is not a safety risk. This spoilage of food by such microorganism are
called food spoilage microorganisms.
On the other hand, there are certain microorganism, which when grow into the food
produce certain metabolites that might be toxic and therefore, they are poisonous and
such foods can cause potential damage to the health of an individual. These types of
microorganisms are called food intoxicating microorganisms. Third type is the infectious
microorganisms where they do not grow or multiply on the food or water, but rather they
simply  use  food  or  water  as  their  carrier  source.  Consumption  of  such  type  of
contaminated food will enable these microorganisms to enter into our system and growsand multiplies in small intestine or large intestine wherever environment is favorable,
and produce toxin. These are called infectious microorganisms.
Salmonella, Shigella, etc. are some common bacteria, which may cause food poisoning
by releasing toxins after the food is consumed. It needs to be known that these infectious
bacteria, even if it is present in food may not be a problem prior to consumption. After
consumption, these organisms do not grow on food rather it grows and releases the toxin
in our system. So, it takes time for the symptoms to appear after consumption of food
with such poisoning organisms.
The infection may be from the diseased animal, poultry, eggs, milk or from the food
contaminated by rodents, insects, etc. Even some environmental pollutants can cause
contamination. Trichinosis is a common disease caused by certain nematodes that is
Trichinella spiralis  which lodges in the muscle fiber of the hogs or pork muscles. It is of
less concern as long as the organism is present in the pork. But when humans consume,
this bacteria along with the muscle goes into the system, it grows and multiplies and
creates problem. The other type of food poisoning is the food intoxication. This type of bacteria grows in
the food and produces toxin. The toxin produced may be of two types i.e. endotoxin or
exotoxin. Exotoxin producing bacteria grow in the food and release the toxin there.
Endotoxin may remain inside the bacterial cell while the bacteria continue to grow in the
food. So, the food may not become toxic, but it may contain the toxic bacteria. Common
example is the botulism; it is a type of food poisoning which is caused by ingestion of
toxin that is produced by the  Clostridium botulinum . The  Clostridium botulinum  is an
anaerobic toxin producing bacteria and is capable of forming spores. It is a common
problem in the low acid foods and it produces such a potent toxin, that a spoonful of this
toxin is capable of killing a million of persons.
Food materials which are likely to be contaminated by Clostridium botulinum  should be
made sure that this contamination is totally eliminated from the food. Another type of
toxins  are  the  mycotoxins,   like  aflatoxins,  ocratoxins,  patulin  etc.  which  are  the
secondary metabolites produced by certain varieties of molds like Aspergillus niger and
they grow into the food and release this toxin which becomes fatal upon consumption.The food poisoning is of different types, i.e. the poison may be naturally present in the
food or it might be released by the microorganisms as it was referred to in exotoxin.
These toxins exist in food in a very low concentration and do not alter any sensory
property of food but consumption leads to deleterious effects.
A few examples of the natural food poisoning agents are the arsenic, lead, oxalic acid,
cadmium, mercury etc. which might be present in the food materials due to contact with
heavy water, from the environment or from the other sources. Ergotism is a type of
poisoning which develops from the growth of the fungus on wheat or rye. 
Staphylococcus food poisoning is a case where the organism as well as the toxin both can
make the food toxic. The symptoms of Staphylococcus food poising include vomiting,nausea, diarrhoea, abdominal cramps, etc. and it takes around 1 to 6 hours or less time
for the onset of the symptoms. 
In  Streptococcus  and  Salmonella type of food poisoning, only the microorganism is
involved that is if the microorganism is consumed, it gets established in our system and
produces toxin. In the case of  botulinum, it releases toxin into the food we consume.
Vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, difficulty in swallowing, double vision, etc. are some of the
symptoms for these types of toxicities.
Various  conditions  may  result  to  the  contamination  of  the  food  and  its  spoilage.
Handling  of  food,  environmental  pollution  or  contamination  from  the  handling
equipment,  processing  machines,  improper  washing,  improper  preparation,  improper
refrigeration, etc. may result into spoilage of food. The use of contaminated water, lack
of screening and exposure of food to flies, insects, pests, etc., not only lead to diseases,
but also reduce the aesthetic value of the food. One should take proper care to eliminate
these sources of contamination from the food materials.It is necessary to understand the microbial growth and its kinetics. The growth normally
refers to the increase in cell number or increase in size of the organism depending upon
whether it is a multicellular or unicellular organism. 
In  the  unicellular  organism,  the  growth  is  measured  by  increase  in  number  of  the
organism. In multi cellular, growth is measured by the increase in size of the organism.
So, growth is defined as the increase of all the chemical components of the cell, this
leads to increase in cell number which causes increase in size or number of the cell of the
individual. Most of the bacteria reproduce asexually, which means that no sex cells are
involved in these cases. Bacteria reproduce by binary fission, i.e. divide perpendicularly
to the length axis and there by two new cells are produced from each bacterial cell. 
There  are  different  models  to  express  the  growth  of  bacterial  cell  in  the  form  of
mathematical equations. If growth fits the definition that all chemical components of the
cell increase with the same speed, a unicellular  bacterium increases in cell number
exponentially with base 2.
                    Nt = N0 x 2n                          … (1)
      Where, Nt = Cell number at time t.
                   N0 = Starting number at time zero
        n = Number of doublings (generations)
By designating generation time as  g and total time as t equation (1) can be written as
Nt = N0 x 2t/g              … (2) 
Set μ=1/g, which is defined as the  specific growth rate  constant, inserted into (2) gives  
                       Nt = N0 x 2tμ                        … (3)
After taken the logarithm, the equation (3) can be written as
                                       log N t = log N0 + t μ log 2 
Another phenomenon that is very important is the period of balanced and unbalanced
growth seen in the microbial culture. Growth of bacteria is related to the composition of
the  medium.  If  all  the  essential  components  are  available,  the  growth  is  balancedthroughout.  Balanced  growth  means  all  the  components  are  increasing  in  same
proportion; cell number, cell size, cell components, etc. 
If, however, one or several essential components are missing, the growth is terminated
due to unbalanced growth, which often leads to the death of the culture. If two different
energy sources are available in the growth medium, the growth curve normally shows
two exponentially distinct phases.
The growth curve of bacteria is expressed in four phases; lag phase, log phase, stationary
phase and death phase. After being inoculated into the system, bacterial cell takes some
time for adjustment and the growth is very minimal or there is no growth, it is called lag
phase. Lag phase is followed by exponential phase or log phase where the bacteria grow
exponentially. Then finally, either due to depletion of one or the other constituent or
because of the secondary toxic metabolites, there is some period of unbalanced growth
and is followed by a stationary phase. In this condition, the bacteria remains alive under
dormant condition without growth. During stationary phase, there may be accumulation
of the toxic metabolites or there may be depletion of the food reserves resulting in death
of  the  bacteria.  The  death  phase  is  similar  to  log  phase;  here  the  bacteria  die
exponentially.
There are many incidents or processes where it is necessary to grow the bacteria under
certain conditions and where the bacteria need to be killed. There is also certain situation
where the bacteria are not killed but necessary to keep it under dormant condition.Understanding  the  growth  and  death  kinetics  of  microorganism  will  enable  one  to
determine the food process operations, even processing technology that is necessary to
be adopted as per the requirement.
What are the various factors, which influence the growth of bacteria or microorganism in
food? If the factors governing the growth are properly understood, it becomes simpler as
to select which process to be applied to encourage the growth or to cause the death of the
microorganism.
So,  these  factors  therefore,  which  influence  the  growth  and  multiplication  of
microorganism in food, can be grouped into different classes like physical, chemical and
microbiological factors. And there are certain factors which relate to the nature of the
microorganisms as such.In physical factors, temperature, water activity and oxidation reduction potential become
important factors. In general, the microorganisms need optimum temperature for growth.
At lower temperatures, the growth ceases and at higher temperatures, the microorganism
dies.
Similarly water activity, oxidation and reduction potential, etc., are important variables.
Among the chemicals that is the substrate available in the food material for the growth of
the microorganisms, concentration of hydrogen ions like pH of the food, concentration of
the major solutes present in the food or even presence or absence of oxygen, air or
preservatives,  also  influences  the  microbial  growth  kinetics.  Even  the  microbial
characteristics like how the microorganism is able to utilize the substrate influences its
growth behavior. For example, bacteria cannot use starch as its food, but if starch is
hydrated and is converted into glucose, then they find it easy to consume.
Even the number and type of the microorganism present and the growth rate at which
one microorganism will be able to consume a particular nutrient are some of the factors,
which  might  influence  the  characteristics  of  the  growth  of  microorganism  in  food
material.Factors  affecting  microbial  growth  can  be  classified  into  different  ways  that  is  the
intrinsic factors which include those chemical and physical factors that are within the
food and with which inextricably in contact throughout the period. The other factors
might  be  the  processing  factors  that  are  deliberately  applied  to  the  food  during
processing  for  improved  preservation.  Some  of those  factors  can  be  categorized  as
extrinsic / extensive factors, which include those factors that influence microorganism in
food, but they are applied from outside, generally they act during storage.
The other two important factors are the implicit factors and net effects. The implicit
factors include those factors that are related to the nature of the microorganism, the
interactions which microorganism have among themselves, and the interactions whichthese microorganisms  have with the environment  or with other food materials  with
which it comes into contact during storage. 
Ultimately,  the net effects become very important; when we analyze any processing
situation,  many  individual  factors  indicate  a  particular  effect  individually,  but  food
processing like hurdle technology concepts, when multiple factors are involved then
overall effect of these multiple factors might be much more than what would have been
expected by the individual factors alone.
So, the net effects take into account the fact that many of the factors strongly influence
the effect of each other upon microbial growth and survival. So, the overall effect of
combination of factors may not be although rapidly predictable, but may be useful in a
greater way than the perceived effect of the single factor.
Further, intrinsic factors can be of three types; chemical factor, physical factor, and
processing factor. The chemical factors may be nutrient, pH and buffering capacity,
oxidation  reduction  potential  or  antimicrobial  substances.  Physical  factor  may  be
equilibrium relative humidity or water activity, ice and freeze concentration or certain
colloidal changes. The processing conditions may change the food composition, may
make the constituent or substrate easily available to the microorganism or otherwise.
There may be changes in the microbial type, changes in the microbial number and even
changes in the microstructure of the food, making the food easy or difficult to be utilized
by microorganisms. These are the intrinsic factors present in the food.The extensive factors are equilibrium relative humidity during storage, temperature of
the storage environment, oxygen tension of the storage environment, etc. These are the
factors which operate from outside. Milk is a very good example. There are several
bacteria present in milk. Once lactic acid bacteria grow, it produces certain acidity into
the milk which makes the milk favorable for the growth of acid tolerant lactic acid
bacteria. So, there might be synergistic effect or antagonistic effect. Antagonistic effect
means that certain microorganisms once they grow bring out changes in the acidity and
might release alcohol which becomes detrimental to other microorganisms. 
So,  once  having  understood  these  different  factors  which  influence  the  ecology  of
microorganism, their growth and development, or inactivation kinetics, it becomes easy
to decide what type of food process one should go for, depending upon the type of
microorganism  involved  and  so  on.   Most  of  the  antimicrobial  food  preservation
techniques  are for two types of microorganism. One type is for the food poisoning
microorganisms and the others are for the food spoilage microorganisms. So, if it is
infective type like salmonella, listeria, campylobacter, etc., it is necessary to manipulate
the  factors  during  processing,  handling  and  storage  in  such  a  way  that  these  are
eliminated from the food. 
Similarly,  presence  of  the  toxicogenic  bacteria  like  Clostridium  botulinum,
Staphylococcus aureus  might not be a problem. If they have contaminated the food, the
condition around the food should be manipulated in such a way that they are not able togrow and multiply, as these microbes can create problem only when they grow into the
food and produce toxin.
So, these two types become, in fact, the target for the antimicrobial food preservation
technologies,  where  the  toxicogenic  or  toxin  producing  or  poisoning  types  of
microorganisms are involved. Other food spoilage microorganisms, when grow into the
food, produce minor metabolic  products like  thiols, esters, amines, peroxide, which
ultimately influence color and flavour of the material.
It may result into the generation of major metabolic products, secretion of enzymes, even
presence of biomass itself, which results into the visual presence of microorganisms such
as slime, haze, and mold colonies. The spoilage group of microorganisms grows and
produces certain secondary metabolites which cause the sensory and other characteristics
changed and it becomes unfit for consumption. So, in this case not only the presence, but
its growth becomes important factor. 