Novel Technologies for Food Processing and Shelf Life Extension
Prof. Hari Niwas Mishra
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 09
Traditional Food Preservation Technologies – Part 1
In the earlier lecture, the factors which influence spoilage of foods were discussed.
Among the various agents, the growth and multiplication of microorganisms has been
found to be the major reason for the spoilage of the food. In this lecture, the issues
related to traditional food preservation technologies will be discussed. 
The major techniques which are traditionally used for preservation of food are based
upon those limited set of factors that influence microbial ecology of foods. 
Most of these techniques act through either slowing down or in some instances, the
complete inhibition of microbial growth. Few techniques act by direct inactivation or
killing of the target bacteria, yeasts or molds. In addition to those main inhibiting and
inactivating techniques, there are a few comparatively new procedures that restrict the
access of microorganisms to food products.
Accordingly all the food processing technologies which are being used currently as well
as  from  ancient  time  traditionally,  they  can  be  broadly  classified  into  three  major
categories.Category 1 is those set of technologies that work on the principle of slowing down or
inhibiting  the  growth of microorganisms. Temperature  is an important  factor which
influences the growth and multiplication of microorganisms in food. If the temperature is
lowered,  the  growth  rate  of  the  microorganism  is  reduced.  The  lowering  of  the
temperature  is  used  as  one  factor  for  slowing  down  or  inhibiting  the  growth  of
microorganism in food. Accordingly, cold or chilled storage, freezing and frozen storage
are the two traditionally used food preservation technologies that work on the principle
of lowering of temperature of the food.
The other factor is water activity or osmotic concentration; that is either lowering of
water activity or raising the osmotic concentration of the food, influences the microbial
growth  and  multiplication.  Rather,  when  the  water  activity  is  lowered  down,  the
microbial growth is reduced. The traditionally  used preservation technologies  which
work on these principles include drying, freeze drying, curing and salting, conserving
with added sugars, etc.
Another  technology  which  is  based  on  slowing  down  the  microbial  growth  is  to
manipulate the nutrients present in food in such a manner that microorganism is not able
to utilize or use that nutrient. This is done by compartmentalization of the aqueous phase
in water in oil emulsions. A good example of this is butter, that is the milk fat. Fat is
present in milk in the form of oil-in-water emulsion. In this form, it can be accessed
easily by microbial enzymes and other factors and it can get spoiled. However, when thisfat is separated from the milk in the form of cream, it becomes water-in-oil emulsion and
the microorganisms find it difficult to break the emulsion and use the fat.
Similarly, decreased level of oxygen in the environment around the food or within the
food is another way of slowing down or inhibiting the growth of microorganisms in food.
The vacuum technology or nitrogen packaging is a common example which works on
this basis. Similarly, controlling the gaseous composition like increasing the level of
carbon dioxide or lowering the level of oxygen influence the respiration rate of the
microorganisms. This lowering of the oxygen and increasing the carbon dioxide form the
basis of two major processes, like controlled atmosphere storage or modified atmosphere
packaging. 
Increasing the acid content of the food either by addition of acids or in situ formation of
certain  acid  like  lactic  acid  or  acetic  acid  by bacterial  fermentations  or  other  such
reactions is another process to prevent microbial growth. Spoilage microorganisms are
unable to survive under a higher alcoholic concentration. So, another set of technology
which  is  used  for  slowing  down  or  inhibiting  the  growth  of  microorganism  is  by
increasing  the  content  of  alcohol  in  food  material  or  in  beverages.  Vinification  or
brewing is the conversion of malt into beer. Then by fortification using appropriate
fortification technologies one can increase the alcohol content.
Another important method is by changing the acidity or alkalinity of the food material,
mostly the acidity. In this case, there are certain chemical preservatives which can be
used. This preservatives may be inorganic compounds, like sulphites, nitrites, organic
compounds; such as propionate, sorbate, benzoate, paraben etc., or antibiotics like nisin,
pimaricin might influence the growth or complete inhibition of the microorganism. So,
accordingly  these  are  one  set  of  technologies  which  are  used  traditionally  for
preservation of food. 
Controlling all these factors does not result in the killing or inactivation of the micro
organism. By controlling all these factors, the microorganism is forced to go under the
stationary phase or the rate of exponential phase is lowered down. When these factors are
removed, if the microorganism finds a favorable condition, it will grow and multiply.Toxicogenic or pathogenic microorganisms are of prime concern. It is essential to ensure
that these toxicogenic bacteria or other organisms are completely inactivated or killed
from the system. It can be achieved by providing some sort of energy for the killing of
these  microorganisms.  Traditionally  heating  has  been  used  to  inactivate  the
microorganism. 
There are processes like pasteurization where only mesophilic group of microorganism
or spoilage microorganisms  are eliminated. In the sterilization process, all forms of
microorganisms  are  removed  or  killed.  Other  way  of  killing  the  microorganism  is
providing radiation energy and the processes which are used for food irradiation include
radurization, radicidation, radappertization, etc. 
Third group of technology which is rather comparatively a new addition in traditional
food preservation technologies list is restricting the access of microorganisms to the
food. For example: either by treatment of the ingredients with ethylene oxide or by
treatment of the packaging material with hydrogen peroxide or heat or irradiation can
fully decontaminate the food material. Decontaminating the ingredient and the packaging
material and then aseptic processing is called aseptic thermal processing and packaging
to make sure that there  is no recontamination.  By these processes, the load of the
microorganisms from the food are reduced and made sure that its shelf life is increased.
It can be said that majority of the traditionally used food preservation technologies work
on the principles of controlling the pH and water activity of the food and which in turn
prevents the growth and multiplication of spoilage microorganisms. In other instances
where pathogenic toxicogenic microorganisms are of concern, heat treatment is used.
How the control of the pH and water activity influences the growth and multiplication of
the food? What is the mechanism by which the change of pH resuls in reduction of
microbial growth? Control of pH: The pH is an important factor affecting the growth of microorganism in
food. It affects the microbial energy metabolism involving the buildup of gradient of
hydrogen ion across the microbial cell membrane. It also affects the microbial enzyme
activity  and  stability  of  the  cellular  macromolecules.  Also,  pH  affects  the  sensory
properties of many foods. For example, if you increase or decrease the pH below a
certain level the food may be more acidic, its taste may be sour, it may be more alkaline.
And therefore, it may become sensoririly unacceptable.
Changes in the pH, apart from affecting the sensory properties they also influence the
consistency of food. For example, the lowering of the pH can cause coagulation of milk
casein and milk proteins, and it may change even the physical state of the milk. It may
change the solubility of the pectin which may cause softening of the fruits or changes in
the fruit texture. It may result in inactivation of the enzymes like amylases in rye dough.
So, all these changes in the constituents of the food which take place due to lowering of
the pH may cause significant change in the consistency or textural characteristics of the
food material.Also, the  pH  of the  food is  determined  by free  carbonyl  and  amino  group in low
molecular weight compounds and to a lesser extent in the cellular macromolecules like
proteins, nucleic acid, polysaccharides, etc. There are different methods of controlling
pH in food. It depends upon proper selection of the raw material, whether it is of plant
source or animal tissues. So, by proper selection of ingredient or certain additive, the pH
of that food can be manipulated and the microorganism growth can be prevented. 
The pH can be controlled by the addition of certain acid or by allowing the in situ
formation  of  acidic  or  alkaline  low  molecular  weight  compounds.  The  growth  and
multiplication of the microorganisms may be influenced by both either low or high pH.
Most of the foods that we eat are either low acid food or acid food. So, majority of the
microorganism can easily grow into the low acid food, a few of them can also grow into
the acid food. But, there are few foods for example, egg which we consume is a highly
alkaline food material or in fact it has a pH about 9; so it is an alkaline food. Egg even at
pH 9, it favors the growth and multiplication of microorganism. For the control of the pH, one important factor is the use of organic acid. It becomes an
important agent or important additive for food preservation. The effect of organic acid on
microorganism in food depends on two major factors viz., (1) The dissociation constant.
How the acid get dissociated when it comes in contact with food, and (2) The ability of
the undissociated form to penetrate the cytoplasmic membrane. 
Certain  acids  do  not  dissociate  rather  their  un-dissociated  form  penetrate  into  the
cytoplasmic  membrane  and  goes  into  the  cell  and  causes  a  disturbance  in  the  pH
homeostasis. There is a buildup of hydrogen ion gradient across the membrane, inside
and outside and that actually affects the normal physiological process of the cell and
microorganism’s growth is inhibited or lowered down.
Some of the organic acids like sorbic acid, benzoic acid, propionic acid, etc. act virtually
by the second way.  Its un-dissociated form penetrates into the cytoplasmic membrane
and does the job. These organic acids are classified as preservatives in food legislation.
So, the organic acids or other acid which have the ability to penetrate into the microbial
cell in undissociated form, and to create gradient of this disturbed homeostasis inside the
cell, they actually are designated as preservatives.The minimum pH for growth as well as the rate of inactivation of microorganism by acid
is affected by certain factors: 
(1) Nature of the acid and its ability to penetrate into the cytoplasm membrane in its
undissociated form. Also the presence of other inhibitory factors, like low water activity,
certain other preservatives, low temperature; all these may interfere with the energy
metabolism or which can increase the need of maintenance energy for the cell of the
microorganisms.
(2)  The ability of the microorganism to react to the acid stress and to maintain passive or
active homeostasis and how the cell or microorganism is able to react to the acid stress,
and how it is able to maintain the pH homeostasis either by active means or by passive
means. Passive pH homeostasis means that the microorganisms either prevent external
protons from entering the cell or increase the buffering capacity of its cytoplasm by
synthesis of glutamate or citrates. Active pH homeostasis, means that cell maintain its
cytoplasmic pH through metabolic activities.The other factor is the control of water activity. Water activity is one of the major factors
which influences  the growth and multiplication  of microorganisms  in food. In fact,
optimum water activity for the growth of the majority of the microorganisms is in the
range of 0.99 to 0.98. Every microorganism has a limiting a w value below which it will
not be able to grow, to form spores or to produce toxin. This is taken care of while
creating condition for minimizing the microbial growth.
The aw requirement for the growth of different group of microorganisms varies. For
example, the common spoilage bacteria are inhibited at an a w of about 0.97 i.e. if the
water activity of the food material is brought below 0.97, most of the food spoilage
bacteria will not be able to grow and multiply.The  pathogenic  or  toxicogenic  bacteria  are  comparatively  little  more  tolerant.  For
example, that Clostridial species of bacteria can grow at a water activity level of 0.94,
Bacillus  species  0.93,  Staphylococcus  aureus  is  considered  to  be  the  most  tolerant
pathogen which can tolerate a w to the maximum level and can grow at a w as low as 0.86
under aerobic conditions, as well as 0.91 a w under anaerobic conditions. Majority of the
yeast and molds are able to proliferate at an a w below 0.86, while some osmophillic
yeasts and xerophillic molds are capable of slow growth at just above 0.6 a w.
So, it becomes clear that to preserve a food by using reduction of a w as a stress factor, its
aw should be lower to 0.6 i.e. if the a w of a food is brought down below 0.6, it will not
support any growth of microorganism in it.
Fully dehydrated foods have lower water activity like in the range of 0.3 or so. In
dehydrated foods, this lowered water activity does not support any growth of chemical,
biochemical or other processes which are deleterious to food texture, flavor, and nutritive
value.
The minimum water activity for growth is always equal or lower than the minimum
water activity for toxin production. So, major advances in the control of water activity as
a means of food preservation will therefore are contingent upon the improvement of the
food sensory aspects. It is like the same case as it was observed with pH.  Secondly, what
is the method of controlling a w, whether it is drying, whether it is freeze drying, whetherit is concentration, evaporation or which techniques are adopted to control the water
activity.
Water activity in a food can be controlled either by removing the water from the food by
using  appropriate  dehydration  techniques.  Or,  it  can  also  be  controlled  by  adding
appropriate amounts and types of salt or sugar in the food and allowing the binding of
the water with these salts or sugars.
Having seen the influence of pH and water activity and means of controlling and how the
control influences the characteristics of the food material, characteristics of the microbial
growth, and thereby increasing its shelf  life, it is important to focus on another aspect
that is the conventional heat treatment. Particularly when toxicogenic microorganisms
are of concern, heat treatment is used.
The preservation of food by application of heat is achieved by large scale inactivation of
viable microorganisms.  Clostridium botulinum  is generally considered to be the most
heat resistant spores forming bacteria which cause trouble in food processing industries
as it can grow in low acid foods. The surviving spores of this organism can germinate in
the container  because inside the container anaerobic environment  is maintained  and
Clostridium botulinum  is anaerobic bacteria. So, these spores, if it survives the heat
process, it can grow and can germinate in the food and produce toxin. The toxin which is
produced by Clostridium botulinum  is a highly poisonous toxin; micromicrogram of this
toxin is sufficient to kill a healthy person.The severity of the thermal process which is selected to deliver sufficient lethality to
ensure that the processed food stuffs achieve commercial sterility, the required shelf life,
and it does not pose a risk to the public health is a function of the probability of the
survival of the target organism. How much the heat treated food has attained commercial
sterility is a function of how the heat treatment is able to kill the target microorganism;
for example, Clostridium boltulinum in the case of low acid food.
A wide range of variables influence the probability of the survival of the microorganisms
in the product under a given condition. Therefore, there is a need that these factors that
that influence the killing, or inactivation of microorganism should be considered while
defining the boundary conditions of a thermal process.
An empirical approach is generally used to investigate the efficiency of a thermal process
in a given practical situation to determine whether the commercial sterility has been
achieved or not. For this purpose there are certain temperature measuring instruments.
These temperature measuring instruments like thermocouple are positioned at the point
of slowest heating within a container. The point where the probability of survival of a
given organism is greatest is normally the geometrical centre of the container.
The process should be sufficient enough to give the desired sterility at its slowest heating
point. The slowest heating point and at several other points the temperature is measured
and this method of lethal rate summation at that point is used to determine the actual
delivered lethality, and hence the probability of the survival of a target microorganism.
This approach is used to develop thermal process designs, to suit new product, packages
as well as process systems. This approach is also used to establish and quantify new
production scenarios ahead of commercial use, and is used to validate all processes at
regular and frequent intervals.Special  instruments  have  been  developed  to  assist  process  evaluation,  to  measure
temperature, and pressure inside a container, even to measure deflection of container
surfaces as a response to changes in differential pressure, as well as even to measure the
rotation of the container which is normally performed in order to improve the heat
transfer efficiency. 
The growing public awareness of the risk of food poisoning and the commercial pressure
to  produce  more  and  more  high  quality  safe  stable  foods  will  encourage  more
computerized retort process control system, where the degree of overcooking thermally
associated with products and process variables will be trimmed, and optimized for the
sake of product quality and process efficiency.
Another way of improving the process is combining heat treatment, as well as control of
water activity and pH to preserve the food. It is possible that new forms of preservation
may be combined with conventional retorting to further optimize the delivered lethality
and  maximize  product  quality,  whilst  reducing  manufacturing  costs.  Synergies  are
practically interesting, because the combination of processes like hurdle technology is a
promising means of enhancing safety while retaining the quality of the food.