Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 1:  Course Overview and Introduction  
Lecture 3: Composition, Nutrition , and Health Values of Plant Oils  
   Hello everybody. Namaskar.  Welcome to this third lecture of module 1 of this NPTEL 
course on Food Oils and  Fats: Chemistry and Technology.  In this lecture today, we will 
discuss about composition, nutrition , and health value of plants  and oils.  The concepts which are covered in today's lecture include the composition of vegetable oils, what are 
the major components and minor components pres ent in various vegetable oils, fatty acid  
profiles of vegetable oils, total phenolic and flavonoid content , and finally, we will  also 
take up a summary of the nutritional and health benefits of plant oils.   
So let us see the composition of vegetable oils.   You know that vegetable oils play an 
important role in our diet.  They are consumed directly in refined or virgin forms or via 
many food products.  Vegetable oils are usually produced from plant seeds, nuts , or fruits 
like for example, rapeseed, sunflow er, olives, etc. are used for extraction of oils and these 
oils are  extracted from these sources either simply by pressing or by solvent extraction , or 
sometimes  by both processes. They are considered non -polar and lipophilic systems 
whose composition is h ighly variable and complex depending upon  their origin, quality , 
and producing methods.  That is what is the source of these plant oils and fats, how they 
are extracted by which  method towards the end of this lecture I will also give you some 
overview that  how the various methods of extraction influence the composition of oils 
and fats , particularly  the fatty acid profile or other minor components.  The components in vegetable oils and fats as I told you there is triglycerides which  are 
composed of three fa tty acid molecules esterified to one glycerol molecule.  They are the 
main component, main building blocks of vegetable oils.  These triglycerides constitute 
up to 95 to 98 percent.  The characteristics of triglycerides are determined by the type, 
proportions , and positions of  the fatty acid in the glycerol backbone.  The details of the 
chemistry of these triglycerides and how the various fatty acids that as saturated  fatty 
acids, long chain fatty acids, short chain fatty acids , etc., influence the characteristics  we 
will take up again in the separate other classes.  Today our concern is just to tell you what 
the various components present in  oils and fats , particularly vegetable oils.  So you can see here triglycerides  that is they are a type of lip id or fat molecules  which are 
composed of as I told you a glycerol and three fatty acids molecules  attached by  ester 
linkage that is you can see here that is here is the glycerol which has three alcoholic 
group.  So each alcoholic group and this fatty acid  has a COOH carboxylic group.  So 
from the alcoholic group OH and H from these two groups , they combine one  molecule 
of water is released and a monoglyceride is formed.  Similarly,  when three fatty acids are 
joined with the glycerol molecule with three est er linkage that is called a triglyceride  and 
these glycerides that is the triglycerides  whether they are liquid, solid , etc., which  depend  
upon their melting characteristics  other properties will entirely depend upon the type of 
these fatty acids that are attached to them.  That is where the proportion, positions, fatty 
acid chain length etcetera  are.  
 The fatty acid composition of triglycerides varies depending upon the varieties, 
cultivation  methods agronomical practices , and climatic conditions. Typically, even 
number of carbon atoms dominate the fatty acid chains and the fatty acid chain  length in 
vegetable oil due to their biosynthetic part.  That is every plant material has its 
physiological process and this governs that normally  it has been se en that most of the 
fatty acids that are present in triglyceride, monoglyceride , or diglyceride contain an even 
number of carbon atoms.  
Here in this figure , I have just shown you that what are the differences  see that lauric acid 
is a saturated fatty acid,  palmitic acid another saturated fatty acid  which is C 18, palmitic 
acid is C 16, lauric acid is C 12, oleic acid is C 18 with one  unsaturated bond then 
linoleic acid and linolenic acids are that saturated, polyunsaturated  fatty acids with two 
and three do uble bonds respectively.  So, in this figure rapeseed oil you can see here that 
it has more amount of oleic acid  that is it has monounsaturated fatty acids.  Nuts have 
more amounts of linoleic acids that is the two double -bond  saturated fatty acid.  Coconu t 
oil you can see here has more amount of lauric acid than saturated fatty  acids and that is 
why this coconut oil is solid at room temperature.  It has been shown that grapeseed oil 
contains more amount of linoleic acid and so on.  
Then apart from this maj or component the oils and fats are extracted depending upon  the 
nature of the extraction how they are extracted method pressing solvent extraction 
etcetera.  Other components are  present in the plant materials they also get extracted 
along with the triglyc erides.  So, these are called minor components.  So, the minor 
components  maybe  will be less than 5 percent they can be glycerolipids such  as mono 
and diglycerides or phospholipids Even  during the extraction process during  the pressing 
process these various conditions may also hydrolyze the triglycerides.  So, in the oil , 
there may be more amount of little less or more amount of free fatty acids  and the 
generation of free fatty acids also causes  the generation of formation of diglycerides 
monoglycerid es etceter a. Other  phospholipids are also present these are the monoglycerides diglycerides  and 
phospholipids glycerolipids and the glycerolipids that might be present  in the oil in traces 
amount may be sterol, tocopherol , tocotrienol , free fatty acids,  vitamins, pigments, 
proteins, phenolic compounds and so on.  So, the mono and diglycerides as I told you in 
the triglycerides you have seen are when all the three alcoholic linkages are esterified 
with the fatty acids.  So, similarly , when only one alcoholi c linkage is esterified with one 
fatty acid you can see  R 1 in this picture then it becomes monoglyceride.  When two fatty 
acids , R 1 and R 2 you can see here when they are present in  the glycerol backbone they 
become  diglycerides .  So, both monoglycerides  and diglycerides are naturally present in virgin oils due to  the action of indigenous lipase in fruits or oil seeds as well as during the 
extraction  that is the process parameters they may also influence as I told you earlier.  
 
  The enzymatic hydrolysis leads to the formation of both partial glycerides and free fatty  
acids in which partial glycerides account for 1 to 6 weight percent depending on the oil 
type.  For example, the concentration of glycerides ranges  from 1 to 2.8 percent in virgin  
olive oil a nd monoglycerides are present as much as lower as lower as less than 0.25 
percent . Now, let us see what phospholipids are triglycerides you have seen in the last 
slides that there  are three molecules of fatty acid present.  Now, here in the 
phospholipids , they are also very very important components present in  the oil and they 
get extracted from the seeds or other material however most of  these poly phospholipids 
are removed during the degumming step they are also known as gums.  
 
  So, in the oil refining process the phospholipids are removed , and some phospholipids 
like lecithin , etc., are then further refined and characterized for further use in food 
processing.  They are used in food processing as an emulsifier they are a very i mportant 
commercial  product and they are byproducts  of oil refining plants.  So, the phospholipids 
are considered polar lipids present in the plant cell membranes  which coextract with 
neutral triglycerides during squeezing or solvent extraction of  both see ds and waste virgin 
oils.  So, they consist of a glycerol backbone like triglyceride, but the only difference 
between  triglyceride and phospholipids is that which of course causes this difference 
causes  the major difference in their properties these here t here are two fatty acids , and the 
third one is attached with a phosphoric acid molecule and which in turn attached with  
various other components like amino alcohol side chains i.e. choline, ethanolamine, 
serine , or a sugar molecule inositol , and accordingl y these phospholipids may be named 
as phosphatidylcholine,  phosphatidyl ethanolamine, phosphatidyl serine , or phosphatidyl 
inositol.  So, these phospholipids have one hydrophobic tail As you can see here these are 
the fatty  acids  that may be saturated and  unsaturated fatty acids  and they have a 
hydrophilic head  hydrophilic head has the glycerol backbone and then phosphoric acid 
attached.  , which  is why that is they have both hydrophobic as well as hydrophilic 
components These  phospholipids that is they ha ve emulsifying actions that is they  when 
they are in between which  are the polar and nonpolar groups .  So, they keep together that 
is they create or form a sort of bridge between these compounds  and keep them together 
and it is the phospholipids you can sa y lecithin which help make the  milk fat remain 
intact in the water component in the serum that is milk the fat is present  in the form of 
that oil in water emulsion and that emulsifier is the lecithin.  So, here you see the 
composition of different phosphol ipids in selected crude oils and there  are three types of 
soyabean oil, three types of rapeseed oil, rice bran oil , and camellia  oil. 
So, in this , you can see there is that phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidyl -ethanolamine, 
phosphatidyl -inositol , and phosphat idic acid are content.  So, if you see the rice bran oil contains about twenty -seven  to twenty -eight  percent  phosphatidylcholine, twenty -three  
percent phosphatidyl -ethanolamine, about thirteen  point eight percent phosphatidyl -
inositol and it has comparatively less amount of phosphatidic acid.  So, you see that even 
the phosphatidic acid they are comparatively less in almost all  the oils except for that in 
the camellia oil which contains around fourteen point six  percent of the total 
phospholipids present, but at the same time , you see the soybean has the maximum 
amount of phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidyl -ethanolamine and even also it  has a good 
amount of phosphatidyl -inositol.  So, you see in all these oils at least the major 
phospholipids present  is phosphatidylcholine.  
 
Now, the other thing in the free fatty acids is the chemistry of free fatty acids  again we 
will be taking it up separately in the next module, but here I have told you  that in the 
glycerol these fatty acids are attached.  So, I have told you that either by the hydrolysis or 
by the enzymatic action or by some other  factors when these triglycerides  come in 
contact with these  various conditions during  extraction, during storage, during processing 
etcetera then these ester linkages  get broken  and the free fatty acids are released from the 
triglycerides.  So, in the oil finally, you get a mixture of triglyceride, monoglyceride, 
diglyceride , and free fatty acid depending upon the extent of hydrolysis or enzymatic 
action.  Normally vir gin and refined vegetable oils or fats have free fatty acid content of 
less than 5 percent and 0.1 percent respectively and that is why the free fatty acid content  
is regulated as per the law.  If you have more amount of free fatty acid content in the oil 
in the triglyceride then  its properties and characteristics get changed even 1 percent free 
fatty acid in vegetable  oil seriously reduces the smoke point that it is a frying 
characteristic, cooking  characteristic etcetera These  aspects we will take up in t he other classes.  Most fatty acids of natural origin have an alkyl chain comprising between C4 and 
22 carbon atoms.  The most common unsaturated fatty acids are C16 and C18.  They are 
usually eliminated during deodorization and physical refining processes due to their  
impact on foaming and the smoke point of the oils.   
 
In this table , I have again tried to give you the content of the minor compounds  like 
phosphorous, acid value, minerals, diacylglycerols etcetera in various crude oils.  Again 
the crude oil samples are 3 soyabean oil samples, 3 rapeseed oil samples, rice  bran oil , 
and camellia oil.  So, you can see that the initial phosphorous content is much higher in 
rice than in rapeseed oil.  So, soyabean oil also contains a significant amount of camel lia 
oil, but in the rice  bran oil that is initial phosphorous is comparatively less than the other 
oils that are presented  here.  So, here acid value you can see here acid value that is the 
koh milligram per gram,  Rice bran oil has more acid value and then  followed by your 
rapeseed oil.  Similarly , the mineral content of calcium, ferrous, magnesium , etc., and 
diacylglycerol percentages are given in this table you can take.  So, even these values 
speak about the characteristics of triglyceride and  accordingl y their usefulness in various 
operations and their health values.  
Another  important minor component in vegetable oils is sterols that are beta-sitosterol is 
the most abundant phytosterol in vegetable oils along with a variable amount of other  
sterols like campesterol , avenasterols, brassicasterol etcetera depending upon the oil type.  
Phytosterols are affected by several oil refining processes in which deodorization  can 
significantly reduce the total sterols due to the distillations and esterification  of th e 
sterols.  It is well known you must be knowing that Tocopherols  and trocotrienols which are the  other types  of plant sterols are well known for their vitamin E or anti -oxygen  
property or vitamin properties. Naturally , tocopherols  are present as free alco hols while 
tocotrienols  are esterified  the content of these tocotrienols  or trocopherols depends upon 
the oil type which may also  be influenced by their unintentional removal during the oil 
refining especially in the deodorization processes.  And it is the  antioxidant properties of 
these tocopherols  and tocotrienols  which help keep  the vegetable oils for comparatively a 
longer period . Of course , while doing this they are performing their antioxidant action, 
and their vitamin activity is somewhat suppresse d. Then water, there is a water content of less than 0.05 percent is generally controlled  in 
commercial vegetable oil because if there is an oil it will create problems , and the 
stability  may result in hydrolysis etcetera.  So its content is carefully controlled.  Then 
other minor components are phenolic compounds, pigments like carotenoids, 
chlorophylls etcetera  which may get extracted during the extraction process.  Then 
triterpenoids are like squalene s, protein  peptides , or even some trace metals that may also 
get extracted along with  the triglycerides.  
 So here in this slide , I have tried to give you the oil and protein contents of the major  oil 
seeds.  You can see here ground nut oil and palm oil if you see that palm kernel and 
ground nut  kernels  are almost the same both contain around 45 to 50 percent oil content 
and around 21 percent protein content.  The other oil seed which has high oil content and 
also significantly high protein content  is the  canola.  Canola has again 40 to 45 percent 
oil about 17 to 18 percent protein.  Coconut has around 65 to 68 percent oil and also about 
10 percent protein.  The protein quantity of the coconut is almost equal to the wheat flour.  
So it is again a very impor tant valuable sou rce of both oils and proteins. Sunflower oil 
again you see here has around 30 to 45 percent oil and 17 to 18 percent  protein.   
 So here the common fatty acids that are present in vegetable oils that are they are 
saturated fatty acids lau ric, myristic, palmitic , and stearic and their symbol is the  normal 
4, 12, 14, 16, 18, 0 means that is there is no unsaturation they are  all saturated fatty acids 
and here 12, 14 this indicate the number of the carbon atoms.  So you can see  here there is 
no unsaturation. Then monounsaturated fatty acids include oleic, pesto -selenic,  and 
erucic they are 18:1, 18:1 , and 22:1.  So they are 18 carbon -containing  and 22 carbon -
containing , but one unsaturated linkage at  the position of the unsaturated bond is that 9, 6 
and 13 respectively and CE means cis  forms they are the cis position means that is both 
the there is an OH group  are in the  same side.  Then polyunsaturated nonconjugated  fatty 
acids present in vegetable oil  commonly include linoleic acid, linolenic a cid, and 
linolenic acid (g) which  is 18:2, 18:3  18:3 and here that is the only difference between 
linolenic (a) and linolenic (g) is in  the position of the saturated bond and also that is it 
contains 9, 12 and 15 and whereas,  the linolenic (g) is the 6, 9 and 12, but they are all 3 
unsaturated linkages 18:3.  Then polyunsaturated conjugated fatty acids are allosteric  and 
calendic both of them  are 18:3 and here that is in addition to cis there is also a T linkage 
that is the  transform  that is 9c, 11t and 1 3t are 8t, 10t and 12c.  So, at 12 position it is cis  
form and at 8 and 10th position it is the trans form in calendic acid.  Oxygenated  fatty 
acids include Ricinolic and vernolic that is 18:1, and 18:1 both of  them , and here 12 OH, 
9 C and 12, 13 epoxy, 9 C these are the unsaturation levels. So, this gives you a fairly 
good idea about how that cis position and trans position are  there what are the saturation 
values and these are the commonly found vegetable that  is the fatty acids present in the 
vegetable oil.    Here some data that is what is the percentage of the fatty acid that is the fatty acid profile  
of common vegetable oil that is 16:0, 18:0, 18:1, 18:2 , and 18:3. If you look at  the data 
that cocoa butter has a bout 26 percent 16:0 whereas, it has 34, 35 percent  of 18:0 and 
18:1 of course, almost negligible amount of 18:2 and 18:3.  Similarly, you see that 
rapeseed although it has a high erucic  content rapeseed then  it has around 3 percent of 
that 16:0, 1 percent 18:0, but it has a higher amount of 18:1,  18:2 , and 18:3. Even lower 
erucic  rapeseed oil can has a significantly higher amount  of 18:1, 18:2 and 18:3 like 18:1 
is oleic then 18:2 is the linoleic and 18:3  is the linolenic acid. So, you see it has your 
groundnut oil again it has more amount  about 38 percent 18:1 and 41 percent 18:2, but 
traces of the 18:3. So, this gives  that is the yes that is the which are the oil and normally if 
they have more amount of polyunsaturated  fatty acid obviously, they should b e 
considered better.   
 So, here again , the same data for safflower oil, sunflower oil, and sesame oil and you can  
see that sunflower oil is all these they have oils they have high in  monounsaturated and 
polyunsaturated  fatty acids  like 18:1 and 18:2.   
Then here  is the fatty acid profile of rice bran oil especially if you see it  has a total of 
about 98.8 percent that is they are 98.8 grams  per 100 grams  of fatty acid triglycerides  
that is the fatty acids are proper. Then saturated fatty acids are about 20.5 percent in rice  
bran, monounsaturated fatty acids 41.9 and polyunsaturated  fatty acids 36.4 percent.  
 
  So, here again , that is the fatty acid profiles of various tree nut oils and tree nut oil  here 
almond, brazil nut, cashew nut, hazelnut , macadam ia and in this also some idea  has been 
given that is the pressed oil, solvent extracted, roasted and supercritical  fluid  extracted 
oil. So, here it also shows that in this tree nut  oils whether you are extracting the oil after 
roasting or before roasting w hether it is  a by the supercritical  fluid extraction, solvent 
extraction , or by that also influences  the amount of that the fatty acid present in them particularly the omega fatty acids  and polyunsaturated  fatty acids you can see the content 
of 18:1 omega 9, 21 omega 9, 18:2 omega 6, 18:3 omega 3 etcetera they are content.   
 Similarly , others  like pine nuts, walnuts  etcetera this type , and this data says that even 
the processing method extraction method also significantly  the amount of various fatty 
acids present or the fatty acid profile of the oils plant oils.   
As far as the total phenolic and flavonoid contents of the vegetable oils are  concerned, 
these phenolic compounds I hope you know are a diverse group of bioactive  compounds. 
They  possess antioxidant properties that help protect the body against damage from free  radicals. The total phenolic content of vegetable oils can vary depending on the type of 
oil and the method of extraction. Extra virgin olive oil is known t o have a higher phenolic  
content compared to other types of vegetable oil. Flavonoids are another group of 
bioactive  compounds that show anti -inflammatory, antioxidant , and anticancer properties. 
High -flavonoid content oils include sesame oil, rice bran oil, and flaxseed oil.  
 So, here in this slide , I have tried to give you the total phenolic and flavonoid content  of 
the vegetable oils and you can see that the different oils that is they have that  accordingly 
that is indicated  the TPC value or TFC value  that is which is a good indication of the 
antioxidant properties of this oil. So, the soybean oil you can see  here particularly the 
sunflower and rice bran oil see that rice bran oil is having  a TPC value  of 19.59. Even  
perillartine oil has a TPC value of  20.38, a grape oil TPC value of 15.56. So, these oils 
are to be considered that they have a good amount of  antioxidant potential.   Now, let us discuss the nutritional  and health benefits of vegetable oil and most of these 
points have been covered in the  earlier  lecture in general when we were talking about the 
health impact of these  oils and fats.  But here in this oil exclusively I will be covering the 
health benefits of plant -based oils that is yes they are a rich source of energy. That is one 
gram of fat or oil  provides 9 kilo calorie heat energy upon complete oxidation and this 
makes vegetable  oils an important component in the diet , especially for individuals  who 
have high energy requirements like athletes etcetera. These  vegetable oils and plant oils 
are considered  good sources  of linoleic acid. Linoleic acid is important for the growth 
and development  of the body and it also helps to maintain healthy skin and hair. 
Safflower oil  is a rich source of linoleic acid it contains around 78 percent of these fatty 
acids.  
They are low in cholesterol and in fact, vegetable oils are naturally cholesterol -free. They  
have other sterols, but not the cholesterol. Cholesterol is found only in the oils and  fats of 
animal sources.  So, by using vegetable oils inste ad of animal -based  fats individuals  can 
reduce their intake of cholesterol , and they can lower the risk of heart  disease or 
cardiovascular diseases etcetera which are the major problems  of the high amount  of 
cholesterol consumption. Also , the consumption o f plant oils improves  the absorption of 
fat-soluble  vitamins. Consuming that is vitamins  A D E and K which are important  for 
overall health. Adding a small amount of vegetable oil to a salad can help improve  the 
absorption of fat-soluble  vitamins in the ve getables.  
 
 
   These plant oils as I showed  you earlier ha ve good antioxidant properties . Free radical  
can cause damage to cells and tissues and is associated with several  chronic diseases  
including cancer and heart diseases. So, these antioxidants that are present in  vegetable 
oil help break  this free radical chain reaction and therefore,  prevent  the body from 
various unhealthy diseases or disorders diseases. For example, olive oil contains 
polyphenols which are powerful antioxidants that can help reduc e the risk of  heart 
diseases. Then they have they are the source of vitamin E. Vitamin E also plays a role in 
the immune system and it is important for maintaining  healthy skin and eyes. So, when 
we are taking plant oils we are consuming  a good amount of vitamin E.  Also , these  plant oils are considered a good source of omega -3 fatty acids. These fatty 
acids are important for brain health and can also help to reduce  inflammation in the body 
Flax seed oil is a rich source of alpha -linolenic  acid (ALA) which is an omega -3 fatty 
acid that can be converted to the more active forms of omega  3 like EHA, EPA or DHA 
like Ecosapentaenoic acid or Doposahexaenoic acid.  So, these  plant oils support brain 
function . Vegetable  oils contain fatty acids that are  important for brain functions and 
development.  
So, now I would like to summarize today's  lecture that vegetable oils are derived from 
plants an d are composed of triglycerides which are composed of glycerol and fatty acids. 
The fatty acid composition of vegetable o ils varies depending upon the type of the oil and 
their method of extraction. Vegetable  oils are a good source of energy and can provide 
quick energy to the body. Vegetable  oils are high in antioxidants like phenolic and 
flavonoid compounds which help the body  from various chronic diseases like cancer, 
heart disease, and diabetes. Vegetable oils are  good sources  of essential fatty acids like 
linoleic acid which play a role in the synthesis  of hormones and cell signaling molecules. 
Consuming vegetable oils w ith meals can improve  the absorption of fat-soluble  vitamins.  
While vegetable oils can be a healthy addition to  a balanced diet, it is important to 
consume them in moderation as they are high in calories .  So, they may have a very good 
effect on health, but at the same time , they will also  add a high amount of calories  to the 
body. So, vegetable oils since they are high in calories  can contribute to weight gain if 
consumed in excess. So, this would be used  in causes and causes is carefully they should 
be used.  
 These are the references that have  been cited in this lecture. Thank you very much for 
your patience hearing.  
 
 