Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 1:  Course Overview and Introduction  
Lecture 09: Triglycerides – Function in Nutrition & Food Processing  
 
  Hi everyone, Namaste.  Now, we are today in the 9th lecture of this course.  In the 
earlier class, we discussed about triglycerides and their chemistry and some important 
functions  particul arly the important properties.  
 
In today's class, in the next h alf an hour or so, we will discuss about functions of  
triglycerides in nutrition and food processing.  We will discuss what is the importance of 
triglycerides in human nutrition particularly  how it is digested in the gastrointestinal 
tract.  Then we will  also discuss briefly the structure property relationship of triglycerides 
and  functions of tri glycerides in food products. How different triglycerides influence the 
appearance of texture, mouthfeel and flavor  of food products.  Here also we discuss that  
yes triglycerides are that 3 molecules attached with 3 molecules  of fatty acids attached 
with glycerol molecule and these are in general lipids.   
 
So, lipids play important role in determining the texture, appearance and flavor of food  
products.  Let us take a very simple example like in our h ome even we prepare chapati. 
So, you see the chapati, puri that is which is deep fat deep fat fried chapati and then  
paratha that is smeared fat and you see the difference in all their texture, their flavor  and 
their color you feel.  So, this is the simplest example which we can say that how these 
lipids or fats influence  the properties of food products.  Physical properties of edible fats 
and oils depend primarily on the molecular structure,  interactions and o rganization of the 
triglyceride molecules that they contain.  In particular, the strength of the attractive 
interactions between the molecules and the  effectiveness of their packing within a 
condensed phase largely determine their thermal behavior,  their  density and rheological 
properties.  Lipids have distinctly different properties than water due to which they affect 
the chara cteristics  of food distinctly.  
 
In this slide, I have just tried to give you that a comparison of some major physical 
chemical  properties of a liquid oil with water at 20 degree Celsius.  A liquid oil is 
basically triolein that is it is a triglyceride containing olein simple  triglyceride, oleic acid 
in all the three glycerol OH groups.  So, the molecular weight you see here ther e is a how 
much difference water has a molecular  weight of 18 whereas, this oil triolein it has a 
molecular weight of 885.  Melting point triolein of course, it is already an oil.  So, it is 5 
degree C elsius is the melting point. If you freeze it before 5  degree Celsius, it may be 
little further otherwise above 5  degree Celsius, it will be that liquid.  Its density that is oil 
has 910 kg per cubic meter whereas, water has density of 998.  You see that that is the 
water is more dense than the oil.  Similar ly compressibility that is a oil is more 
compressible than water as the data indicate  here.  That is viscosity is th at is 50 in case 
of oil and 1. 002 that is a milli Pascal second  that is in the case of for water.  Similarly the 
data for thermal conducti vity, thermal expansion coefficient all are different  you see the 
thermal expansion coefficient is much more f or oil than that of the water. Similarly 
dielectric constant however, water has a more dielectric constant than oil ok.  Surface 
tension there is  a again there are difference w ater has more this tension and refractive 
index of oil is more than that of the oi l we are talking about triolein  it is more than that of 
the water ok.   
 
So, let us see what happens how the oils triglycerides are digested i n the intestinal tract 
and digestion and absorption of dietary lipids occur in the small intestine and the fatty 
acids are  released from the triglycerides and they are packed and delivered to the muscle 
and adipose  tissues. So, it whole process may be af ter one or two slides I will show you a 
pictorial view then the things will become more clear, but tell that it occurs in several 
steps.  That the first step after you have ingested the fat or triglycerides the first stage is  
the solubilization by micella r formation using bile salts that is in vertebrates before 
ingested  triglycerols or triacylglycerols can be absorbed through the intestinal wall.  
They must be converted from insoluble macroscopic fat particles to finally, dispersed 
microscopic  micelles and this solubilization is carried out by the bile salts ok.  Such as 
taurocholic acid which are synthesized from cholesterol in the liver and is stored  in the 
gall bladder and they are released into the small intestine after the ingestion  of a fatty 
meal.  So, these bile salts they are amphiphatic compounds that act as a biological 
detergents  converting dietary fats into mixed micelles of bile salts and triacylglycerols 
ok. 
 
   
Then comes the second step that is where that is the action of lipase starts.  So, that is the 
micelle formation enormously increases the fraction of oil molecules it  assemble to the 
action of water soluble lipase in the intestine and the lipase action converts  the 
triacylglycerols into monoacylglycerols and diacylglycerol s and free fatty acid or  even 
glycerol.  So, in the mixture now you are having all glycerol plus free fatty acid plus 
monoacylglycerol  dryacylglycerol and so on.  Then finally, it goes to the third step that 
is diffusion into intestinal mucosa.  The prod ucts of lipase action diffuse into the 
epithelial cell lining the intestinal  surface that is the which is normally  known as 
intestinal mucosa. Then it is followed by chylomicron formation that is these products 
which are diffused  into the intestinal muco sa then they are converted reconverted rather 
to triacylglycerol and and packed with the dietary cholesterol and specific proteins into 
lipoproteins aggregates and  which are called chylomicrons.   
 
Then the next step is the lipid uptake where the protein  moieties of lipoproteins are 
recognized  by the receptors of the cell surface.  And in lipid uptake from the intestine 
chylomicrons which contain lipoproteins C -II that is the  apoprotein C2 shortly it is called 
apo C2.  They move from the intestinal muco sa into the lymphatic system and then enter 
the blood  which carries them to the muscle and adipose tissues.  In the next step there is 
the where triacylglycerols are hydrolyzed and in the capillaries of  these tissues the 
extracellular enzyme lipoprotein lipase is activated by apo C -II hydrolyzes 
triacylglycerols  so fatty acids and glycerol. In the step 7 there is absorption of fatty acids 
by gl ycerol that is fatty acids and glycerols are taken up by the cell in the target tissues 
ok.   
 
So, here I have shown you that is you can see that it is a complete intestinal setup  that is 
fatty fats are ingested in the diet, it come through the stomach there is a gall bladder  then 
the for gall bladder bile is secreted then bile salt emulsify  fatty fats in the sm all intestine 
forming mixed micelles and then it comes to the next  step that is intestinal lipases 
degrade triacylglycerols.  In the third step fatty acids and other breakdown products are 
taken up by the intestinal mucosa  and converted into triacylglyce rols ok.  Then finally, 
this triacylglycerols are incorporated with cholesterol and apolipoproteins and   
 
 
 
And this specific heat capacity increases with the increasing temperature ok.  The again 
the oils or triglycerides they normally have the therma l conductivity to the tune of 0. 165 
watt per meter Kelvin ok.  And they are poor conductors of heat than water that is the 
water has more thermal conductivity.  Melting  point as well as enthalpy of fusion that is 
Tm an d Hf they depend on packing of triglyc erides, acylglycerol molecule within the fat 
crystals.   
 
Effect of triglyceride structure on thermal properties l ike if you see that the packing  of 
triacylglycerol in fat crystals how it influences the thermal property.  So, more effective 
packing result s in high values for Tm and Hf both that is the melting  point as  well as 
enthalpy of fusion. Then the increasing the chain length of your triglycerides results in 
higher Tm and Hf.  Tm and Hf are higher for saturated fatty acids than for unsaturated 
fatty acids.  So, if triglyceride has more unsaturated fatty acids so, it is Tm and Hf will be 
less.  Tm and Hf are higher for straight chain fatty acids than t hat of the branched chain 
fatty acids.  Then effect of symmetry of distribution of fatty acids on glycerol that is Tf 
and Hf  are higher triglycerides with more symmetrical distribution of the fatty acid s on 
the glycerol  backbone. And then Tm and Hf both are higher for the trans fat than that for 
the cis fats cis bonds  ok.  And these two values Tm an d Hf melting point and enthalpy of 
fusion are higher for more  stable polymorphic forms ok.  That is the stability of the 
polymorphic part if the polymorphic part are more stable ok.  Then their Tm and Hf both 
will be high ok.   
 
Here in this table there are melting points and heat of fusions of some stable most stable  
poly forms of selected triglyceride molecule are given that is the triacylglycerides are  
LLM, MMM, PPP, SSS, OOO, LI, LI, LI and LN, LN, NN, SOS, SOO that is these are 
the simple  glycerid e as well as mixed glyceride.  L is lauric acid, M is myristic acid that 
is MMM means there is a triglyceride where  all the three fatty acids are myristic acid.  
LLL is the triglyceride where all the three fatty acids are lauric acid.  So, you can see the 
melting point of the LLL is 46 degree Celsius whereas, MMM it is 58  degree Celsius.  
So, PPP that is a fatty acid which comes contains all the three palmitic acid all the three  
fatty acids are palmitic acid is a melting point is furthermore ok.  SSS 73 d egree Celsius, 
but so, it is among the saturated part increasing the number of  carbon alright that it 
results into the saturation that  is melting point increases. But if you go that is the when 
the unsaturation is there then again the melting point is dec reases  that is oleic acid which 
is oleic acid is 1 double bond.  So, here you see that is melting point is 5 degree Celsius, 
linolenic acid is more double  bonds minus 23 degree Celsius, linolenic acid minus 24 
degree Celsius etcetera ok.  And similarly h eat of fusion also these values are given you 
can see ok.  Then the thermal stability is very important characteristics like most of the 
when the  oils and fats are heated during heat processing, during frying operation, 
cooking operations  they may oxidiz e.  So, thermal stability thermal properties if you talk 
about smoke poin t, flash point, fire  point. So, thermal stability measuring is needed to 
select the lipids of high temperature application  particularly for baking and frying that is 
a oil which has  higher smoke point means it  can be exposed to higher temperature ok.  
And this specific heat capacity increases with the increasing temperature ok.  The again 
the oils or triglycerides they normally have the thermal conductivity to  the tune of 0.165 
watt per meter Kelvin ok.  And they are poor conductors of heat than water that is the 
water ha s more thermal conductivity. Packing point as well as enthalpy of fusion that is 
Tm and Hf they depend on packing of  triglycerides, acylglycerol molecule within th e fat 
crystals.  Effect of triglyceride structure on thermal properties like if you see that the 
packing  of triacylglycerol in fat crystals how it influences the thermal property.  So, 
more effective packing results in high values for Tm and Hf both that is the melting  
point as well as enthalpy of fusion.  Then the increasing the chain length of your 
triglycerides results in higher Tm and Hf.  Tm and Hf are higher for saturated fatty acids 
than for unsaturated fatty acids. So, if triglyceride has more uns aturated fatty acids so, it 
is Tm and Hf will be less.  Tm and Hf are higher for straight chain fatty acids than that of 
the branched chain fatty  acids.  Then effect of symmetry of distribution of fatty acids on 
glycerol that is Tm and Hf  are higher trig lycerides with more symmetrical distribution of the fatty acids on the glycerol  backbone.  And then Tm and Hf both are higher for the 
trans fat than that for the cis fats cis bonds  ok.  And these two values Tm and Hf melting 
point and enthalpy of fusion are higher for more  stable polymorphic forms ok. That is 
the stability of the polymorphic part if the polymorphic part are more stable ok.  Then 
their Tm and Hf both will be high ok.  Here in this table there are melting points and heat 
of fusions of some  stable most stable  poly forms of selected triglyceride molecule are 
given that is the triacylglycerides are  LLM, MMM, PPP, SSS, OOO, LI, LI, LI and LN, 
LN, NN, SOS, SOO that is these are the simple  glyceride as well as mixed glyceride.  L 
is lauric aci d, M is myristic acid that is MMM means there is a triglyceride where  all the 
three fatty acids are myristic acid.  LLL is the triglyceride where all the three fatty acids 
are lauric acid. So, you can see the melting point of the LLL is 46 degree Celsius 
whereas, MMM it is 58  degree Celsius.  So, PPP that is a fatty acid which comes 
contains all the three palmitic acid all the three  fatty acids are palmitic acid is a melting 
point is furthermore ok.  SSS 73 degree Celsius, but so, it is among the saturat ed part 
increasing the number of  carbon alright that it results into the saturation that is melting 
point increases.  But if you go that is the when the unsaturation is there then again the 
melting point is decreases  that is oleic acid which is oleic aci d is 1 double bond.  So, 
here you see that is melting point is 5 degree Celsius, linolenic acid is more double  
bonds minus 23 degree Celsius, linolenic acid minus 24  degree Celsius etcetera ok. And 
similarly heat of fusion also these values are given you can see ok.   
  
Then the thermal stability is very important characteristics like most of the when the  oils 
and fats are heated during heat processing, during frying operation, cooking operations  
they may oxidize.  So, thermal stability thermal properties if you talk about smoke point, 
flash point, fire  point.  So, thermal stability measuring is needed to select the lipids of 
high temperature application  particularly for baking and frying that is a oil which has 
higher smoke point means it  can  be exposed to higher temperature ok.  Thermal stability 
of triacylglycerols is much better tha n that of the free fatty acids. Propensity of lipids to 
breakdown during heating is largely determined by the amount  of volatile organic 
material that they cont ain such as free fatty acids.   
So, the smoke point is the temperature at which the sample begins to smoke when tested  
under specified conditions that is if you go on heating that is the air temperature  will 
come at which the oil will catch fire means that oil cannot be that oil cannot be  further 
heated.  So, that is that decides the yes up to.  So, you want that a frying operation to 
conduct at 200 degree Celsius.  So, obviously, you cannot use an oil which has a smoke 
point of 150 degr ee Celsius. You have to have a oil which has a smoke point more than 
200 degree Celsius.  So, similarly flash point is defined as the temperature at which the 
volatile products  generated by the lipids are being produced at a rate where they can be 
temporarily ignited  b y application of a flame, but cannot sustain combustion.  Fire point 
is the temperature at which the evolution of volatiles because of the thermal  
decomposition occur so quickly that continuous combustion can be sustained after 
application  of a flame.   
 
Then, let us discuss rheological properties where the type of fat, their rheological  
behavior, what are the structural factors and then their structural factor, their effect  on 
the rheological behavior.  So, for liquid oil, there a Newtonian with visco sities between 
30 and 60 milli Pascal  second at room temperature whereas, the viscosity decreases 
steeply with increasing temperature  followi ng logarithmic relationship. The solid fats 
that is a mixture of fat crystals in a liquid oil that is they have b oth solid  and liquid fat, 
they are normally plastic in nature and their rheological behavior highly  depends on 
concentration, morphology, interactions and organization of the fat crystal that is  again 
what is the solid fat ratio, how they are packed, ho w their crystals are packed  at sub -
cellular level etcetera.  If you look at the structural factor that is in the liquid oils, 
structural factors  may be solid fatty acid composition.  So, the viscosity is higher if the 
fraction of fatty acid with alcohol group in their  hydrocarbon chain is higher.  Like for 
example, castor oil has higher viscosity than other oils due to presence of ricinoleic  acid.  
Similarly, the solid fat content in the fat or fat crystal morphology, the this if you  look at 
the struct ural factor and their effect on rheological behavior, so they yield stress  
increases with increasing the solid fat content and also that is yield stress is higher for  a 
small needle shaped crystals.  
 
 
   
Optical properties that pure triglyceride have little inherent color as they do not  have 
groups that absorb light in visible region, but commercial oils tend to be colored  due to 
the presence of pigments that is the carotenoids, chlorophyll etcetera which are  extracted 
along with the triglyceride fr om their material oil bearing material.  So, this pigment add 
color to the oil.  So that is why these edible oils commercial edible oils they often 
undergo a decolorization  or bleaching step during the refining process and where these 
pigments are removed .  In emulsified foods, lipid contribute to opacity due to their ability 
to scatter light which  is a direct result of the difference in refractive index between  the 
lipid and aqueous phases. So, optical properties if you see refractive index its value it 
room temperature is around  1. 43 to 1.45 and refractive index increases with increasing 
the chain length of the fatty  acid, increasing the number of double bonds as well as 
increasing conjugation of double  bond, ok.  All these increases will result into the 
increase in the refractive index value.  So, if you have more unsaturated fatty acid, 
obviously they will be having more refractive  index, ok.  Longer chain length, 
polyunsaturated fatty acid there will be more refractive index.  Then absorption spect ra 
that is conjugated diene absorb ultraviolet light at around 232  nanometer range whereas, 
conjugated triene absorb ultraviolet light as 270 nanometer  and UV visible absorption 
spectra of oils that is presence of conjugated double bond  like carotenoids  or 
chlorophylls etcetera they influence the absorption spectra.  
 
 
So, as far as the electrical properties is concerned there are several analytical techniques  
for fatty acids.  They are based on measurement of electrical characteristics.  For 
example, e lectrical conductivity measurement of fats concentration or electrical pulse  
counting of the fat droplet size.  So, relative dielectric constant it is a fairly low for the 
fats and oils due to their low  polarity of triglycerides or for pure triglyceride dielectric 
constant increases with increasing  polarity and that is mainly owing to the presence of 
OH group or owing to the oxidation process  and also this dielectric constant increases 
with the decreasing the temperature.  The electrical resist ance is n ormally high for oils. 
However, there is a they are poor conductors of electricity because of this high electric  
resistance.   
 
Common effect of triglycerides on appearance of the food products the characteristic 
appearance  color, opacity of many food p roduct is strongly influenced by the presence of 
lipids.  For example, liquid oil they are colorful and optically clear that is the presence of  
light absorbing pigments such as chlorophyll and carotenoid etcetera in the liquid oil  
they influence the appe arance of the they absorb the light and accordingly the appearance  
of the food products in which they are present is a influenced.  Solid fats usually optically 
opaque they are usually optically opaque and due to scattering  of the light fat crystals 
and then concentration size and shape of the fat crystals will influence  the appearance of 
the food product in which they are present.  Then the at perhaps the effect of emulsion is 
the food system is emulsion that is they  are normally opaque due to the scat tering of 
light by oil droplets which are immiscible  with water and here the concentration size and 
refractive i ndex of oil droplet alright. For example, you see that whole milk it has 4 
percent fat is generally whiter as you can  see here in this picture  it is whiter than that of 
the skim milk which has less than  0.1 percent food and this skim milk is they can scatter 
light strongly ok.  And skim milk only contains casein micelles that is scattered light 
more weakly that is  whole milk is scattered light  that is the strongly whereas, the skim 
milk it scatters  light more weakly and because of that skim milk is slightly light blue in 
color and whereas,  the whole milk is pure whole white in color.  So, the fat content 
obviously, it influences the appearanc e of the food.   
 
Similar in interesting example of the importance of fat crystallization and appearance of 
the  food product is bloom it occurs due to stability problem associat ed with fat 
crystallization. For example, poor temperature, incompatibility of the fat blends, fat 
migration and fat recrystallization  etcetera it influence the bloom.  So, large white spots 
are a dull whiteish grey appearance on the surface of the product  if it is there its major 
main cause might be fluctuating temperature duri ng storage  ok.  And here the 
macroscopic mechanism for that is the melting fat and recrystallization of  the fat phase.  
However, minor changes which affecting the appearance is that it changes in the 
morphology  of the fat crystals on the surface from fl at smooth crystals that specularly 
reflect light  giving a smooth appearance to silky crystal or spiky crystals that diffusely 
reflect light  giving a cloudy appearance ok.  So, using surfactant that limit crystal 
transition the careful control of the stor age temperature  one can control the bloom in the 
food products ok.  
 
   
Then effect of triglyceride on the flavor of food product triglycerides are relatively  large 
molecules with low volatility.  Hence little influence in a these triglycerides they have  
little inherent flavor.  In fact, purely refined and deodorized oils they do not have any 
flavor they are supposed  to be blend in taste and flavor.  However, natural edible fats and 
oils have distinctive flavor profile due to the presence  of characteris tic volatile 
compounds such as lipid oxidation products or natural impurities  etcetera which might 
be present there or some flavoring materials might get extracted from  the food in which 
they are extracted or oil seed etcetera.  And also the minor fatty acid constituent which 
are especially in p articularly in animal  fats. So, the flavor perception like aroma and taste 
it will depend upon the type of the lipid  as well as concentration of the lipid because 
partitioning of flavor compounds between oil,  wa ter and gaseous regions within the food 
matrix according to their particles and volatiles  that causes the influence or flavor taste 
in aroma and flavor.   
 
Here just in this picture if you shown you that is schematic diagram representing virgin  
olive oi l flavor perception that is virgin olive oil in it comes that is you see first  is that 
here extra virgin olive oil glass it comes it is containing in the glass and  then when there 
are two senses one is the mouth because the flavor means that is the  join t appreciation of 
both tongue like taste as well as nose smell ok.  So, one is that one route that it will come 
to the this aroma through nestle nasal route  and also order through the orthonasal route 
that is 2 and 3.  So, this two routes aroma will come and then four is the nasal cavity it 
goes to the nasal  cavity and finally, fifth is the olfactory bulb olfactory and it comes that 
is olfactory  epithelial where they sense of a smell.  So, these routes these cells comes and 
olfactory epithelial cells tha t is sense of a smell  they sense the smell and then it is and 
there is the tongue with the sense of taste the  taste buds that is they give the bitterness 
perception etcetera then it comes to the oral  cavity and finally, the trigeminal nerve 
chemesthesis  perception and pungency etcetera  that is the  point of this. So, all these they 
send the signal into the brain here and the brain record this signal  very promptly and it is 
in the few fraction of second vary right.  So, all these signals different send s ignals that is 
in the brain and brain records its  and appreciates it and finally, decides that yes what is 
the it is a recognition of the  sensory perception it recognizes that yes it is only valid it is 
this particular sense  of flavor or taste ok.   
 
Then effect of triglyceride and the texture of the food products the influence of lipid  and 
the texture of food is largely determined by the physical state of the lipid and the  nature 
of the food matrix that is like bulk fat, emulsified fat, structural fa t etcetera.  Bulk liquids 
like cooking and salad oils here viscosity of the oil over the temperature  range of is of 
the interest and this influences the texture ok.  Similarly that is the partially crystalline 
fats they are present in chocolate, baked  pr oducts, shortening, butter and margarine and 
here concentration, morphology and interaction  of fat crystals melting profile of the fat 
crystals all these affect the melting profile  affect the spreadability and these factors will 
influence  the texture. Then oil in water emulsion like cream, dessert, dressings and 
mayonnaise here presents of  fat droplets gives creamy texture.  Water in oil emulsion 
like in margarine, butter and spreads solid fat content morphology and  interaction of the 
fat crystal will i nfluence the texture of the product ok.  
 
Margarine production is a good example of importance of lipid crystallization and 
determining overall  texture of the food products.  A lipid phase having a blend of 
triglyceride suitable for texture of final product is homogenized  in its liquid state with an 
aqueous phase to form oil in water emulsion.  This emulsion is then proceeded under 
carefully controlled time temperature shear conditions  to obtain the desired extent of 
crystallization, crystal size, p olymorphic form and deg ree  of crystal interaction. Ideally 
the final product should contain a three -dimensional network of small aggregated  
crystals in the beta polymorphic forms as this provides the desired textural and stability  
characteristics.   
 
Shortening is another example of importance of fat crystallization on the texture of food  
products to obtain desired functionality or desired functional characteristics of a 
particular  product.  It is important to choose blend of fat and oil that gives ap propriate 
melting profile  and polymorphic characteristics and to process the fat using controlled 
cooling and shearing  to obtain desired crystal type and structure.  Because this desired 
crystal type and structure will influence its properties particular ly  whipping and other 
properties entrapment of air and all those things in baking this is  very important.  So, it is 
usually important that the lipid is partially crystal line at storage temperature. So, that it 
maintains its structural integrity, but mel ts during consumption to give a desirable  mouth 
feel.  So, functional properties may be tenderness, texture, mouth feel, structural integrity,  
lubrication, incorporation of air, heat transfer, extended shelf life etcetera in the product  
like cake, bread , pastry, fried products, baked products etcetera.  So, in all these products 
these functional properties that is they influence the texture,  they prevent the interaction 
between the protein or starch molecule which serve to tenderize  the product by redu cing 
gluten cohesion and shortening the texture and forming a three  dimensional fat crystal 
network.   
 
Then effect of triglyceride and the mouth feel of the product you can see the triglyceride  
can also affect the mouth feel of food system that they ar e present in various factors such  
as physical state and properties of the fat crystals can lead to different mouth feel  
perception like if it is the physical state of the lipids can give oily mouth feel because  
coating of tongue by liquid oi l during mas tication. Solid fat crystals they may give grainy 
or gritty texture.  If fat crystals are particularly large in size, then size of fat crystals also 
it influences  that is they give them smooth or texture particularly if the fat crystals are 
small in size ok.  So, properties of the fat crystals its melting characteristics etcetera it 
gives a cooling  sensation.  So, melting characteristics and that is why even cocoa butter 
you see cocoa fat because  of its unique melting characteristics it is used in a vari ety of 
confectionery products  and it gives a very good mouth feel.   
 
So, now I will summarize this lecture by saying that the fatty acid or that the triglyceride  
functions in a large way they furnish large fraction of oxidative energy in animals.  
Dietary triglycerides are emulsified in the small intestine by bile salts, hydrolyzed  by 
intestinal lipase, absorbed by intestinal epithelial cells, reconverted into triacyl  glycerols 
and then formed into chylomicrons by combination with specific  lipoprotein s. Dietary 
aspects of triglyceride structure and affect the functional properties of the  food product 
and the importance of fats on flavor, appearance, mouth feel, texture of  the food product 
is important ok.  And this is very very important in design de ciding the usefulness of a 
particular fat  and oil in a for a particular food processing operations or its use in a 
particular food  giving the desired characteristics, structural characteristics, appearance, 
flavor and so  on.   
 
So, these ar e the references which are used in this lecture.   
 
Thank you for your patience hearing.  
