Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 1:  Course Overview and Introduction  
Lecture 08: Glycerides – Type , Structure and Function  
 
  Hello everybody.  Namaskar.  Now, we are in the eight lecture of this course.   
 
In this lecture today, we will discuss about glycerides, their types, structure and function.  
The concepts that are covered in today's lecture include glycerides and its clas sification, 
chemical synthesis of glycerides in the biological materials, then triglycerides structure 
and  function and then triglycerides as an energy source.  So, these we will cover.  
 
 
 
  So, the glycerides as was also briefly told in earlier classes th at they are the fatty  acids 
esters of glycerol, ok.  They are non -polar hydrophobic molecule that are insoluble  in 
water because of the polar hydroxyl of glycerol and they are polar carboxy ls of the fatty 
acids are bound in ester linkages.  Lipids have lower specific gravities than water.  They 
may be mono, di - or triglycerides depending upon the number of fatty acids present, ok.  
 
  See here in this reaction, it is shown that the glycerol a nd then the fatty acids.  It joins 
with this molecule that is fatty acid OH, the OH her e and this OH in the carboxylic  group 
fatty acid, ok.  So, from this one water molecule goes out, alright, and there i s a linkage 
between CH2O -COOR, yes.  So, that becom es a easter linkage.  So, depending upon 
whether 1 or 2 or all the 3, they are esterified, i t will become a monoglyceride, 
diglyceride or finally, triglycerides, ok.   
 
The glycerol molecules has 3 carbon atoms, 5 hydrogen atoms and 3 hydroxyl groups.  
So, there are 4 bonds or linkages to each of the 3 carbon atoms.  It is I hope you all know 
that is carbon contains 4 bond that  is 4 hydrogen can join to the single carbon atom, ok.  
Then esterification is the reaction of an alcohol with a c arboxylic acid to  give a ester and 
water like for example, here you see a fatt y acid plus alcohol. So, if it is esterification 
process it undergoes, then it gi ves the ester like R we take as  a fatty acids.  So, R -
COOR1.  So, this becomes here this is one is fatty acid and there is alcohol.  So, it is fatty 
group and alcoholic group reaction bet ween carboxylic and alcohol it becomes a ester, 
ok.  So, this shows you the gener al and in the process and water molecule is released, ok.  
This gives you a general description of the esterification process and mind it when it  is 
hydrolyzed then ester linkage can be broken and one will get again the fatty acids and  
the alcohol may be glycerol.  So, the other in this lower reaction it is shown ester ification 
of a glycerol with a fatty acid to form triglyceride.  That is where three molecules of fatty 
acids are esterified  with the three hydroxyl group of the glycerol, then it becomes a 
triglyceride and in the process three molecules of water  get released, ok.   
 
So, if we discuss the structure of glycerides, this glycerol and common fatty  acids are 
achiral compounds with no chir al centers in the molecule.  An a chiral molecule has a 
plane of symmetry and it has superimposable mirror image. When the middle carbon in 
glycerol has four dif ferent substit uent groups, it becomes chiral with mono, di and mixed 
triacylglycerols having a chiral carbon atoms.  A chiral molecule has neither a plane nor a 
center of symm etry and has non superimposable  mirror images which are called 
enantiomers or opt ical isomers.  Optical isomerism is a type of stereoisomerism.  To 
distinguish the configuration of the fatty acid in triacylglycerols, the carbon atoms  of 
glycerol are nu mbered stereospecifically, ok. That is the from the top is the number one 
that is st ereospecific numbering that is Sn stand for stereospecific numbering.  
 
 
And here in this if you keep that carbon atom like in the top from the top to bottom the  
top carbon atom is known as Sn1 stereospecific number 1, then middle is the Sn2 
stereospecifi cally  numbered 2 carbon atom and the bottom one is the Sn3. So, that is 
called stereospecific numbering of the carbon that is a Fischer projection  must drawn 
with hydroxyl group at C2 to the left.  The carbon atom at the top of the structure is C1 
and at  the bottom it is C3.  And in this case the prefix Sn that is stereospecific numbering 
is used and in that way it is possible  to differentiate between the positioning of the fatty 
acid.  That is a stereospecific numbering of triglyceride is used to design ate the 
configuration of  triglycerides.    
So, here you see that is to be a specific numbering that is the chiral objects in this  figure 
that if you look at our left hand and right hand that mirror image they cannot be  
superimposed. They do not have a pl ane of symmetry.  Whereas, if this there are two 
flask of identical nature they are a chiral object they can be  superimposed each other 
they have the plane of symmetry.  So, this is the that mixed triglyceride they are normally 
chiral there is no plane of  symmetry  in this. Whereas, glycerol it is  a it has a plane of 
symmetry.  It is achiral ok.  So, that is the concept.   
 
So, this is used in fact, for this numbering also that these stereospecific numbering I  
already discussed this.   
 
Then you can see let us see stereospecific numbering of and test  of chirality of some of 
the common triglycerides, monoglycerides and diglycerides.  So, here if you look at the 
monoacylglycerol, monoglyceride. It has a that is the 1 SN1 acylglycerol means at the 
first one the fatty acid.  So, this indicates that the symbol is star indicates that the chiral 
center that is the  other second one in all these three ok.  It is the chiral center because 
they are all chiral compou nds and in this whether the SN2  acylglycerol or SN1 
acylglycerol or SN3 acylglycerol that is it is just shows that the number of  that the fatty 
acid positioning of fatty acid whether it is first carbon atom in this case  second carbon 
atom or in third carbon atom ok.   
 
Then becomes similarly stereospecific numbering and test of chirality for the 
diacylglycerols.  Diacylglycerol may be SN12 diacylglycerol or 23 diacylglycerol or 13 
SN diacylglycerol ok. That is 12 means that is the ester linkage is the top car bon atom 
and middle carbon atom  that is these are 12.  Whereas, the 23 it is the middle carbon 
atom and third c arbon atom are 31, 13 it is the  top carbon and bottom carbon ok.  That 
the also that is they are the in the second carbon is the see that is superimposable 
structure it is a chiral from chiral center ok that is star in all these cases.   
 
Then it is a triacylglycerol you see that is where ther e are a simple triglyceride and  we 
say the mixed triglyceride ok.  Simple triglyceride means where all the three fatty acids 
are the same fatty acid and it  is triglyceride obviously, so 1, 2, 3 all the three are  there 
are same fatty acids. So, it is a achiral compound whereas, the mixe d triglyceride it is a 
R1, R2 and R3.  There are all these three fatty acid different fatty acid it is a chiral 
compound chiral  center is at 2.  Whereas, in the mixed triglyceride where R1 and R2 
there are two fatty acids same there  is R2 and R2 at secon d and third carbon atom and at 
first carbon atom it is R1.  So, this is achiral.  Similarly if there is a R1, R1 and R2 at the 
second position R1 at first position and  second third last position there is  same carbon 
and the second. So, it is also that is the presence of the chiral centers in R1 and R2 can 
make these  triacylglycerols as chiral.   
 
Then types of triglyceride if you discuss that is the glycerid e or glycerol ester is  a 
monoacylglycerol, diacylglycerol or triacylglycerol depending upon w hethe r 1, 2 or 3 of 
the alcohol  groups of glycerol are esterified with fatty acids.  So, see that these are the 
mono esters of glycerol, di esters of glycerol, t ri esters  of glycerol. Monoglycerides, 
diglycerides or triglyc erides there are three types of  glycer ides.   
 
Then monoglycerides may be either 1 or alpha monoglyceride or 2 or beta monoglyceride 
depending  upon whether the terminal or middle hydroxyl groups have b een esterified 
respectively. Like you see that alpha monoglyceride it is the terminal hydro xyl and beta 
monoglyceride  that esterified at a middle one, but it is a monoglyceride.  So, both here in 
the beta monoglyceride that both the terminal hydroxyl are there only  esterified in the 
middle one 2 SN2 and when in the alpha means that is either o f the terminal  hydroxyl is 
esterified.   
 
Then diglycerides can be further described as a 1, 2 d iglyceride or 1, 3 diglyceride 
depending upon the position of the fatty acids on the glycerol molecule ok.  1, 2 
diglyceride that is 1, 2 means esterified at carbon number  1 and 2 fatty acids are there 
whereas, 1, 3 esterified is carbon atom number 1 and 3 ok.   
 
The triglycerides are the simplest lipids construct ed from the fatty acids.  
They are also referred to as triacylglycerol or natural fats.  Plants, pa rticularly cereal 
grains, usually st ore lipids as triacylglycerol. Triglycerides are the main lipids stored in 
all cereals, endosperm and in wheat the end osperm contributes about 12 percent of the 
total in the grain.  Mixed triglycerides are most naturally  occurring triglycerides.  They 
are important as emulsifiers in food proteins.  
 
 
 
  The classification of triglycerides we discussed earlier also they may be simple 
triglyceride  or mixed triglycerides.  Simple triglycerides are mono acid triglycerides 
where all the 3 fatty acids are the same ok.  Whereas, the mixed triglyceride here there 
are 2 may be different it will be 2 fatty  acid joining the 3 ester linkages, it will be 3 
different fatty acids and so on.   
 
Let us discuss nomenclature of triglycerides.  They can triglycerides can be named by 
several different sy stems like triacylglycerols are  often named using t he common names 
of fatty acids. Simple triglycerides they contain like let us say if they  contain all the 3 
fatty acids or the ste aric acid, then different way of naming like they  can be renamed as a 
tristearin  or tristearate, glycerol tristearate, tristearylglycerol or simply StStSt or 18:0 -
18:0 18:0 that is for the stearic acid.  If there is similarly other like if oleic acid is 
everywher e, then it can be the triolein,  trioleate, glycerol trioleate, triacylglycerol, OOO 
that i s abbreviation for and then it will be 18:1 -18:1-18:1 because it has a 1 double bond.  
Similarly, if there are only oleic acids, simple trig lyceride depending upon whether  what 
are the if they are having a stearic acid, palmi tic acid, oleic acid etcetera, all the 3 fatty 
acids are same.  So, accordingly you can name it tripalmitin, tripalmi tate, glycerol 
tripalmitate and  so on.   
 
In the case of mixed glyceride, nomenclature depends upon whether the stereo specific 
locatio n of each fatty acid is known. The nomenclature of these heterogeneous 
triacylglycerols replaces the I C at the end of the fatty acid with OYL like that triglyceride 
containing palmitic  acid t hat is IC is there in the last case that is T oleic acid that is OIC 
is there and stearic acid IC.  In all these cases suppose if triglyceride has all these 3 acids.  
So, in the I C will be is replaced with OYL.  So, palmitoyl -oleoyl -stearoyl -glycerol  or 
simply i t can be named as palmito -oleo stearin or glycerol -palmito -oleo stearate or 
simply P for palmi to, O for oleo, St for stearate  that is the POSt.  It shows that simply that 
is this glycerol these are the 3 fatty acids like first is  P, second is o leic acid and the third 
is Sn3 stearat e the POSt are 16:0, 18:1, 18: 0 these are abbreviated name.  So, in this way 
they can be named.   
 
 
 
  Then other case when the stereo specific location is known th at is stereo specific 
location of the fatty acid is if  it is known then Sn is added to the name like 1 palmitoyl,  2 
oleoyl, 3 stearoyl, Sn glycerol.  So, it clearly indicate that is that palmitic acid is at Sn1 
position, oleic acid is at  Sn2 position and stearic acid is Sn3 position.  It can also be said 
that is Sn1 -palmito -2-oleo-3-stearin or Sn -glycerol -1-palmito,  2 -oleo-3-stearate or S n 
POSt or Sn -16:0-18:1-18:0. So, these are the different ways.   
 
Also if two of the fatty acids are identical the naming ot her than the abbreviated names 
can be shortened  like suppose here in the structure you see that first and second they  are 
the palmitic acid and at the third position it is a stearic acid.  So, these fatty acids can be 
named diglyceride can be named like 1,2 -dipalmitoyl -3-stearoyl - -Sn-glycerol means 1 , 2 
di palmitoyl means 1 and second po sition there are each palmitic acid and total there are 
2 palmitoyl the di palmitoyl or Sn2 di palmito -3-stearate,  Sn -glycerol -1,2-dipalmito -3-
stearate or PPSt or 16:0 -16:0-18:0 that is ok.  So, that in that way it ca n be named.   
 
Then fats as energy source they are we consume the fat or major energy source in the 
body,  but in the fats and carbohydrates and nutritionist recommend that approximately 
30 percent or  so, but not more than 30 percent of the total intake of body energy s hould 
come from the  fat sources.  So, cells can obtain fatty acids or fuels from three sources 
like fats which are consumed  in the diet, fats which are stored in the cell as lipid droplets 
or fats synthesized  in one organ for export to another. Some spe cies use all three sources 
under various circumstances, other use one or two. Vertebrates,  for example, obtained 
fats in the diet they like they also mobilize fats stored in a specialized  tissues like 
adipose tissue which consists of cell that is called adipocytes.  Then in the also they have 
the fats in the liver that is which converts excess dietary  carbohydrate to fats for export 
to other tissues ok.  So, if this is the you see in the left this figure is adipose and here 
adipocyte is in  the right.  S o, in the adipose you see that the fat globules how their 
membrane as well as fat reservoir  they ar e in the adipocyte etcetera. So, they contain 
these either in the adipose tissues or in the adipocytes these fats are  present in the body 
cells.   
 
So, on an average 40 percent or more of the daily energy requirement of human in highly 
industrialized countries is supplied by dietary triacylglycerols, bu t as I told you the 
nutritional  guidelines recommend no more than 30 percent of daily calorie intake  from 
fats it should  be restricted.  Triacylglycerols provide more than half the energy 
requireme nts of some organs particularly  the liver, heart and resting skeletal muscle.  
Stored triacylglycerols are virtually the sole source of  energy in hibernating animals and 
migrating birds. Protists obtain fat by consuming organisms lower in food chain ok and 
some also store  fats as cytosolic lipid drople ts cytosolic lipid droplets.  
Vascular plants mobilize fats stored in seeds during germination, but do not othe rwise 
depend  on the fats for energy.   
 
The energy value of foods is currently predominantly expressed in kilo calories it may be 
written  as k small c a l or capital C a l capital C a l this indicates that kilo calorie ok.  
The energy value of a single food or nutrients can be directly measured by determining 
the  amount of heat released upon its ignition and total combustion in a bomb calorimeter  
ok.  And in this way when the food is burnt in the bomb calorimeter.  So, the energy 
which is measured in t his is this not take does not take into consideration  the amount lost 
by the digestive and metabolic processes that is excretion in the faces, sweat,  and urine 
etcetera what happen when we are taking the fat inside our body then fat goes  into a 
specific  metabolism system and where the energy is released.  
 
  But in the body whatever energy is released that energy utilized by a part of the various  
body functions various purposes, but some of the energy it is not utilized that also  is a it 
goes out is exc reted from the body in the form of faeces in the form of sweat  urine 
etcetera.  So, the total energy that is obtained from the fat in the body it may be that the 
one  after whatever you are getting the calorific value from the bomb calorimeter if you 
minu s  it from the energy that is not utilized by the body that is excreted released through  
excreta, sweats, urine, etcetera that becomes.  So, that is the they do not correspond to the 
amount of the energy utilized by the body  that is bomb calorimeter what ever it gives 
energy it will give you a total energy value  of the fat, but not necessarily that the energy 
value which is utilized by the body.   
 
So, the physical energy values of common foods and nutrients is given in this table.  Like 
you see that sta rch, glycogen, dextrins, disaccharides, monosaccharides, glycerol they 
gives us to the tune of that  is 4 kilo calorie per gram. Generally , the carbohydrate 
polysaccharides etcetera of course , disaccharide monosaccharides they have little less, 
but all most all together close.  Butyric acid 5.95, then oleic acid, stearic acid, butter, 
olive oil, rapeseed oil all  these there is a beef tallow, lard they all to the tune of 9 kilo 
calorie somewhere 9. 4,  9.5, 9.2 and so on.  T hen gelatin has 5.25 kilo calorie or 21.97 
kilo joule ok.  Ovalal bumin 5.69 kilo calorie or 23. 81 kilo joule, wheat glu ten it gives 
5.95 kilo calorie energy or 24.8.  Ethano l gives almost 7. 11 kilo calorie energy or 29.75 
kilo joule ok.  So, these were the  total calories.  
 
That physiological  energy values if you see that there are certain parameter. That is the 
carbohydrate, fat and protein.  Physical energy value of the carbohydrate is 4.1 kilo 
calorie per gram, that is from the fat it is 9 or 9. 3 kilo c alorie and proteins 5.65 kilo 
calorie. Digestibility coefficient  that is the how much the fat is actually utilized that is 
diges ted in the body if you see that  that is the digestibility coefficient is for the energy is 
energy intake minus energy in faeces divided by energy intake multiplied by 100 that is 
what is the total energy you  are taking ok.  And how much is released from the body 
through excreta etcetera  is a th en in the case of carbohydrate it is 97 percent fats 95 
percent and proteins 91 percent.  So, if this is a physiological energy value whatever final 
that is 4.1 if it tak es that is a multiplied by 0. 97 it gives 4 kilo calorie per gram.  So, 
normall y we consume in our calculations etcetera food calcu lation energy value 
calculation  food formulation we should take this that is a we sho uld account the 
carbohydrate 4 kilo calorie.  Similarly, for  the fats 9.3 multiplied by 0. 95 that is 9 kilo 
calorie. Fo r the protein that is the 5.65 minus 1.25 into 0.91 because this 1.25 c omes 
energy value of the final metabolic product because in the protein it is urea tha t is a urine 
it also goes urine  in the form of urea, creatine, uric acid and other nitrogenous 
comp ounds.  But in the carbohydrate and fats the final metabolic products are carbon 
dioxide a nd water carbon dioxide water.  
So, the normally there is no energy lost in this it is  only through the excreta after  the 
undigested energy which goes through excreta.  So, in this way total energy energy value 
can be calcula ted in the case of protein that  is from 5.65 it is also subtracted this final 
metabolic produ ct which goes 1.25 energy value  of the fina l metabolic products ok then 
0.91 is 4 kilo calorie.  So, carbohydrate and protein 4 kilo calorie and fats 9 kilo calorie.  
So, this is the data it can be used for food formulation.  Normally the protein is not taken 
as a input formulation inp ut calculation it is not taken as a source for energy ok.   
 
So, with this I will summarize this lecture by saying that glycerides are esters of glycerol  
and fatty acids and can be classified as mono, tri, and diglycerides.  Triglycerides are the 
major components of the fats and  oil in fact, they are all fats  and oils are basically 
chemically if you say they  are all triglycerides only. Monoglycerides and diglycerides are 
minor component that are used as emulsifiers in  food products etcetera.  Glycerides 
exhibit stereoisomerism and their stereospecific structure is  important for the 
nomenclatures.  Fats are an important source of energy and energy reserves for the 
human body ok.   
 
These are the references which are used in this lecture this.   
 
Thank you very much.  
