Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 1: Course Overview and Introduction  
Lecture 5: Composition, Nutrition and Health Values of Animal Fats and Oils  
 
 Hello friends, welcome you all to this 5th lecture of the course today. In the earlier class 
we studied about sources and availability of animal fats and oil.  Today, we will talk about 
composition, nutrition and health values of animal fa ts and oils.   
The topics which we will cover today include milk fat, rendered fat and fish oil, their 
properties that is the different types of animal fats and oils.  Then major and minor 
components present in these major fats and oils of animal sources p articularly their 
composition, fatty acids, MUFA PUFA ratio, antioxidant content and so on.  Also, towards 
the end we will have a look and compare the important properties of animal fat and 
vegetable oil  and finally, we will conclude the lecture with speak ing something about 
nutritional properties and health values of animal oil and fat.   
Let us see the properties of the animal fat.  In the last class, we discussed about their 
sources.  In the earlier class also, I talked about that animal fat is commonly classified as 
depot fat, which is localized fat present in the adipose tissues and intramuscular fat that is 
localized fat present in the muscle tissues.  Depot fats are mostly present in the 
subcutaneous layer , although they also include some intramuscular deposits as well like 
seam fats.  Intramuscular fats include lipids from adipose cells in the muscle and membrane 
bound lipids.  In fresh red meat, the principal lipid component of d epot fats are 
triglycerides , which can be easily extracted using non -polar organic solvents.  Butter and 
lamb fats are very saturated.  More than 50 % of their fatty acid content is saturated.  
 
 Among land animals, only eggs and chickens have a consistent amount of essential fatty 
acid, that is the fats , which are present in eggs and chickens.  They have the significant 
amount of essential fatty acids.  Even aquatic sources have that oils and fats which are 
available in aquatic sources.  They have the richest amount of essential fatty  acids.    
Herring, salmon , and sardine are precious dietary sources of omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty 
acids that is mostly 2 0:5 and 2 2:6 as far as the carbon number and their number of double 
bonds is concerned.     
                                                        
 
 So, here in this slide, I have just given you a comparison of fatty acid content in major 
animal fats and oils. You see that the red color indicates monoenes, white color indicates 
omega -6, green color indicates omega -3, and black color i s the saturated fatty acids. So , 
you can see that major proportion in almost all the animal fats particularly butter you see, 
it has around 70  % saturated fat, lamb has around 50 % saturated fat and similarly other 
fats also.  Then, this monosaturated fats  are also present in the significant amounts. Herring 
has the maximum one.  Even egg and chicken fats also include significant proportion of 
monoenes.  As far as the omega -3 and omega -6 proportion is concerned, you can see that 
sardines, salmon and herring have a significant amount of omega -3 fatty acids.  Whereas, 
the chicken, egg and lard have also good amount of omega -6 fatty acids.  If you look at the 
nutritional properties and health values of animal fats and oils, there is the saturated fats.  
They are  present in the red meat, dairy products, coconut oil as you saw in the earlier also.  
                           
 
  And we have discussed these, what are the health benefits of these various saturated fats, 
trans fats, monosaturated and polyunsaturated fa ts etc.  The saturated fats result into 
increased risk of heart diseases and less than 20 gram of saturated fat per day should be 
consumed.  It raises both LDL and HDL and increases the total cholesterol , if you take too 
much saturated fat from the animal sources.  The trans fats equally that is even they are 
sometime more problematic than the saturated fats, they increased  risk of heart diseases 
and less than 2.2 gram of trans fat per day  should be consumed.  
and it raises the LDL that is the bad and lower HDL cholesterol levels and increases the 
risk of stroke and diabetes.  And this trans -fat has been found that in the margarine, cream 
soup with puff pastry, chicken pies etc. particularly the product which are given heat 
treatment and the fat containing th e fatty acid during heat treatment cis form is converted 
into trans form.  In major cases it has been found.  Then monosaturated fats , which are 
present in the olive oil, canola oil, avocado oil, this earlier we discussed because plant oils 
mainly they are  the rich sources of these monosaturated fatty acids.  
And in the polyunsaturated fatty acids particularly omega -3 is found more in salmon, tuna,  
and omega 6 is found mostly in the that is a vegetable oil source.  This moderate intake of 
these polyunsaturat ed fatty acids reduces the risk of heart damages etc.  High omega -3 to 
omega -6 ratio is good for the reduced disease and anti -inflammation.  Then now let us 
discuss about the properties of milk fat which is one of the major sources  of fat in the Indian 
dietary or even the majority  of the people in the world, those are who are vegetarian the 
milk fat becomes a major source for them.  So, it is also available in two form that is milk 
fat and one is the anhydrous butter fat and the oth er form is butter oil.  
 
 Anhydrous butter fat is milk fat separated directly from milk or cream and the butter oil is 
milk fat made by removing water from the butter.  The composition of milk fat is somewhat 
complex, triglycerides constitute approximately 98 % of milk fat with the remainder being 
made up of diglycerides, monoglycerides, phospholipids , cerebro sides , even some amount 
of cholesterol, vitamins, tocopherols, carotene , and some flavor compounds.  Milk fat 
contains more fatty acids than any other fat or animal of animal or vegetable origin.  Cow's 
milk fat is now known to contain over 500 different fatty acids.  Most of these fatty acids 
are present at exceedingly low levels, but some of these minor components are very 
important , such as lactones , which contributes to the unique flavor of the milk fats.  
                 
 
 So, here in this slide I have given you the composition of milk fat that is the triglyceride 
as I told you include 96 to 98 percent, diglycerides very less 0.3 to 1.6 percent, sim ilarly 
monoglycerides also very less 0.1 percent, phospholipids it contains 0.2 to 1 percent, that 
steroids 0.2 to 0.4 percent, it has free fatty acids 0.1 to 0.4 percent and traces of cholesterol 
esters and vitamin also it has 0.1 to 0.2 percent.  In the earlier class, I gave you the structure 
that is in the milk how the fat is present in the milk fat globule inside and there in the serum 
how these are dissolved.  So, here you can see this is just a structure of fat globule which 
shows that in this globule   there is a fat globule membrane and inside there are , that is the 
yellow portion here  you can see , these are the majorly constitute phospholipids, 
lipoproteins, glycerides, cerebro sides , and some proteins nucleic acid enzymes etc. 
whereas, the other portion that is , these  are the triglyceride , they are concentrated here that 
little more yellow part triglyceride,  diglyceride, fatty acid, sterols, carotenase , and vitamin 
A, D, E and K and all these are obviously, include inside a fat globule membrane they are 
present in the serum milk serum.  
 So, if you look at the physical properties of the milk fat, it is distinguished from other fat 
except the l aurics, by the low average molecular weight of its fatty acid that is milk fat its 
fatty acids are genera lly of low molecular weight as indicated by a high saponification 
value and low refractive index.  This saponification value, refractive index etc.  
these are the properties of the milk fat in general , we will be taking up separately when we 
discuss the det ails of the chemistry and properties of fats and oils may be in the next week.  
So, butter fat differs from the lauric oils by a high content of steam volatile, short , and 
medium chain fatty acids that is butyric acid, caproic acid, caprylic acid and capri c acid.  
The fatty acid distribution in milk fat triglycerides is not random and the short chain fatty 
acids preferentially occupy the SN3 position.  Ruminant milk fat contains relatively low 
concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acids as a result of bio  hydrogenation of dairy lipids 
in the rumen.  The bio hydrogenation process also converts 6.8 to 7.5 % of the unsaturated 
fatty acids to the trans configuration mainly C -16 and C -18 monoene acids.  Conjugated 
linoleic fatty acid CLA isomer that is cis-9 and trans -11 isomers has been associated with 
the beneficial health effects , including cancer protection, heart disease defense, reduction 
in body fat, enhanced immunity , and increased bone mineralization.   
                  
So, the milk fat composition an d their physical properties here majority most of the 
important physical properties has been shown here in this table like you see that a specific 
gravity at 40 to 20 degree Celsius, it ranges between 0.907 to 0.912.  The refractive index 
of milk fat at 60  degree Celsius is 0.4465, its iodine value is 34.  Similarly,  saponification 
value, unsaponifiable matter, titer value melting or Mettler  dropping  point, solidification 
point all these oxidation stability index of the milk fat at 110 degree Celsius  is around 12.7 
hours.  So, these are the important characteristics of the milk fat.  
               
 
  The fatty acid composition of the milk fat if we discuss about 98 % or more of  the lipids 
in triglycerides particularly milk triglycerides are found in t he globule inside  in the globule 
which I showed you in the earlier picture.  Phospholipids are about 0.5 to 1 percent of the 
total lipids and sterols are about 0.2 to 0.5 percent.  These are mostly located in the globule 
membrane.  The other triglycerides  etc. they are inside the globule, but these phospholipids 
and they are mostly present in the globule membrane.  Cholesterol is the major sterol that 
is present at the 10 to 20 milligram per dl in the milk.  Bovine milk contains substantial 
quantities of C 4:0 to C10:0 and about 2 percent of C18:2 and trans C18:1 and almost no 
other long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids.  The triacylglycerol structure of the milk fat 
is unique with much of the C4 to C10 at SN 3 position.  
So, if you see here that in the butt er, it contains around mono fatty acid 24 percent saturated 
51 and others are 21. omega 6 is 2 percent and omega 3 is 1 percent. Whereas in the ghee 
the monosaturated fatty acid is around 26 percent, saturated fats are 56 %, polyunsaturated 
fat is about 3 %, in which omega -6 include 2 % and omega 3 includes 1 %.  So, this is the 
fatty acid composition of milk proper fat.  
 So, now, the nutritional properties and health value of milk fat you know lipids can be 
directly absorbed in the digestive system without hy drolysis and which contributes to very 
high digestibility of milk fat and about 97 to 99 percent of the milk fat is easily digestible 
in majority of the people.  Then the unique nutritional value of the bovine milk can be 
attributed to the presence of short  chain fatty acids and medium chain fatty acids which are 
important sources of energy to the muscles, heart, liver, kidney, blood platelets and nervous 
system.  They do not pose an obesity risk, they prevent ulcerative colitis, cancer, 
atherosclerosis, hyp ertension.  They have anti-inflammatory  and antibacterial effects and 
they boost natural immunity, but mind it milk contains cholesterol. Lipid derivative which 
stabilizes and stiffens cell membrane builds the cell cytoskeleton, protects nerve fibers, and 
acts as a precursor of steroid hormones, bile acids and vitamin D 3.  So, the cholesterol is 
an equally very important component for our body even the sex and adrenal hormones that 
they are synthesized from the cholesterol.  
Cholesterol is raw material part,  but excess of the cholesterol is bad. It invites heart 
problem.  So, one should regulate the cholesterol level in the body and therefore, that 
consumption of animal fat should be controlled.  Bovine milk lipids do not exert 
hypercholesterolemic or atherogenic effects in the human body.  
 
 Now, let us see the rendered fat. What are rendered fat?  We had discussed in the earlier 
class , what are their sources , we had discussed.  Now let us see the some of the properties.  
So, the major rendered fats are their components include tallow, the major constituent of 
tallow are the glycerides of oleic that is 37 to 43 percent, palmitic 24 to 32 percent and 
glycerides of stearic 20 to 25 percent, myristic 3 to 6 percent and linoleic 2 to 3 percent.  
Minor components in clude cholesterol and arachidonic acid, elaidic acid and vaccenic acid.  
Hydrogenation of the carbonyl group is used to obtain the corresponding fatty alcohols and 
this may also be achieved by the hydrogenation of the glycerides.  The other major 
component in the rendered fat include lard.  The structure of lard contains a high percentage 
of medium melting oil, di -saturated and monosaturated triglycerides.  It has about 0.95 % 
cholesterol.  As a saturated fat, consumption of this food has been associated with  the high 
blood pressure and coronary heart diseases.  That is if you take more lard, obviously you 
will be consuming more cholesterol and which will be risk to high blood pressure and 
coronary heart diseases or CVD cardiovascular diseases.  However, it has  less saturated fat 
than some  other fat like butter etc . by weight.  
            
 The fatty acid composition of rendered fat mainly the lard, chicken fat, beef fat and mutton 
fat.  If you see here that is the different fatty acid like C 10, C 12, C 14, C 15, C 16, these 
are mostly saturated fatty acids and their content obviously you see in the lard, saturated 
fatty acid C 16 is more.  In the chicken fat also, it has a higher amounts 25 percent, in the 
beef 31 % and in the mutton fat around 26 %. The other short chain fatty acids they are not 
present much in these rendered fats and the polyunsaturated fatty acids particularly C18:2, 
this is also present in the lard, chicken fat, a significant amount in beef fat also, but in the 
mutton fat it has very less qu antity.  But C18 :1 that monosaturated fatty acids in the mutton 
fat as well as C18 :0, these are have the significant amount ok.  So, this shows that as what 
are the fatty acid particularly saturated fatty acids, unsaturated fatty acids and 
monosaturated fa tty acids etc ., which are present in the.  So, on an average you can say lard 
contains around 30 percent saturated fatty acids, 60 % or 60.98 %, Lard contains 39 % 
saturated fatty acids and 61 % unsaturated fatty acids and accordingly others that is the 
mutton  fat it contains around 68 % saturated fatty acids and approximately 32 % unsaturated 
fatty acids.  
 
  So, the let us see little elaboration of the hogs a lard.  So, hogs are monogastric and their 
stored fats closely resemble dietary intake.  Consequently, th e degree of unsaturation of 
lard depends on the amount of the fatty acid composition of the oils in the feed.  Lard is 
rancid at a peroxide value of 20 milliequivalent per kg of the oil as opposed to the whereas, 
this peroxide development of rancidity in t he vegetable oil will be almost at a much higher 
value of peroxide like 70 to 100 milliequivalent per kg.  It is the range for the most of the 
vegetable oil.  So, major reason for is that that these vegetable oils they have natural 
antioxidants which is not  present there in the lard or other milk fats.  Lard responds well to 
the addition of antioxidants such as butylated hydroxy anisole, butylated hydroxy toluene, 
toluene, TBHQ and other various tocopherols, which along with the if the metal chelators 
are su ch as citric acid etc. are added.  So, the lard's help life or even that is the development 
of rancidity in the lard can be prevented or can be extended.  The structure of lard contains 
a high percentage of medium melting disaturated monounsaturated trigly cerides.  
These triglycerides are largely in a symmetrical arrangement which causes lard to 
crystallize in the b form.  And this characteristic has restricted the use of lard to application 
requiring low structural properties, but high lubricity.                         
So, here again the composition like in the milk fat we saw that a specific characteristic that 
is the n some important physical properties these are similarly here for the lard.  That 
physical properties and composition like a specific gravit y is 0.896 to 0.904 at 50 
degreeCelsius, refractive index may be 1.448 to 1.460, iodine value is 57 range may be 45 
to 70.  Similarly, saponification value and unsaponifi able value etc. and oxidative stability 
index , if you see here,  it has a range of 16.6  to 19.  So, at 110 degree Celsius it is a 16.6 to 
19 hours or typically this at 16.9 hours.  
Now tallow, this tallow contains a high level of cholesterol that is approximately 1000 
ppm.  Almost half of the fatty acids present in the tallow are saturated a nd they include 
myristic acid which has the greatest effect on raising the blood plasma cholesterol level.  
In addition, tallow contains approximately 5 % trans fatty acids which is characteristics of 
the ruminant digestive system.  Trans fatty acids origina te from the microbial 
biohydrogenation of polyunsaturated fatty  acids in the digestive tract of ruminants and 
therefore, occur naturally in ruminant meat and milk fats.  The predominant trans fatty 
acids of biohydrogenations are C18 -1 trans 11 isomer vacc ine and C18 -2 cis 9 trans 11 
conjugated linolenic acid (rumenic).  The tallow contains very little red or yellow pigments, 
but can have a high green colour caused by the chlorophyll.  
                   
The composition and physical properties of tallow are given in this slide.  A specific gravity 
at 40  degree Celsius temperature and water at 20 degree Celsius it is 0.893 to 0.904, 
refractive index is 1.448 to 1.460, iodine value is 40, saponification value is in the range 
of 190 to 202 and its oxidative stability index is around 3.6 hours.  So, it is generally very 
prone to oxidative stability.   
Then nutritional properties and health values of rendered fats you see that is the tallow is 
rich in nutrients it helps to absorb more nutrients from the food, b ut it is rich in vitamin 
content like A D E K and B 1. Tallow reduces inflammation. It contains conjugated linoleic 
acids which is a natural anti -inflammatory. One of the fatty acids in beef tallow that is the 
palmitoleic acid possesses antimicrobial proper ties which may help to ward off infections.  
It is good for your nervous system;  tallow is high in choline a nutrient that supports the 
nervous system also the healthy fatty acids help to protect nerve cells.  It helps the body 
burn the fat that is consumi ng healthy fats stimulates the release of glucagon the hormone 
that signals body it is time to burn stored fat to use for energy.  Tallow is also rich in vitamin 
E which helps to protect the body cells from free radical damage.  
 
 Now, let us see the charac teristics and properties of fish oil that is menhaden oil is a refined 
marine oil that is derived from menhaden fish of the genus Brevoortia.  Menhaden is a 
pelagic -type fish especially for use pursued for reduction to meal and oil.  Crude m enhaden 
oil cont ains non triglyceride materials such as waxes, moisture, insoluble impurities, free 
fatty acids, trace metals, sulphur, halogen, nitrogen compounds, pigments,  and sterols.  
Menhaden oil differs from vegetable oils and animal fats by its high proportion of poly and 
saturated fatty acids especially the long chain omega 3 fatty acids.  EPA and DHA are the 
major sources of omega 3 fatty acids which comprise 30 % or more of the oil.  
The ratio of omega -3 to omega -6 fatty acid in menhaden oil approaches around 10 t o 1, a 
reverse of the omega 6 to omega -3 ratio of soyaben oil and canola oil , that is , which is there 
7 to 1 and 2.5 to 1 respectively.   
                    
Fatty acid composition of some potential fish oil is given here that is that softshell turtle 
oil, fresh water eel oil, shark liver oil 1, shark liver oil 2 , and the tuna oil and lemuru oil.  
Here you see those contents  of caprilic acid, capric acid.  So, normally caprilic and capric 
they are very insignificant or in some of the oil they are not detec ted. 
But the other oils like you see palmitic, it is present softshell fish oil and also fresh water 
eel oil, in tuna oil, lemuru oil etc.  And then again that is the stearic acid that is there is 
almost of the saturated fatty acid, saturated stearic and f atty acid saturated they are the 
major content of this and apart from this even some amount of that even tri -equation 
alkalization, l emuru silica acid etc. very insignificant proportions are presented there.  
            
 So, physical properties of the fi sh oil that is a specific gravity it has at 60 degree Celsius 
0.903, refractive index 1.485, iodine value 159, range is 152, 165 means that is iodine value 
it is high means that is , it has a high unsaturation value.  Saponification value is 196.  So, 
sapon ification value larger the saponification it indicates the chain length of the fatty acid, 
un saponifiable manner is 1 percent.  Similarly , that even cholesterol in this fish oil may 
be contained from 0.5 to 1.5 % and the trace metal iron, copper, phosphor us etc. may also 
be found in this in the range significant range.   
So, major components of the marine oil that is the fatty liquid consists mainly of saturated 
fatty acid as you would see in the earlier slides with palmitic acid 16:0 at the most relevant 
monounsaturated fatty acids with the oleic acid 18:1 omega 9 as a predominant and 
polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) which are represented by eicosapentaenoic acid and 
docosahexanoic acid and omega -3 fatty acids are in the linolenic region they are present in 
less amount.  Omega _3 PUFA especially EPA that is 20:5 omega 3 and DHA 22:6 omega 
3 are among the main component of the fish oil.  Cholesterol is another lipid relevant to 
health and is the main sterol in the marine species accounting for more than 90 % of the all 
sterols, but in some cell species such percentage can lower to about 25 percent.  Vitamins 
A D and E are the fat soluble vitamins which occur most commonly that is the determined 
in the fish oil going to their high concentrations of not only in  the liver, but in the fresh  
fish as well.  
 
 Regarding nutritional properties and health values of fish oil omega fish oil omega 3  fatty 
acids EPA are essential polyunsaturated fatty acids for the brain since the brain  tissues 
lack sufficient enzymatic activity necessary for de novo omega 5 3 synthesis.  So, therefore, 
that is it is always recommended that one should consume good amount of fish oils which 
is a important precursor to the brain formation.  The American Heart Association 
recommends that eve ryone should eat oily fish twice per week and that those with coronary 
heart diseases should consume 1 gram per day of EPA plus DHA from oily fish or 
supplements.  Fish oil preparations can lower plasma triglycerides, increase bleeding time, 
down regulate gene expression for platelet, derived growth factors, lower blood pressure, 
decrease the number of endothrial adhesion molecule, improve lipoprotein size and 
decrease the risk of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases.  In non -neural diseases 
the diet ary intake of omega 3 fatty acids reduces pre -athrogenic cytokines, improves 
endothelial function, reduces vascular -oscular indeed coronary ath erosclerosis .                  
 
  So, here the nutritional properties and health value of fish oil is continued.   You can say 
beneficial effect of fish oil, it has cerebroprotective, renoprotective, subnoprotective, 
heptotective, baspoprotective, promoprotective , and cardioprotective .  All these properties 
good health value properties are there in the fish oil.  It causes decrease in blood pressure, 
decrease in heart rate, decrease in blood viscosity, improvement in endothelial cell 
function, plate destabilization, decrease in platele t aggregation, decrease in homocysteine, 
decrease in triacylglycerol etc. So, all these good properties are associated with the fish oil.   
So, finally, before summary a final overall summary comparison between the plant fat and 
animal fat in the earlier c lasses we discussed also the plant fat and their sources and their 
properties also we discussed in detail animal fat and its composition and properties.  So, if 
you have a comparison that is in comparison with more vegetal oils, the animal fats are 
much mo re saturated and contain a relatively narrow range of fatty acids.  An exception 
would be the ruminant milk fat which contains large proportion of short chain fatty acid.  
In contrast with the plants where lipids are stored in seeds or fruits in animals th e fats are 
found almost everywhere.  They are more abundant in adipose cells which are found either 
in concentrated location like in the subcutaneous form or intraperitoneal form or in filtered 
among the muscle cells that and are present in the high concen tration in bones.  
 
  In contrast with plants fatty acids with odd carbon numbers are with branched chains are 
found in animal fats, but in a small amount.  These fats have also an important content in 
monounsaturated fatty acids.   
So, now I would like to summarize finally, this lecture by saying that animal fat is 
commonly classified as dipot fats which are localized in adipose tissues and intramuscular 
fats, which are localized in muscle tissues.  Among land animals only eggs and chicken  
fats have a consi stent amount of essential fatty acids.  Aquatic sources being the richest 
milk fat contains more fatty acid than any other fat of animal or plant origin.  
Tallow contains a high level of cholesterol that is the 1000 ppm the consumption of Tallow 
accordingly  should be restricted.  Herring, salmon , and sardine are the precious dietary 
sources of omega 3 and polyunsaturated fatty acid that is 20:5 and 22:6.   
So, these are the references which are used in this lecture and with this thank you all for 
your patien ce hearing.   Thank you.  