Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 1:  Course Overview and Introduction  
Lecture 1: Oil & Fats Processing Industry - Current Status, Issues and Challenges  
Hello everybody.  Namaskar.  I welcome you all to this NPTEL course on Food, Oils and 
Fats, Chemistry , and Technology.  In this lecture today, we will briefly first discuss the 
course.  Then we will also take a general overview of foo d, oils , and fats and their health 
benefits.  We will also discuss the food, oils , and fats market, global and Indian  status, 
factors responsible for the growth of edible oils and fat markets , and issues and 
challenges facing  the food, oils, and fat sector. Finally, we will also touch up on some 
points that the initiative that has been taken by  the Government of India to boost the food, 
oils, and fat sect ors.  This is a 12-week  course having 60 lectures of 30 minutes each.  Th ere will be 12 
assignments in the course, one at the end of every week.  Finally, there will be one online 
examinat ion at the end of the course. The broad areas that will be covered in this course 
include the nature and occurrences of food lipids, their ph ysical, chemical , and nutritional 
characteristics, qua lity deterioration processes like rancidity, auto-oxidation , 
polymerization , and their prev ention using antioxidants etcetera.  Edible oil extraction is 
what are the various  pretreatments , then mechanic al expression, solvent extraction , or 
other novel technologies will be covered.  Then we will also cover edible oil refining, 
modification  of fats and oils , and recovery of fats from animal sources.  Finally, we will 
include or we will discuss comme rcial c ooking and frying oils, specialty oils, byproducts , 
and waste utilization, existing law s and regulations applicable to  food, oils , and fat 
sectors.   The week -wise course content given in this table like in the first week 5 lecture  will be 
included to give  an overview and rather  an introduction of the fats and oil sectors.  Then 
in the second week , we will take up food lipids, their nature and occurrences and in the 
third week we will discuss the chemistry and properties of edible oils.  Then fourth, and 
fifth weeks  will be devoted to the recovery an d expelling of oils from plant sources like 
mechanical expression, solvent extraction etcetera.  In the sixth week and seventh week , 
we will discuss the edible oil refining and deodorization process and other modi fication  
processes of fats and oils.  That eighth week we will be devoted to recovering  fats and 
oils from animal sources.  In the ninth week commercial cooking and frying oils and 
specialty oils and fat products will  be discussed in the tenth week.  
Then i n the last two weeks , we will take up byproduct utilization and valorization of  oil 
processing industry waste, QAQC , and laws and regulations prevailing in the fats and  oil 
processing sector.   
In this I have given you suggested readings . There  are 10 books that will be useful  in this 
course like Bailey’s Industrial Oils  and Fat Products , and Edible Oil Extraction 
Processing  and Application  by S. M. Chemat.  Then fats and oils formulating and 
processing for application like by Richard D.  Oberon, oils and fats in the food industry by 
Frank D. Gunsmun and  practical handbook of soybean processing and utilization or rice 
bran and rice bran oil their chemistry processing and utilization , and finally, the tenth 
book is the specialty oils  and fats in food and nutrition,  their properties , processing , and 
applications.  So, this is the list of books that will be beneficial and I advise you all t o 
refer to these books all these books are available online.   Now, let us see what are foods, oils , and fats. Thes e oils and fats are extracted from seeds 
or recovered from other parts of the plants and animals.  They are generally a mixture of 
mixed triglycerides.  What are triglycerides?  We will take it up in the next class.  Oil 
may contain phospholipids, sterols, free fatty acids, antioxidants etcetera.  Generally,  oils 
are liquid at room temperature for example,  vegetable oil like peanut oil,  soybean oil, 
mustard oil, animal -based  oil, fish oil etceter a.   
Then fats are solid at room temperature , for example, you know butter, margarine, 
shortenings , and other various types of animal fats.  These fats and oils are used 
extensively in various food process operations like cooking, frying, baking, salad dressing,  preparation of margarine and spreads, as an emulsifier, as a texture enhancer 
and so and so on.  They are used in many processed foods ready to eat and convenience 
foods , they are used  as nutrition supplements, even they are used sometimes  the 
bypro ducts for animal feed  productions etcetera.  
 If you look at the health benefits of food, oils , and fats, you see that many oils and  fats 
contribute to vitamin absorption in the body.  Many vitamins such as vitamins  A, D, E , 
and K are fat solvents and nee d to be consumed  with dietary fats in order to be properly 
absorbed by the body.  The oils and fats are sources of essential fatty acids, they are rich 
in fatty acids  like omega 3 and omega 6 which the body cannot produce on its own.  So, 
these fatty acids are important for brain health, immune function , and cardiovascular 
health  and it becomes very important that we should consume the oils and fat which are  
rich in these fatty acids.  Also consuming a moderate amount of mono -unsaturated  and 
polyunsaturated  fats such as those found in  olive oil, fish oil etcetera may help improve 
cholesterol levels  and reduce the risk for heart  diseases.  
 Some edible oils such as olive oils and coconut oils contain compounds that have been 
shown  to have anti -inflammatory ef fects in the body which may help reduce the risk of 
chronic  diseases such as arthritis and other certain diseases like cancer etcetera. Oils and 
fats improve brain function particularly the consumption of omega -3 fatty acids that  is 
which are found in fish  oils may help improve cognitive functions and reduce the risk of  
dementia and Alzheimer's diseases.   
 
  
Oils are very good medicine for skin health, some edible oils such as coconut and 
avocado  oil may help improve skin health and appearance due to the ir moisturizing and 
antioxidant properties.   Now, l et us have a glance at the food  oils, and fats market.  First , we will take up the 
global status and then we will switch over and discuss the Indian status .  So, the oils and 
fats market has been filling consistently in created nations and rising  nations like the US, 
Brazil, China, India , and Indonesia. Europe accounted largest share of markets which is 
46 percent. Among vegetable oil s palm oil stayed the mo st well -known  with around 30 
percent of  the share and if you can see here that fats and oil market size from 2021 to 
2023 every  year the scenario it is increasing the production as well as availability is 
increasing.  
Then Asia Pacific is the fastest growi ng market at present be cause of the palm oil 
creating nations like Malaysia and Indonesia as well as oils and fats consuming  nations 
like India and China.  The global fats and oil market growth is expected to expand at a 
CAGR of 4.25 to 4.5 percent  over the  period from 2022 to 2030 and in this slide I have 
tried to give you the data regarding fats and oil market share by region and this includes 
the data of 2021 where Europe has a share of around 46 percent in the market.    
The Asia Pacific market in 2022  that is global revenue share included 32.4 percent 
whereas, the sale value was 1,09,179.8 kilo ton.  One of the key factors propelling the 
growth of edible oil  market is the rise in consumer  inclination for nutritional 
enhancement.  The key global industr ial players of vegetable oil market include 
Associated British Food, Archer Daniel Midland Company, Wilmar International Limited 
and Uni lever PLC, Mewah International Incorporation of Singapore etcetera.   So, as far as the Indian status is concerned the  market size in 2020 of Indian oil and  fats 
was about US dollar 3.54 billion.  The Indian fats and oil markets are increasing at a rate 
of 6.82 percent CAGR from 2021 to  2027.  It is expected to reach US dollar 5.72 billion 
in 2027.  If you look at the var ious oils that dominate in the market the pie chart, pie 
figure  shows that palm oil with 38 percent share is the dominating oil which is followed 
by soy oil with 19.7 percent share, rapeseed or mustard oil with 14.1 percent, sunflower  
oil 9.2 percent, cott onseed oil 5.9 percent, groundnut oil 3.1 percent and 10 percent rice  
bran oil and other oils.   As far as the data for edible oil consumption in India is concerned you can see palm oil  is 
the dominating  the total edible oil consumption in 2020 -2021 was 21 .66 million  metric 
tons, the palm oil itself included 8.23 million metric tons.  So, almost one -third 
approximately of the total oil consumed in India is palm oil.   
This slide shows here that data on palm oil, crude sunf lower oil, crude rapeseed oil, crude 
palm oil , and other oils imports that is India that is there as you can see  in this figure 
India imported  a lot of oils in the year 2018 -19 about 9.34 million metric ton  palm oil 
was exported in the country and other oil, crude sunflower rapeseed  also were also 
imported significant quantities.  In 2021, 8.314 million metric tons of palm oil, and 1.909 
million metric tons of crude sunflower oil  were imported in the country.   This table shows the edible oil availability in India during 2010 -2021 and you  can if you  
look at the data on the domestic production and the imports we find that the imports data  
is higher means that we are not able to meet our requirement by our domestic production.  
So, we are importing every year at the data for the last 10 years  shows.  So, what does it 
say that there is a need to increase the production of edible  oil, particularly the oil seed 
which can be used for the extraction of oils . Also, there is a need to have advanced 
technology for getting a higher yield of oil from th ese oil-bearing  materials.  
 
The key industrial players in Indian veget able oil markets include Adani Wilmer Limited, 
Ruchi Soya Industrial Limited , Mariko Patanjali Oil Limited , Mother Dairy , Imami 
Agrotech, Gokulri Oils, Vijay Salvex, Kamani Oils Limited  etcetera.  The factors that are responsible for the growth of the edible oils and fat market in the 
country  include the most important factor is the growing population. As the global 
population  continues to grow so does the demand for food products includi ng the edible 
oils market  and a larger population means a larger market for these products which is 
driving growth in  the industry. Another  factor is the increasing consumer awareness of 
health benefits.  Many edible oils and fats are rich in essential fatty acids and nutrients 
that are beneficial for  health. As consumers become more aware of the health benefits of 
certain oils such as olive  oil and coconut oil they are increasingly seeki ng out these 
products driving demand for  growth in the market.  
 
The growing demand from the food processing industry for oils and fats is  another factor 
that drives the food processing industry. Edible oils and fats are  widely used in the food 
processing industry as ingredients in a variety of products.  As the demand for processed 
foods continues  to grow so does the demand for these ingredients  driving growth in the 
market. Certain  edible oils and fats such as soybean oi l and palm oil  are also used as 
feedstock for the production of biofuel. As the demand for renewable energy  sources 
continues to grow so does the demand for these products which is driving growth in the  
oils and fats markets. Increasing disposable income o f the consumer particularly the level  
of disposable income in rising developing countries the consumers are increasingly  able 
to afford higher quality food products including edible oils and fats.  And this is driving 
growth in the market , particularly in emerging economies where  demand for these 
products is growing rapidly. Technological advancement in the production  process is 
another factor that is the driving force for the industry . Advancements  in technology are 
making it easier and more cost-effective  to produce edible oils and fats which  is helping 
to drive down cost and increase availabili ty. For example, new extraction  methods su ch 
as cold -pressed and expeller -pressed oils are becoming more popular which allow for the  
production of high-quality  oils without the use of harsh chemicals etcetera.   
 Right  now having this brief introduction about the edible oils and fats sectors  let us see 
what are the various issues and challenges that are facing the edible  oils and fats sectors 
in our country. The number one biggest challenge is the dependence  on imports India is 
heavily dependent on imports  to meet the domestic demand for edible oil and  fat as you 
can see in the earlier slide in the showing the data. So, the country imports  more than 70 
percent of  its edible oil requirement which makes it vulnerable to price fluctuations  and 
supply disruptions in the global market.  The productivity of oil crops in India is  relatively 
low compared to other major producing countries and this is due to various factors  such 
as inadequate irrigation facilities, lack of access to improved seeds and technologies and  
these are limited availability of credit and market linkages. So, we need to improve the 
produc tivity.  
 Then inadequate infrastructure is another challenge f acing the fats and oil sector. The 
inadequate infrastructure for storage, transportation , and processing of oil seeds  and 
edible oils is a major challenge facing this industry. The lack of mode rn storage facilities, 
efficient transportation systems,  and pr ocessing units often leads  to post-harvest  losses 
and poor quality of oil seed and edible oils. The prices of edible oils and fats in the  
domestic market are often subject to volatility due to fluctuations in global prices and  
supply -demand  imbalances. Thi s makes it difficult for farmers, processors , and 
consumers to plan  and make informed decisions.  
Quality  issues are another challenge  like adulteration, contamination , and poor packaging 
are major concerns in the edible oil  and fat industry in India. Thes e issues pose a serious 
health risk to consumers and also affect  the marketability of the products. The lack of 
awareness and knowledge among farmers and other  stakeholders regarding the latest 
technologies and best practices for oil seed production  and pr ocessing is another 
challenge facing the Indian fats and oil industry.  This often leads to  the suboptimal use of 
resources and poor quality of the produce.  
 
  The government of India has taken  certain initiatives to boost the production of edible 
oils and fats in the country and it has  created a national mission of edible oil NMEO , 
particularly for the oil club. Around 9 metric tonnes  of palm oil is imported every year to 
the tune of rupees 40 ,000 crore which  is around 56 percent of the total imports of  edible 
oil. So, at present against a total  potential area of around 20 lakh hectares , only 3.7 lakh 
hectares are under oil palm production. So, in this figure , you can see that India figure 
that is the areas what is the potential area  that is 27.99 lakh hectares  is the potential area 
where palm oil can be grown, but at present  the area covered is just 13 percent of the available that is 3.5 lakh hectares and the  fruiting area is further less that is 1.89 lakh 
hectares. So, the government of India has taken  an initiative to improve both this area 
covered under palm oil cultivation as well as in increasing the  availability of the fruiting 
area.  
 Increasing production of seedlings by establishment of seed  gardens, nurturing of oil 
palm to assure domestic avai lability of seedlings and for the target fixed  by NMEO oil 
palm as well as the improving productivity of FFBs increasing drip irrigation  coverage 
under oil palm, diversification of areas from low yielding cereal crops to oil palm,  
intercropping during ges tation periods of 4 years would provide economic return to the 
farmers  where there is no production and these are the strategies to implement the 
proposed NMEO  oil palm. The scheme is implemented in a mission mode through the 
active involvement of the  stakeholders. Fund flow is monitored to ensure the benefit of 
the mission research,  and the targeted beneficiary in time to achieve the targeted result.  
Another  important initiative of the government of India to boost  the oil and fat sector is 
the creation of a direct rate of oi l seed development and it is a subordinate office of the 
department of agriculture and farmer welfare in the ministry of agriculture  and farmer 
welfare. It is involved in the formulation of schem es such as the preparation of plant 
documents for oil seed schemes, and the identification of potential areas  for oil palm 
cultivation in India. Looking after the monitoring of oil seed development programs and 
oil palm development  program schemes implemen ted in the country and also in the 
central sector schemes of the ministry  in the assigned states of Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu , and Telangana  are the responsibilities of the directorate 
of oil seed development, Hyderabad.  This directora te assists the states, and union 
territories to plan, formulate , and implement  crop programs to increase the production 
and productivity of nine oil seed crops  and area expansion under oil palm through focused interventions. It also assists the  department of agriculture and farmer welfare and 
fixes the target of production.  
 So, finally, I would like to summarize this course that the global edible oil and fat market 
is expected to continue growing in the country in the coming years driven by factors such 
as population growth, rising  disposable income , and changing dietary habits.  Asia 
Pacific is the largest market for edible oils and fats according to over 50 percent of the  
global consumption. India and China are among the largest consumers of edible oils  and 
fats in the  region. The high level of imports of edible oils and fats in many countries such 
as India highlights  the need for increased investment in domestic production and supply 
chain infrastructure.  Efforts are underway to promote sustainable pal m oil production 
practices.  In this lecture , I gave you an overview of the current status of the fats  and oil 
processing and production sector, as well  as the various issues and challenges, but in 
India , we need to as you can see the data of the production and imports. Although we  
produce a sufficient quantity of oil seeds and other plants that are used for the extraction 
of oils  including both from plant sources as well as animal sources, we are not able to 
meet our  required requirement fats and oil requirement in the country. So, there is a great 
need  to increase the production productivity of the materials havi ng these oils and also 
the technological advancement in recovery and extracting, refining, processing , and 
convertin g these value -added  products of this sector.  
Thank you very much, these  are some of  the references that have  been used in this lecture 
you can  refer. T hank you and Jai Hind.  
  
 
 