Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 1:  Course Overview and Introduction  
Lecture 2: Plant Sources of Edible Oils and Fats  
 Hello friends, Namaste. Now, we are in the second lecture of the first module, we will 
discuss various sources  particularly the plant sources of edible oils and fats .  So, the overall concept that we will discuss in this 25 to 30 minutes is the plant sources  or plant  
parts as a source of oils and these include  vegetable oils and fats, oil seeds  and nuts, 
cereal oils, fruit oils, spice oils , and finally, we will discus s their utilization  pattern that is 
what are the various oils, plant oils, how they are utilized in the country.  
In the figure , the plant sources of edible oils and fats refer  to the parts of plants that as 
seeds, nuts, fruits , or legumes that are used for extraction  of oils like soybean oil, coconut 
oil, and rice bran oil.  In soybean oil , we use seed, soybean seed for extraction of oil 
whereas, in the coconut  which  is whole fruit is used of the coconut plant, flesh of the 
coconut is used for extraction  of oil.  In rice bran oil it is the outer layer, the bran layer 
which is a byproduct  of the rice milling industry is used for the extraction of oil.  For 
medicinal usage , the barks of the medicinal plants etcetera are also used to extract 
essenti al oils like cinnamon oil. C innamon oil is extracted from  the bark of the cinnamon  
tree and contains a lot of good quality healthy oils.   Then the vegetables, oils , and fats are extracted from seeds or other parts of the plant.  
These vegetable oils and f ats are a complex mixture of triacylglycerols more than 95 
percent  they include triglycerides or triacylglycerol and they also contain some minor 
amounts of  other components which is generally less than 5 percent.  Most vegetable oils 
and fats are a complex  mixture of triacylglycerols and minor components.  All vegetable 
oils are liquid at room temperature while the fats remain solid or semi -solid depending 
upon the type and quantity of the fatty acids present in them.   
This figure shows the world production of vegetable oil during 2022 where you can see  
that 75.88 million tons of palm tops the list. Soyabean with 58.62 million tons in the 
second which is followed by rapeseed, sunflower, palm kernel, groundnut, cottonseed, 
olive, maize , and finally,  safflower oil  which  contains around 70,688.3 tons.  So, these  
are the statistics of the world's  production of vegetable oil during 2022.  So, if you look at the what are different types of vegetable oils or what are different  types 
of vegetable materials that are used to get the oil.  So, number one as I told you earlier the 
seeds are the ones like soybean seeds,  and sunflower seeds that  are used to extract the oil. 
Another  category of the plant is the nuts that is like elements, walnut etcetera  They  are 
used to extract the oil so, nuts.  Then various cereals are  used for extraction  of oil 
particularly the bra n layer or germs etcetera like corn germ oil, wheat germ oil, and rice 
bran oil these are extracted from the cereals.  And finally, another very impor tant 
category of the plant is fruits which are used to extract  the oils Olive  fruit or palm fruit is 
used for extraction recovery of oils.  
 First, let us discuss the oil seeds.  It is a well -known  fact that oil seeds contribute a major 
portion of the vegetable oil segment.  They are rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids 
including omega 3 and omega 6 fatty acids.  So, these oil seeds are oil extracted from the 
oil seeds have both benefits as well as  drawbacks.  The benefits include  that they are rich 
in healthy fats, the y are versatile applications, t hey are anti -inflammatory, they are stable 
at high temperatures  as well and they are economical  sources of the oil.  The drawback 
includes  there is some oil seeds have a high content of or excessively high con tent of 
omega fatty acids which may not be good to consume.  Also , they have high calories, 
some oil seeds  may have certain allergic reactions, they  may contain harmful components  
like uric acid as in the case of rapeseed oil , and so on.  So, both the oil s eeds have 
positive as well as negative points.   
If you look at the oil seed production statistics in the country as a whole and at a global  
level, India is the fourth largest producer of oil seed in the world.  It has 20.8 percent of 
the total area under cultivation globally accounting for 10 percent of the global 
production.   The country produces groundnut, soybean, sunflower, sesame, niger seed, mustard and 
safflower seeds.  In 2021, the production of oil seeds in the country was 365.65 lakh tons 
which was a 10 percent  increase from that of the previous years.  In India Rajasthan with 
20 percent share which is followed by Gujarat with 20 percent share, Madhya  Pradesh 
with 19 percent and Maharashtra with 16 percent share.  So, the oil seed production in t he 
country is expected to grow at a CAGR of 7.3 percent  and it is growing if you look at the 
data from 2016 -17 to 2020 -21 to 22 which is  given in this figure that it is growing at a 
CAGR of 7.3 percent.   
 The other category is the oil nuts, that is the tree nuts are a type of nuts that grows  on 
trees.  They are characterized by a hard outer shell and an edible kernel or meat inside, 
ok.  So, these nuts are used that is inside the kernels they are a valuable so urce of oil.   So, 
common examples  of tree nuts include almonds , walnuts , hazelnuts , cashew nuts, 
pistachios, macadamia nuts , and Brazil  nuts.  You can see here the pictures of walnuts , 
almonds,  and pistachios given where the in-shell,  in-hull, and finally,  kernel that is the 
kernel both un -peeled and peeled kernel.  So, the peeled kernel they are the source of 
valuable oil in many cases.  
Almond  oil extracted from sweet or bitter almonds is an excellent source of unsaturated 
fatty acids and phytosterols.  I t contains more vitamin E as compared to the other oil nuts 
and features excellent moisturizing properties.  In the global market, the share of almond 
oil is dollar 1456.3 million in 2020.  The projected market size by 2031 is dollar 5584.4 
million.  It is  expected to grow at a CAGR of 13 percent from 2022 to 2031.   
Walnut oil that is walnut oil is an edible specialty oil and has multiple domestic and  
industrial uses.  It is extracted using the processes like cold pressing and expeller 
pressing.  The deman d for walnuts  is rising globally as they are a resource of proteins and 
essential fatty acids.  The global market share of walnut oil include  a dollar 1.28 billion in 
2021.  The projected market size is 2.08 billion by 2029 and it is expected to grow at a 
CAGR  of 6.25 percent from 2022 to 2029.   
 
 The other important category includes  cereal oils.  They are extracted from various grains 
such as corn, rice, wheat , and oats.  Cereal oils are a good source of healthy fats, 
vitamins , and minerals wheat germ  oil is high in vitamin E, corn oil is rich in omega -6 
fatty acids.  So, adding cereal oils to your diet can help meet daily nutritional 
requirements.  Cereal oils  have a high smoke point, which means they can be used for 
high-temperature  cooking methods like frying and baking.  They can also be used in 
salad dressings, marinades , and other recipes that require oil.  Cereal oils have a 
relatively long shelf life due to their high antioxidant content.  They can be stored for 
longer periods  without going rancid or spoiling.   Wheat  germ oil and oat germ oil, are two important cereal oils. Wheat germ oil is 
extracted from the germ of wheat kernel that is often used in cosmetics and supplements 
due to its high vitamin E content.  Oat germ oil i s extracted from the germ of oats and is 
used in cooking and cosmetics.  It is high in concentration of antioxidants  and is believed 
to have anti -inflammatory properties.   
Corn oil is extracted from the germ of corn kernels and is widely used in cooking , baking , 
and salad dressing. Rice bran oil is extracted from the rice bran and is commonly used in 
Asian cuisine.  It has a high smoke point and has a mild flavor.  The rice bran oil if you 
look here at the high nutritional content of rice bran oil is the  one that boosts its 
adaptation in the food industry.  The global rice bran oil market is projected to grow from dollar 6.67 billion  in 2021  to 
dollar 12.27 billion by 2028 and is expected to grow at a CAGR of 9.09 percent in the 
forecast  period of 2021 to  2028.  If you look at that Asia Pacific that is in 2019 the rice 
bran oil market was to  the tune of dollar 4.31 billion and in 2020 it increased to the tune 
of 4.68 billion.   
Fruit oils are the oils that are extracted from the seeds or flesh of various fruits.  They are 
commonly used in cooking, cosmetics , and in personal care that is  in personal care 
products due to their nourishing and moisturizing properties.  Palm oil, olive oil , and 
coconut oil are important fruit oils.  Palm oil is extracted from t he fruit of palm trees .  It 
is composed of a mixture of saturated and unsaturated fatty acids.  It is a rich source of 
vitamin E. Olive oil is extracted from the fruit of olive trees .  It is rich in 
monounsaturated fatty acids and is commonly used in cooki ng and as a salad dressing oil.  
Coconut oil is extracted from the meat of coconut.  It is high in saturated fat and is 
commonly used in cooking, skincare,  and hair care.   
The palm oil production if you look at the statistics, you can see that global palm  oil 
production has significantly increased in the last 10 years. Indonesia and Malaysia are the 
leading producers  and exporters of palm oil worldwide. The figure you can see below 
that Indonesia, its production share is 58 percent in the globe.  It is the  data of 2019 that it 
has a production of 42.5 million metric tons and has a share of 58 percent in the global 
market.  The second is Malaysia with a production of 19 million metric tons having a 26 
percent share.  These  are followed by other countries like Thailand, Colombia, Nigeria, 
Papua New Guinea etcetera.   
 The palm oil yield if you look that oil palm produces about 35 percent of all  vegetable oil 
on less than 10 percent of the land allocated to oil crops.  Currently , about half the people 
in the world rely on palm oil as part of their diets and  it is the dominant oil used in food 
in Africa and Asia.   
And if you look here, obviously, because palm oil is the major oil, there is  a reason to say 
that if you want to use that for pro ducing one ton  of palm oil only 0.26 hectares  of land is 
required whereas, for producing one-ton soybean oil 2 hectares land  is needed.  For 
producing one-ton sunflower oil 1.43 hectares  as well as for producing one-ton rapeseed  
oil 1.25 hectares of land is  needed.  The productivity per hectare of palm oil is higher  and 
also it is  an economic source of oil.  So, but impact of it has some effect on biodiversity.  
 
The tropical area suitable for oil palm plantations is particularly rich in biodiversity.  Oil 
palm development , therefore, has a significant negative impact on global biodiversity.  
The expansion of palm oil plantations often involves clearing natural forests  and other 
habitats, which can lead to the loss of  biodiversity and wildlife habitat.  So, this is an 
important point that must be considered or looked into by the stakeholders  or those who 
are involved in the cultivation of oil palm.   
 Coconut  oil is an edible oil obtained from the flesh of coconut. It  is a white solid fat with 
having distinct aroma and taste.  It has demand in the food, pharmaceutical , and beverage 
industries .  India is the third largest producer of coconut oil in the world with 12.7 
percent of market  share and an annual production vol ume of 394.2 thousand metric tons.  
India contributes 34 percent to the global coconut oil production with its production  
figure of 21,209 million nuts.  The global market share of coconut oil is to the tune of 
dollar 3.6 billion in 2022.  The projected ma rket share  by 2032 is 6.1 billion dollars .  It is 
continue expected to grow at a CAGR of 5.4 percent from 2022 to 2029.   
If you look at the data of the olive oil that is produced  in the figure it is then  from the 
year 2012 -13 to 22 -23 and with little inc rease, almost it has remained stagnant you can 
say around 2.5 to 3.3 or 3.29 million metric tons over the years.  So, the oil extracted 
from the fleshy part of the ripened fruit of olive oil or olive tree that is olea europia.  
Olive oil varies in color  from clear yellow to golden and some varieties obtained from 
unripe fruit have a greenish tint.  So, olive oil is a very good oil particularly because it 
has a good amount of fatty acids, omega  fatty acids , and other health -promoting  
components.   
Then very important component although the quantity may be less compared to the other  
oils, from a health point of view the spice oils and food processing point of view the  spice 
oil become very important.  So, spice oils refer to the essential oils that are extracted from 
spices like cinnamon,  clove, nutmeg, black pepper , and ginger.  These oils are obtained 
through various methods of distillation or extraction from spice plant's leaves, flowers, 
stems, roots, or seeds.  Spice oils are highly concentrated  and possess the characteristic 
fragrance and flavor  of the respective spices.  They are commonly used in the food and 
beverage industry as well as in perfumery, aromatherapy, and medicinal applications.  That is Clove  oil is one very important oil that has eugenol and it is used for making  
medicine for toothache  etcetera.  So, this clove oil that is used.  So, similarly the other 
oils they have a lot of medicinal properties.  Clove oil extracted from the dried flower 
buds of the clove tree is used in den tal care  products and perfumes as well as a flavoring  
agent in cooking.  Cinnamon oil that is obtained from the bark of the cinna mon tree is 
used in cosmetics, aromatherapy , and as a flavoring  agent in food and beverages.  
Nutmeg oil which is extracted fro m the seeds of the nutmeg tree is used in perfumes, 
soaps , and as a flavouring agent in cooking.  Black pepper oil which is obtained from the dried fruits of the black pepper plant is  used in massage oil, aromatherapy , and as a 
flavoring  agent in food and beverages.   
Ginger oil that is extracted from the root of the ginger plant is used in aromatherapy,  
cosmetics , and as a flavoring  agent in food and beverages.  Cardamom oil is obtained 
from the seeds of the cardamom plant and it is used in the preparation  of perfumes, and 
soaps and as a flavoring  agent in cooking and beverages.  Fennel oil which is extracted 
from the seeds of the fennel plants is used in aromatherapy,  cosmetics , and as a 
flavouring agent in food and beverages.   The uses of vari ous plant oils if you see that is the oil seeds, The oils obtained from  oil 
seeds like soybean oil, sunflower oil, mustard oil etcetera are used for cooking, frying , 
and baking as well as in the production of margarine, shortening , and salad dressings.  
Cereal oils like those obtained from corn oil, rice bran oil etcetera are used in the 
production  of margarine and shortening as well as in industrial applications such as 
biofuel production, etcetera.   Fruit oils which are obtained from olive oil or other f ruits 
are used extensively  in food preparation.  Olive  oil is extensively used in making various 
foods or as a salad dressing  as well as in cosmetics, soaps , and skin care products.  Tree 
nut oils like those obtained from almonds etc. are used in salad dre ssing and  baking as 
well as in cosmetics, soaps , and skin care products.  Spice  oil for example, clove oil has 
very good food and beverage application  it is used in the production of foods and 
beverages as well as in perfumery, aromatherapy , and medicinal applications.  
 
  So, finally , I would like to summarize this lecture that edible oils and fats are essential  
components of a healthy and balanced diet, they are rich sources  of energy and provide  
essential fatty acids, vitamins , and minerals.  The market p otential for edible oils and fats 
is significant due to the increasing demand for healthy and sustainable food products.  
Seed oils, tree nut oils, fruit oils , and spice oils are some of the most widely used and  
traded edible oils and fats globally.  Cereal oils are an excellent source of omega -3 and 
omega -6 fatty acids which are essential  for making that are maintaining optimal health.  
Coconut oil showed its versatility in applications  from domestic usage to pha rmaceutical 
in the beverage industry.  All these various plant sources of oils are used extensively in 
Indian products .  One major thing is that most of these plant oils are rich sources  of 
polyunsaturated  fatty acids, except barring a few that are solid a t room temperature most of them like rice bran oil, sesame oil, sunflower oil, cotton seed oil etcetera.  They are a 
good source of that is not only omega 6 and omega 1 but also they have  a good amount of 
antioxidants.  As I also told earlier the trend is that we should consume more 
polyunsaturated  fatty acids and also for the proper health of the consumers there should 
be a proper  that is the MUFA, monounsaturated fatty acids , and polyunsaturated fatty 
acids.  Their ratio as well as the ratio of omega 3 an d omega 6 fatty acids should be in a 
proper  proportion and these oil should have a good quality of or a good amount of 
antioxidants.  Most  plant oils have all these, the y have a proper amount of MUFA an d 
PUFA, they have a good amount of mono omega 6 and om ega 3 fatty acids as well and 
they have naturally natural antioxidants present in them.   
 
So, we should consume more and more plant  oils and we should use plant oils for better 
health benefits.  These are some of the references that are used in this l ecture, ok. Thank 
you very much for your patience here.  
 