Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 1:  Course Overview and Introduction   
Lecture 7: Fatty Acids and Their Types  
 
  Hello, everybody. Namaskar.  Now, we are in the 7th lecture of this course.  Today, we 
will discuss about fatty acids and their type.   
 
The topics which we covered or concept that we will cover  in today lecture include that 
what are the different nomenclatures, how we name fatty acids.  In the earlier class, I 
gave you a brief idea abo ut what are the fatty acids. So, in the today's class, we will 
discuss about their na ming, their structure funct ion relationships, what are different types 
of fatty acids like saturated fatty acids, unsaturated  fatty acids, trans fatty acids, essential 
fatty acids, omega 3, omega 6 fatty acids  and so on, ok.   
 
So, you know the earlier also I had given you a brief description about fatty acids.  Let 
me revise it and say a phrase that fatty acids are ca rboxylic acids with hydrocarbon  chain 
ranging from 4 to 36 carbons, ok.  You can see in the figure here that these fatty acids, 
they consist of a hydrophobic  hy drocarbon chain that is the CHCHCH and one end will 
be the CH3 end that is called methyl  end and then on the other end, it has a carboxylic 
group.  
 
  So, that is the terminal carboxylic group and this is called as a carboxylic end.  So, the 
fatty acids th ere are two, one is the hydrophobic hydrocarbon chain and then in one end, 
it is methyl group of the hydrocarbon and the other end is having a carboxylic COOH  
group.  So, that is called a fatty acid, ok.  They occur in esterified form as well as in the 
free form.  Generally, free form those fatty acids are there commonly known as free fatty 
acids.  
 
  It is found in fats, oils and other lipids in the esterified form.  As free fatty acids in 
unesterified form, it is found in the blood plasma, ok.   
 
So, the re are over 1000 fatty acids known, but only about 20 or so or ev en less than  that 
are encountered in significant amounts in the oils and fats of commercial importance.  
You can see the most of the fatty acids which are found i n natural lipids, they contai n 
even number carbon atoms and mostly ranging between 14 to 20 carbon atoms and this is  
because of the mainly the biosynthesis pattern of the fatty acids which occurs within the  
addition of two carbon units.  The most common acids which are found in the food fats 
and oils are generally 16 carbon  containing palmitic acid and 18 carbon containing 
stearic acid.  
 
  Here in the table, I have given you a list of the commonly found fatty acids in normal  
food, plant and animal origin like glutaric acid is gener ally a prominent fatty acids  found 
in the dairy fats.  Then caproic acid, caprylic acid, capric acid, laur ic acid and even 
myristic acid,  they are all found in significant amount in coconut as w ell as in palm 
kernel and these  are all saturated fatty acids , ok.  The other like palmitic, stearic, oleic, 
they are found in co tton seed, palm, cocoa butter, tallow, even olive, canola and so on.  
Linoleic acid is found in good amount in corn, sesame, soybean and sunflower.  
Linolenic acid is found in the linseed,  ok. Similarly , ecosapentanoic acid or docosa  
hexanoic ac id, they are found in the fish as well as in animal fats.  
 
 If you see that mostly the fatty acids, if you want to disc uss about their classification,  
there are different ways of classifying them and one common classification is on the basis 
of their chain length that is mainly on the number of ca rbon atom which are present in the 
fatty acids.  So, they are known as short chain fatty acids which contain  less than 6 
carbon atom in the hydrocarbon chain, medium chain fatty acids that contain between 8 
to 14 carbon atoms  in the hydrocarbon chain and the long chain fatty acid s that contain 
16 to 24 carbon atoms in the hydrocarbon chain.  The melting temperat ure of the fatty 
acids increases wi th the addition of carbon atoms  in the hydrocarbon chain means longer 
the fatty acid  chain in the triglyceride, the  higher will be the melting point or melting 
temperature for that fat.  Most commodity oils contains free fatty acids or fatty ac ids with 
chain length between C  16 and C 22 with C 18 fatty acid dominatin g in most of the plant 
oils. Palm kernel and coconut sources of they contain medium chain fa tty acids and they 
are referred  to as lauric oils.  So, these anima l fats have a wider range of chain length.   
 
So, let us discuss about nomenclature of the fatty acids t hat is the there are generally 
three systems which are used for nomenclature that is one  is the standard IUPAC system, 
then common system in which this certain all these fatty acids that they are given some  
trivial names and then short hand or there is some short system short names is given  to 
the fatty acids ok.  So, standard nomenclature obviously is given by IUPAC it is 
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry.  And the rules in the standard 
nomenclatures are based on the molecul ar structure of fatty acids.  Common trivial 
nomenclature is based on the occurrence of the  fatty acid in natural systems and the shor t 
hand that is omega nomenclature is based on the number of carbon atoms and the 
position of double bond from the methyl end of the fatty acid structure ok.   
 
So, IUPAC system you can see in this the fatty acid is named after the parent 
hydrocarbon  ok.  And for example, an 18 carbon carboxylic acid is called octadecanoic 
acid ok and its parent  hydrocarbon is octadecane that is the 18 carbon aliphatic 
hydrocarbon you can see in the structure  here that is CH3 that is CH3.  So, it is a 18 
carbon containin g hydrocarbon chain.  So, it is octadecan e. So, when this is converted 
into a carboxylic acid fatty acid that is one end is OCH3 other  end  becomes COOH then 
it becomes the corresponding fatty acids.  And in the name normally that is the large 
letter last letter E is converted into OIE  or E is replaced with OIC ok.  So, octadecane 
becomes octadecanoic acid that is the fatty acids ok.  
 
 
So, here in this slide I have given you some standard common names of the IUPAC 
system  that is the number of carbons in the hydrocarbon and its name like the one carbon 
obviously  CH4 is the methane because carbon has one valency and it has a four linked 
with the  single bond four hydrogen atoms.  So, it becomes so CH4 it is hydrocarbon it is 
containing on e carbon is methane alright. Similarly, ethane, propane, butane, pentane that 
is with the depending upon the number  of carbon atom present in them.  You can  see 
here that is 16 carbon containing fatty acid is hexadecan, 18 carbon containing  fatty is 
octadecan.  So, 18 carbon in the last slide I have show you it becomes octadecanoic acid.  
Similarly, 16 carbon containing that is hydrocarbon when it will be co nverted into fatty 
acids  then it will be hexadecanoic acids ok.  22 carbon contai ning fatty acid is docosane. 
So, its fatty acid will be docosanoic acid.  So, means E that is the last letter you see in 
almost all the names.  So, E is replaced with OIC is two words.   
 
For unsaturated fatty acids hydrocarbon name is changed to indicate the presence of 
double  bond.  For example, 18 carbon containing fatty acids if it has one double bond 
then it will become  octadecenoic  acid.  Octadecenoic  acid means one double bond, but if 
there are two double bonds in this then  it will become name will become 
octadecadienoic acid.  Mono enoic acid one bond and di enoic acid is two double bond.  
So, that is this triangle configuration it represents the di stance of the double bond  from 
the carboxyl atom that is it shows that unsaturated linkage that is the symbol normally  
double bond unsaturation and it shows that the position where this double bond exist  like 
here you see that this symbol and then 9,12 - octadecadienoic acid or simply one can  
write 9,12 -octadecadienoic acid means that is the symbol is that the double bond starts  
first at the ninth carbon atom and then second double bond is at the 12th carbon atom.  So 
this is and the carboxyl carbon at om always is a numbered as number one that is the 
numbering  of the hydrocarbon chain it starts from the carboxylic end carboxylic carbon 
atom COOH  C of the COOH is counted as number one and then 2 3 4 5 it will go on and 
so on.   
 
So for the unsaturated  fatty acids the double bond can be either in cis p osition or in trans 
position.   So, therefore, double bond geometry is designated with the cis -trans 
nomenclature system.  So, the cis -trans terms are used to describe the position of atoms 
or groups  connec ted to double bonded atoms.  They can also be used to indicate the 
relative positions of t he in the ring structures that is atoms and groups they are cis or trans 
if they lie on t he same side or on the opposite  sides of the reference plane in the 
molecule.  The prefixes cis and trans can be abbreviated in the stru cture writing system 
like c or t in the structural formulas.  So, you can see here to elaborate little more that is a 
cis one there are two hydrocarbon s  where one trans is indicated and C is indicated, cis is 
indicated means that is in the carbon  hydrocarbon chain as you see that is each carbon is 
having that is a CH2, CH2, CH2 linkages  are there means that it has that the hydrogen 
links in between th em. 
 
  So, if these two hydrogen which are connected with the two carbon atoms if they are on 
the  same side of the chain poly hydrocarbon chain or the plane then it becomes cis and if 
they  are on the opposite side like here it is on the other side this o pposite side then it  
becomes the that is the hydrogen which are connecting the two carbon atoms which are  
connected with a double bond.  If the hydrogen atoms are on both the carbon atoms are 
on the  same side the resulting fatty acids will become cis, if  they are on the opposite side 
the resulting fatty acid will  become trans.   
 
The trivial or common system of nomenclature of fatty acids. In this the common that is  
it is a normally and let me say that this is the common system of is more is used becau se  
the names are little simple here alright and normally that is a they are the most of the  
common names of the fatty acids originate from the first identified botanical or 
geological  origin for those fatty acids.  For example, tetradecanoic acid is cal led myristic 
acid as it was found in the it is  found in the seed oils from the Myristicaceae family.  
 
  Generally however, heptadaconoic acid has been mistakenly named as margaric acid as  
it was once incorrectly thought to be present in margarine, but so  in many cases that is  
the like linolenic acid it is found in the linolenic that is linseed that is it becomes  oleic 
acid from the olive.  So generally these names they originate from the source that is from 
where it is this ok.   
 
The common name like and they because sometimes although this  IUPAC name is very 
systematic  one can easily understand, but sometime it becomes difficult to remember.  So 
in daily usage these common names are more used than the systematic name.  So the 
some of the common names can pose however, memorization difficulties such as the 
combination  like caproic acid, caproic, caprylic, capric although all these remain almost 
similar in  nature ok, but there are certain differences.  
 
  Similarly arachidic and arachidonic, linolenic, linolenic, gamma linolenic, dihomo 
gamma linolenic  acid and so on.  So, here in the structure I have just shown you some of 
the trivial names of the saturated  unsaturated fatty acids as well as saturated fatty acid 
like for example, hexanoic acid  which is caproic acid, octanoic acid which is caprylic 
acid, decanoic acid which is capric  acid and so on.  Similarly arachidonic. Arachidic acid 
is the saturated fatty acid when it desaturates becomes  arachidonic acid.  Linoleic acid, 
alpha linolenic acid, ga mma linolenic acid, dihomo gamma linolenic acid  all these names 
are mainly there are differences in the position and number of the double bond  or and 
saturation in the fatty acid.  
 
 
 
  EPA that is Eicosapentaenoic  acid usually referred to as cis 5, cis 8, cis 11, cis 14, cis 17  
Eicosapentaenoic acid which is a fatty acid that is commonly found in fishes that is the  
structure you can see here these are the cis structure that carbon positioning is given  and 
all th ese are cis because the hydrogen on these carbon atoms are on the same side.  But a 
different isomer like 2 cis, 5 cis, 8 cis, 11 cis, 14 cis Eicosapentaenoic is also  found in 
nature that is it can be there is a common nomenclature in EPA refer to the  C 5, C 8, C 
11, C 14, C 17 isomer.  Docosahexaenoic acid there is commonly known as DHA refers 
to all cis that is all cis means  at 4, 7, 10, 13, 16, 19 there is a there is carbon atoms they 
contain cis hydrogen at  the cis position.  So, these are all 6 all  cis 4, 7, 10, 13, 16, 19 
docosa hexanoic acid that is DHA.   
 
So, the short hand or omega system of nomenclature of the fatty acids this in this system 
the  nomenclature of the fatty acid the carbon number in the fatty acid chain length is 
followed  by a  column and then the number of the double bond and the position of the 
double bond closest  to the methyl side of the fatty acid molecule is shown.  
 
  That is fatty acid as I told you earlier it has a carboxylic and it has methyl end.  So, 
methyl end  norma lly is also called as omega end.  So, in the omega a dash and then a 
number that is number at which the first double bond  starts.  So, that is the omega system 
and also there will be total number of carbon atoms present  in the chain.  That is the 
methyl group is number 1 and in the short hand notation the unsaturated fatty  acids are 
assumed to have cis bonding and if the fatty acid is polyunsaturated the double  bonds are 
in the methyl interrupted positions.  
 
  Shorthand  terminology cannot be used for fa tty acids with trans or methyl end  bonds for 
those  with additional functional groups like branch, hydroxy etcetera they are in the 
double bond  system that is are not methylin interrupted isolated or conjugated.  That is 
sometime omega is replaced by n in  the fatty acid short hand nomenclature.  For 
example, you see here that is 18 2 n 6 it shows or it is the same 18 2 omega 6.  18 colon 2 
means that is it has a that is total 18 numbers of carbon are there in the  hydrocarbon 
chain in the fatty acid hydroc arbon chain.  It has two double bond and the position starts 
at that 6 that is the from first from the  omega end that is fatty methyl group end at the 6th 
position is the n.  
 
 
  Here you see that is the fatty acids IUPAC nomenclature like 18 1 9 means th at there  is 
a 1 carbon atom and that is double bond that is it 1 double bond unsaturation and  that is 
the double bond starts at 9th position from the omega end and that is the same you  can 
write a short hand nomenclature like this or here you see the tw o hydrogens  are on the 
same side.  So, it becomes cis fatty acids.  So, normally this short hand that is omega 
when it is so they are always used for the  cis fatty acids only.   
 
So, you see here that is the names of the fatty acid at a glance that is s ystematic  name 
common name and the short name that is used here like butanoic acid it is known  as 
butyric its short name is 4 colon 0 means there are 4 carbon atoms no double bond that  is 
all these here in this butanoic, pentanoic, hexanoic, octanoic, d ecanoic, or similarly 
butyric,  valeric, caproic, caprylic, capric, lauric, myristic, palmitic, stearic, arachidic, 
lignoceric all  these are the saturated fatty acids as in the name that is there indicate that 
there  is no double bond and they are having like a lignoceric has 24 carbon atom 
arachidic  has 20 carbon atom in the hydrocarbon chain.   
 
The unsaturated fatty acids similarly you see that some of the common unsaturated fatty  
acid their systematic IUPAC name, common name, and short name like C9 -Dodecenoic 
acid  means it is a 12 carbon containing one double bond at the third position. Then C5 
tetradecanoic acid, physeteric acid is 14 one at ninth position then C9 octadecanoic  acid 
that is oleic acid here that is there are 18 carbon one double bond and it is at  the ninth 
position.  So similarly in all the names like if there are C5, C6, C7, C8, C11, C14, Eicosa 
trienoic  acid means it is arachidonic acid ok.  Eicosa pentaenoic acid that is it has 5 
unsaturated bond ok.  This is Eicosa tetraenoic acid it will become Eicosa tetraenoic acid 
it has 4 double bonds  ok.  So, in this way the names are given to the common name, 
short name and systematic name  of unsaturated fatty acids.  
 
 
 
  Then let us discuss about a structure function relationships of the fatty acids.  The 
physical properties of fatty acids and of compounds that contain them are largely  
determined by the length and the degree of unsaturation of the hydrocarbon chain.  Fi rst 
and most important property: the solubility. If you look at the nonpolar hydrocarbon 
chain  accounts for the poor solubility of fatty acids in water.  The longer the fatty acid 
chain or fatty acyl chain and fewer the double bond the lower  is the solub ility in water.  
 
  The carboxylic acid group is polar and ionized at neutral pH and accounts for the slight  
solubility of short chain fatty acid in water.  The protein leaving systems the fatty acid if 
we discuss in vertebrates free fatty acid  that is un sterified fatty acids with a free 
carbogenic group ok.  They circulate in the blood bound non covalently to a protein 
carrier serum albumin.  However, fatty acids are present in the blood plasma mostly as 
carbogenic derivatives such  as esters or amides.  Taking the charged carboxylate group 
these fatty acid derivatives are generally even  less soluble in water and are the free fatty 
acids.  
 
 
 
  The melting points are also strongly influenced by the length and degrees of 
unsaturation  of the hydrocarbon ch ain ok.  More saturated fatty acids, long chain fatty 
acids higher will be the melting point.  More unsaturated fatty acids, short chain fatty 
acids lower will be the melting point.  Even unsaturated fatty acids are liquid at room 
temperature ok.  So, at r oom temperature the saturated fatty acids from 12 carbon to 24 
carbon have a waxy  consistency whereas, unsaturated fatty acids of these length are oily 
liquids.  
 
  This difference in melting points is due to the different degrees of packing of the fatty  
acid molecule.  Fully saturated fatty acids have a straight chain structure and easily 
arranged in order  or crystalline structure.  In unsaturated fatty acids a cis double bond 
forces a the hydrocarbon chain due to which  it cannot pack as well as the sat urated fatty 
acids.  Because it takes less thermal energy to disorder these poorly ordered arrays of 
unsaturated  fatty acids, they have markedly lower melting points than saturated fatty 
acids of the  same chain lengths.  
 
 
  Then saturated and unsaturate d fatty acids. We discussed. We have already described 
little  bit of more that is they are obviously, the saturated fatty acid do not contain any 
double  bond.  Saturated fatty acids. Unsaturated fatty acids contain one or more double 
bond.  If there is o ne double bond it is a monounsaturated fatty acid; two or more than 
two double bond  it is called polyunsaturated fatty acids commonly known as PUFA, ok.  
 
  There is a there is also a common pattern in the location of double bond. It has been  
seen in most  of the unsaturated fatty acid.  Like for example, if it first double bond starts 
at 5 position then it will be 5, 8,  9, 11 and then 14 and so on.  So, there will be some 
regularity like 9, 12 and then 15 or 6, 9, 12, 6, 9.  So, there is a some sort of re gularity is a 
common pattern in found in the positioning  of the double bond.  
 
  The other double bond of PUFA are generally that is that 12 and 15 that is arachidonic  
acid ok.  However, it is exception to this generalization because it has 5, 8, 11.  The  
double bonds of PUFAs are almost never conjugated li ke that is it is not like that CH 
double bond CH and then single CH and double bond CH no you will not find.  You will 
find that in the position 2 that there will be on e CH 2 bonds in methyl linkage meth ylene 
bridge will be there between one double bond.  So, that is why if this here first is 6 then 
7, 8, 9 , if it is 5 then 5, 6, 7, 8.  So, there is a difference of the in between there are three 
carbon atoms alternate it  will be there.   
 
Then trans fatty  acid I already explained. Further you  can see here in the structure here 
this becomes trans where in the carbon atoms, hydroge n are both are on the opposite side.  
If the hydrogen atoms on the double bond that is if it is o n the same side it becomes cis,  
like you see here these are on the double side other side.  So, they become on the double 
bond position that  is they are on opposite side.  
  So, it becomes trans.  Normally the dairy products and meat product meat produc ed by 
fermentation in rumen of dairy animals they contain trans fats also that is hydrogenated 
fish or vegetable oil.   
Generally, they triglycerides when they are in the natural form normally they are  in the 
cis form except for if you in general they are in cis, but when they are heate d or 
processed.  So, this during heating that is cooking processes etcetera the n this cis is 
converted into a trans form that is ok.   
 
And obviously, this consumption of trans fatty acid always asso ciated with the health 
hazards ok. Diets high in trans f atty acid correlate with increased blood levels of LDL 
that blood bad cholesterol as well as decreased level of HDL that is good cholesterol.  So, 
if you take more trans fatty acids it will increase the quantity of bad cholesterol;  it will 
reduce the quan tity of good cholesterol.  
 
  French fries, doughnuts, cookies etcetera even potato chips and all this they are 
considered  to be having to be more in the trans fatty acids because they are given high 
heat treatment  during heating that is the cis is conver ted into.  So, the consumption of 
trans fat and I told you is associated  with cardiovascular diseases, diabetic mellitus, colon 
cancer and so on.   
 
Then comes essential and non -essential fatty acids.  These are very important in the 
earlier class also I discus sed about it that is the fatty acids present in our bodies as 
triglycerides and other lipids classes come from two sources.  One is endogenous that is 
endogenous means that is this is synthesized inside the body.  
  Some fatty acids are synthesized in side our body from the precursor like acetate which  
are resulting from catabolism of fats or carbohydrates.  And then the other source is the 
exogenous source that is which is obtained directly  from the fat in our diet means that is 
those fatty acids w hich are not synthesized in our  body, but they are important they are 
necessary for normal functioning of our body or for keeping us in a good healthy 
conditions.  These fatty acids must be taken from the diet and those are taken known as 
essential fatty acids.  Also the body is able to modify the structure of fatty acid m ainly by 
the length elongation that is adding two carbon atoms through a metabolic cycle or by 
desaturation that is inserting double bonds in it.  But there are certain acids that humans 
and other animals cannot make or even they cannot  desaturate like the plant they can 
desaturate steric into oleic, oleic into linoleic and  linoleic into linolenic.  
 
  But our system animal human system cannot desaturate linoleic into linolenic or oleic  
into linoleic.  So these, but at the same time these are very very important for our healthy 
life healthy living. So, they must be consumed through food and they are desc ribed as 
essential fatty acids that is they are essential for our body.   
 
So, non -essential fatty acids are synthesized by a healthy body as long as it gets enough 
essential fatty acids.  However, research shows that additional health benefits of direc t 
consumption of non -essential fatty acids as well linolenic as well as linoleic are 
considered to be the essential fatty acid because they cannot be synthesized by our body 
hence m ust be supplied by the diet and  they are required for important bodily functions 
like growth, good  skin, air quality etcetera. So, it has been estimated that the to tal calories 
the minimum intake of linoleic acids should  be around 3 percent with that of linolenic 
acid at about 0.5 percent.  Non -essential fatty acids play important role in the production 
of biologically active  material such as prostaglandins, leukotri enes and thromboxanes .   
 
The here see that the some of the omega 3 and omega 6 fatty acids that is omega 3 and  
omega 6 fatty acids are present in the polyunsaturated fats in omega 3.  The fatty acid as I 
told you earlier also the fatty ac id first double bond occurs on the third carbon as you can 
see here third carbo n of the from the methylene. For example, alpha linolenic acid, 
eucosa pentanoic acid or docosa h exanoic acid in  all these that is the this is the methylene 
and the first double  bond starts at third  position third carbon atom.  Similarly, in the 
omega 6 fatty acid the first double bo nd is on the sixth carbon atom from the methyl end 
like linoleic acid, arachidonic acid, gamma linoleic acid and so on.  Also there are that 
omega 9  fatty acids similarly they are named.   
 
Omega 3 performs many transport functions in the body related to the cardiovascular  
health and brain function especially in developing the children and immune system 
health.  Sources of omega 3 fatty acids: gener ally major sources include oily fish like 
mackerel, tuna,  salmon or herring, even rapeseed oil and walnuts they also contain good 
amount.  
 
  Then sources of omega 6 fatty acid include margarine, sunflower oil, olive oil, pumpkin,  
seed oil, avocado etcete ra.  So, if you look at the important of omega 6 and omega 3 very 
very important and particular  ratio of the omega 6 to omega 3 is very important from for 
normal functioning of our body.  Omega 3 has a vasodilating vasodilating and anti 
inflammatory and a nti-coagulant effect  ok whereas, omega 6 has a vasoconstrictive, pro -
inflammatory and pro -coagulant effect.  See that omega 3 it dilates the blood vessel 
whereas, omega 6 it constricts the blood vessels.  So, when the blood vessels are 
constricted it incr eases the blood clotting ok.  
 
  When the blood vessels are dilated then obviously, it will thin it cause the thinning of 
the  blood.  So, this is very important.  So, a proper ratio of omega 6 to omega 3 of 5 is to 
1 or lower is necessary in order to  achi eve a balance and thus an inflammation neutral 
state.   
 
So, I would like to summarize this to the lecture that fatty acids are an important  class  of 
lipids that are of several types.  Fatty acids can be named using different nomenclature 
systems such as IUPAC, trivial name, short  hand systems for naming in which short 
names are  provided to the fatty acid. Then the presence and degree of unsaturati on in 
fatty acids and hydrocarbon chain can influence  their physical properties almost all even 
biological properties, functional properties  that is the number of unsaturated linkage, 
positioning of these linkages, chain length,  degree of unsaturation a ll these will influence 
the properties of the fats and oil and their  other characters even the free fatty acids if 
there is a more it will also influence  processing characteristics and other.  Fatty acids are 
also important from nutritional point of view  that only you diets that are  rich in essential 
and omega 3 fatty acids and free from trans fat must be recommended  for a good health.   
 
So, these are some of the references which has been cited in this lecture.   
 
Thank you very much for your patienc e here.  Thank you.  
