Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 1: Course Overview and Introduction  
Lecture 6: Lipids and Their Classification  
 
 Hi everyone, Namaste.  Now we are entering to the second week of the course and this 
week, the five lectures will be devoted on 'Nature and Occurrences of Food Lipids.'  Like 
in these five lectures , we will discuss various matters or concepts related to that what are 
the food lipids, what is its nature, how they are found.  Today's lecture 6 will talk about 
'Lipids and their Classification'.   
So, we will cover in today's lecture , nature and occurren ce of lipids, their classification 
and what are the different types of lipids like simple lipid, compound lipid and derived 
lipids.  Also, we will throw some light on triglycerides and waxes, phospholipids, 
sphingolipids and steroids and carotenoids.  
 
Although in earlier classes also we made a small brief mention  of all these things, but 
now we are going towards the deeper side. We will discuss mostly the chemistry etc. 
what are their constituents, how they are presented.   
So, the lipids you have seen earl ier also we discussed, they are chemically diverse 
compounds, which are all soluble in organic  solvents.   
Lipids in the form of triglycerides occur as storage lipids in biological tissues.  The 
triglycerides from plant and animal sources are generally rich  in unsaturated and 
saturated fatty acids, respectively and that is why triglycerides from plant sources are 
normally liquid at room temperature, triglycerides from animal sources are generally 
solid at room temperature.  Lipids in the form of phospholipid s, glycolipids, lipoproteins, 
sterols etc. occur as membrane lipids in biological systems.  Storage lipids are neutral 
lipids, while the membrane lipids are polar in nature.  
Other lipids occurring in small quantities also serve crucial functions such as enzyme 
cofactors , electron carriers, hormones, emulsifying agent in gastrointestinal tracts and so 
on.  
 
So, the lipids are normally classified in various ways.  The three major ways by which we 
can classify lipid that is on the basis of  their chemical composition, that is what are these 
lipids composed of and accordingly that is on the basis of their chemical composition.  
Lipids are classified into three groups like simple lipids, compound lipids and derived 
lipids.  We will have details  of all these.  Then another way of classification is on the basis 
of type of fatty acids which are present in lipids , that is whether saturated fatty acids are 
present or unsaturated fatty acids are present.  Accordingly, there is the saturated fat or 
unsaturated fat or solid fat or liquid fat.  Then third and the very important classification 
of the lipid is , that is based on the requirement by the human body , that is , which fat , that 
is essential fat and non -essential fat. That is essential fat , there are  certain particularly 
some fatty acids etc. , which our body cannot desaturate.  
We do not have the molecular machinery, but the plant s do have.  So, plant oil, fish oils 
etc. have those essential fatty acids and these essential fatty acids , because our body, they 
are required for normal functioning of our body, but our body cannot synthesize them.  
So, we must take these fatty acids, that is essential fatty acids from the plant sources or 
fish oil etc. as you discussed in the earlier classes  also. 
So, on the basis of the human body requirement of the fats like essential fat and non -
essential fat, the triglycerides or lipids are accordingly classified , that is those who 
contains more amount of essential fatty acids or which contain non -essenti al fatty acids.  
Then let us see little details like the you saw that lipids that is one classification is on the 
basis of their , that is simple , that is the chemicals compound , their nature like simple 
lipid, compound lipid and derived lipid.  
 
So, let u s first discuss simple lipids.  Simple lipids are also homol ipids called and these 
are two types . They can be classified . One is the triglyceride;  another is the waxes and 
this triglyceride again there may be a simple triglyceride or mixed triglyceride.  S imple 
triglyceride means in the earlier class we discussed about triglyceride it is glycerol and 
three fatty acids.  So, if all the three fatty acids , which are attached or which are present 
over the glycerol molecule, they are the same fatty acid like let us say one fatty acid is 
stearic acid or palmitic acid.  If it is in all the three alcohols are esterified with the same 
fatty acid , then it becomes a simple fatty acid , but the mixed triglycerides that is simple 
triglyceride.  The mixed triglycerides are the one, where different fatty acids may be or 
two fatty acids might be ste aric, one may be palmitic or even one may be oleic, one may 
be ste aric, one may be palmitic.  So, these are where , different fatty acids are attached 
with the same glycerol molecule , then it becomes mixed fatty acid.  And mind it most of 
the fats and oils, they are mixtures of mixed triglycerides.  
So, the waxes, they are the esters of long chain alcohols, that is mono hydroxy alcohol 
and fatty acids, that is here long chain fatty aci ds and long chain alcohols, they are 
combined .  So, that is the main difference between the triglycerides and waxes.  
Triglycerides, here these are the glycerol, the three hydroxyl groups and three fatty acids 
are attached.  Whereas, the waxes, one long ch ain fatty acid and one long chain alcohol, 
that is mono hydroxy alcohol, these are attached. So, these becomes the waxes.  
 
 We will take up the little details of all this more.  So, let us see triglycerides that fats and 
oils.  So, as you can see here in t his structure, I have shown that the fats and oils earlier 
also we discussed , they are chemically known as triacylglycerols or triglycerides and they 
are formed by the reaction between alcohol and fatty acids or reaction of fatty acid with 
alcohol  and when  one fatty acid , you see here , that is , it becomes mono glyceride, two 
fatty acids are joined with the di glyceride and three fatty acids are triglycerides  and 
triglyceride again that is , the I just told you , that is simple triglyceride and  mixed 
triglyce ride, you can see here , in the simple triglyceride , where all these R3 fatty  acids 
are the same fatty acids, it becomes simple triglyceride.  
When these are the different , R1, R2, R3 , then it becomes mixed triglyceride.   
So, mono and diacylglycerols are partially soluble in water , since they have hydroxyl 
groups . In mono , there are two hydroxyl groups, in di there are one hydroxyl group.  So, 
they are little bit partially soluble with water, but the triacylglycerols, since they do not 
have any hydroxyl gr oup.  So, they are completely non polar, they are only soluble in 
organic solvents.  They are neutral lipids, that is they have no charge.  
They are more abundant, which constitutes about 98 % of all dietary lipids.  The 
differences in texture, appearance, p hysical properties, functional properties between fats 
and oils are mainly because of the fatty acids, the differences in the fatty acids , which are 
attached with the glycerol molecule or in the triglycerides.  So, plant and marine 
triglycerides contain un saturated fatty acids especially the polyunsaturated  fatty acids, 
while the animal fats are relatively rich in the saturated fatty acid s.  This we discussed 
earlier also.   
The waxes as I told you they are also commonly called wax esters or mixtures of est ers of 
fatty acids and long chain monohydroxy alcohols.  
Biological waxes are esters of long chain like C14 to C36 saturated and unsaturated fatty 
acids with long chain like C16 to C30 alcohols.  Their melting points are generally in the 
range of 60 to 100 degree Celsius and these are generally higher than those of the 
triacylglycerols.  Simple waxes are esters of medium chain fatty acids like 16:0, 18:0, 
18:1 and long chain aliphatic alcohols ranging in size from C8 to C18.  Simple waxes are 
found on the su rface of animals, plants and insects and they play a role in prevention of 
water loss.  Complex waxes are formed from the diols or from the alcohol acids.  
So, this triacontanoylpalmitate, the major component of the beeswax is an ester of 
palmitic acid and t rioctanol  and a honeycomb constructed of beeswax is formed at around 
25 degree celsius and completely impervious to water.  In fact, the term ‘wax’ originates 
in the old English weax, weax meaning the material of honeycomb.  So, from w e a x that 
is from t his weax finally, it comes wax.  
Simple waxes can be named by removing the -ol from the alcohol and replacing it with -
yl and replacing the -ic from the acid with -oate.  
For example, the wax ester of hexadecanol and oleic acid would accordingly be named as  
hexadecyl oleate or hexadecyl -cis-9-hexadenenoate.  So, this is the system of similarly 
the most of the triglycerides also are named like this.  Waxes are found in animal, insect,  and plant secretions as protective coatings.  Waxes serve as energy sterols  and water 
repellents in biological systems.  Carnauba wax, beeswax and candelilla wax are the 
typical examples of glazing agents and fruit waxing in the food industry.  
They are generally used for coating over the surface of the fruits to restrict their 
respiration and increase their shelf life.  Now, these were about the simple lipids.  
 
Now, let us talk about the compound lipids or hetero lipids.  So, compound lipids they 
may be of three major categories like phospholipids, galactolipids, and lipoproteins.  So, 
phospholipids are again, they can be further classified into glycero -lipids and 
sphingomyelins, that is the here.  These phospholipids, they are the glycerol molecule s, 
that 2 fatty acids are there and the third fatty acid that is at SN3 p osition , a phosphoric 
acid group is joined and which in turn, combined with another moiety that choline, 
alcohol etc.  We will take up little detail further.  This sphingomyelin , you can see here, it 
has at SN2 position fatty acid, SN3 position phosphate a nd choline and this is a glycerol 
wax.  So, the other galactolipids the other type of the compound lipids they are of two 
types cerebro sides  and sulfolipid s.  Cerebro sides  are that is you can see here that is at 
SN2 position is a fatty acid and SN2 positio n are mono or oligosaccharides.  
In the sulfolipids that is SN1 and SN2 position are fatty acids and SN3 position is mono 
or disaccharide, which might be further joined with sulfate.  and the gangliosides are that 
is they contain SN1 and SN2, two fatty acid s and then SN3 position , there are complex 
carbohydrate and which may be further tied with the sialic acid.  So, this is the 
gangliosides.  Regarding lipoproteins that is the lipoprotein may be further different 
types , depending upon the various compositio n derivatives etc. like a chylomicron , very 
low-density  lipoprotein VLDL, low density lipoprotein LDL or high-density  lipoprotein 
HDL.  
 
                        
 
 That is, you can see here in this structure that is how lipoprotein structure of a 
lipoprotei n, there where triglycerides, molecules these green proteins that is 
phospholipids, free cholesterol or cholesterol bound to fatty acids, they are all present in 
the cell.  But let me tell you, among all these lipids as far as the food processing is 
concer ned.  So, simple lipids , that is the fats and oils , that is triglycerides and the 
phospholipids , that is these two are the phospholipids.  These two are the important 
constituent s form from processing point of view and of course, lipoprotein etc. from the 
nutrition and health point of view , almost all these lipids are important.  
                           
 
So, let us see phospholipids , that is in the phospholipids , as earlier also , there is one 
hydroxyl group in glycerol, is esterified by phosphoric acid at SN3 position here.  SN1 is 
fatty acid, SN2 is fatty acid and SN3 is the phosphoric acid and which in turn attached 
with another moiety which may be choline , which may be some oth er.  So, this structure 
makes the phospholipid amphiphilic with one part of the structure is soluble in aqueous 
phase , while it is a hydrophobic part is soluble in the oil phase and that is why these 
phospholipids , they act as an emulsifier.  They keep bot h oil phase and water phases 
together and whenever they are present , wherever they are present in the food system and 
the result , they act as a bridge between the m and they keep them in place they do not 
allow , that is the emulsifiers , which keep two immis cible liquids into a miscible form or 
stabilized form.  As a result , this molecule is surface active and it can arrange at the oil -
water interface creating emulsions.  Phospholipids are widely used in food industry as 
emulsifiers in beverages, baked goods, salad dressings, confectionary products etc. and 
among them lecithin is the one more most important food that naturally contain 
phospholipid include egg yolk, liver, soybean, wheat germ and peanut and lecithin being 
the most characteristic example. In fact , in the peanut butter , when the peanut oil the 
margarine is prepared , we will take up separately in the next class earlier later, that the 
peanut butter , that is margarine that  is in the peanut oil water is added and about it 
contains as high as 8 to 10 p ercent of the emulsifier lecithin or some other emulsifier , 
which keep these water and oil phases mixed together.   
                       
Then sphingolipids, they are class of lipids containing a backbone of sphingoid bases.  
They are sphingosine is an animal alcohol that form the structural basis of the most 
important sphingolipids.  For example, ceramides are composed of sphingosine with N 
linked fatty acid at the SN2 position.  Derivatives of ceramides may be formed by the 
reaction between OH group at SN1.  For example, sphingomyelin consists of a ceramide 
with phosphocholine esterified at SN1.  When a single sugar residue usually glucose or 
galactose is attached at SN1, a cerebroside is obtained , whereas, when an oligosaccharide 
with one or more sialic  acid is attached a ganglioside is obtained.  These compounds play 
an important role in signal transduction and cell regulation and although they are not very 
typically consistent as dietary lipid due to their low concentration, their role is being 
continu ously examined and reevaluated.  Foods rich in sphingolipids and their derivatives 
include dairy, meat, egg, soy and seafoods like mussels, scallops etc.  Fruits and 
vegetables are generally low in their sphingolipid contents.  So, here you can see in this 
picture , there are some major sphingolipids like, this is the structure of a sphingosine as 
you could see that at SN2 position there is a fatty acid at SN3 position there is a here this 
is and at SN1 position is a X molecule , which is normally that is X is  defined in this table 
that is when this X is H then it is a ceramide.  When X is a phosphocholine , it is become 
a sphingomyelin, when X is a glucose , it becomes neutral glycolipids, when X is a 
disaccharide like glucose and galactose or it may be oligosac charide, di tri etc.  
etc. it becomes lactoside, ceramide or when X is a complex oligosaccharide , it becomes 
gangliosides like GM2.  So, there are you can summarize that , there are three subclasses 
of a sphingolipids and that are the derivative of ceramides , but they different mainly in 
their head group . Here it is SN1 that is head group at SN1 position.   
Galactolipids and sulfolipid s of course, you see in the earlier structure , the second group 
of the membrane lipids are those , that predominant in the plan t cells or the galactolipids 
in which one or two galactose residues are conducted by a glycosidic linkage to C3 of 1, 
2 diacylglycerols.  Galactolipids are localized in thylakoid  membranes which are the 
internal membranes of chloroplast and they make up to 70 to 80 % of the total membrane 
lipids of a vascular plant.  They are probably the most abundant membrane lipids in the 
biosphere.  Plant membranes also contain sulfolipid s, in which sulfonated glucose residue 
is joined to a diacylglycerol in glycosidic lin kage.  In sulfolipid s, the sulfonates on the 
head group bears a fixed negative charge like that of the phosphate group in 
phospholipids.   
                             
So, because see here, these are the, in monogalactosyl diacylglycerol and digalactosyl 
diacylglycerol, almost all the acyl groups are derived from linoleic acid , that is 18:2   
double bond at 9 and 12 position and the head groups are unchanged.  So, these are the 
mono MGDG and DGDG structures , you can see here.  Whereas, in the sulfolipid 6 -sulfo 
6-deoxy -alpha -D you can see the structure is down that glucopyranosyldiacylglycerol.  
This is the glucose, but pyranosyl diacyl, third is that group , it is attached and it carries a 
fixed negative charge.  So, these are the structures, we discussed ea rlier also to make the 
things more  clear.   
                     
Now, very important from the health point of view lipoproteins , that is these are the 
compound lipoproteins , that obviously, based on their density lipoproteins can be 
classified as we discussed earlier also into , that is the chylomicrons and very low -density  
lipoprotein VLDL, intermediate density lipoprotein IDL, low density lipoprotein and 
high-density lipopro tein that is HDL.  So, here you see that is the molecular structure of 
chylomicron is shown here , you can see that the surface is a layer of phospholipids 
particularly this yellow portion you see that is the phospholipids here phospholipids.  And 
with the head group facing the aqueous phase and triacylglycerol sequester in the interior 
that is they are the yellow portion, triacylglycerol , these yellow portions make up more 
than 80 % of the mass  and several apolipoproteins  that is lipid binding proteins that is 
they   protrude from the surface B4, C3 and C2 act as signals in the uptake and 
metabolism of chylomicrons.  And the diameter of chylomicrons ranges from about 100 
to 500 nanometer even you see that these are the cho lesterol also they are attached with 
it.   
Then apolipoproteins and lipoproteins. Apolipoproteins are lipid binding proteins in the 
blood, responsible for the transport of triacylglycerols, phospholipids, cholesterol,  and 
cholesteryl esters between organs.   Apolipoproteins like apo -mines detached or separate , 
designating the protein in the lipid free form combined with the lipids to form several 
classes of lipoprotein practices.  Spherical aggregate with hydrophobic lipids and at core 
and hydrophilic protein  side chains and lipid head group at the surface.  Various 
combinations of lipids and proteins produce particles of different densities ranging from 
chylomicrons and VLDL, VHDL and so on.  
             
So, derived lipids finally, you see they are steroids , terpenes, carotenoids, fat soluble 
vitamins, fatty acids, eicosanoids etc. that is steroids that is C -29, C -28, C -27 steroids,  
and other things diterpenes.  So, all these various forms of derived lipids are also present.  
                 
So, we will see  that quickly these , that is , steroids they consist of interconnected rings 
with a variety of attached side chains.  You can see here in the steroid structure.  Many 
sterols are important in maintaining the human body including cholesterol, bile, 
hormones,  testosterone, estrogen, cholesterol,  and vitamin D. Dietary sterols of the 
greatest significance in food is cholesterol , where elevated levels of cholesterol in the 
blood are associated with the diseases , such as atherosclerosis that increases the risk of  
heart disease, heart attack or stroke etc.  And major dietary sources of cholesterol include 
red beet, egg yolk, liver and butter.  
                   
 
Then phytosterols or the stanlos, they are the plant sterols like beta, sitosterol or 
stigm asterol and they may compete with intestinal cholesterol absorption and reduce its 
level in the blood.  So, if you are taking more phytosterols, then it becomes beneficial.  
Products belonging to the broader group of functional foods are available in the market 
incorp orating phytosterols in the formulation like margarine, yogurt drink etc ., which 
help to reduce the cholesterol level in the body.  So, here you see some of the sterol 
structure like sterol, cholesterol, vitamin D 3, beta sitosterol and then there is a structural 
overlap.  So, this image structural overlap is shown , illustrates common structural aspects 
between the various sterols.  And you can see finally, the common characteristic is the 
gonane structure consisting of there is a last structure consistin g of three molecules of 
cyclohexane , that is A, B and C rings and one cyclopentane like D ring and attached with 
a side chain.   
             
Terpenes, there are large number of terpenes are found , they are commonly occur red in 
the oil , that give plant th eir fragrance , particularly many terpenes are the major flavoring 
materials in the plant sources of the citrus oil, lemon etc.  Originally the term terpene was 
restricted to hydrocarbons. It is now used to include substituted derivatives to the 
fundamental s building block of the inter terpenes is the isoprene unit that is C5H8.  
The larger structures are assembled from several isoprene units usually head -to-head  or 
linked isoprene units.  Terpenes can be cyclic or acyclic with a larger range of structural 
variations and more than 23000 terpenes systems are known and mono terpenes are based 
on two isoprene units.  So, have a molecular formula generally C10 H16.  Other terpenes 
have multiple of C5 unit like C15, C20, C25 and major terpene you can see the limone ne, 
menthol, camphor, vitamin A, citral, b -carotene, isoprene, these all, they are present in 
the various plant sources.   
           
So, then carotenoids, very popular sterol present in the plant sources.  They are essential 
components of all photosynthet ic organs like plant, algae, cyanobacteria etc.  Some fungi 
and non-photosynthetic  bacteria can also synthesize carotenoids.  Many animals rely on 
the food borne carotenoids as visual pigments antioxidants or colorants.  Carotenoids 
belong to the isoprenoids and their basic structure is made up of eight isoprene units 
resulting in C40 b ackbone.  F ormally , two types of carotenoids can be screened that is the 
carotene ,s which are pure hydrocarbon and the second are the xanthophylls.  
They are derivatives that contain one or more oxygen functions. You can see different 
types of carotenes  like alpha carotene, beta carotene, beta cryptoxanthin, lutein, lycopene, 
zeaxanthin.  They are all the compounds belonging to the carotene family derived lipids 
family and then you can see lycopene is the color compound present in tomato and lutein 
the color  compound in aneto that is even this carotene.  They are beta carotene is a 
precursor of vitamin A , that is yellow colored compound present in most of the yellow 
colored fruits and vegetables.  
           
 
 So, these are very important group.  Then fat -soluble vitamin like vitamin A, it exists in 
diet in many farms.  The most bioactive form is the all -trans -retinol and cis form that they 
are created by a light induced isomerization.  The daily value of vitamin A is 1000 retinol 
equivalent which represents 1 000 micron of all -trans -retinol equivalent to 6000 
micrograms of beta carotene.  Vitamin A can be toxic when taken in extra level that is 
extending to the levels exceeding to the percent daily value.  
Some reports suggest that level of 15000 R E per day can be toxic.  
               
So, you can see here that is the 11 cis -retinol, all -trans -retinol and the beta carotene this 
structure of the vitamin A.  Vitamin D although as many as 5 vitamin D compounds have 
been described, but only two of these are biologi cally active and that becomes ergo 
calciferol , that is vitamin D2 and chole calciferol vitamin D3.  Vitamin D3 can be 
synthesized in human from 7 dehydrocholesterol , which occurs naturally in the skin via 
solar radiation.  That is why for this is a very important vitamin and then exposure to 
solar radiation is very important , that is the what is that is the ergosterol , which is pro 
vitamin D2 and then when you with th e help of solar radiation UV radiation it is 
converted into ergocalciferol , that is vitamin D3 or 7  dehydrocholesterol , which is pro 
vitamin D3 is with the help of solar radiation , UV radiation , it is converted into 
cholecalciferol , vitamin D3 in our body.   
               
Then vitamin E, these are the compounds which include mainly the tocopherols and 
tocotrienols.  Tocotrienols have a conjugated structure you can see here that is in the 
structure  is the tocopherols and tocotrienols.  Only difference in th eir structure is that is 
the tocotrienols , they have the conjugated , that is the triene double bond system in their 
phytol side chain and where it is the single bond saturated phytoside.  Even methyl 
substitution like here you see in the both the cases thi s affects the bioactivity of vitamin E 
as well as its in vitro antioxidant activities and both tocopherols and tocotrienols , you can 
see the structure this R1.  So, depending upon whether R1 is a methyl group that is an R2 
is a methyl group that is there a re R1 and R2 in both.  So, if R1 and R2 both are methyl 
group it becomes alpha tocopherol.  If R1 is methyl and R2 is a hydrogen it becomes beta 
tocopherol.  If R1 is H, R2 is CH3 it becomes gamma tocopherol and if both R1 and R2 
these are H it becomes delt a tocopherol.  Then accordingly that four forms of tocotrienol 
also alpha, beta, gamma, delta are available.  
                    
Vitamin K in fact, there are two forms of vitamin K that is vitamin K1 phylloquinone , 
which is found in green leaves and vitamin K2 menaquinone , which is synthesized in the 
inside organs by the intestinal microflora.  Vitamin K is involved in the blood clotting as 
an essential cofactor in the synthesis of gamma carboxyglutamate, which is necessary for 
active prothrombin.  Vitamin K deficiency is rare because of the synthesis involved in the 
intestine and in our body,  it is synthesized significant amount and this is here the 
structure of vitamin K1, K2 and K3 that is phylloquinone, menaquinone and menadione.  
              
Then another derived fatty acid. Fatty acids are carboxylic acids with an aliphatic or a 
straight carbon atom , you can see here , that is it has one carboxylic end and other is the 
methyl end.  Fatty acids differ from one another in two major ways , that is the  length of 
the carbon chain and degree of saturation also.  So, number of carbon atoms determine 
the length of the chain and naturally occurring fatty acids . It is always an even number 
especially between 4 and 22 carbon containing.  The one end of the str ucture is a 
hydrophilic that is methyl end whereas, the other hydrocarbon chain is the hydrophobic 
that is this hydrocarbon chain.  You can see it is a hydrophobic whereas, the carbonyl 
group is the hydrophilic.  The counting of the carbon atoms starts  from  the carbon atom 
of the carbonyl group that is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and so on and accordingly where this 
unsaturated linkage that is the numbering is done.   
The degree of saturation is determined by the number of double bonds between the 
carbon atoms in th e absence of a carbon -carbon double bond the fatty acid is called 
saturated fatty acid.  Fatty acid with one carbon -carbon double bond is called 
monounsaturated and the fatty acid with two or more double bonds are called 
polyunsaturated fatty acid.  Satura ted fatty acids are primarily found in animal sources 
such as meat, poultry, butter, egg, lard.  Plant sources contain more polyunsaturated fatty 
acids.  However, coconut and palm oil , they contain saturated fatty acids.  Major sources 
of monounsaturated fa tty acids are olive and avocado oil as well as peanut butter.  PUFA 
are predominantly found in plants like corn, canola or sunflower or flaxseeds.  
             
Then eicosanoids are other group , that is they are the prostagladins, thromboxanes, 
leukotrienes and lipoxins.  Eicosanoids are biologically active lipids, derivatives of 
unsaturated fatty acids containing 20 carbons.  Eicosanoids are derived from arachidonic 
acid and related polyunsaturat ed fatty acids such as EPA , that is Eicosapentaenoic acid.  
Main functions of this include role in inflammation, reproduction, gastric secretion,  and 
regulation of blood pressure.  Other homeostatic functions include regulation of vascular 
leakage, product ion of mucosal integrity of stomach and regulation of aggregation of 
platelets.   
Finally, we will summarize this lecture that lipids are the important constituents of human 
diet.  There are different types of lipids like simple lipid, compound lipid and d erived 
lipid.  Triacylglycerols or triglycerides are the major components in the vegetable oil as 
well as the other fats.  The different classes of lipids have different structures and perform 
different biological functions.  These are the references which are used in this lecture and 
finally, thank you all for your patience hearing.  Thank you.  