 
Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week 3:  Edible Oils - Chemistry & Properties  
Lecture 11: Engineering Properties of Edible Oils  
 
 
 
 
Hello everybody. Namaskar. Now, we are in the module 3 of the course and in this module 
in the next 5 lectures,  we will discuss about chemistry and properties of edible oil.  So, in 
today's lecture that is the lecture 11, let us talk about engineering pro perties of edible oil.  
Here we will discuss physical properties, thermal properties, optical properties, rheological  
properties, plasticity and even crystallization and polymer version of edible oils and fats  
because these properties are very very impor tant in using the fats and oils in food 
processing,  deciding their usefulness even in deciding as well as in designing the 
equipment for  handling for processing of these fruits and vegetables for these fats and oils 
in various  food products.   
 
So, we have earlier also discussed and you know by now that oil constitute one of the  
essential component of balanced diet as good source of energy.  The chemical and physical 
properties of oil are among the most important properties that  determine the quality and 
help to describe the present condition of oils.  Physical, chemical and nutritional properties 
of vegetable oils vary significantly dependin g  upon the type of fatty acid present in the oil.  
Vegetable oils also contain other compounds in minor am ount as we have discussed already  
earlier and these minor components of the vegetable oil affect their quality and nutritional 
value. The physical characteristics of an oil or fat are dependent on the such factors   or 
plant sources, degree of unsaturatio n, length of carbon chains, isomeric forms of  fatty acid 
present in the triglyceride, molecular structure of the glyceride and the processing 
parameters.  So, all these factors influence the physical characteristics of the oils and fats.   
 
During extraction, purification and usage, oils undergo a variety of processing operations  
including frying, distillation and chemical modifications which may also significantly  
influence their properties depending upon the process parameters are used li ke cooking  
temperature, frying temperature and so on.  The physical properties of edible oils depend 
primarily on composition and on the biological origin as well as the temperature to which 
it is exposed to.  Prediction of the behaviors of oil under real  processing conditions from 
molecular  properties is beyond current understanding.  Semi empirical equations are 
developed that relate the property of interest like for example, time for fat to drain from 
the fried potato chips or such products to independently measurable  bulk properties such 
as density, viscosity and surface tension.  With these equations, it is possible to predict how 
the changes in the properties of an oil  alter the efficiency of a process.  There are several 
such equations in the literatu re and we will cite a few whenever it is necessary  in this 
course we will take up.  
 
So, now let us have a look of some of the properties and the common physical properties  
of edible oil which everyone as a processor, as a manufacturer, as a exporter, as a producer  
of the oil should be concerned with are the density, specific gravity, vi scosity, optical  
property, thermal properties, rheological properties and finally, and most importantly  from 
processing and food formulation point of view crystallization and polymorphism.  The 
density of a material is a measure of the mass per unit volu me.  The density of most food 
oils is less than that of water.  In general, the density of an oil decreases with the molecular 
weight and increases with  the unsaturation of the fatty acids.  Several researchers have 
developed empirical functions to relate vegetable oils to fatty acid composition and 
temperature.  The density of oil decreases linearly with the temperature.   
 
Other property important property is specific gravity which is commonly used in 
conjunction  with other figures in assessing the purity of the oil.  This is a dimensionless 
unit defined as the ratio of the density of the substance to the  density of water at a specified 
temperature.  The specific gravity of vegetable oil is usually about 0.910 to 0.920 at 25 °C. 
And in this figure , the specific gravity of some common vegetable  oil like groundnut oil, 
mustard oil, soy oil, coconut oil, palm kernel oil, olive oil, sesame  oil, palm oil and in the 
y axis is the specific gravity  are shown . So, you can in this bar diagram, you can see 
groundnut oil has little more specific gravity  or it is 0.92 and that next in the soybean oil  
it again about 0.925, same is about sesame  oil and palm oil. The olive oil is less dense  
among all these oils as you can see in this bar diagram . 
 
 
Then the next property becomes viscosity.  It is a measure of the intermolecular friction in 
a fluid and hence of its resistance to flow . Viscosity is the property that which indicates a 
resistance to flow.  Food oils we have as a ideal Newtonian liquids over a wide range of 
shear rate and therefore,  may be characterized as by a single viscosity.  Viscosity of oils 
decreases exponentially with increase that increasing the temperature.  The viscosity of 
water is much less that is the 2 % approximately than th at of the  most of the oils .  
 
 
 
A comparison of the physical properties of edible oil with  that of the water is given in the 
table and you can see the molecular weight is of the oil is much higher than that  of the 
water, ok.  And melting point density, compressibility, viscosity, and other parameters are 
also provided  here in the data . In this table you can see that thermal expansion coefficient  
of the oil is around 7.1  × 10-4, whereas for water, it is 2.1  × 10-4.  Dielectric constant of oil 
is 3, whereas for the same per water is 80.2.  Similarly surface tension, refractive index,  
etc is also provided there.   
 
Then the other important property is the optical properties.  These optical properties of 
lipids influence the overall appearance of many food material  in which they are used.  
Certain optical properties of lipids can be used to provide valuable informati on about  their 
composition or quality.  The most important optical properties of lipids are their refractive 
index and their  absorption spectra.   
 
The refractive index is based on the ratio of the speed of a light wave in air as compared  
to its speed in the fat substance.  The refractive index of a particular oil is mainly determined 
by the molecular structure  of the fatty acid that it contains.  The refractive index tends to 
increase with increasing chain length, increasing number  of double bonds and increasing 
conjugatio n of double bonds.  Empirical equations have been developed to relate the 
molecular structure of lipids to  their refractive inde xes.  Measurements of refractive index 
of liquid oil can be used to provide some information  about the average molecular weight 
or degree of unsaturation of the fatty acids that they contain.   
 
 
The absorption spectra that is  normally measurements of UV absorption spectra of oils can 
also  provide a valuable information about their composition, quality or molecular 
properties.  For example, conjugated dienes absorb UV light at around 232 nm whereas the 
conjugated trienes absorb UV light at around 270 nm.  The absorption spectra of crude as 
well as refined oil can be seen in the figure here.  X -axis is wavelength and nanometer and  
in the Y -axis it is shown the absorbance.  The absorption spectra of an oil can also have a 
pronounc ed influence on the final appearance of a crude product.  Pure dry glycerols have 
little inherent color because they do not contain groups that absorb  light in the visible 
region of the electromagnetic spectrum.  
 
The thermal properties, the most important thermal properties of lipids from a practical  
stand point of view in the food processing are specific heat capacity that is commonly  
known as C P, thermal conductivity K, melting point T MP and enthalpy of fusion that Δ HF.   
 
 
The specific heat capacity and thermal conductivity of some of the liquid oils, their physical  
properties at 20 °C are given in this table that is the water, sunflower,  corn, olive and their 
value C, alpha, C P, ρ, specific gravity, β, τ, etc  all these things are like ultrasonic velocity, 
attenuation, specific heat at constant temperature, C P that is the density is ρ, absorption, 
adiabatic expansion coefficient B, viscosity  η and thermal conductivity τ that is these 
values are given in the table.  And you can see from this here that a specific heat capacity 
of the most liquid oils and  solid fats are at around 2 joules per kg per Kelvin and it increases 
with increasing temperature.  Lipids are relativel y poor conductors of heat and tend to have 
appreciably lower thermal  conductivity that is at around 0.170 watt per meter per degree 
Kelvin and the water that is the which has thermal conductivity of around 0.598 watt per 
meter per kg.  So, these oil they h ave considerably lower thermal conductivity than the oil 
than the  water.   
 
 
Melting point and heat of fusion of a lipid depend upon the packing of the triacylglycerol  
molecules within the crystals formed that is the more effective the packing, the higher  the 
melting point of the and the enthalpy of fusion.  Melting points and he at of fusions of pure 
triacylglycerols tend to increase with the  increasing chain length and they are higher for 
saturated fatty acids than for unsaturated  fatty acids.  Triacylglycerol which have more 
straight chain fatty acids their melting point and h eat of  fusion will be more in comparison 
to those which have symmetrical distribution of fatty  acids.  That is the triacylglycerols 
which has more trans fat they will have more melting point  than those which have cis fats 
ok.  These melting points are higher for more stable polymorphic form in comparison to 
those for  the less stable polymorphic forms .  
 
So, factor that determine the melting behaviour of a food oil or fat depends upon the 
average  chain length of the fatty acids.  In general the longer the average chain length as I 
told you earlier also higher will be  the melting point.  Then other factor  is the positioning 
of the fatty acid on the glycerol molecule it also  affects the melting point.  As an example,  
safe flour oil which has a long average chain length will melt like a medium  chain length 
triacylglycerol. Relative proportion of saturated t o unsaturated fatty acids is another factor.  
The higher the proportion of unsaturated fatty acids the lower will be the melting point.  
Processing techniques such as the degree and selectivity of hydrogenation and 
winterization  are also important factors  that influence the melting behaviour of fats and 
oil. 
 
 
Then thermal stability of lipids it is another important parameter and which is very helpful  
in deciding the usefulness as well as stability of the food oils and fat in the processing 
operations.  Its usefulness in the food processing and for selecting the oils and fat for a 
specific operation.  So, the important properties which determine the thermal stability 
include smoke point  which is the temperature at which the sample begins to smoke when 
tested under specified conditions.  Flash and fire point are other properties the flash point 
is the temperature at which  the volatile products generated by the lipid are being produced 
at a rate where they can  be temporarily ignited by application of a flame, but they cannot 
sustain combustion.  The fire point is  the temperature at which the evolution of volatiles 
because of the  thermal decomposition occurs so quickly that continuous combustion can 
be sustained after application on a flame.   
 
 
 
Smoke point of certain some of the common oils is given in this diagram . There is a like 
avocado it is smoke point is 550 ° whereas, rice bran oil has 470 °, palm oil 466, even corn 
oil 450 °, canola 400, virgin and extra virgin olive  oil 380 °, etc.  So, common that is a 
vegetable oils they are this smoke point and all these points  are given in the degree 
Fahrenheit . So, measurements of these temperatures obviously, are particularly important 
ok.  When the selecting lipids that are going to be used at high temperature during baking,  
during frying etc.  For example, if you want to  fry a food at 300 degree Celsius let us say 
potato chips  or any other product ok and you want to select the which will be the useful 
oil for this  then obviously, you there is no point of taking a oil which has a smoke point 
less than 300  degree Celsius . 
So, you have otherwise you have to have the oil which has smoke point at least somewhat  
greater than the 300 degree Celsius.  So, that you can heat that oil that is here smoke point 
is the one which is a maximum  temperature up to which the oil can be hea ted above that 
point it will just catch fire.  The thermal stability of triacylglycerol is much better than that 
of the free fatty acids.  Thus the property of lipids to break down during heating is largely 
determined by the  amount of volatile organic mate rial that they contain such as free fatty 
acids etc . 
 
The other important physical properties of the oil include  rheological properties.  Most 
liquid oils are Newtonian liquids with intermediate viscosity typically between 30  and 60 
milli Pascal second at room temperature.  Most solid fats actually consist of a mixture of 
fat crystals dispersed in a liquid of matrix . The rheological properties of these solid fats are 
highly dependent on the concentration,  morphology, interaction and organization of the fat 
crystals that are present in the system.   
 
 
 
 
Plasticity is another important characteristics it is a important rheological characteristic  
like solid fats exhibit a type of rheological behavior and it is known as plasticity.  And a 
plastic material behaves like a solid below a critical applied stress known as yield  stress, 
but it behaves a liquid above this stress and you can see here that is the relationship  that is 
for Bingham plastic fluid that is relationship between shear stress and shear  rate that is 
given. So, it will indicate that at which stress it will behave like a solid and  where it will 
behave like a liquid.  The rheological behavior of an ideal plastic material known as 
Bingham plastic is shown in this figure.  For an applied shear stress the rheolog ical 
characterization of this type of material  can be described by the equation  
𝜏=𝐺𝛾 (𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝜏<𝜏0)  
𝜏−𝜏0=𝜂𝛾̇ (𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝜏≥𝜏0)  
where τ is the applied shear stress, y is the resultant shear strain, γ. is  the rate of shear 
strain, G is the shear modulus, η is the shear viscosity and  τ0 is the  yield stress that is the 
point where the material starts to flow.  So, this  property here using this you can calculate 
the rheological the rheological characteristics of the Bingham plastic foods.   
 
At 70 degree Fahrenheit or 21 degree Celsius a typical shortening that appears solid contain  
around 50 to 20 percent solid and hence 80 to 85 percent liquid oil you see, but it looks like 
solid. Through proper selection of oil or oils processing techniques and control this amount 
of small  amount of solids can be made to hold all of the liquids in a matrix of a very small 
stable  needle like crystal which is generally known as beta prime crystals you can see here.  
Below a certain applied stress there is a small  deformation of the sample, but there  is weak 
bonds between the fat crystals are not disrupted ok.  When the critical yield stress is 
exceeded the weak bonds are broken and the fat crystals  slide past one another leading to 
the flow of the sample and onc e the force is removed  the flow stops and the fat crystals 
begin to form bonds with their neighbors again.  So, here you see that is the three types of 
crystals which can form the fats depending  upon the different triglycerides and other 
conditions prese nt at the end.  That is the alpha crystals which are random, beta crystals 
which are like parallel rows  and beta prime crystals where you can see here alternating 
rows of right angles.  That is the beta crystals are most stable whereas, the alpha crystals 
are least stable  beta prime in this middle in between they have the stability that is average 
of alpha  and beta.  Similarly that the beta crystals have highest melting point and alpha 
crystals have lowest  melting point and this beta prime crystals obvio usly, they have the 
intermediate melting  point.  
 
 The solubility of vegetable oils in aqueous ethanol depends upon the concentration of  
alcohol and temperature of the system.  Solubility i s very important properties of the 
triglycerides.  At ordinary temperature even absolute alcohol is not a good solvent for 
vegetable oil since  the solubility is less than 10 gram of oil per 100 gram of alcohol.  With 
increase in temperature the rapidity and completeness of the solubility increases.  Mowrah , 
safflower, peanut and cottonseed oils are soluble in absolute a lcohol at 70 degree  Celsius.  
As the oils investigated are found to be miscible above the boiling point of the alcohol even  
if the concentration is 98 percent all the oils are found to be miscible.  In 95 percent ethanol 
they are miscible between 90 degr ee and 100 degree Celsius.  Addition of a good solvent 
like n -hexane increases the solubility of oil and the solubility temperatures  are lowered.  
 
 
 
 
The other important property is the crystallization and polymerization.  The physical state 
that the solid or liquid of the lipids in many food products plays  an important role in their 
production and in determining their final quality attributes.  The creation of food products 
with desirable properties therefore, depends upon  an understanding  of the major factors 
that influence the crystallization and melting of lipids in foods .  
 
 
 
And one is the important contribution is the contribution is of the solid fat content that is 
important parameter.  The physical state of the lipid in a food is usually characterized in 
the form of the  solid fat content which is the presence percentage may be 0 to 100 percent 
of the lipid that is solid at a particular temperature.  The solid fat content falls from 100 to 
0 percent when the temperature is increased from below to above the melting point.  As 
mentioned earlier the desirable plastic rheological properties of edible fats usually  occur 
over the range of temperatures where  the lipids are partially crystalline.  A bulk fat consists 
micro structurally of spherulites as you can see here in the figure, which in turn composed 
of crystalline nanoplatelets assembled from crystalline lamellae of the triglycerides that is 
a nano lamell ae finally, give that the crystalline extra bulk fat spherulite ok.  It is spherulites 
you can see here in the figure and how these are formed that is the  from the triacylglycerol 
molecule, then lamellae, then nano platelets and finally, the spherulites  st ructure . 
 
A liquid to solid transition that is the crystalline is exothermic because  energy is released 
as the molecule come closer to each other.  And there are three stages that is the one is the 
super cooling the degree of super cooling  of a liquid can be defined as  
𝛥𝑇=𝑇−𝑇𝑚𝑝  
where T is the temperature and T mp is the melting point . And the value of   ΔT at which 
crystallization is first observed depends upon the chemical   structure of the lipid, the 
presence of any contaminating material, the cooling rate,  the microstructure of the lipid 
phase like bulk versus emulsified oil and the application of external forces etc.  So, there 
is the for crystallization first the cooli ng occurs and then comes the  nucleation  
 
 
 
When the materials is  cooled down, then the nucleus starts first nucleus  is small nucleus 
is formed and which enlarges into the form of crystal.  So, crystal growth can only occur 
after the stable nuclei have been formed in a lipid.  These nuclei are believed to be cluster 
of oil molecules that form small ordered crystallites  that are created when a number of 
lipid molecules collide and become associated with each other.  There is a free energy 
change associated with the formation of one of these nuclei.  The total free energy  change 
associated with the formation of a nuclei is therefore, a  combination of a volume and a 
surface term and that can be found out using these equations  that  
𝛥𝐺= 𝛥𝐺𝑉+𝛥𝐺𝑆  
𝛥𝐺= 4
3𝜋𝑟3𝛥𝐻𝑓𝑢𝑠𝛥𝑇
𝑇𝑚𝑝+4𝜋𝑟2𝛾𝑖  
r is the radius of the nuclei delta H fus is the enthalpy change per unit volume associated  
with the liquid solid transition which is negative  normally and γi is the solid liquid  
interfacial tension.  So, using this equation one can find out.   
 
 
Then the rate at which nucleation occurs can be mathematically related to the activation  
energy that is delta G that must be overcome before stable nuclei are formed that is  
𝐽=𝐴𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝛥𝐺∗
𝑘𝑇) 
where J is the nucleation rate which is  equal to the number of stable nuclei per second per 
unit volume of material.  A is the pre exponential factor, k is Boltzmann constant and T is 
the absolute temperature.  
 
 
Then there might be two types of nucleation one is the homogeneous nucleation other may  
be heterogeneous nucleation that is homogeneous nucleation occurs when no impurities 
are present  in the oil.  The formation of stable nuclei negligibly slow at slow a t temperature 
just below the  melting point, but increases dramatically when the liquid is cooled below a 
certain temperature like that ok.  Heterogeneous nucleation occurs when liquid oil is in 
contact with foreign substances  such as surfaces of dust par ticles, fat crystals, oil droplets 
or air bubbles, reverse micelles or vessel containing the oils.  Then nucleation can be 
induced at higher temperature that expected from a pure system.  Then once nucleation is 
then these nuclei once nuclei are formed the y try to enlarge that is called crystal growth . 
They grow into crystals by incorporating molecules from the liquid oil at the solid liquid 
interfac e.   
 
 
And here in this figure you can see the stage of crystallization that nucleation and crystal  
growth rates have different temperature dependencies which account for differences in the 
number  and size of the fat crystals produced under different cooling co ndition.  And you 
can see here that the this figure that is the super cooling that the rate in  the nucleation of 
growth nucleation of the growth rate how it is influenced by this rate  of the nucleation and 
this is the rest of the crystal growth.  And I t old you that it depends upon the temperature 
have different temperature dependency.  And accordingly different types of crystals are 
formed that is nucleation, then early  crystal growth, then main crystal growth and finally, 
you get recrystallization and polymer polymorphic transition.  That is in the nucleation  there 
is the it coat heterogeneous nuclei preventing  their use such as from the nuclei variety 
crystallizing fat ok.  And the crystal growth will be slow crystal growth in the earlier stages 
and th ere will be by blocking the growth side, it may also alter crystal morphology by 
blocking the specific fat etc.  And once that is in the final stage during processing that is 
unstable polymorphs are  there they destabilize stable polymer or increase the energy barrier 
for the transition etc ok.  
 
 
So, you can see here that is the post crystallization what happens that is the structure during  
processing how they are formed and then finally, in the storage what happens that is the 
post  crystallization involves a change from a less stable to a more s table polymorphic form 
because  of the rearrangement of the triacylglycerol molecules the post crystallization 
process.  If a lipid forms mixed crystals, then there may be a change in the composition of 
the  crystals during storage because of the diffusion  of triacylglycerol molecules between 
the crystals.  There may also be net growth in the average size of the crystals within a lipid 
with the time to Oswald ripening.  Finally the bonds between fat crystals may straighten 
over the time during storage owing  to a there is sintering mechanism that is fusion of  the 
crystal growth together and that is called recrystallization.  So, that crystallization crystal 
growth 0 to 10 minutes, then aggregation  gel formation network compaction and then 
finally, recrystalli zation during storage.  So, these are the stages and that finally, what the 
gives that polymorph that is the  accordingly the conditions should be formed that is heat 
of fusion or even heat of crystallization  removal etc.  This should be it also be temper ed 
properly to have a proper molecular surface and beta  prime crystals are better considered 
for various purposes.  
 
 
So, the polymorphism that is here is triacylglycerols exhibit a phenomenon known as 
monotrophic  polymorphism which is the ability of a material to exist in a number of 
crystalline structures  with different molecular packing.  You can see that alpha, beta , beta 
prime L2 and beta L3.  The three most commonly occurring types of packing in 
triacylglycerol are hexagonal,  orthorhombic and triclinic that is the usually that is 
hexagonal is alpha is alpha gonal  and this alpha, beta prime and beta polymer.  So, alpha 
is hexagonal, beta prime is the orthorhombic and beta is the triclinic.  The thermodynamic 
stability and thus the melting point of these forms decrease in the order  that is the beta, 
beta' and that is the beta is more had more melting point more stable  than the beta ' than 
the alpha.   
Triacylglycerols often crystallize in the alpha form initially because it has the lowest  
activation energy for nuclei formation with time crystal transformation to most stable  
polymorphic form that is beta depending upon the temperature, pressure,  and the presence  
of impurities.  
 
So, the knowledge of polymorphic form from the crystals in the lipid is often important  
because it can have a large impact on the thermal behaviour and morphology of the ice  
crystal form and therefore, on the physicochemical and sensory properties of the  foods.  
Finer beta crystals are preferred in the margarine and spreads where smoothness, gloss and 
a  high degree of surface coverage of disperse water is required.  Larger beta mono 
polymorphic forms are often preferred in a bakery shortening for example ,  lard to create 
flakiness and cocoa butter stability in chocolate.  So, blending of the lipids may also be 
used to control whether the beta or beta prime  polymorphs are the predominate crystal 
habits which are formed.   
 
So, here the various polymeric form finally, is shown here that is a transition pathways  
showing that these are the dotted arrow thin arrows are exothermic reactions and thick 
arrows are endothermic reactions.  You can see that how this liquid oil it tran sform into the 
various form alpha form, beta ' form and beta form that what we discussed earlier.  The 
same is a in pictorially presented in this case.   
 
 
 
 
So, finally, I would like to summarize this lecture that here the physical, chemical and  
nutritional properties of the oils play a very important role and they vary depending upon 
the type of fatty acid present in the oil.  Physical and chemical propertie s of the oil depends 
upon the fatty acid composition, the  bulk properties of the oils are density, viscosity, 
melting point, specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity etc.  Fat undergoes 
crystallization process through super cooling, nucleation and crys tal growth  and 
triacylglycerol exhibit polymorphism which is the ability of a material to exist in number  
of crystalline structure with different molecular packing and this polymorphs that is they 
decide  they are helpful in using these fats in the vario us bakery operation, various other 
product manufacturing etc.  So, this is the references which has been used in this lecture . 
 
These are the references ok.   
 
With this, thank you very much for your patience here. Thank you.  
