Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 03 : Edible Oils - Chemistry & Properties  
Lecture 14 : Oxidative Rancidity  
 
 
Hello everybody, Na maskar.  Now, we are in the 14th lecture.  In this lecture during the 
next half an hour or so, we will discuss Oxidative Rancidity.  
 
In the earlier class, we discussed rancidity and reversion a nd where oxidation of the oils 
and fats was seen as a major c ause for the rancidity. So, let us see in detail the mechanism  
of oxidative rancidity and how  it can be prevented because , in most oils, this is the major 
problem that is oxidation and  auto-oxidation.  So, we will discuss in this class what is 
lipid-induce d oxidation, then finally,  the mechanism of auto-oxidation  is initiation, 
propagation , and termination, what the various decomposition products of oil that is auto 
oxidized oils decomposition products , and how auto-oxidation  can be stopped, what the 
variou s preventive  measures.  
  
Let us see what is light-induced  lipid oxidation.  In the earlier class, there was something 
about oxidation and reduction, what is the  oxidation reaction I told you .  So, light-
induced  oxidation causes the quality loss of foods a nd beverages and makes the  product 
less acceptable or unacceptable to the consumer.  The mechanism of light-induced  lipid 
oxidation can be photosynthesized or photosensitized  oxidation and photo -oxidation . It 
may be either photosensitized oxidation or it m ay be photo -oxidation  depending on  the 
presence or absence of photosensitizers , respectively.  So, photo -oxidation  is the 
oxidation under light in the absence of photosensitizers  such as chloro phyll and riboflavin 
etcetera. Whereas, photosensitized oxidati on is the oxidation under the light in the 
presence  of photosensitizers.   
 
Photosensitizers in foods stored under light can accelerate lipid oxidation either by Type I 
or Type II mechanisms. Singlet state of photosensitizer can absorb light energy and 
become excited singlet state photosensitizer. The excited singlet state photosensitizer 
becomes to the excited triplet state photosensitizer by intersystem crossing mechanisms. 
The excited triplet state photosensitizer reacts with triplet oxygen to form sing let oxygen 
(Type II mechanism) or abstracts electron or hydrogen atom from a substrate to generate 
radicals (Type I mechanism).  Chlorophyll in plant materials, riboflavin in dairy foods, 
and myoglobin derivatives in meat products are well -known photosensit izers that can 
accelerate oxidation reactions.  
 
 
 
 
The photosensitized oxidation or photo -oxidation is shown pictorially for better 
understanding.   The sunlight consists of  UV and all the radiations shown here and when 
these l ights they falls on the food that has natural pigments or photosensitizer like 
chlorop hyll, pheophytine, flavin, porphyrin  or dye stuff l ike erythrosine, methylene, blue, 
then these photosensitizer convert into that is the singlet oxygen and triplet oxygen 
through spin inversion.  Singlet oxygen acts on the free fatty acid s, particularly in the 
saturated linkage and th e oxidation products are formed .   
 
 
Hydroperoxides are formed in the presence of light  and these are the result of photo 
oxidation.  Photo -oxidation produces  aliphatic and aromatic oxidized compounds, such as 
ketones, aldehydes, carboxylic acids, fatty acids, esters, epoxies, sulfoxides, sulfones, 
phenols, anhydrides, quinones , and alcohols . When oils are exposed to solar radiation 
photo -oxidation  will occur in crude and  refined  oil.  And it is in crude oil there may be 
photosensitizers like chlorophyll etcetera  they may get extracted from oil.  So, obviously, 
that is it will be photosensitized which  is other mediated photo -oxidation .  
Photosensitized oxidation and the re fined oils where these coloring compounds are  
removed may be  another mechanism.   Activated  species act as a singlet single free 
radical initiator by transforming electrons  to lipids  to form radicals that react with oxygen 
in the same way as in the auto-oxidation process and the hydroperoxides are formed.  
 
If you see the mechanism of light-induced  oxidation little like the type 1 mechanism  or 
type 2 mechanism that is these photosensitizers absorb energy from light as you have 
seen in the earlier figure.  Th ey absorb energy from light that may be visible light or 
ultraviolet light and  they are activated to an excited singlet state one SN , which  is 
activated singlet state , which  you can see this synthesizer  absorb the light and get into 
excited states.  So, these excited singlet photosensitizers are very unstable and tend to 
return to the ground  state by either reacting directly to the lipid substrate you can see here 
directly to the  lipid substrate like type 1 mechanism in the photosensitizer alright or that 
is they activate  triplet oxygen to singlet oxygen.  You can see here in the second type 2 
mechanism which readily initiates the oxidation  process and both ways  either they 
directly interact with the lipid substrate or they  interact via activating triplet ox ygen to 
singlet oxygen parallel .  So, this is both type 1 and type 2 mechanisms . 
 
  
Let us take one example of light-induced  oxidation , type 1 photo -oxidation  proceeds via a 
free radical or free radical iron route free radical chain mechanism leading to t he 
formation of  hydroperoxide ; whereas, type 2 photo -oxidation,  the highly electrophilic 
singlet  oxygen reacts directly with the double bonds of unsaturated fatty acids by the 
addition  rather than through free radical intermediates.  That is here oxygen di rectly adds 
to the saturation position  in the bond .  Hydroperoxide is generated during a singlet 
oxygen attack which is accompanied by  a shift of the double bond in the molecule s as 
shown below for photo oxidation of methyl linoleate.  You can see here meth yl enolate 
that O2 9 and 12 here the unsaturated linkages that  here at such point s oxygen adds here 
and it becomes that hydroperoxides . 
  
Then the photosynthesized oxidation in milk let us see a case study , where riboflavin in 
the milk is shown in this ba r diagram . The  peak area in the electronic  columns and the 
columns show the  products  like pentanols, dimethyl disulfide, hexanols , and heptanols  
that are in  this product formation.  It can be seen here that the figure shows the effect of  
riboflavin on the formation of oxidation product in milk under light at 2 4 degrees  Celsius 
for 2 hours.  So, it can be seen that as the fat content in the milk increases pentanol, 
hexanol , and heptanol  increase  significantly while the dimethyl disulfide concentration 
does not change , it remains almost the same.  BHA that is butylated hydroxy anisole and 
ascorbic acid hydrogen donating free radical  scavengers reduce the hexanol and heptanol 
formation . Sodium azide , a singlet oxygen  quencher  prevented dimethyl disulfide 
format ion in milk.   
 
Then photo -oxidation  of lard you can see here in the table  that there are various volatile 
compounds from  lard with 0 and 5 ppm chlorophyll under visible light at 55 degrees  
Celsius for 0 an d 48 hours in the GC peak area.   These  are the va rious compounds 
etcetera which are detected . ND means not  detected . Pentane, pentanal, hexanal, 
heptanal, and nonanal were identified in lard both with 0 and 5 ppm chlorophyll stored 
under light, which indicates that these volatile compounds can be formed in lard in the 
absence of photosensitizers. Pentane, pentanal, and hexanal can be formed  from methyl 
linoleate and heptanal and nonanal from methyl oleate by autoxidation.  These volatile 
compounds identified in photo oxidized  lard were also found in  lard s tored at 55 ᵒC in the 
dark, which  underwent autoxidation.  Lipid oxidation mechanism of  photooxidation under 
visible  light seems to be a free radical  chain reaction like  autoxidation.  
  
Then let us see the study of lipid peroxidation which is more commonly known as auto-
oxidation .  So, the auto -oxidation  reaction leads to lipid breakdown and the formation of 
a wide range of  oxidation products  and we discussed in the last class also briefly about 
this.  Autoxidation reaction leads to lipids breakdown and form ation of a wide range of 
oxidation products. When lipid substrate (LH) is exposed to heat, light , or metal ions the 
hydrogen atom of the double bond is extracted , and free or alkyl radical (L•) is formed.  
These free radicals react  with oxygen and peroxy radicals  (LOO•) are formed by 
subtracting a hydrogen atom from another unsaturated fatty acid . It leads to the formation 
of primary oxidation products called hydroperoxides (LOOH)  by the mechanisms of 
initiation, propagation , and termination.  The length of the propagation cycle is directly 
proportional to the degree of lipid  unsaturation.  These primary oxidation products are not 
stable and further break down into  carbonyl compounds such as aldehydes , ketones 
alcohols, etc.  
 
So, I told you that the oxidation of lipids  takes place through a chain reaction mechanism  
which is called the free radical chain reaction mechanism.  Lipid auto-oxidation  occurs 
via a free radical chain mechanism that proceeds through three distinct  stages , these are 
called initiation, pr opagation , and termination , and which ultimately leads  to a series of 
chemical changes  in the oil.  So, the initiation as I told you is an alkyl radical formed by 
abstraction of  a hydrogen radical from an allylic position. Then  alkyl radical reacts with 
oxygen at rates controlled by diffusion to form peroxy  radicals which in turn react with 
new lipid molecules  giving  rise to the hydroperoxide as  the primary oxidation product  
and new alkyl radicals that propagate the reaction chain.  And then finally, in the  
termination stage radicals interact or react with each other  to yield relatively stable non-
radical  products.   
 
Let us see a little more detail about these processes  in the initiation as you can see 
molecular oxygen combines with unsaturated fatty acid -producing  hydroperoxide s and 
peroxyl free radical s, both of which are highly reactive and unstable molecule s. The 
hydrogen atom at the methyl ene group in double bond s is removed to form an alkyl free 
radical or free radical that is here in this is the fatty acids  C-OH is single bond C -H and 
this C -H and C -H this is here these are the link with  the double bond.  The single bond C -
H2 then methyl group is called alpha group here and then the C-H double bond here.  So, 
these two double bonds are here .  So, the 7, 8, 9, position  has a double bond  here, then 11 
and 12. So, in the unsaturated position at the alpha -methyl  group that is the hydrogen 
atom , double  bonds are removed and you get this alkyl free rad ical. 
 
Then propagation this is when these unstable bypr oducts of first stage react with other  
lipids continuing the free radical lipid peroxidation chain reaction and it results in the 
continuing the oxidative degradation process breaking down the lipid molecules like you 
can see in alkyl free radical which is  formed in the initiation step.  It may react with 
another oxygen molecule  may for m ROO free radicals  like peroxy free radicals  then RO 
plus R -H is called topoxides and R free radical R -OH may further break down  into RO 
and OH and RO plus R -OH is RO radica l here and R -H is a new lipid  molecule .  It gives  
R-OH and alkyl R free radical s.  So, this process continues  means there is more and more 
it is once it is initiated if  it is not controlled the process will go on.  
 
Then finally, it leads to the terminatio n it is marked by the slowing or stopping of the  
reaction radical compounds are formed by the combination of the radicals  and it is the 
completion  of making unreactive compounds or when an antioxidant is encountered . You 
can see here two alkyl free radical s R and R combined with another new alkyl R -R.  Two 
RO free radicals  may give R -OR, R -OO plus R may give R -OO-R. R is an alkyl group O 
is oxygen RO free radical and R radical may give non-radical products like RO -R.  Then 
RO-O, RO -O these two are the radic als combined giving  RO-OR plus O2 , and oxygen  is 
released.  So, this is the  termination reaction .
 
Then finally, comes the decomposition that is hydroperoxide which is formed by these  
above methods are readily decomposed by heat, metal catalyst , or enzyme activity. F or 
example, RO -OH which was formed in the termination reaction further decomposed to 
RO plus OH, 2RO -OH, and RO plus RO O plus H2O .  These  radicals formed from the 
hydroperoxide undergo a series of reactions  leading to several  product  formations  such as 
hydroxy acid, keto acids, aldehydes , and many other carbonyl  compounds.  The short -
chain  acids derived by oxidation are largely responsible for the undesirable  flavor and 
other characteristics of the rancid oil .   
 
So, this auto-oxidation  is enhanc ed by certain factors like metal ion.  So, this acts as a 
pro-oxidant that is the metal ions and trace heavy metals present as impurities in the 
lipids they act as initiators , like generation  of radicals.  Transition metals or transition 
metal ions like io ns of iron and copper are good promoters of  free radical reactions that 
decompose the hydroperoxide to form peroxy and alkoxy radicals  like RO OH and the 
metal ions produce RO plus  OH ions plus  Mn plus 1, RO OH and Mn plus 1 then produce 
ROO plus H plus ions and Mn.  So, this is metal -catalyzed  decomposition of 
hydroperoxides.  
 
 
Fish oil without having any antioxidants  undergoes rapid autoxidation.  Purified 
menhaden oil when exposed to air at ambient temperature deteriorates rapidly and 
peroxide value also increases  5 to 12-fold within two days. Oxidation in fish oil occurs 
because of high concentrations  of polyunsaturated fatty acid exposure to air.  volatile  
oxidation products formed in fish oil such as 1 -penten -3-one, hexanal, 4 -(Z)-heptenal, 
2,4-(E,E) -heptadienal, nonanal and 2,6 -(E,Z) -nonadienal are responsible for off -odors 
and are good indicators  for the oxidation status in fish oil.  EPA and DHA are the most 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in fish oil having 5 and 6 double bonds.  Free radicals 
and per oxides are produced during the initiation phase, and in the propagation phase , 
some  other reactive chemical products form from peroxides such as dihydroperoxides. In 
the termination phase , non-reactive secondary oxidation products such as hydrocarbon, 
aldehydes,  and ketones are formed and cause off-flavor.  
The oxidation of fish oil  is shown that is this that is the unsaturated fatty  acids when it 
comes in the light etcetera there is a hydrogen abstraction and then followed  by molecular 
rearrangement.  Then  it further takes oxygen uptake then peroxy radical is formed and  
these peroxy radicals  then take hydrogen that is hydroperoxides are formed and then 
hydroperoxide  further gets alkoxy radicals  like polymers or dimers keto hydroxy or 
epoxy compound and  it cleaves into aldehyde, alkyl radicals etcetera. This peroxy radical 
that dimers polycyclic peroxides, endoproteins, and radicals decomposes  into 
decomposition product s like aldehydes , ketones, and hydrocarbons  which gives off  
flavor . 
 
Another important oxi dation is the  oxidation reaction that is catalyzed by the enzyme , 
known as enzymatic oxidation. oxidation  reaction is catalyzed  by enzymes in 
unprocessed foods or elaborated under mild conditions.  So, the lipoxygenase and other 
enzymes catalyze  the oxidati on of free  polyunsaturated fatty acids released from the 
glycerides by the action of lipolytic  enzymes like lipases , etc., and then the lipolysis 
causes the removal or generation of free fatty acids , and then these lipoxygenases act on 
the unsaturated or p olyunsaturated fatty acids and auto -oxidation occurs .  So, the first 
step in enzymatic oxidation is the lipolytic degradation of triglycerides.  Oxidation 
products are the same hydroperoxides as produced in the autooxidation process . The 
reaction is stereo specific and regioselective . The fat and water in the presence of 
lipoxygenase  or cytochromes P450 , give free fatty acid s and glycerol and these free fatty 
acids  oxidize  into hydroperoxide and then finally, they degrade into aldehyde ketones , 
etc. 
 
The de velop ed rancidity in oi l could be measured by two methods direct measurement of 
free radicals or indirect approach.  So, in the direct measurement of free radicals,  one can 
use electron spin resonance or  spin trapping  methods , where the free radicals forme d can 
be measured  directly .  In the indirect approach , thiobarbital acid reacting substances 
etcetera can be used  and these  thiobarbital acids  are formed in the oil during  
autooxidation or during the oxidation process , and these compounds  are measured by 
either gas chromatography or by other methods .  Then free fatty acids peroxide value 
conjugated diene s, anisidine value , and lipid chromography  like fluorometric  compounds 
could be used to assess the development of  rancidity in the fats or oils. 
 
 
Rancidit y is most commonly detected by odo r or smell which  is another  common 
method.  So, odor or smell one can sense the rancidity in  oil and there is  an electronic 
nose etcetera one can sense or by other methods , one can use.  Also , the odor and smell 
are accompa nied by a marked increase in the acid value of the fat, like peroxide value, 
anisidine value , and thiobarbituric  acid test. T he peroxide value is used for the primary 
oxidation products and as discussed in earlier classes peroxide value is a measure of the  
peroxide s contained  in the oil.  The peroxide present is determined by titration against 
thiosulfate in the presence of potassium  iodide and starch is used as an indicator.  Then 
anisidine  value is used as an indicator of the secondary oxidation product  that accesses  
the secondary oxidation of oil or fat , which is mainly imputable to aldehydes  and ketones 
and is therefore, able to tell the oxidation history of an oil or a fat.  Furthermore, anisidine  
value analysis of oil is an indicator of excessive oil de terioration  in the deep  frying 
process.  Then the thiobarbituric  acid test is based on the reaction that  oxidation products 
of the unsaturated system produce  a color  reaction with TBA. M any alk anals and alkenals 
produce  yellow color compounds, and diena ls produce a red color pigmen t at 530 
nanometers  and these indicate the development of rancidity  in the oil.   
 
Ther e are different ways  for controlling this lipid oxidation  process and they can be 
controlled by the addition of an antioxidant . Then eliminate oxygen by nitrogen flushing 
or by vacuum  packaging that is we eliminate the c ontact of the oil with the oxygen and 
this can be especially  related to the nitrogen packaging. Elimination of the 
photosensitizer like coloring pigments etcetera can be reduced by the bleaching step of 
the refining process or by other methods.  Then denaturation of the lipoxygenase enzyme 
or lipase enzymes which might be  there in  an extraction process , thus  before extraction , 
some sort of treatments will be given to the  oil seeds . So, these enzymes which are 
respon sible for either hydrolytic rancidity or  oxidative rancidity can be eliminated.  
  
Low temperature and dark storage help the controlling lipid oxidation . For fat at low 
temperatures  in cool dark places  use airtight containers , use opaque containers  to cut off 
the exposure to light and air .  Do not keep strong -smelling  foods in the vicinity of the fat 
and oil absorb  foreign order  easily.   Copper containers  and rusted iron accelerate 
rancidity . Only steel or aluminum container s should be used. Natural antioxidants like 
vitamin  E can be used.  Artificial antioxidants  like BHA, BHT  etcetera are also used .  If 
fats and oils have to be stored for some time they should be better to be hydrogenated  and 
then stored because these  hydrogenated fats or solid fats are less prone to o xidative  
rancidity.  Hydrogenation increases the shelf life of fats and prevents oxidative rancidity.  
 
Here I have just tried to give you the effect of the processing step on the removal of  
minor c omponents fro m the oils.  Degumming  remove s phospholipids and in refining we 
remove free fatty acids phospholipids, metal  ions, and soaps . In the bleaching , it removes 
pigment, and primary oxidation products, and in fractionation waxes , solid 
triacylglycerols are removed in the deodorization  process that is free  fatty acid, secondary 
oxidation products, residual pigments, sterols , hydrocarbons, and other  compounds are 
removed and all these removals  of all these compounds helps in preventing the oil from 
oxidation or hydrolysis and therefore, it increases the shelf life  of the oil.   
 
Then there are other ways  to improve  the oxidative stability of the oil . Number  one is the 
encapsulation.  Nowadays either encapsulation or microencapsulation  techniques have 
been  employed for the stabilization of specialty lipids such as omega -3 oils for 
pharmaceutical applications , food, supplements , and ot her uses. Here a membrane is 
creat ed and the  active ingredient like oil  is encapsulated under a membrane . This 
membrane of the capsule protects the core  material from undesirable effects of light, 
moisture , and oxygen , and thus increases the  shelf life of the en capsulated product s.  
Enhanced oxidative stability of the encapsulated fat s and oil has been reported.  
Antioxidant  addition is one of  the main methods employed for controlling lipid oxidation . 
The use  of antioxidants  is more effective and it is more com monly used in fact, whatever 
edible  oil etcetera which we get in the market most of them antioxidants are added.  This 
antioxidant addition is reported to be a convenient and economical means  for preventing  
the oxidation of oil .  These ant ioxidants are substances that when present at low 
concentrations  compared to that  of an oxidizable  substrate markedly delay or prevent its 
oxidation.  It includes free radical scavengers, singlet oxygen quenchers, inactivators of 
peroxides  and other radical  oxygen scavengers, metal ion chelators, quenchers of 
secondary oxidation  products , and inhibitors of prooxidative enzymes among others.  The 
antioxidants commonly which are used are BHA,  BHT, and propyl gallate these ar e the 
tertiary with TBHQ these are the synthetic antioxidants  whereas, the vitamin E 
tocopherol et cetera are natural antioxidants.  
  
So, finally, I would like to summarize this lecture . The mechanisms of light -induced lipid 
oxidation can be photosensitized oxidation and photooxidation, where the difference is 
the presence and absence of photosensitizers like natural pigments.  When lipid substrate 
(LH) is exposed to heat, light, or metal ions the hydrogen atom of the double bond is 
extracted and free or alkyl radical (L•) is formed, which is known as autooxidation.  
Lipoxygenases and othe r enzymes catal yze the oxidation of free PUFA released from  
glycerides by the action of lipolytic enzymes, which is known as enzymatic oxidation.  
Storing lipids in dark places, at low temperatures, elimination of min or components,  
application of antioxidants, and encapsulation are some methods to avoid  oxidation of 
lipids.  
 
These are the references that are used in this lecture.  Thank you very much for your 
patience here.  Thank you.  
