Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 4 : Mechanical Expelling of Oils from Plant Sourc es 
Lecture 17: Physical Methods for Oil Extraction – Concept & Mechanism  
 
Hello everyone.  Namaskar. Now, today in the 17th lecture of this course, we will 
discuss about Physical Methods for Oil Extraction and basically we will talk its concept 
and mechanism.   
 
We will discuss about expression, then hot and cold press ing, mechanical models 
for oil expression and also we will talk about important parameters that affect the oil 
yield and quali ty.  And finally, before summarizing we will also talk little bit abo ut 
advantages and disadvantages  of pressing method of oil extraction.   
 
So, you know that the vegetable oil can be obtained from oil seeds using different 
systems  of  the press, solvent extraction or a combination of both methods. Seeds contain 
high amounts of oil and which are pre pressed by using appropriate method  and then 
they are solvent extracted or they are direct solvent extracted that is the particularly  the  
oil seeds which have lower oil content.  So, the extraction technology can be selected 
depending upo n the production cost, material  traits, availability, uses goal of the cake and 
environmental factors.  Based on the oil seed structure and composition, so me fracti ons 
of oil might remain in the meal or the cake and this should be considered when 
comparing the press and cold press for  the yield of the oil and the meal composition.   
 
Then what is mechanical extraction?  That is the mechanical extraction of  oil 
which is more commonly known as expression is a  solid liquid phase separation method 
which is applie d to cooked oil seed flakes.  It can be executed by batch which is mainly 
hydraulic method and by continuous which is  mainly mechanical working presse s.  This 
method usually uses an expeller press to give pressure on vegetables, nuts and seeds  to 
cause the oil to run.  Usually the mechanical pressing method provides yields only up to 
75 to 70 percent of the  oil.  If you get a 80 percent yield of the o il, it can be consid ered a 
very very good process. The most large commercial operations use a mild pressing 
operations to extract the oil  and therefore, only we can get if you increase the pressure, 
then oil yield m ay be little  bit increased.  But this increase in pressure will also cause 
more heat generation and that will adversely  affect both the quality of the oil as well as 
meal.   
 
The expression as a earlier also I had told is the process of mechanical pressing 
liquid  out of the liquid containing solids, a screw presses, rolle r presses, mills, 
collapsible  pl ate, plate and frame, filter presses, hydraulic presses these are all used for 
this operation.  And the efficiency of a mechanical expression process cannot be equal to 
the unity.  I n actual operations, it seldom exceeds a 90 percent or even as I told you little 
early  that even maximum if you can get 80 percent yield that itself is a very good process 
that  can be considered.  So, here you see that the variation of pressure and volum e during 
the rapeseed oil extraction  process in a piston cylindrical ring at 16 degree Ce lsius using 
a drainage area 0. 64  centimeter is shown here.  The curve that is time versus the pressure 
and you can see here that is if you increase  both the time as well as pressure that is the 
kernel pressure increases the volume of  express oil will increased ok.  And the volume of 
cake obviously, will reduce because the oil content in the cake will reduce,  but as I told 
you that if you have excessive more pressure .  So, that is the initial you see that when you 
are applying the pressure initially that  with the application of the pressure the oil is 
released, but after a certain pressure  because when the oil content becomes less alright 
then you one has to be litt le apply  one has to apply little more pressure to get the 
remaining oil remainder of the oil and  this excessive pressure causes that is excessive 
heat generation and which adversely affect  the quality ok.   
 
Mechanical models for oil expression that is the one is the oil flow through the 
cell  wall pores that is when you are I will tell you may be little later either in this lect ure  
or in the next lecture. What is when you apply pressure what happens that is the cell 
membrane that ruptures and  this through this pores the oil flows ok.  So, this oil flow 
through the cell wall pores that is the for that natural flow through  pores or 
plasmodesmata can be calc ulated by Hagen Poiseuille equation for the flow of  
Newtonian fluid s through a pipe and that is J v is equal to pi r  to the power 4 P 1 minus  P 2 
by 8 eta L  is equal to L p dot del p where J v is the flow rate of th e fluid R  is the pore 
radius P 1 minus P 2 that is  delta P  is the pressure drop across a pore  of length L ok, e ta is 
the fluid viscosity and L p is the hydraulic conductivity.  So, wit h this you can calculate 
the J v.   
𝐽𝑣=𝜋𝑟4(𝑃1−𝑃2)
8𝜂𝐿=𝐿𝑝𝛥𝑃 
 
Then Mrema and McNu lty in 1979 applied the above equation to an assembly of 
cells in  an oil seed kernel and suggested the simple following simple model for oil 
expression  into the in ter kernel wires and that is J v is equal to L p nc into del P  that is 
where  this n c is the number of cells on the shortest radius of the oil seed kernel that is the  
shortest path of for flow of the oil in the inter kernel wires ok.  That is the number of 
number of assembly will increase then obviou sly, J v will also increase.  
𝐽𝑣=𝐿𝑝𝑛𝑐𝛥𝑃 
 
Then let us say the what is the pressing that is the pressing first the cold pressing 
particularly  high oil containing seeds such as sesame and peanuts and the oily pulps of 
olives yield  free oil by the simple application of pressure. Oil of thi s type generally 
require no further  processing. Sesame and peanut oils have a pleasant nutty flavor olive 
oil has a strong,  but well accepted flavor. However, cold pressing is not very efficient   
 
To increase the oil yield from the cold pressing. Some pretreatments could be 
applied to the  seeds before pressing such as enzyme application, microwave treatment, 
steaming, roasting etcetera  and these pretreatments we have discussed in details as even 
including some novel pretreatment  we talke d about in the earlier class.  
So, cold pressed virgin oil do not require  normally further refining only 
centrifugation or filtration might be necessary to obtain  high quality cold pressed oil 
because the cold pres sing if some suspended particles  etcetera fine particles etcetera 
might come. So, that are removed by centrifugation or  filtration. Minor bioactive liquids 
that are commonly  lost during refining are retained in the cold pressed oil. The cold 
pressed mac hines has  a simple working scheme wherein oil seeds are fed into one inlet 
and the two exist provides  oils and exists provides oil and a non -oiled cake. Oil yield 
depends upon the pretreatment  that is peeling, drying and enzymatic treatment and the 
process parameters applied to the  oil seeds are that the raw materials as it raw material 
whatever various process parameters  are applied like heat, pressure etcetera that also w ill 
influence the oil yield. Cold pressing could be investigated under  three mai n systems that 
is expel lers, expanders,  and twin cold system that is for pilot or laboratory scale 
production.   
 
So, hot pressing let us say cold the pressing may be cold pressing as well as hot 
pressing  I discussed briefly the cold pressing then let me  talk about hot pressing ok. The 
oil  mills seed residue from the which oil has been removed obtained after cold pressing  
techniques contain an excessive amount of valuable oil because as I told you cold 
pressing  is not very efficient lot of oil remains in the cake.  So, this lead to the 
development of more efficient presses such as hydraulic batch press or continuous  spiral 
press or expeller. These presses develop pressure up to tune of 1 to 15 ton per square inch 
and they leave about 4 to 5 percent oil  in the acid mill that is here in the by hot  pressing 
method you can go up to 90 and 95 p ercent that is oil recovery. Unfortunately as I told 
you earlier also such presses also  develop excessive heat causing  darkening of the oil and 
denaturation of the oi l protein and they adversely affect  the acceptability of the cake 
particularly.  
 
So, if you have a comparison between hot pressing  and  cold pressing you can see 
that cold pressed oil can preserve better the native properties  compared to the hot pressed 
oil or solvent extracted oil. Cold pressing is free from  chemicals involved in the refining 
steps, but cold pressing oil is considered as good  quality if there is no chemicals and 
microbiological contamination including mycotoxins and metal  like a ferrous and copper 
etcetera that may act as a prooxidant.  So, generally that is the cold pressed oil they are 
used as a virgin oil they are not  even subjected to refining treatments etcetera and 
therefore, there is no. So, if properly  operated cold pressed mills they can give a better 
quality oil  although the yield is  less.  
There is an increasing demand for cold pressed oil in the market as  the high 
preserved  nutritional quality because the even bioactives etcetera which are extracted or 
expressed  by cold pressing method from the material like oleum etcetera they are 
retained in the  oil. So, cold pressing has a lower oil extraction  yield  than hot pressing 
which inhibits the development of cold pressing to become commercially  available 
despite the benefit of the cold pressing oil because it that is limits rather  the more this oil 
milling that is the hot pressing is becoming commercially more applicable  because the 
oil losses are less here in the cake. Thus a new pretreatment is recommended  to 
overcome disadvantage of the cold disadvantage of the cold pressing that is the before 
cold  pressing that is these oil seeds or materials fruits etcetera this should be given some  
sort of treatm ent like novel treatment like PE F, microw ave treatment etcetera. So, at to 
increase the pores etcetera or break the cell ruptures  cell. So, that just by simple 
application you can get a better recovery.  
 
So, what are t he different steps of the cold pressing or stages of the cold pressing 
and in this we will see first thing is the seed  de -fatting. It enables to obtain a better 
quality of oil, brighter col or, higher oxidative stability and mill though it is not used on an 
industrial scale due to some technical difficulties and  also the yield is very very less. This 
process improve the oil quality by reducing the content  of chlorophyll and other 
substances such as metals, pe sticides perme ating through the  hulls or the seeds into the 
oil that is just you see that these are the de -fatted seed mills,  de -fatted flax seed mills or 
de-fatted mustard seed oil cake. So, just this here som e sort  of there is a direct that is 
obtained by the this ju st simple seed or de -fatted by using  appropriate methods normally 
either the simple pressed.   
 
Then seed fragmentation that is the crushing it permits to extract the oil by partial 
destruction of the seed structure and hull opening some cells enla rging the oil spillage 
area and  lowering the cell resistance. Thrust seeds should immediately be subje cted to 
further  processing as the quality and stability of cold pressed  oil is time dependent. If you 
express  it for more time there may be deterioration in the quality.   
 
Then seed conditioning, seed conditioning in the pretreatment in the last class we 
also discuss ed in details. So, this various  methods for seed cond itioning normally the 
roasting in the oven by exposing the pulp to the temperature of approximate ly 100 degree 
Celsius etcetera and if necessary moisturizing it into the to the optimal humidity. This 
treatment positively  affects the oil extraction. However, it negatively influences the  oil 
and mill quality. The high  quality of the cold pressed oil is affected by many fac tors. It is 
at most importance for the raw material quality that is the purity, uniformity, integ rity and 
ripeness. Even harvest  time is another key determinant. In addi tion, the raw material 
quali ty is impacted by pre -pressing activities including crop gathering, drying, storag e 
and post harvest handling.  
Studies conducted on cold pressed oil extracted in the hydraulic press indicated 
that the  only advantage of whole se ed conditioning that is roasting before extrusion was 
a reduced  level of lipid hydrolysis. There is no significant changes in the seed values in 
proportion to  the milled seeds. So, that is the advantage ok.   
 
Seed milling and application of conditionin g temperatures at 60 to 80 degree 
Celsius in  order to obtain the optimum quality of the oil and cause desirable changes that 
is an  increase in the extraction yield and oxidation stability while reducing the negative 
trends  in the trace deterioration. At  elevated acid and peroxide value and higher amount 
of pigments   etcetera are also there. So, screw ty pe press used for cold pressing  regardless 
of a nozzle parameter, it was possible to extract oil in mild conditions without  any 
change in primary and sec ondary oxidation state in fatty acid content and oxidative  
stability of the obtained oil. However, the extraction e fficiency was low whereas, the 
residual fat content in the pomace cake is high.  Before pressing the seed exposing it to an 
elevated te mperature causes a substantial increase in extraction yield in combination with 
an increase in color darkening,  lipid  hydrolysis and pheophytin  content.  
 
So, what is the let us talk about technology  of cold pressing that is cold pressing 
is conducted u sing hydraulic or a screw presses  coupled with a cooling system as I told 
you earlier. The screw and hydraulic presses are  the commonly used extrusion press with 
a maximum outlet temperature of 50 degree Celsius to  25  degree Celsius respectively. 
There is an increasing trend on using the small and medium  size extraction plants with a 
capacity of 0.5 to 25 tons per day on the production of  cold pressed oil nowadays. These 
plants are usually using the screw press to produce cold  press oils. The cold pre ssed oil is 
then purified with physical processes such as filtration,  sedimentation or centrifugation.  
 
Here there is the proc ess sequence of different kinds  of seeds like cleaning, de -
linting, dehulling, cracking, flaking, cooking  and then finally,  pressing. So, for the cotton 
seed for their oil extraction all t hese process the cotton  seed is subjected to all these 
process like it has to be clea ned, then de -linted, dehulled, then cracked and flaking, 
cooking and conditioning and then it i s subjected  to pressing for oil  extraction. Palm 
kernels are generally th ey are cleaned, cracked, flaked, cooked and then pressed. Peanuts 
are clean ed, dehulled, cracked, flaked, cooked and pressed. Sesame that is it is a cleaned 
and then finally, cooked and pressed.   Flax seed cleaned, flaked, cooked and pressed and 
soybeans are cleaned, c racked and finally, pressed. So, these are the different operations 
to which this various oil seeds are subjected  to for the cold pressing treatment.  
 
So, parameter s that affect the oil yield and  hot and cold press extraction 
particularly the preheati ng conditions, particle sizes, cold rotation speed, the moisture 
content of the seed and diameter of the restriction  die are the key factors. The oil is barely 
separated fr om the seed  without preheating and the device is heated and facilitate the oil 
outlet whe n waiting for a certain period of time. When the effect of particle size was 
examined, it was found that the best result was achieved in the processing of seeds as a 
whole that is when the as a whole the seed  was turned, then it give the better result. Oil 
efficienc y is found to be higher at low cold rotational speed because of the contact time 
with the device is more. Lower diameter  molds increases  the oil output in the seeds 
structure and particularly there is a because  if the diameter is lower, it will result into the 
high p ressure. So, that increases the  oil yield. Moisture cont ent negatively affects the oil 
content. Higher the moisture content, lower will be the yi eld of the oil. Pre -treatments 
obviously have a significant effect on the residual oil and pressure rate both.  
 
So, as regard to the properties of the cold pressed oil , this cold pressed oil can be 
valuable edible oil that do not conta in harmful constituents to human an d are free from 
microbiological  contaminations. Metals like ferrous and copper which accelerate the 
oxidation of oils and  chlorophylls are usually removed during the refining processes.  
Recent technology of obtaining oil s through cold pressin g using nitrogen atmosphere or 
supercritical carbon dioxide extraction allows retaining them almost in an i ntact taste that 
is the taste of the oil is or flavor of the oil and other things almost remains natural.  Their 
chemical compo sition is richer in byproducts with a higher leve l of biological and 
antioxidant  activity. The cold pressed rapeseed oil is in contrast to th e refined one is less 
resistant  to oxidation unlike olive oil. Olive oil is more resistant t o oxidation cold presse d 
olive oil, but this cold pressed rapeseed oil is less resistant to oxidation.  Cold pressed oils 
have a distinct aroma and taste and a re used as an additive to fresh  food and as an 
ingredient enhancing various products like may onnaise etcetera with speci fic bioactive 
nutrients.  
 
So, the various physico chemical physic al and chemical characteristics  that should 
be considered when authenticating a cold pressed oil that is and what are those various 
characteristics that are listed here. That is numb er one is the color that is the  color of the 
refined oil is less intense than the color of the unrefined sunflower oils.  Then acidity, 
raffination signif icantly affect the reduction of free fatty  acids in the oil.  
Presence of that is stigma stadi ene that is these  dienes are not present in unrefined  
oil, but are present in considerable quantities in the refined oil. Even tocopherols 
neutralization  bleaching an d deodorization affects the loss  of tocopherol etcetera.  
 
Fatty acid composition  high process temperatures can cause the formation of trans 
fatty acid especially in the trans -octadecen ic like linolenic and linoleic acids even 
conjugated fatty acids. So, they are formed during bleaching from linoleic to linoleic or 
linolenic acid and t heir detection  by UV absorption or by HPLC can be done. And the 
method can o nly be used when large qu antities  of the oil have been refined .   
 
High levels of vitamins as well as limited levels of xanthines, vitamin A and trace 
amount  of  other antioxidant component can be beneficial for the health. These cold press 
dial protect  the skin, they improve eye health, they reduce bad cholesterol, they lower the 
allergic reaction,  they reduce oxidative stress and they have also capacity to low er 
inflammation and that  is the reason why nowadays that is the cold press dial are being 
more and more becoming  popular in among the consumers who are the health co nscious 
consumers.  
 
So,, the advantages cold pressing is advantages like it has lower en ergy 
consumption, there  is a lower investment cost, does not it does not use toxic solvents or 
thermal conditioning  of the seeds, does not generate waste water, it has a lower 
environmental impact in comparison  with solvent extraction, it shows higher f lexibility 
because processing diverse types of seed is  fast and easy in this case. This cold presses 
are cold pressed dial are  preferred to refined dials as they contain more antioxidants and 
bioactive substances  like sterols, carotenoids and phenolics etcetera. More natural 
biologically active substances  such as phenolic compounds, tocopherols or tocals are 
they are present in the significant  amount in cold pressed dial which could improve 
oxidative stability as well as thermal stability  of the oil.  
 
So, at the s ame time this cold pressing has  some disadvantages also like it needs 
high capital or investment required compared to  the conventiona l method. Most cold 
pressed oil  contain high amounts of polyunsa turated fatty acids which might be 
disadvan tageous in terms of oxidative stability. Cold press  oils also contain higher 
amounts of pro -oxidative compounds. So, their shelf life might be short er compared to 
the refined oils .  
 
So, finally, I would like to summarize this  like today's lecture and the I will say 
that expression  is the process of mechanically  pressing liquid out of the liquid containing 
solids. Cold press extraction is one of the methods of mechanical extraction. It requires 
less energy t han oil other oil ex traction  techniques and is also environmental friendly . 
High quality oils  can be obtained by performing production at low temperature using cold 
press methods. The sunflower, rapeseed, grape seed, hemp, flax seed, olive and pumpkin 
oils are obtained by cold pressing extraction method.  These oils have better nutritive 
properties than the refined oi ls. Normally the cold pressing that is those soft fruits or soft 
seeds they are cold press ing of these are more preferred  because here the pressure as I 
told you ea rlier also the pre ssure applied is not much just by simple application of 
pressure and they are at and mor ally there is the either palm, kernel oil or olive oil or 
sesame oils etcetera. These are normally even mustard also they  are normally used by 
cold pr essing methods and these col d pressed oils that is they are  as such without further 
refining treatment at the most some clarification or centrifugation  etcetera filtration 
etcetera can be done. May be some companies  they go for double filtration  instead of  
going for refining and because consumers prefer the valuable components natural  taste, 
natural flavor of the cold pressed oil.  
 
So, with  this these are the references that are used in this lecture.  
 
Thank you very much for your patience hearing.  
