Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 03 : Edible Oils - Chemistry & Properties  
Lecture 13 : Rancidity and Reversion  
 
Hello everybody,  namaskar.  Now, we are in the 13th lecture of this course.  
 
Today in the next half an hour or so, we will discuss a very important phenomenon  that 
takes place in edib le oil s and that is Rancidity and Reversion.  So, we will discuss what is 
rancidity, it s definition, what are the factors that lead  to rancidity , and different types of 
rancidity like hydrolytic rancidity, oxidative rancidity, ketonic  rancidity , and then finally, 
reversion, w hat reversion  is and how it take s place . 
 
Rancidity is the natural  process of decomposition of fats or oils leading to  the 
development of undesirable flavor and order by either hydrolysis , oxidation , or both.  So, 
lipids basically in this process degrade to the point of becoming either unpalatable or  
unhealthy to ingest.   You can see here in the fatty acids there is  hydrolysis and the fatty 
acids are release d free or when there is an  unsaturated bond there may be oxidation.  
Oxidation of this lipid at the unsaturated position, what is its mechanism, and how it 
happens  will be taken up briefly in this lecture ahead , and in a separate lecture we will  be 
taking  up on oxidation that is auto-oxidation . 
 
Then the causative factors for rancidity are normally various catalysts  like metal ions, 
heat, radiation, light particularly UV light, water if there is  any and then there are certain 
enzymes  like lipases, lipoxygenases  etcetera , and acid.  So, these are the various factors 
or causative factors that lead to the development of or accelerate the rate of development 
of rancidity in  oils and fats.  
 
There may be different types of rancidity that is one is hydrolytic rancidity, other  is 
oxidative rancidity, and ketonic rancidity is another type and reversion  although it is 
directly not the rancidity, it relates to the changes in the  flavor and development of 
undesirable flavor  and it might happen in certain oils even befo re the onset of the 
rancidity.  
 
In this table, an overview is provided of the different types  of rancidity, what is the main 
substance producing this particular type of rancidity, the type of chemical reaction that is 
responsible for this type of rancidity , and materials that subject to this type of rancidity.  
Let us say fi rst is the lipolytic rancidity. So, in volved in  the lipolytic rancidity  are the low 
fatty acids,  medium chain fatty acids etcetera . This is enzymatic hydrolysis like there is 
lipase in the enzymes which breaks the  ester linkage of the triacylglycerol of the 
triglycerides.  In this process , there is release of free fatty acids in the system and the 
system will  have triglycerides, monoglycerides, diglycerides , and free fatty acids  
depending upon the extent  of the action of the enzymes and hydrolysis reaction.  So, 
basically , saturated fats like milk fat, palm seed oils etcetera are more  subject to this type 
of rancidity. The second is oxidative rancidity and this is  here basically the main 
substrate producing this rancidity is th e lower aldehydes and ketones. These  lower 
aldehydes and ketones come from the oxidation of the fatty acids which is there in t he 
triglyceride molecule and ultimately  they give various carbonyl compound aldehydes, 
ketones, acids etcetera which become responsible  for the flavor and this type of rancidity.  
Whereas, in the case of lipolytic rancidity , the flavor is basically the fla vor of the  free 
fatty acid , in oxidative rancidity these carbonyl compounds may be  the causative agents 
for the fla vor.  So,  for both  the chemical reaction which is also called  auto-oxidation , and 
the enzymatic oxidation , the lipoxygen ase is  the enzyme res ponsible . Oxidative rancidity 
and auto -oxidation  are more permanent  in oils that have more polyunsaturated fatty acids 
and more amount of polyunsaturated  fatty acids.  Then in ketonic rancidity , the main 
substrate  producing the flavor change  is 2 alkones th at is the methyl ketones. T he 
reactions are beta-oxidation  and enzymatic decarboxylation and it is again more prone  in 
palm seed oils or even coconut kernels and milk fat etcetera. Finally , oxygen -substituted  
change and rearrangement  products are responsib le for the flavor reversion , and here is 
the oxidation cleavage and rearrangement of the molecules which is the mechanism of  
this flavor development. Again  this flavor reversion takes place in the oil which has more 
amount of  polyunsaturated fatty acids .   
 
Hydrolysis i s the breakage of the ester linkage , that is the breakage of the free fatty acids 
from the triglyceride is the primary event.  It is caused by agents like moisture, light, 
heat, alkali, acid, enzymes , lipase etcetera.  It results in the  increase of free fatty acids and 
mono and diglyceride  content in the oils and fats .  Particularly  when an alkali like sodium 
hydroxide or potassium hydroxide is the hydrolytic agent  the resultant free fatty acid is 
converted into its sodium or potassium salt , that is sodium or potassium salt of the 
respective fatty acids . For example, suppose it is a palmitic acid then  sodium palmitate  or 
potassium palmitate  formation  will take place and this  process is called saponification 
and that is how even in the industry  soaps are produced.  Otherwise , the process is called 
lipolytic when other agents are there like light, heat, moisture , enzyme, acid , etc., and 
when these are the causative agents  the process is  called lipolytic rancidity or hydrolytic 
rancidity.  Here  change in the flavor is mainly because of the increase in the free fatty 
acids content  and this free fatty acid content causes several changes in the oil.  The oil's  
smoke point is seriously depressed like cottonseed  oil if that is the even 1 percent smoke 
developed free fatty acids  it reduces it’ s smoke point by even 100 degrees  Celsius .  Also, 
food that is fried in oil containing a high amount of free fatty acids may tend to  be darker 
in color and there may be more fat absorption by the fried food  that the  surface of the 
fried material may be cracked it may not be smooth as it should be .  As I told you that is 
in this case of hydrolytic rancidity there is the  flavor mainly is because of the flavor of 
the free fatty acid and this is more pronounced  in the short-chain  fatty acids like butyric, 
capric, caprovic etcetera which are generally  present in the m ilk fat or such other 
products.  
 
Here is the development of FFA that is it reduces the smoke point and seriously  affects 
the cooking or frying quality of the oil and this is the reaction to how this  lipolyti c hydro 
rancidity takes place. Ultimately if there is a complete hydrolysis  there will be free fatty 
acids and glycerol.  On partial  hydrolysis,  diacylglycerol,  monoac ylglycerol,  
triacylglycerol , and then a free fatty acid mixture will be formed because of the reaction 
mechanism . 
 
Then let us discuss oxidative rancidity.  This obviously, as the name indicates it is caused 
by oxid ation of the unsaturated fatty acid chains of lipids by atmospheric oxygen.  
Because of the spontaneous nature of the reaction that is once the reaction has started it 
will continue, it will propagate, it will go further its rate will increase if it is not 
controlled . So, if once it is initiated it spontaneously takes care and it follow s it goes on 
and that is why this process is frequently referred to as auto-oxidation .  So, the oxidation 
of unsaturated fats in food is mediated by free radicals which are formed through  a 
complex series of reactions and these may be photo -oxidation , auto-oxidation,  or 
enzymatic oxidation . Details of all these processes  particularly what is photo -oxidation , 
auto-oxidation,  and enzyme oxidation , their mechanism , and their various adverse effect  
will be taken  up separately in the next class .   
 
Oxidation is  the process of the addition of oxygen or remova l of hydrogen or electrons. 
An oxidant  or oxidizing agent is an element or compound that gains electrons as  you can 
see here in the  picture and it gets reduced  and this  favors oxidation. In the food system , 
oxygen is the most common oxidant.  The factors influencing oxidation are heat, light, 
ionizing reactions , trace metals like  copper and iron , and enzymes like lipoxygenases and 
metalloproteins such as heme , etcetera.  You can see here there is oxidation of compound 
A, compound A loses the electrons, becomes  a reducing  agent , and gets ox idized 
whereas, the B compound  gains electrons and gets  reduced this is shown.  So, t hat is how 
the oxidation -redox  reaction  takes place .   
 
Lipid oxidation is the  oxidation of highly unsaturated fatty acids . It may be also because 
of the oxidation of moderately unsaturated  fatty acids.  Oxidation of highly unsaturated 
fatty acids leads to the polymeric end products  and ultimately it leads to rancidity 
reversion , off flavor s, and odors development . 
 
Let us see the mechanism and consequences of lipid oxidation that is when the lipid is in 
the early stage it oxidizes the lipid into lipid hydroperoxides and then these lipid 
hydroperoxide at a later stage may further oxidize into a ldehydes  etcetera or there may be 
formation of adducts like hexanol lysine, ok.  This is the structure of hexanol lysine that 
may from the aldehydes, etcetera . There  is the formation  of adducts  like aldehydes or 
modified proteins. I n the end , various unsat urated  carbonyl compounds like aldehyde 
ketones etcetera are formed which give the undesirable  flavor .  This oxidation product  
even may be the cause of toxicity in the food . 
 
The hydroperoxides are the primary oxidation products and then these hydroperoxi des 
decompose into secondary oxidation products like aldehydes, ketones, dines , and trines.  
And then, there is the oxidation of secondary oxidation products  they get oxidized and  
result in tertiary oxidation products  like acid, epoxides, dimers, oxirane  rings etcetera.  
So, lipid oxidation primary products are hydroperoxide, secondary products  are 
aldehydes, ketones etcetera and tertiary products are acids, epoxides,  dimers, and oxirane 
rings. These tertiary and secondary products  may sometimes be the sour ce of toxicity.   
 
All these lipid oxidation products which are formed influence the various properties of 
the oils and fat such as  flavor quality  loss, there is development of rancid flavor , and also 
changes in the color and texture  of the food which are  fried in this or even in which these 
oxidized oil is used. There is a nutritional quality loss in the essential fa tty acids 
particularly if they are oxidized then  there is a loss of the essential fatty acids, and there  is 
also if there  are vitamins that m ay get adversely affected . The  health risks as I told you 
there may be growth  retardation or heart diseases because of various secondary and 
tertiary products which are formed . Finally, there is  a loss of consumer acceptance, there 
is economic loss because  the consumers  might not like to buy these  oxidized products, 
oxidized  oils, or lipids.   
 
In the nutritional significance of lipid oxidation , if you see , there are three  distinct classes 
of substances occurring in oxidized fat that have been shown to be toxic . Those  are the 
peroxidized fatty acids that destroy both vitamin A  and E in the foods, then polymeric 
material , and finally, the oxidized sterols  which are  thought to be involv ed in the 
causation of the atherosclerotic  disease.  
 
 
Ketonic rancidity is associated with lauric acid oils and butter fat.  This type of rancidity 
is more frequently encountered as a result of the action of fungi  such as Aspergillus  niger  
and the blue -green mold that is Penicillium glaucoma  on coconut oil  or other oil seeds.  It 
arises when certain fungi convert short and intermediate carbon chain length fatty  acids 
like C6 to C14 carbon -containing  fatty acids into methyl ketones like C5 and C13 , which 
means one carbon atom is reduced  by the action of enzymes  present in fungi . It is due to 
the conversion of short -chain  fatty acids by some molds  to a homologous series of 
aliphatic  methyl ketones, pentan -2-one, h eptan -2-one, nonan -2-one andundecan -2-one  
i.e. one carbon atom less than the parent fatty acid . 
 
Fermentation experim ents with whole oils and simple triglycerides confirmed that only 
short and intermediate -carbon chain -length  fatty acids were converted into methyl 
ketones. Methyl ketones produced contained one carbon atom less than the parent fatty 
acid.  Tetradecanoic ac id was the longest fatty acid to undergo conversion into its 
corresponding methyl ketone. Experiments with free fatty acids established that short and 
intermediate -carbon chain -length  fatty acids inhibited the growth of Penicillium 
crustosum. It was conclu ded that the conversion of fatty acids into methyl ketones was a 
detoxification mechanism for their removal from the environment.  
 
 
 
 
  
The essential prerequisites for the formation of ketonic rancidity appear  to be the 
presence  of molds, low water activi ty, and low partial pressure of oxygen  because low 
water activity and  low partial pressure are the requirements  that favor  the growth of 
molds and the  presence of short -chain  fatty acids in the medium . The  mold enzymes 
convert  these short -chain  fatty acids  shown here into  methyl ketone  molecules and the 
quantity produced  after 4 hours and 8 hours is shown .  
 
 
 
Let us take a case study particularly the ket onic rancidity in coconut oil .  Coconut oil has 
a higher concentration of medium -chain  fatty acids (C6: 0 - C12:0) . The triacylglycerols 
of coconut oil has a high concentration of lauric acid (C12:0) and myristic acid (C14:0). 
Ketonic rancidity involves the fungal conversion of medium chain fatty acids (C6 - C~2) 
to the methyl ketone one carbon atom less.  The conversion  of triacylglycerols to methyl 
ketones involves two reactions. The first reaction involves lipolysis of triacylglycerols 
containing medium chain length fatty acids to release free fatty acids . The second 
reaction involves the conversion of free medium chain fatty acids to the methyl ketone 
one carbon atom less. Thus , lauric acid (C12:0) is converted to 2 -undecanone (C11:0), 
capric acid (C10:0) is converted to 2 -nonanone (C,~) and caprylic acid (C8:0) is 
converted to 2 -heptanone (Cv).  So, this is these are with particular relation to the ketonic 
rancidity of coconut oil.   
 
Then how can we control the ketonic rancidity?  Most  preservation factors operate 
through the inhibition of or slowing of microbial  growth.  Both ext rinsic  factors related to 
the environment and intrinsic  factors related to the food  products that can control the 
growth of mold are used here.  Ketonic rancidity can be controlled by controlling the 
temperature because  the temperature is an important requirement for every 
microorgan ism, even in the case of mold . They require optimum temperature for their 
growth.  They require oxygen for their growth therefore, ketone production was not 
observed  in the absence of oxygen.  So, if there is an environment that is oxygen -free 
then ketonic  rancidity can be controlled.  The preservatives like sorbic acid at the rate of 
1000 milligrams  per kg of oil inhibited  ketone production because this preservative is  
effective  against molds. The fatty acid composition of the oil is an important factor that 
contributes  to the formation of  ketones that is more the short -chain  fatty acids more the 
concentration of ketone s form ed. In the oils which have more polyunsaturated fatty acid 
this is generally not a problem.   
 
Then let us see flavor reversion.  Many oils and fats undergo a change in the flavor before 
becoming rancid.  This change in the flavor of the oil  because of some other action that is 
may not be actually the rancidity  that is hydrolytic ketonic or oxidative rancidity, but the 
other flavor chan ge.  This change in flavor which is different than the rancid flavor is 
known as reversion  and this is more of a problem in the oil which has higher amount  of 
polyunsaturated fatty acids.  Flavor reversion is defined as a change in edible fats that is 
characterized by the development  in the refined material of an objectionable flavor prior 
to the onset of the true rancidity.  It may develop during the exposure of the fat to 
ultraviolet or visual light or by heating  because they all catalyze these conditions  then 
more unsaturated fatty acids change even withou t going to the oxidate process .  A small 
amount of oxygen seems to be necessary for the reaction that is catalyzed by the  presence 
of small amounts  of metals such as iron and copper . Selective hydrogenat ion decreases 
the amount of linolenic acid and aids in prevent ing flavor reversal.  Soybean oil  is the 
most susceptible oil to flavor reversion because it has more amount of polyunsaturated  
fatty acids.  
 
 
 
 
 
The factors that affect the flavor reversion  include metals like iron and copper, presence 
of ultraviolet rays, heat, light and oxygen .  Flavor reversion is more prominent in some 
fats like soybean oil. I t has a tendency to have  beanie, hay like or eventually the fishy  off 
flavor.  The addition of  sequester such as ethylene dioxide  tetra acetic acid that is the 
EDTA helps  preventing reversion . 
 
 
 
Let us see a case study of  flavor reversion in soybean oil.  The soybean  oils that are 
extracted , that is the crude soybean oil  have  a grassy flavor.   Then at refining, bleaching , 
and deodorization , this grassy flavor is removed. T he return of good deodorized soybean 
oil flavor to the undesira ble crude oil flavor within a very short period of time takes place 
and that is termed as flavor reversion .  This development of a characteristic grassy or 
beanie flavor in deodorized soybean oil  is commonly called flavor reversion .  So, both 
there is in these flavors  develop  after the refining of oil is very probably because of the 
presence of the more polyunsaturated fatty acids.  
 
Soybean oil  is highly susceptible to oxidation as the polyunsaturated fatty acid content is  
high l ike 57 to 58 percent. The linolenic acid content is high about 7 percent.  So, the 
flavor of the refined oil reverse back to that of the crude oil , and the reason for the 
susceptibility  of soybean oil  include oxidation of linolenic acid, unsponifiable matters, 
phosphatide reactions , and oxidized polymers.   
 
The reason  for flavor  reversion in soya bean oil is the o xidation of linolenic acid which  is 
the oxidative decomposition of linolenic acid , and lower linolenic soybean oil  develops 
less reversion in flavor .  Then lecithin provides the  trimethylamine oxide which in the 
presence  of linolenic acid and the hydroperoxides from auto-oxidation  releases 
formaldehyde  and dimethylamine which gives a fishy odor.   Then unsponifiable m atters 
induce reversion when added to other oils . Flavor  reversion is improved by removing the 
unsaponifiable  with adsorbents or by drastic steam deodorizatio n.  So, deodorization,  
degumming , and removing the un sponifiable matters  control  the reversion problem .  
Then oxidized polymers like oxidized ethyl linolenic polymers could decompose under 
nitrogen  and this yields fl avor components  identical to those isolated from  the reverted 
soybean oil .   
 
Then steps to avoid flavor reversion or flavor inversion include avoiding  metallic 
contamination that is iron in the oil should be less than 0. 15 ppm or so copper  in the ppb 
range. Then chelating agents l ike citric acid oxidation products themselves  act as a pro-
oxidant . The chelating agents if they are used bind to the metal ions. Then avoid 
overheating, overheating will create a set color  that is difficult to bleach and  keep below 
60 degree Celsius when in contact with the air . Then avoid exposure of the oil to air, as it 
results in oxidation  and reduces the shelf  life. Use  bottom fill tanks and nitrogen 
blanketing or sparging . Bottom -filling  tanks mean  that the tank is filled from the bottom 
rather  than from the top as in the top filling containers the oxygen can get easy  entry.  
Then addition of antioxidants and controll ed each processing step to ensure the  removal 
of the impu rities it is intended to remove.    
 
Finally , I would like to summarize this lecture by saying that yes rancidity is a  natural 
process of decompositi on of fats or oil which lead to the development of undesirable  
flavour and may cause health problem ,  and the  oil becomes unacceptable.  Types of 
rigidity are oxidative, hydrolytic, and ketonic and the flavor  change before the  onset of 
rancidity is called reversal.  Hydrolysis of the ester linkage of the triglyceride is a primary 
event that is caused by agents  like moisture, heat, light, alkali, acid, enzyme etcetera.  
Then oxidative rancidity is caused by the oxidation of unsaturated fatty acid chains  of the 
lipid by atmospheric oxygen and most fats and oils undergo  change in the flavour  before 
becoming rancid.   And this stage is known as reversion which  is the flavour chan ge 
before the onset of the rancidity .  So, one should take proper care to handle the oil during 
handling of the oil storage  processing etcetera, one should take care that these causative 
agents are eliminated from  the oil.  This rancidity and reversion are  the major problems  
that deteriorate the quality of oil during its handling.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 These are the references that we used in this lecture.  Finally, thank you ve ry much for 
your patience hearing.  
 
