 
1 
 Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week – 04 
Lecture - 18 
 
Hello everybody. Now, we are in the 18th lecture of this course and in this, and in the next 
half an hour, we will discuss the technology of expression, particularly pressing methods 
and technology which are used for the extraction of oil. In the earlier lecture, we 
discussed about its concept and mechanism which  is when you press how the oil is 
expressed.  
 
Now, in this lecture , we will concentrate on methods and technology of pressing. We will 
talk about traditional methods, we will talk about hydraulic pressing, screw  pressing 
 
2 
 methods , and machines, then factors that affect the mechanical extraction of oil and 
finally , we will discuss something about the quality characteristics of both pressed oil and 
the meal or cake which we call. First, let us talk about traditional methods of oil 
expression.  
 
Traditional oil expressers  are simple mechanical devices that are hand or animal -
operated. Th is equipment work s on the principle of mechanical expression and require s 
no electricity or fuel for this operation.  They are fabricated using inexpensive 
components that can be often manuf actured locally. The non-motorized  express ers are 
used in rural settlements for domestic crushing of oil sheets such  as copra, direct coconut 
meal, mustard, groundnut, soybean , etc. 
However, nowadays that is even power -operated motorized expressors are als o available 
and some companies like KVIC , etc. in their Kachigani oil production they use that is 
power operated Ghani's and all those things. What is Ghani? We will take it a little later . 
So, these traditional oil express ers being hand operated. These de vices have low 
expelling capacities of about 2 to 5 kg per hour or 20 to 30 kg per day.  
So, different types of traditional expressors include that is indigenous or traditional 
domestic equipment or methods, then Ghani which are granite ghani, wooden ghani,  
bengal ghani, power ghani, etc. Then presses like plate presses and ram presses, screw 
presses , and hydraulic presses . These are the different types of pressing machines or 
pressing method s or technology methods which are used in India even traditionally or 
even now also they are used.  So, let us talk about Indian traditional methods.  That is 
here, traditionally that is what they used to the it is a picture  You can see that there is a 
heating oven.  
 
3 
  
So, hot water flotation is probably the simplest method and is still used in many rural 
areas. So, what is done? Seats are ground that is manually unless a local mill i s both 
accessible and affordable. So, the ground sheets that the converted to paste or the paste 
are heated alone at first and then with boiling water and the mixture is yeasted and 
brought to boil. So, after boiling the mixture is allowed to cool during his time the oil 
gathers at the top and is scooped off. In the traditional method the processing oil sheets 
the extraction efficiency is j ust about 40 percent not even half of the oil more than half of 
the oil remains in the oil cake.  
 
So, just by simple it is just by heating and crushing and then boiling in water. Then, 
extraction efficiency refers to the percentage of oil extracted based on the total theoretical 
content. The extraction efficiency is generally low and problems often occur with the 
formation of oil -water emulsion which makes the final separation very very difficult 
particularly the low -concentration oil finally, some emulsio n is formed. In some cases, 
salt is used to break these emulsions. So, these methods are applicable to ground nuts, 
 
4 
 sunflower seeds, palm kernels, coconuts, sesame seed, wrap seed, castor seed and sia 
nuts, etc. 
 
Then traditional expelers there are differ ent types of traditional expelers used in India 
then traditionally we have been using the village Ghani which  is animal animal -powered 
extraction system where there is a post -pestilent motor. So, it is said that this Ghani 
originated in India where they ar e primarily used to express oil from the mustard and 
sesame seeds. Although in some cases, they can be used for coconut and ground nut 
processing. Traditionally , Ghani's are operated by animals as you c an see in the figure.  
They consist of a wooden mortar  and a wood or stone pest le that is there is a mortar and 
pestl e and the seeds are kept inside there is an opening and th ese bullocks move.  
 
So, there is basically the friction is generated between the through which oil is separated 
that is oil is expelle d and it is collected in that there is an opening. The mortar is fixed to 
the ground while the pest le driven by one or more pair s of bullocks or draught animals is 
located in the mortar where the seeds are crushed by friction and pressure to leave.  So, 
depending on the size of the mortar and type of seeds. An animal -powered Ghani can 
 
5 
 express around 10 kg of seeds every 2 hours. Ghani process requires much mechanical 
energy.  
Ghani operated by one bullock, the equivalent of 0.35 kilowatt can process 5 kg oil seeds 
in about 1 hour. This energy consumption is about equal to the maximum amount of 
energy required by a small oil expellers.  Then as I told you there are also power -operated 
Ghani in our country that is the this bullock or animal power is replaced wit h electrical 
power. And there are various several manufacturers available they are now making in our 
country and accordingly , that is the whole pest le and mortar all these are this at their mild 
steel or steel or iron , etc. is made so that you can see that  is particularly the, but this 
contact surface point of the oil and oil seed cake is normally preferred that it should be of 
stainless steel. So, this is just simpl e, otherwise , the technology is the same. There is a 15 
kg KOLU power Ghani machine with a gear-box or even other as 0.5 or 7.5 hp electric 
motor power Ghani machine and its capacity is available up to 20 kg to 750 kg or even 
more.  
 
 
So, different types of you can see the figure here this is the wooden Ghani and where is 
the replaced by metal Gh ani. So, both type s of Ghani’s are available , and this very 
popular particularly in rural India and now some industries in fact, as I told you KVIC , 
etc. produce  Kachigani oil and where they mainly us e motorized power Ghani.  
 
6 
  
Then about the presses, there are different types of presses as we told there is a plate 
press. So, in the plate press, you can see that it is a plate or a piston is forced into a 
perforated cylinder containing the oil -bearing material by means of a worm that is worm.  
So, this is  the plate and here the oil -bearing material is placed. So, once it is pressed and 
this is a perforated. So, with this perforation , oil passes oozes out and inside the cake 
remains there. So, in some cases hydraulic jacks have been used, care is needed to make 
sure that there is no leakage of hydraulic fluid that might contaminate the edible oil.  
Another type of press is the ram press as you can see here, the figure of the ram press is 
shown.  
 
The ram press is a manually operated mechanical press it is ca pable of pressing a range of 
oil seeds including salt flower, sesame , and ground nuts as well as seeds from pumpkin, 
rapeseed, watermelon, mustard , and jatropha carcass. The ram press can be operated 
continuously without the need to remove the cake. So, th at is here that is you put the 
seeds and the ram pressure that is just by pressing  it, the pressure is applied and it gives 
the oozes.  
 
7 
  
Then hydraulic press, the hydraulic press consists of a series of horizontal corrugated iron 
plates as you c an see inside  the picture here. These plates are separated by 4 to 14 press 
molded oil seed cakes , etc. The pressing is accomplished in two stages, in stage 1 , 
pressing the sample at approximately 5 mega pascal pressure for about 15 to 20 minutes, 
and which o bviously, releases the maximum amount of oil, but for the remaining oil that 
is when the oil quantity is reduced then pressure has to be increased. So, afterwards , a 
pressure of 28 mega pascal s is applied for 5 to 10 minutes to complete the expression 
proce ss. The output of this press varies depending on the size and the seed being pressed.  
So, you can see here the different components in the hydraulic press or a hydraulic 
piston, plunger, pressing chamber where the seeds are kept and it is pressed, heating 
jacket, their samples there are fine, SS mesh, perforated plate, holding frame, oil 
collecting tube and there is support , etc. And you can see here that is the P, T , and D that 
is P is the pressure gauge, T is for the temperature controller and then D is t he 
displacement measurement is all these accessories and controls , etc. are provided, but 
simple is that just by hydraulic that is it is pressed pressing and there is a from the bottom 
it presses that is the oil is oozes out.  
 
 
8 
 So, the working principle o f the hydraulic press you can see here there is the schematic 
representation of the pressing process, in the hydraulic press is shown that is in the initial 
stage that is first in the initial stage, it is the loading stage, before the oil begins to be 
extracted from the seed with the application of pressure, the seeds evacuate the air from 
the macropores. So, that is in the initial stage that is oil does not exist, but when you press 
there is the air , what is there present in the micropores , etc. in that th e seed is removed 
and this process continues until a critical point which is formed when the seeds react to 
pressure from their contact points and this situation which causes changes in the volume 
starts the oil driving.  So, this is the initial stage.  
 
Then comes the dynamic stage, in the dynamic stage you can see that the second stage is 
the dynamic where T is more than T0 but less than T , and a pressure P is applied here in 
this case. It begins when the first oil drop is extracted from the seed at this  stage now at 
the gradually evacuated air volume fills with the liquid and begins where that is the 
dynamic stage begins where an air -liquid mixture is removed and then finally, it comes 
the final stage where T becomes capital T is a Tf that is it starts a t the end of the 
secondary stage that is after when all the air has been evacuated and the oil flow is now 
maximized. The maximum instantaneous flow rate is achieved when the liquid fills the 
entire volume to be imputed by the air.  
 
9 
  
So, this is the same the working principle whatever you told that pictorially you can see 
that the first second that is first is the elastic deformation that is O  to A. O to A is the 
there is a microstructural or microstructural deformation then you apply the pressure that 
is this is the deformation size and there is the force when you give the force that different 
deformation will take place.  So, first is the microstructural deformation , it starts when the 
upper crushing plate comes  into the contact with the upper dehusked see d. This stage is 
characterized by the elastic deformation of the micro asperities in the oily core and then 
from A to B, this is the there is a second stage, it is the elastic deformation stage that is 
here this elastic deformation of the core takes place and then comes from stage  from  B to 
C that is you can see further the force is increasing then this results into the elasto plastic 
deformation that is characterized by the elastic plastic deformation of the core that is seed 
cracking occurs at point C at this way and which is characterized by the maximum 
resistance of the oleaginous seeds.  
 
Then this after, from C to D finally, see this is a characterizes seed grinding into a smaller 
particle size and the in the first stage the seed resistance decreases rapidly which is 
corroborated with widening the existing cracks and occurrence of new ones and the  local 
maximum curve appeared from cracking the newly obtained particles that is you see the 
additional breaking points and the n finally, it releases that ca use the oil to flow and oil is 
 
10 
 released. So, in general , whatever the seed treated the more the pressure is applied, the 
higher is the oil extraction yield.  
 
Now, talk about a screw press you can see in the figure that is the screw presses they had 
some hopper there is a there is a screw design here where the which becomes when it 
comes to the end it becomes selectively closer pitch.  So, now, this screw rotates within a 
cage or a barrel which is lined with case hardened tool steel bars and there are space rs. 
The spacers are used between the lining bars to permeate the drainage of the oil as the 
pressure on the seed material is increased that is when this is the hopper and this operated 
either manually, but mostly power operated and it goes towards it. So, when it goes it is 
progressively closer pitch and this pressure increases as the discharge in a movable cone 
or choke controls the operating pressure by changing the width of the earlier space 
through which the press cake must pass.  The choke is typically adjusted by a hand wheel 
and at the opposite end of the screw. The heat generated as a result of the friction can be 
dissipated by cooling the cage with shaft and the shaft with the water.  
 
So, it is provided with the water cooling arrangement , etc. that can be done. So, this is 
about the screw press you can see here in this operation that is the fo r it is hopper the 
 
11 
 material is coming and it is good at it moves here. That is the oil gets squeezed that is  
pressed and oil -liquid discharge cake and finally, the cake is getting here, it is a pressure 
cone. So, this is the simple screw expelling and this cake till it is again recycled till we 
get the maximum amount of oil released and this is a filter press and then you can ge t the 
oil discharge.  
 
So, this is about schematic representation of the principle of working of a screw press.  
So, the advantages and drawbacks of mechanical extraction that is the advantages of part 
relatively simple process, they are lower initial capit al cost and there is no use obviously, 
of solvent any. So, but drawbacks are they are low capacity, high residual oil there in the 
cake, mostly of the 4 to 7 percent as sometime s as high as 8 to 9 percent. Then high-
power  requirement s and high maintenance and cost and operational skills etc. is needed.  
 
So, in this table , I have just given you some of the energy requirement s for oil expelling 
in different systems like traditional Ghani, improved Ghani , and oil expellers. So, the 
energy required per ton of oil seed in kilowatt hour in the traditional Ghani is 125 
kilowatt hour. Whereas, in the improved Ghani  – 105 and oil expeller resistance is just so 
much. Less energy is required in the oil expellers. Then percentage energy requirement 
over traditional Ghani that is if you take this 100 percent.  So, the improved Ghani it 
 
12 
 needs only 84 percent of that and this is oil expellers almost half of that that is 56 percent. 
Oil seed crushing per unit energy that is kg per kilowatt hour in the traditional Ghani is 8, 
improved Ghani 9.5 and oil expeller is 14. So, the increased amount of oil seed expelled 
per unit energy over tr aditional Ghani that is  if you take is 118 percent in the improved 
Ghani and even in the oil expellers , it is 175 percent.  So, here they are these are the 
various pretreatment conditions, types of used presses and plant part which are submitted 
to pressing  normally.  
 
So, you can see here for hazelnut, sesame , and pumpkins . Normally hydraulic presses are 
used and these are the pretreatment s, all these three they are heated above 100 degree 
Celsius and normally in the hazelnut it is the kernel, in the sesame  it is the seed and also 
in the pumpkin it is the kernel that is a hull less cultivar. So, these are normally the parts 
of the plants which are used for the extraction. Then there is also the in the pumpkins that 
muscat pumpkin,  walnut, flax seed, sesame, red grape , and raspberry, in all these 
generally they go for the single screw is press and pretreatment generally not use d except 
for the red grapes where there is the skin is separated . And then in the case of pumpkin 
hull seed kernel , this is in case of muscat pumpkin hull and kernel, this walnut it is kernel 
whereas, in the flax seeds, sesame, red grape , etc. it is the seeds are used for oil 
extraction.  In raspberry, it is a single screw press with no treatment seed with a 
neglectable amount of residual  pulp.  Similarly , blackberry, sour cherry , and blue poppy , 
normally that is a single screw press is used and no treatment pretreatment is given . In the 
blue blackberry , it is the seed and sour cherry it is a shell and kernel , and blue poppy is 
the seed tha t is the part of the plant which is used for oil extraction.  
 
13 
  
So, here that is the merits and demerits of different oil extraction technology we have 
already discussed earlier also we have talked this is a some of the review collected from 
various researchers which they have then like if you see the traditional ghani maybe 
bullock ghani its merit it does not require costly equipment, but it is as a lesser capacity 
and ca n process 10 kg of seeds every 2 hours. Motor ghani is there , merit is that, it has 
reduced crushing time and has a greater crushing capacity, than in comparison to the 
bullock ghani, but here again more expensive than the bullock ghani and their high 
capital cost is required.  
Then the conventional method if you see that mechanical pressing hydraulic press and 
screw press , their merit is low equipment cost, low power consumption, avoid  the use of 
chemical high quality and instantly consumable crude oil pro duction whereas,  its 
demerits are low acid and low yield and high oil content in the residual cake and they are 
time and labour intensive. Cold pressing , there is no use of chemical solvent or thermal 
treatment . These are ecofriendly , the oils have better quality,  and better nutritive value . 
Cold press oil contains less than 0.2 percent transferred acid etc . very less or negligible 
transferred acid, but these are low productivity and their demerits is a low productivity.   
 
So, these are some of the factor s which affect the mechanical extraction of oil different 
factors like pressure are important factor s earlier also . I elaborated on this that is , the heat 
 
14 
 calculates the protein and reduces the viscosity of the oil which increases the yield.  
Prolonged hea ting at a high temperature causes hardening of the material that reduces the 
oil yield. So, this is the effect of the temperature . If you of course, the heat causes the 
coagulate s the protein and it reduces the viscosity of the oil which increases the yiel d, but 
it should not be excessive heating if you do go for excessive heatin g that is high 
temperature will cause hardening of the material. The pressure earlier also told the more 
the pressure applied higher yield the oil yield and extraction yield.  
Then s crew rotation speed , in a screw expeller depending upon the type of the press and 
raw material generally , the increase in the screw speed may either increase or decrease 
the oil yield.  Moisture content, low moisture content lead to a better yield of oil. Higher 
moisture results in poor oil recovery. Particle size, coarser the particle size higher will be 
the yield, but at the same time that if they very fine particle size , etc. are there , they may 
choke that they may act as a that some sort of they may cre ate barrier when you are 
applying the pressure particularly.  So, it may become a hard cake and it may reduce the 
oil yield, but also the other drawback  is  that this particle size particles if they are very 
fine particle they may go with along  with the oil and there may be more refining losses 
refining cost cleaning cost etc.   
 
So, here it is about oil seed cake another very important . After the extractio n the cake 
valuable material which we are getting that is particularly depending upon except for the 
mustard seeds which ha ve certain undesirable components in the hull and the dehulled 
mustard seed when it is used particularly there is the thioglucosinoyl ates, etc. which are 
there which are not good for health. So, it is not suitable for human consumption 
otherwise all other most of the oil seeds are used. So, there is after the extraction of the 
like sesame, pumpkin seeds , or even peanut oil or soybean al l this there is the after the 
extraction of the oil the residue that remains that is a very good quality material which 
can be used for various food purposes  Of course, th ese cakes might require certain 
further reprocessing , etc. to make it edible and use  in the food formulation. So, this is the 
oil seed cake which is obtained by de-fatted solvent extraction that is solvent extraction 
 
15 
 cake the bioactive phenols and then the cake is ground into meal.  Marketing of the cake 
meal or it can be fermented or un -fermented can be used as an animal feed etc. So, this 
cake feed depend s upon the process from which particularly if you are taking the cake 
which is obtained from the mechanical extraction.  
So, this cake has a high quantity of oil. So, normally what they do  this is further flaked 
and then it is sent to the solvent extraction. So, that the maximum oil or alternatively this 
cake with little more amount 4, 5 amount percent of the oil can be used i.e. it can be 
further dried, grounded into fine particles , and th en it can be used in various food 
preparations food formulations , etc. So, this biorefinery approach towards the oil seed 
cakes , etc. if you can say it can be used for edible products, cattle feed, it can be biofuel 
or biopolymers value -added products in b ioelectricity, biofertilizer. So, various 
applications can be there of course, as of course, towards the end of this course we will 
discuss some of the potential common technology for utilization of these byproducts of 
the oil which is a valuable byproduct  kale cake or oil seed meats , etc. We will discuss 
about that more detail . 
 
So, the quality of the oil seed and cake this particularly you have taken example of 
sunflower oil and it is obtained by various treatment s we are taking Ghani, hydraulic 
press , and expeller press. So, the pretreatment for Ghani that is if you see the whole seed, 
the whole seed raw , and cooked. So, it has a free fatty acid percent around raw 6.6 
percent cooked less free fatty is 3.3 percent in the oil recovery in both it is about  oil in the 
cake is around 24 percent . As high as 24 percent oil remains in the cake and the protein is 
25 percent.  
So, you see these have a very good sunflower meal, that is in the cake and it has a very 
good quality oil as well as protein both. Similarly , kernel if you see there is a sunflower 
kernel, there is a raw kernel percent , it has 4.1 percent free fatty acids cooked kernel has 
2.2 percent fatty acids.  Oils in the cake , there is about 17.6 percent oil in the cake and 
21.5 percent in the cooked one , and the protein has most in both the 40 and almost 39.4.  
 
16 
 Then when it is used as a Ghani, but when hydraulic press is used then in the whole seed 
that is a hot sunflower seed whole seed it is oil in oil free fatty acid is very less, but in the 
cake oil co ntent is around high that is about 21 percent and in cold press 19.3 percent.  
Similarly, in the kernel raw and cooked, free fatty acid content may be 1.6 to 2.8 percent 
respectively , and oil content in both  the cake is around 22 percent. Then the same thi ng is 
done by expeller expelling then free fatty acid is around 1.5 percent , oil in the cake is 15 
percent like here , that oil in the cake is reduced by expeller expelling and the protein in 
the cake is around 28.7 percent.  
 
So, the various factors which  influence the yield and quality of the grounded oil you can 
see that is where some experiments were conducted that is the heating at it were applied 
at temperature 70, 90, 115, 135 , and 160 degree Celsius and the pressure were 10, 15, 20 , 
and 25 megapasca ls. So, the various particle size s, that is ground nut oil of varying 
particle size , they were subjected to different temperature and pressure conditions and its 
effect on the oil yield was taken the pressing time and oil this is given here at a vertical.  
The effect of particle size and pressing time on oil yield in ground nut heated at 70 degree 
Celsius for 15 minutes and expressed at 20 MPa. This see as the pressing time is 
increasing the oil yield is increasing in both case s.  
Similarly , the other graph  here the pressure versus oil yield effect of pressure on oil yield.  
So, you can see from here in the figure that the rate of oil expression is higher for 
coarsely ground samples than for finely ground samples. The void formed by the coarsely 
ground sample s was bigger than those  of the finely ground samples and thus it enabled 
the oil flow. There was a significant increase in oil yield when applied pressure was 
increased from 10 to 20 mega pascal s, but oil yield was either unchanged or decreased 
slightly whe n the pressure was increased to 25 mega pascal s.  
 
17 
  
So, finally, I will summarize this lecture by saying that the mechanical expression of oil  
involve the application of pressure that is either it uses hydraulic pressing or a  screw  
pressing and these presses are used to force the oil out of the oil -bearing material.  
Generally hydraulic presses are preferred over a screw press as they are easy to operate,  
provide more power , and are more efficient.  This type of expeller is more eff icient than 
Ghani and press -type that is screw expellers that they are more efficient than Ghani and 
press type expeller. Hence the resulting oil cake contains around 5 to 7 percent oil. Oil 
cakes are rich in protein and thus are also used for the manufact ure of protein -rich food 
for human consumption. They can be there is great potential of course, that is th at these 
oil seed cakes should be properly utilized and of course, before that they need to be 
properly that is some processing they need to be refine d and ma de into edible product s 
for fine powder , etc. and the food can be formulated using these or they can be used as a 
protein source.  
 
These are the references that we have used in this lecture. Thank you very much for your 
patience here.  
 
