1 
 Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
 
Hello  everyone.  Namaste.  Now,  today  in this 19th lecture  of this course,  we will discuss  
about  a screw  expelling  or screw  pressing.   
 
The various  topics  that we will cover  in this lecture  or themes  include  what  are the screw  
press  oil expellers,  how do they work,  what  are the types  and characteristics  of screw  
presses,  then influence  of process  parameters  and seed pretreatment  on expelling  
performances  in the screw  expellers,  then also we will take up compression  and pressure  
curve  and its influence  on expelling  performance  and finally,  we will take one or two 
case studies  to explain  the matter.   
2 
  
So, oil screw  press  or screw  oil press,  in the earlier  class  also I gave  you a brief  overview  
of what  are the oil presses ? These  are compact  structured  oil extrusion  machine s which  
are used for extracting  edible  oil from  oilseeds.  Screw  oil presses  are widely  used for 
pressing  various  oilseeds  such as peanut,  soybean,  sesame,  flax seed,  sunflower , etc. It is 
more  suitable  for large -scale  plants  which  produce  various  grades  of cooking  oils. With  
the proper ly designed  pressing  chambers,  the preheating  process  and rotation  of the 
machine  quickly  increase  the temperature  in the chamber  which  speeds  up oilseed  inner  
structure  breaking  and they are pressed  easily  which  releases  the oil easily.  It features  
high edible  oil output,  qualified  cooking  oil, and continuous  operations.  These  save labor  
and energy  about  60 percent  of the electric  power  and 40 percent  of labor  can be saved  
using  these  screw  presses  based  on the same  oil output.   
 
So, in this slide , I have  shown  you the different  types  of screw  presses . They  may be 
single -press  screw,  double -press , and pre-press , and depending  upon  the supplier  
concerned  a wide  variety  of screw  presses  are available  in the market.  The different  
screw  presses  can be classified  into different  categories  like expellers , expanders , and 
twin-screw  systems.   
3 
  
About the screw  pressing  technology , earlier  also I told what  are the different  
pretreatments.  So, basically , the seeds  are given  pretreatments  like thermal,  size 
reduction , or mechanical  sieving  as the case may be depending  upon  the type of the seed, 
its characteristics,  its oil content,  moisture  content , etc., and also what  are the subprop  
that is the method  which  will be used whether  it is going  for direct  spelling  or it is going  
for pre-press  solvent  extraction  or whatever  this ok. So, they are normally  in the thermal  
pretreatmen t it is cooking  and then it is given  for size reduction  like flaking,  flattening,  
grinding,  crushing , etc., and then also in the mechanical  pretreatment , it may be 
mechanical  sieving  like dehulling , etc. So, all these  that are cooked,  dehulled,  
conditioned,  flaked , flattened , or crushed  seeds  are subjected  to either  single  press  here or 
in the double  press  or in the pre-press . This can be in the double  press  or single  press  they 
can be individually  operated  to get the maximum  oil recovery  or they can be used in the 
pre-press  step in which  the quantity  of the oil in the meal  is generally  high that is around  
15 to 18 percent.  They are further  subjected  to solvent  extraction  and then oil which  is 
obtained  by this is sent to refining  treatment . Details  of refining , we will take up 
separately  in the next class.  So, you saw that three  types  of presses  that is one is the 
expeller , the expander,  then the twin screw  expeller . 
 
4 
 Then , let us talk about  first about  the expellers , oil expellers . These expellers  named  after 
the first screw  press  founded  by Anderson  in 1902  are the screw  presses  most  often  
encountered  in the industry.  An expeller  press  is a screw -type machine  that mainly  
presses  oil seeds  through  a caged  barrel -like cavity.  They  consist  of a screw  rotating  in a 
horizontal  perforated  barrel  formed  by regularly  spaced  metal  bars which  are that thin 
space s can vary from  0.5 to 0.1 mm that is the spacing  that can be adjusted  and the oil 
flows  along  this barrel.  Raw material  enters  one side of the press  as you can see here and 
then the waste  product  or which  say that is more  specifically  the cake, as it cakes  exits to 
the other  side. The machine  uses friction  and continuous  pressure  from  the screw  drive  to 
move  and compress  the seed material.   
 
The oil seeps through  the small  openings  that do not allow  seed fiber  solids  to pass that is 
it is just only it allowed  that the openings  are it is just allowed  to oil to pass fibers  do not 
work  they are retained  on the seed.  Afterwards , the seeds  are formed  into a hardened  
press  cake which  is removed  from  the machine  from  the other  end. The pressure  involved  
in expell er pressing  creates  heat in the range  of around  60 to 99 degree  Celsius.  Raw 
materials  are typically  heated  up to around  121 degree  Celsius  to make  the pressing  more  
efficient.  Otherwise , the pressing  itself  will heat the oil to around  85 to 93 degree  Celsius.  
Some  companies  claim  that they use cooling  apparatus  to reduce  this temperature  to 
protect  certain  properties  of the oil that is being  extracted  in this machine.   
5 
  
In the schematic  figure  here you can see that there  is a feed hopper  through  this that is the 
seeds  are conditioned  and crushed  seeds  are fed to the that is expeller  and here the screw  
there  is a screw  which  you can see rotates  within  a cage barrel  is lined  with case-
hardened  tool steel bars.  And the spacers  are provided  between  the lining  bars. They 
permit  the drainage  of the oil as the pressure  on the feed material  is increased.  At the 
discharge  end, there  is a movable  cone  or choke  mechanism  which  controls  the operating  
pressure  by changing  the width  of the annular  space  through  which  the press  cake must  
pass.  The choke  is typically  adjusted  by a hand  wheel  on the opposite  end of the screw,  
there  is here.  Then the heat generated  as a result  of friction  can be dissipated  by cooling  
the cage and shaft  with water.   
 
At the screw  end, a cone  partially  obstructs  the discharge  area of the meal  causing  the 
pressure  to increase,  or which  that is the pressure  increase  needed  to extract  the oil. The 
oil excluded  from  the cake is discharged  through  the slots between  the bars.  However,  if 
the space  between  the bars is too small  or the compaction  of the press  cake is too high the 
oil rises along  the screw  towards  the feed.  This causes  a phenomenon of lubricating  
which  reduces  friction  between  the cake and the bar and therefore,  it decreases  the 
effectiveness  of the press.  In this type of press  pressure  up to 110 mega pascal s are 
reported  and a minimum  oil content  in the meal  to as low as 3.5 percent  can be obtained.  
6 
 And this if you can get 3.5 percent  it is a very good  oil explorer  its efficiency  can be 
considered  very good.  
 
Then the other  presses  are the expanders.  Expanders  are closed  extruders  where  the seeds  
are crushed  but without  oil extraction.  The screw  is locked  in a closed  system  in which  
nozzles  are regularly  made  to enable  water  or steam  injection.  This mode  of seed 
crushing  can be considered  as a seed preparation  before  a second  mechanical  or solvent  
extraction  step. So, expanders  normally  can be treated  as a preparatory  step. 
Indeed,  at the end of the screw , of course , there  is a perforated  plate  through  which  
material  is extruded  and this more  or less expanded  mass  is suited  for the extraction  
solvent  that is better  suited  for the next step that is recovery  of oil through  solvent  
extraction.  And mainly  for this reason , this method  is mostly  used for low oil seeds,  low 
oil containing  oil seeds  like soybean , etc. However,  some  models  have  in the screw  end 
and extraction  zone  ensuring  some  extraction  of oil. Whereas,  oil seed treatment  become s 
feasible  since  the obtained  pellets  have  oil content  in the range  of about  30 to 35 percent.   
 
Now  here it is the twin-screw  system . It is shown  here, that these twin -screw systems  are 
mainly  extruders  which  use begun to grow  and now they are becoming  more  and more  
popular  in oilseed  processing.  The advantage  of this type of device  is the arrangement  of 
7 
 the screws  that can allow  a thermomechanical  treatment  of seeds  and avoid  the 
pretreatment  steps.  So, this can be used directly  without  any pretreatment  to get the oil. 
You can see here in the screw  that there  is a feeding  zone,  there  are the twin screw s 
which  rotate  that is the, and then in the from  the feeding  zone  the material  when  it rotates  
the screw  it moves  the material  forward  in the transport  zone  where  the seeds  are that is 
then pressed  by the screw  and the air begins  to be expulsed  that is air, it goes out from  the 
cell at this stage  when  it is crushed.   
Then  comes  the compression  zone  where  seed crushing  occurs  and air contained  in this 
zone  between  the seeds  is expulsed  that is more  air almost  all air is expulsed.  And then 
from  here compression  zone  the seed is passed  through  the exudation  zone  and in this 
exudation  zone  it is actually  as you can see here that is seed is compressed.  More  
pressure  is applied  and the oil is exuded  from  the air. Then  finally,  it moves  further  to the 
expansion  zone  where  press  releases  provoke  the water  vaporization  which  is responsible  
for the meal  expansion  and the air expansion.  So, you get the meal  as well as oil both in 
this case.  
 
So, in this slide  I have  just tried to give you a comparison  of the screw  presses  
characteristics  that is these three  expanders,  expellers , and twin-screw  systems  they are 
characteristics , etc. And so, you can see that expanders , they here the entry  of the 
material  is forced  that there  is a mechani cal forced  entry  and there  is a variable  warm  
flight  to flight  distance  between  the diameter.  Discharge  is normally  through  a perforated  
plate  and an unperforated  barrel  that is possibly  perforated  at the screw  end is provided  
and it contains  an intermediary  injection  of steam  or liquid  is possible  here in this case.   
Then  see the characteristics  of the expellers . The expellers  may be Farm scale  expellers  
or industrial  scale  expellers  and in the Farm scale  expellers , the feeding  is normally  on 
demand  by gravity  whereas,  on the industrial  scale  it is forced  entry.  Then  the Farm scale  
expellers  there  is a constant  warm  flight  to flight  distance  and diameter  whereas,  in the 
industrial  scale  there  is a variable  warm  flight  to flight  distance  and diameter  that can be 
adjusted  depending  upon  the type of the seal being  pressed.  Then  in the Farm scale  
8 
 expellers , discharges  through  a die or choke  in the industrial  stage , it is discharged  
through  an annular  space.  In the Farm scale  expellers,  they have  the perforated  barrel  
whereas,  industrial  scale  expellers  have  bars barrel  and the bars and barrel  and screw  
could  possibly  be refrigerated  here cooled  here as per the requirement  so that the oil and 
milk quality  can be controlled.   
In the twin-screw  systems  obviously,  there  is a forced  entry  of the material  it has also a 
variable  warm  flight  to flight  distance  and diameter  in this case discharge  is through  an 
annular  space  you can see here and an unperforated  barrel  is used and their intermediary  
injection  of steam  or liquid  is possible  in this case.  So, it was just a comparison  between  
three  types  of presses.   
 
Now,  let us see what  are the influence  of the process  parameters  and seed pretreatment  or 
pressing  performance  of these  expellers . So, different  properties  that is both the process  
parameters  as well as what  are the various  pretreatment s of the seed have  a significant  
effect  on the pressing  performance.  So, let us see one by one, first is the varietal  effect . 
The difference  in pressing  behavior  between  the two varieties  can be explained  by the 
thinner  hull of yellow  flax and this thinner  hull could  be a less efficient  drainer  during  the 
pressing.  So, this is one example  of how this different  varieties  these  different  varieties  
may be their hulls  or husks , etc. There  may be some  differences  etc. and because  of this 
difference , there  may be difference s in the performance  of the expression.  During  oil 
expression , the hull is considered  an uncompressible  matter  and it is responsible  for the 
formation  of drainage  pores within  the cake.  Thinner  hulls  are more  sensitive  to 
compression  and allow  less pore formation.  Oil flowing  through  cake occurring  by these  
pores , the pore size and the number  decrease  could  be responsible  for a less efficient  
process . 
In this table , you can see that the species  there  are sunflower  two species  varieties  one 
and two is taken , and in both 290 rpm of the speed  at 69 mega pascal  pressure  was used.  
And in this case,  you can see in variety  one the oil yield  was 61 to 62 percent  whereas,  in 
variety  two the oil yield  was 82 percent.  In the capacity  also, in the variety  one kg per 
9 
 hour it was around  43 kg per hour whereas,  in the second  variety  29 kg per hour.  The 
difference  you can see here in both the moisture  content , in the first variety  is around  12.4 
percent  in second  variety  is 6.4 percent  and also the oil content , the first variety  has oil 
content  of around  40 percent,  the variety  two contains  around  43 percent.  Similarly,  the 
dehulled  sesame  of two varieties  Yandev 55 and E8 and when  they have expressed  the 
same  operating  condition  which  is 45 rpm screw  speed.  In the Yandev variety , the oil 
yield  was 66 percent  whereas,  in the E8 variety  the oil yield  was only 61 percent,  while  
both have  moisture  content  of about  8.3 percent.  Oil content  in those  i.e. in the Yandev  
variety  was 55, and in the E8 variety  was 54 percent  wet basis . Similarly,  yellow  linseed  
that they were  subjected  to two operating  conditions  which  are omega  variety  at 24 rpm 
and 6 mm screw  speed that is the oil yield  was 85.7 percent, capacity 5.53 kg and 
moisture  content  was 6.1 percent.  So, this shows  that yes, the different  varieties  of the 
seed type of the seed that is their process  parameters  and pretreatment.  The variety  is one 
important  parameter  that need s to be considered.   
 
The temperature  of the pressing  inside  the screw  where  when  the pressure  is increased  
obviously,  the temperature  will also get increased.  So, the rise in temperature  causes  a 
decrease  in oil viscosity  which  is favorable  to its flow,  but it can also alter the cellular  
structure  and plasticity  of the raw material . The seed temperature  increases  result ing in an 
increase  of barrel  temperature.  However,  concomitant  heating  increases  the oil yield  and 
the capacity  of the press . This is usually  accompanied  by a decrease  in oil quality.  
However,  during  the continuous  screw  pressing  the elevated  temperature  of oilseed  may 
be the result  of the mechanical  energy  dissipated  within  the press  due to friction.  So, 
temperature  has an important  influence  on the process  efficiency.   
Then  screw  rotation  speed,  rotation  speed  in the earlier  table  you saw the effect  of this 
screw  rotation  speed  also that it is an operating  parameter  that does not act directly  on the 
performance  of pressing.  This parameter  acts via a change  in the pressure  and 
temperature  in the barrel  because  screw  rotation  speed  will affect  the pressure  increase  
and thereby  temperature  increase  temperature  change  in the barrel.  
10 
  
Increasing  the screw  rotation  speed  causes  a pressure  decrease  and a temperature  
increase.  Thus,  according  to the type of press  considered  and the type of raw material  
used, increas ing the screw  rotation  speed  can lead to an oil yield  increase  or decrease  as 
the case may be. Screw  rotation  speed  can be related  to the oilseed  deformation  velocity  
depending  upon  the screw  geometry.  
 
Here  I have  just given  you a comparison  that is how the various  parameter s both press  
parameters  as well as seed treatment  influence  the properties  explaining  efficiency.  So, if 
you see the press  parameter  like choke  opening,  if the choke  opening  is lower  down  or is 
reduced  then maximum  pressure  in the barrel  will increase.  The b arrel temperature  will 
increase.  However,  the meal  residual  oil content  as well as the capacity  of the expeller  
will decrease  if the choke  opening  is reduced.   
Now,  if the screw  rotation  speed  is reduced , what  influence  it will have?  It will increase  
the maximum  pressure  in the barrel,  but it will cause  a reduction  in the oil capacity  meal  
residual  oil content  as well as in the barrel  temperature.  Now,  the seed treatment  like 
heating , if you give more  heat treatment,  it will result  in maximum  pressure  in the barrel  
that is it will increase  the maximum  pressure  in the barrel  as well as capacity,  but it will 
reduce  the residual  oil content  in the meal  that means  there  is more  and more  oil is 
11 
 extracted  and it will result  into the more  increase  in the temperature  obviously,  that is 
why you are getting  better  recovery  here if the heating  of the seed during  the pre-
treatment  process  is increased.  Then  the flaking,  flaking  plus heating , if it is flaked  and 
then heat and if the heating  is increased  it will cause  an increase  in the maximum  pressure  
in the barrel,  it will also cause  an increase  in the capacity  and increase  in the temperature  
and it will reduce  the residual  oil content  in the meal.  Seed  moisture  content , if it 
increases  increasing  the seed moisture  content  will cause  a reduction  in the barrel  
pressure,  reduction  in the capacity,  and reduction  in the barrel  temperature , and all these  
influences  will obviously,  result  in more  oil content  in the meal  there  is less efficiency  
and less extraction  of the oil. 
 
Then  see here, the compression  and pressure  curve.  So, you know  that the in the screw  
spelling  the screw  is designed , so that the volume  displacement  at the end that is the feed 
end of the press  is considerably  greater  than that at the discharge  end. As a result,  when  
the material  is conveyed  from  the feed end to the discharge  end the pressure  increases.  
You can see that from  the feed end when  it is going  to the discharge  first the pressure  
increases  and oil is expelled  through  the slots between  the cage lining  barrel.  The 
maximum  radial  pressure  is the radial  pressure  which  is increasing  and then it reaches  to 
maximum  which  is followed  by axial  pressure.  
The maximum  radial  pressure  is generated  at the feed end of the ram section.  This is the 
ram section  you can see here in this is the feed section  of the screw  then the ram section  
and then the plug section.  As it goes that is to the discharge  point  the volume  
displacement  will be less, here this volume  displacement  is more  in the feed section.  The 
axial  pressure  follows  the radial  pressure  up to the beginning  of the plug section  and then 
the fall-off in the axial  pressure  towards  the discharge  end is less marked  as you can see 
here in this figure.  A pressure  gradient  exists  towards  both the end of the press.  So, this is 
the compression  and pressure  curve  obviously,  if you get more  pressure , it influences  
what I have  already  given  you. So, it will result  in more  oil recovery.  This is the feed 
point,  discharge  point , and distance  along  the barrel  in this figure.   
12 
  
Then  a case study, you see the optimization  of the sesame  oil extraction  by screw  
pressing  at low temperature.  The effect  of moisture  content,  restriction  dye, and pressing  
speed  is shown  on the oil recovery.  The moisture  content  is known  as seed moisture  
content  SMC . It was used from  7 to 17 percent , restriction  dye (RD) was used at 4 and 6 
mm, and pressing  speed  was 20 and 60 rpm that is PS. So, the salient  finding  that the 
experiment  was conducted  and then it was found  that water  addition  before  pressing  
causes  an expansion  and breaking  of cell structure  that increases  plasticity  and 
contributes  to press  feeding  owing  to its effects  on barrel  lubricants.  However,  the high 
moisture  content  may result  in poor oil recoveries  because  of insufficient  friction  during  
the pressing . You can see here that if the up to certain  moisture  content  the oil recovery  
increases  and beyond  which  it decreases.  The highest  oil recovery  was obtained  by using  
a combination  of 12 percent  seed moisture  content  approximately  you can see here 20 
rpm pressing  speed  and 4 mm restriction  dye.  
At the moisture  content , an increase  in both the PS and the RD. that is the pressing  speed  
as well as restriction  dye produced  a significant  reduction  in the oil recovery.  This 
treatment  also showed  the lowest  value  of the fine solid  content  in the oil which  is about  
4.7 percent  or so.  
 
13 
 Another  case study.  In this work , the highest  oil recovery  as you can see here in the 
pressing  temperature  is basically  not sesame,  but groundnut  alright  that is only written  
here.  So, the relationship  between  oil recovery  and pressing  temperature , and the second  
graph  shows  the relationship  between  oil recovery  and seed moisture  content.  So, 
groundnut  seeds  were  pressed  at temperature  25, 50, and 70 degree  Celsius  and the 
moisture  content  of the seeds  were  about  2.5, 4.5, and 7.5 percent.  At moisture  content  
that is about  7.5 percent  moisture  content  and 50 degree  Celsius  temperature . An increase  
the temperature  from  up to 70 degree  Celsius  produced  a significant  reduction  in oil 
recovery.  And this might  be mainly  due to the frequent  choking  problems  during  press  
operation s. A significant  increase  in tocopherol  content  and acid and K232  values  with 
increasing  pressing  temperatures  was also reported.   
.  
Then  effect  of another  case study  is the effect  of microwave s on mechanical  extraction  
yield  and quality  of vegetable  oil. You can see here that it was basically , Chilean  hazelnut  
seeds  the microwave  treatment  pretreatment  was given  power  400 and 600 watts, and 
time was 180, 210, and 240 seconds , and pressing  was done  at 7.1 mega pascal  for 5 
minutes . In the figure  here, in A and B, you can see it is a light photomicrograph  of 
Chilean  hazelnut  seeds,  A is the untreated  seed and B the second  one is the microwave  
pretreatment  of the seed.  There is a clear -cut difference  that can be seen and both these  
have  significant  effect s on the oil recovery.  That is microwave  pretreatment  method  can 
help with the microstructural  modification  of substrate  tissues  and the increase  in mass  
transfer  of the oil and other  liquids  improving  the extraction  oil yield.  In effect , the oil 
obtained  from  microwave  pretreatment  seeds  has higher  stability  to the oxidative  
deterioration  that is incubation  time is about  23.9 almost  24 hours  with respect  to the 
untreated  sample  which  had an induction  time of around  9 hours.  
14 
  
The effect  of moisture  on pressing  rate and sediment  content . It was a Jatropha seed , 
moisture  content  was about  7, 8, 9, 10, and 12 percent  approximately  and the cooking  
time was 5, 10, 15, and 20 minutes  it was an experimental  by Prasad  et al. It was reported  
and you can see that with an increase  in the moisture  content  that is up to 12 percent , 
there  is a pressing  rate also increases  and both these have  the influence  on the sediment  
content  in the oil, both in the cooked  and uncooked.  The pressing  rate was decreased  for 
both the cooked  and uncooked  samples  as the moisture  content  reduced  from  12.16  
percent  to around  7 percent  or so it is decreased.  Moisture  behaved  as a lubricant  that 
reduced  the resistance  during  pressing  resulting  in a higher  pressing  rate. On the other  
hand , the sediment  content  increased  with the increase  in moisture  content.  The increased  
frictional  resistance  from  protein  denaturation  and decreased  moisture  results  in higher  
back  pressure.  High  back  pressure  diverts  more  seeds  or more  solids  to the barrel  
opening.   
 
Similarly,  in this, you can say the effect  of the same  experiment  is the effect  of moisture  
content  on oil recovery  and the effect  of moisture  content  on the residual  oil in the meal  
both in the case of cooked  and uncooked  seeds.  The oil recovery  increased  with increased  
seed moisture  and reached  the highest  value  at a moisture  content  of around  8 percent  dry 
basis  for cooked  seeds  and almost  9.86 or 10 percent  dry basis  for uncooked  seeds.  
15 
 Further  increase  in seed moisture , however,  resulted  in a rapid  decrease  in oil recovery  
this can be related  to the mucilage  development  on oil cells.  A comparison  of the oil 
recovery  shows  that the oil yields  obtained  from  the uncooked  samples  were  lower  than 
those  from  the cooked  samples  and the trend  of residual  oil was reverse d so that of the oil 
recovery.   
 
In the oil extraction  from  the palm  kernel , you can see that compressive  stress  was used 
about  10, 20, and 30 mega pascal s. The f eeding  rate was 50, 100, and 150 kg per hour, 
and screw  speed  (rpm)  was 50, 80, and 110 rpm, and these  are the response  surface  graph  
showing  the effect  of feed rate and compressive  stress  on the oil yield  as well as speed  
and feeding  rate on the oil yield.  Oil yield , as you can see from  this graph , the oil yield  is 
directly  proportional  to the compressive  stress . This may be attributed  to the compression  
of the oil-bearing  materials  thus forcing  the oil to escape.  Within  the studied  range  oil 
yield  decreased  with an increase  in speed  while  it increased  with an increase  in the 
feeding  rate. An i ncrease  in the rate of feeding  is accomplished  with an increase  in 
pressure.  Slight  variation  of oil yield  with feeding  rate may be attributed  to the fact that 
oil is expressed  from  the raw material  as a result  of pressure  buildup  associated  with 
loading.   
 
16 
 So, finally,  I would  summarize  this lecture  by saying  that yes, the continuous  mechanical  
expression  process  is currently  the most  commonly  encountered  in the processing  of oil 
seeds  or oleaginous  seeds.  This method  can be used from  the farm  scale  wher e there  are 
machines  that can handle  3 to 100 kg per hour to the industrial  scale  that is which  can use 
even  150 tons per day. This method  has been  widely  studied  on a laboratory  scale  to 
evaluate  the effect  of process  parameters  like screw  to rotation  speed,  back  pressure  and 
temperature,  material  characteristics,  water  content , and pretreatment  type of the seed 
performance,  oil yield , and capacity.   
 
So, these  are the references  that are used in this lecture.   
 
Thank  you very much  for your patience  here.  Thank  you. 
