Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week  03: Edible Oils - Chemistry & Properties  
Lecture 12: Chemical Properties of Edible Oils  
 
 
 
 
Hello  everybody, Namaskar. Now, we are in lecture 12.  In lecture 11, we discussed mainly 
the physical properties or engineering properties of oils, edible oils.  Now, in this next half 
an hour in lecture 12, let us study the chemical properties of edib le oils.  Here, we will 
discuss key chemical properties and reactions, methylation of carboxyl groups, reactions 
of unsaturated fatty acids, halogen addition reaction , and then chemical quality parameters 
that is what are the various parameters which are evaluated  and tested in the laboratory  to 
assess the chemical characteristic, the chemical quality of the oils.  
 
Lipids are a dissimilar group of biological compounds, but they are poised of a chain of 
hydrocarbons ending with the groups of bonded oxygen and hydr ogen.  Chemically the 
acidic carboxyl group of the fatty acid is the most reactive portion. It reacts with the alcohol 
to yield ester s releasing water molecule s and that is how triglyceride, monoglyceride, 
diglycerides are formed . In the earlier  classes  we have had a glimpse of this.  In complex 
lipids, the esters , which is principal cova lent bond link the fatty acid moieties  to other 
groups like ROR that is the second  chemical. Ether bonds also links  fatty acids and is 
chemically more stable as compared to the ester bond.   
 
Key properties of the oil lipids , that is the chemical properties  etcetera may be solubility 
that is the lipids are soluble in nonpolar solvents like  ether, chloroform,  and benzene, but 
they are insoluble in water. Consistency  is anothe r important property . Most of the lipids 
are colorless, odorless , and tasteless . Being lighter than water, they have a specific gravity  
in the range of 0.91 to 0.92.  The consistency of lipids depends upon the presence of 
saturated and/or unsaturated  fatty acids.  Hydrolysis  is brought about in the presence of 
acids or alkalis under the activity of enzyme lipases . Acid hydrolysis results in the 
formation of glycerol and a long chain of fatty acids .  
 
Saponification value or saponification reaction is anoth er important property that is 
alkaline  hydrolysis of fat results in the formation of sodium or potassium salts of the fatty  
acid called soaps , that is if the hydrolytic agent is an alkali.  So, the free fatty acids that are 
released react  with the alkali  and they form sodium salt of fatty acid or potassium salt of 
fatty acid and that is  the soap formation . The hydrogenation  reaction is the conversion of 
liquid vegetable oil into solid vegetable  ghee by reacting with hydrogen gas in the presence 
of a catalys t. The reaction catalyst is nickel and the reac tion takes place at around 200 
degree Celsius.  Another important chemical property is the emulsification . When the fats 
and oils  are rubbed with water , the large molecules of lipids break into smaller ones  
forming  the emulsion, and the process is called emulsification.  
 
So, let us see the  chemistry of all these reactions , which we have discussed . Hydrolysis  is 
the reaction of the three fatty acids of the triglyceride s with three  molecules  of water . On 
heating three free fatty acids are released and water molecules  replace the fatty acids in the 
triglycerides thus forming glycerol.  So, the  triglyceride s and  water on heating release 
glycerol plus three  fatty acids which  is the hydrolysis  reaction . 
 
Hydrolysis i s the reaction of water with fats. This results in the splitting of some of the 
fatty acids from the oil or fat, yielding some free fatty acids.  This hydrolysis reaction takes 
place at the junction of the fatty acid and the glycerol  portion of the molecule .  Hydrolysis 
is accelerated by high temperatures  and the presence of an excessive amount of  water.  This 
reaction is especially significant in the preparation  of deep -fried  foods where the frying fat  
may be at a temperature of 170 to  180 degrees Celsius a nd the food that is fried is high in 
moisture.  In that case , the moisture content present in the food also causes the lipids  to 
hydrolyze and therefore, more amount of free fatty acids is formed. E xcessive free fatty 
acids influence the frying properties,  heat transfer capacities, and other engineering 
properties of the fats and oils . Excessively high levels  of free fatty acids may result in  
excessive smoking and even affect the flavor of the fried food . If the oil has more amount 
of free fatty acids , then the food fried will have more absorption of oil into it, it will have 
cracked surfaces, it will develop a darker  brown color . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Then the other reaction is hydrogenation as I told you t hat is where you see fatty acid which 
has unsaturated linkage . So, h ydrogen ation  is basically the addition of hydrogen un der 
controlled conditions into the un saturation bond , and then unsaturated fatty acids become 
saturated fatty acids  where nickel is a catalyst . The unsaturated fatty acid triglyceride is 
liquid at  room temperature and then when it becomes saturated it becomes solid  at room 
temperature . 
 
This is one of the more important chemical reactions of food oils and fats, especially  the 
oils. It is one of the important modification reaction details of its c hemistry and technology 
that we will discuss separately when we discuss the modification processes of fats and  oils.  
It is a typical example of the reaction that occurs at the point of unsaturation or double  
bond . Hydrogen is added directly to the point o f unsaturation in the fatty  acids . Gaseous 
hydrogen is used at elevated oil temperatures under increase d pressure and in the presence 
of a suitable catalyst such as nickel compound.  This reaction is used to make fat products 
with greater flavor stability.   Hydrogenation also permits the conversion of liquid veget able 
oil into solid shortening and semi -solid  plastic shortening that are better a dapted for use in 
deep frying, baking , and so on.  So, by controlling the hydrogenation , one can go even with 
the s elective hydrogenation to produce the solid fat having proper characteristics, proper 
melting characteristics, proper molecular packing etcetera.  
 
Another  important reaction that oils undergo is oxidation .  The oil fatty acids and 
unsaturated fatty acids , etcetera , when they come in contact with air and heat, light, tim e, 
etc. act as catalysts . Then peroxide is formed , that is free fatty acid plus oxygen which  
gives peroxide free radicals . And this is basically peroxide formation is the basic  oxidation 
reaction  and this again has a very important role to play in the development of rancidity , 
that is auto-oxidation  process by whic h the oil becomes rancid. The oxidation reaction will 
adversely affect both the flavor of the fat and the  food in which it is used . 
 
 
   
Oxidation induced by air at room temperature is referred to as auto-oxidation .  As I told 
you products  containing a higher proportion of unsaturated fatty acids are  more prone to 
oxidation than those containing lesser amounts.  The rate of oxidatio n increases with an 
increase in temperature, exposure to oxygen in the  air, the presence of light , and contact 
with the material s that are classified as pro -oxidants  because these increase the rate of 
oxidation.   
 
Now next important reaction is the sapon ification reaction which in the introductory slide 
I gave  you that is what is saponification.  It is basically the process of making soap from 
alkali and fat or oil, vegetable oil , and animal fats or fatty acid esters in the form of 
triglyceride you  know i t.  So, the alkali when it is used breaks the ester bond as you can 
see in these reactions  that is the RRR shown are the ester linkages.  So, when it comes in 
contact with an alkali, strong alkali like sodium hydroxide solution , it will break this ester 
linkage, but these  3 fatty acids react with  sodium and this OH goes here.  So, it becomes 
CH2OH, CHOH, and CH2OH , and the 3 fatty acids form  sodium salt of  these fatty acids , 
and this sodium salt of fatty acids is basically called soap . So, this is the sapon ification 
reaction.  
 
Then next is the polymerization.  Polymerization is the reaction of fat with itself whereby 
relatively small molecules  of oils or fat combine  to form much larger molecules.  
Polymerization may occur either at the point of unsaturatio n on fatty acid chains or at the  
juncture of the fatty acids and the glycerol molecule.  Polymerization can occur in the deep 
frying of foods where frying is done at temperatures  ranging from around 163 to 190 
degrees  Celsius. The reaction is accelerated b y frying at too high a temperature , above 180 
degrees Celsius , the presence of oxygen, the use of poor quality frying fat , and poor frying 
practice. The rate of polymerization increases with the amount of unsaturation in the fat or 
oil.   
 
 
 
 
 
Another  important reaction is esterification you know which  is the combining or 
recombination  of the free fatty acids with the glycerol molecule.  It is an important 
commercial reaction.  It involves t he production of monosylglyceerides, diaglycerides  from 
triglycerid es and glycerols  etcetera . The vegetable -based  oils and fats are reacted with 
methyl alcohol  methanol, and then fatty acid methyl ester  and glycerin  are formed.  
 
Then  inter esterification reaction is another very important process reactions as these 
allow s to have the oils and fats of specific properties . Inter esterification, the name itself 
indicate it is the migration and interchan ge of fatty acid radicals from one fat to another or 
from one point to another.  This is done to develop new fat molecules t hat have specific 
properties.  Inter esterification or  ester interchange rearrangement reactions may also be 
subdivided  into either random inter esterification or directed inter esterification and you  
can see here , that in the  triglyceride there is R 1, R1, and R 2 that is R 1 is 2, R 2 is the 2 nd 
position. Then it can interchange the R2 position, here in R 1, R 2 , and R 2 , which is  R 
double prime. So, this can be in various positions  that are there is and in within the same 
molecule the positioning  of fatt y acids is interchange d.  This interchange , it changes the 
characteristic, particular properties , etcetera of the fatty  acids.  
 
Halogenation includes chlorine, bromine , and iodine and  they can readily add to the double 
bond of the unsaturated fatty acids . As you can see  here in this sunflower oil , for example, 
this is unsaturated linkages.  In this R 1 and R 2 position , there are 2 unsaturated bonds and 
in R 3 there is one.  So, in these 2 positions,  this can be either in the first or in the s econd 
unsatu rated position b ecomes halogenated .   So, this halogenated oil like even brominated 
vegetable oil you must have heard that sometimes  this addition of halogens etcetera in oil 
may adversely affect the properties  and characteristics of the oils.   
 
Then met hylation of the carboxyl group like carboxyl methyl transferase there is there  have  
course conditions  and they can transfer like  fatty acid esters or di esters  or bioplastic or 
fatty acid esters are used in biodiesel production acyl transferases may help in re-
methylation  of carboxyl group which can be  used in the for specific suitable for the 
pharmaceutical and other applications ok.  
 
Methylation is a common modification in biological systems that involv es a transfer  of 
methyl group f rom a donor molecule to a substrat e.  So, carboxyl group methylation of 
fatty acids using MT  enzyme is a route currently being  explored for the production of 
biodiesel. Bi odiesel is composed of fatty acid met hyl esters  (FAMEs)  and it is a sustainable 
alternative  to petroleum fuels.  The standard approach to produce FAM Es is through the 
transesterification  of triglycerides  from vegetable oil  with methanol using an alkaline 
catalyst.   
 
Then let me discuss some of the chemical quality parameters of edible oil . In quality control  
of edible oil s, several parameters are used for the analysis of these values  like free fatty 
acid level, unsaturation level, and degradation of products which are analyzed in the 
laboratory and  these values can be used to indicate to assess the quality of the oil . Also , 
they determine the quality and hence the economic value of the product.  So, the quality  
parameters which are generally analyzed include iodine value, saponification  value, 
peroxide value, anisidine  value, totox value, acid value as well as the  total polar 
compound s.   
 
 
The iodine value  is the degree of unsaturation th at can be expressed in terms of  the iodine 
value of the fat.  The iodine value is defined as the number of grams of iodine that will react 
with the double  bond in 100 grams  of fat.  The higher the iodine value the more a specific 
oil or fat is unsaturated.  So, the typical iodine value of crude soybean oil is in the range of 
125 to 135 .  So, there is a specific protocol that is used in the laboratory for the 
determination  which  is the titration method.   
ğ¼ğ‘œğ‘‘ğ‘–ğ‘›ğ‘’  ğ‘£ğ‘ğ‘™ğ‘¢ğ‘’ =(ğ‘âˆ’ğ‘£)âˆ—ğ‘âˆ—126 .9âˆ— 100
ğ‘¤âˆ—1000  
That is B is the quantity of sodium thiosulfate used for the blank titration, v is the quantity  
of thiosulphate for the sample, that is oil sample in which we are analyzing the iodine  value 
and then N is the normality of sodium thiosulfate solution, W is the weight of oil  sample 
and 126.9 is the molecular weight of iodine.  So, using this process one can find out the 
iodine value.  
 
The saponification  value  is defined as the amo unt of alkali expressed  in milligrams  of KOH  
per gram sample required to saponify a defined amount of sample.  It is conveniently 
determined through saponification of a known amount of oil or fat with excess KOH  
solution followed by bac k titration of the excess base with the acid solution in  the presence 
of phenolphthalein as an indicator.  The amount of base needed for sapo nification  of the 
fatty acid chain s is then indirectly  determined from the excess base that remains unreacted.   
ğ‘†ğ‘‰=(ğ´âˆ’ğµ)âˆ—ğ‘âˆ—56.1
ğ‘Š 
where A is the amount of sulfuric  acid for the blank  in ml ,  
B is the amount of sulfuric acid used for the sample  in ml,  
W is the weight  of sample  in dry bas is g and  
N is the normality of sulfuric acid solution and 56. 1 is the equivalent weight  of KOH.  
 
Peroxide value is the measure of peroxide contained in the oil, peroxide value is determined  
by measuring iodine released from potassium i odide.  
ğ‘ğ‘’ğ‘Ÿğ‘œğ‘¥ğ‘–ğ‘‘ğ‘’  ğ‘£ğ‘ğ‘™ğ‘¢ğ‘’  (ğ‘šğ‘’ğ‘
ğ‘˜ğ‘” ğ‘œğ‘–ğ‘™)=(ğ‘†âˆ’ğµ)âˆ—ğ‘Šâˆ—ğ‘ 
 
where B is the  volume of sodium thiosulfate used for blank,  
W is the weight of the sample,  
S is the volume  of sodium thiosulfate consumed by the sample and  
N is the normality  of the standard sodium  thiosulfate.  
 
 
Anisidine value is measure of the aldehyde level of an oil or fat, in particular those  that are 
unsaturated and principally the  two alkenals .  To determine the anisidine value a solution 
of oil or fat  in iso -octan e is reacted with p -anisidine in a glacial acetic acid  to form 
yellowish  reaction product s.  The anisidine value is then determined fro m the absorbance 
measured at 350  nanometers  both before  and after the reaction.  TOTOX value indicates 
the oxidati on level of the oil .  
ğ‘‡ğ‘‚ğ‘‡ğ‘‚ğ‘‹ =2ğ‘ƒğ‘‰+ğ‘âˆ’ğ´ğ‘‰ 
where PV is the peroxide value and  
p-AV is the p-anisidine value, respectively.   
So, 2 multiplied by PV plus the p -anisidine value gives total oxidation TOTOX value.   
 
Determination of a percentage o f total polar compounds in oils and fried foods is a widely 
accepte d parameter an d reliable benchmark to decide whether the oil is safe for further use 
or not.  The TPC value refers to all degraded products present in the oil and is measured to 
check  the degradation of the oil.  Monitoring  frying oil for the total polar cont ent makes 
sure that a particular product is of consistent  quality and is safe for human consumption.  
According to the official methods the fat or oil is separated into polar and nonpolar 
compound  fractions by preparative column chromatography . Here you can see that,1 gram  
of oil is taken then 150 ml of  light petroleum and diethyl  ether in ratio 87:  13 and then 
diethyl  ether 150 ml is added .  These  fractions are the nonpolar and polar compounds  and 
these are generated by the  TLC plate (thin liquid chromatography ).  
 
 
 
Free fatty acids are hydrolysis products of triglycerides in vegetable  oil.  In edible oils their 
formation occurs primarily during the production and the storage procedu res of the oil and 
in general during the handling of the raw materials.  An established method to measure the 
content of free fat ty acids is the so-called  acid value , referred to as the amount of po tassium 
hydroxide per milligram of KOH  required to neutralize  the acidic fraction in 1 gram of the 
sample that is milligram KOH  per gram of oil . The acid value is a volumetric method for 
the determination of free fatty acids in lipids  that consists  of the titration of the sample with 
a standard ized ethanol ic solution of KOH  using phenolphthalein as an end-point  indicator.  
 
In this table there is chemical properties of some of the commercial edible oils are given 
and these parameters  are set by FOA/ WHO  as standard  for these seven edible oils . The free 
fatty acid content in the soybean oil should be nil, an acid value  maximum of 0.6, a 
saponific ation value that is milligram KOH  per gram of oil maybe  189 to 195 , a peroxide 
value maximum  of 10, an ash content percent should be 5 to 2.5  percent  and a smoke point 
is 232 degree Celsius . Sunflow er oil its acid value is 0.6 milligram OH per gram, its 
saponification value is 188 to 194 , peroxide value in milli equivalent per kg is 10 , in fact  
same  for all these  oils, and most of these oils their ash contents ranges from 1.5 to 1.25 and 
for soybean  oil, sunflower oil, sunlit  oil, hayat  oil, Avena  oil, their smoke point is from  230 
to 232 degree Celsius, their  acid value i s 0.6 and free fatty acid may be for hayap oil 0.15 
percent, Avena  oil 0.15  percentage  of oleic acid . 
 
The smoke point -free fatty acid, acid value, saponification value, peroxide  value , and as h 
content of oils like so ybean oil, sunflower oil, sunlit  oil, etc. are given.  All these parameters 
of the chemical properties of common edible oils are given  in this, this has been taken from 
the Mengistie  et al. 2018 , reference . And you can see here there is most of these oils have 
a smoke point above 200 except that nig er oil which  has around 161 degrees  Celsius. Free 
fatty acid in most of the cases is less than 1 to 2 percent , but in the nig er oil , it is around 8 
percent.  Similarly , the acid value of niger oil has more  than USA oil , for which it is 2. 8, 
Avena ( palm oil ) has 4 .48, hyat  (palm oil ) is 3.17 , and other s are very less . Similarly , the 
saponification value peroxide value of niger  oil and USA oil are  more , sunlit and sunflower 
oil also  has 8.52 and 8.80. In most cases,  these oils have 8, but the l owest peroxide value 
is observed for  hyath  palm and Avena palm  oil. 
 
 
Finally, I summarize this lecture , lipids are poised of a chain of hydrocarbon ending  with 
groups of bonded oxygen and hydrogen with the acidic c arboxyl grou p of the fatty acid 
and th is carboxyl group is the most reactive . It is the most reactive, that is one is the 
carboxyl group  and the other is the unsaturation point in the chain fatty acid chain.  The 
key chemical properties of the lipids are hydrolysis, oxidation, saponification, 
polymerization , esterification, interesterification, halogenation , and methylation , etc .  
Important chemical reactions that are used to determine the quality of edible oil s are iodine 
value, peroxide value, anisidine value, TOTO X value, acid value, saponification number, 
total polar compound, and free fatty acid content. So, by determining these parameters in 
the laboratory there are standard protocols one  can use and one can get for example, if you 
get a higher TOTOX  value, or higher peroxide value, it indicates that the oil is oxidized  or 
auto-oxidized .  If you get more amount of free fatty acids in the oil it means that there is a 
significant  substantial hydrolysis of the fat has taken place .  If you get more iodine v alue 
means the oil has more amount of unsaturated fatty  acids.  So, these values give an 
indication of the fatty acids or triglyceri des.  
 
 
 
 
 
These are the references that are used in this lecture.  Thank you very much for your 
patience here.  Thank you.  
 
 
