Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricult ural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 03 : Edible Oils - Chemistry & Properties  
Lecture 15: Antioxidants in Edible Oil  
 
 
Hello, everybody.  Namaskar. Now, we are in the 15th lecture of this course and 
in this lec ture in the next half an hour, we will study about antioxidants , which are 
naturally prese nt antioxidant as well as added  antioxidants in edible oils.  In the earlier 
class, the last class , we discussed about aut oxidatio n process and while discussing the 
preventive measures or how these oxidation , autoxidation  can be prevented, we 
elaborated  different methods . And there one , important method was that use of 
antioxidants.  So, what are antioxidants that I  elaborated in the last class.  
 
Today in this class, we will discuss about what are the n aturally present 
antioxidants, what are synthetic antioxidants that are frequently used in edible oils and 
fats, mechanism o f action of antioxidants, total antioxidant capacity of vegetable oil like 
DPPH, FRAP, etcetera and oxidative stability index, how they are de termined and what 
does it mean.  
 
So, antioxidants . I earlier also told . Now, these are the substances which from the 
name itself you can take it out that the substances which inhibit or del ay the oxidation of 
a substrate  when present at a concentration lower than the oxidizing sub strate , that is , 
they are active at a very low concentration.  Antioxidants are used to counteract the 
deterioration of stored food product s and in this case , particularly , we are talking about 
edible oils.  So, these antioxidants , they are used in edible oil to prevent their oxidation , 
autoxidation process.  Antioxidants function by interfering with the free radical chain 
reaction process.  In the last class , we saw that how the aut oxidation takes place ; that is , 
the initiation  reaction whe re the free radicals are formed;  then propaga tion, that is the 
chain reaction  and then finally, termination.  So, it is basically , that is , once the 
antioxidants are formed , that is , the free radicals , sorry , once the free radicals are formed , 
that is , thereby init iation process , then immediately  antioxid ant become active and they 
interrupt the next process , that is, the propagation process  though.  So, they function by 
interfering with the free radical  chain reaction and they reduce the primary radicals to 
non-radical species.  
 
So, various food antioxidants are elaborated in this table and they can be broadly 
classified into two groups . One is the primary antioxidant and other i s the secondary 
antioxidant or which are the which may also be called sometime as synergistic 
antioxidants.  So, the pri mary antioxidants includes phenols like gal lates, hydroquinone, 
trihydroxybut yrophone, nor dihyroyguairetic acid and so on.  
The hindered phenols they are also included in the primary ant ioxidants . And 
hindered phenols are. Examples of hindered phenols are BHA that is butyl ated hydroxy 
anisole, butylated  hydroxy toluene, tertiary butyl hydroxyquinone, tocopherols , gum 
guaiac, ionox series and so on.  Then there are other miscellaneous primary antioxidants 
like ethoxyquin , anoxomer and trolox -c.  So, these are the primary antioxidants , ok.  
Then the secondary antioxidants , they, which work as a oxygen scavenger or metal 
chelators or other by miscellaneous.  So, major oxygen scavenger , that is , what they do . 
They scaven ge the oxygen molecule s and make  them un availa ble for the oxidation 
reaction.  
Then these prominent oxygen scavengers , which are used in  edible oils and fats 
are a scorbic acid, ascorbyl palmitate , erythrobic acid, sulfites a nd so on.  Then metal 
chelato rs are phosphoric acid, citric acid,  EDTA, amino acids and peptides  and the 
miscellaneous synergistic antioxidants are nitrites, a mino acids, flavonoids, vitamin  A, 
selenium , etcetera , ok.   
 
So, let us see the . Let us a bit , that is . The primary oxida nts. They are basically 
hydrogen  donating antioxidants.  They can donate hydrogen atom or electrons to free 
radical species as you can see here . That is , this antioxidant is , you can transfer the 
electron to the f ree radical , and the n accordingly  the this free radical becomes a non -
radic al product , ok.  So, the free radical that is the chain mechanism is terminated , that is , 
how the se primary antioxidants work.  
That is antioxidant free radical does not initiate another fre e radical due to 
stabilization of radical by delocalization.  The primary antioxidan ts which are mostly the 
synthetic  in nature, but th ey are extensively  used in the oil processing, in the oil , refined 
oil whatever you buy from the market etcetera.  You will find one or the other or even 
more than one antiox idants being used there , because these antioxidant s mostly , we will 
discuss little later also , they are mostly , they are the synergistic , that is , if the two or more 
antioxidants are used together , their effectiveness is increased.  
 
So, the butylated hydroxy an isole, butylated hydroxy tolue ne, propyl gallate and tertiary  
butyl hydro  quinone ; these are ; their structural formulas a re given here . And they are 
most  commonly used synthetic antiox idants in edible oils and fats.   
 
So, this secondary oxidants . How they  work ? That: they have t he hydrogen 
donation  to lipid radicals ; they work by quenching of singlet oxygen ; by removal of 
molecular oxygen and  as well as regene ration of tocopherols , etcetera.  That is the . 
Reducing the effectiveness of prooxidants  like converting ferric ion to ferrous ion.  So, 
this is how the secondary antioxidant function.  
 
So, the metal chelators . We have seen they are the secondary oxidants.  So, 
various metal chelators include phosphoric acid, citric ac id, EDTA, amino acid , peptides, 
proteins  such as transferrin, o votransferrin , etcetera.  These were ; some of these we have 
discussed  in the earlier slide as well.   
So, how these metal chelators functions ? That they form complex  ion or 
coordination compounds with the metals , because , you see , in the most of the oils there 
might be some , either the  chlorophyll linked  etcetera to magnesium metal ion . There may 
be some during , the, when the  oil is being treated during refining process or in the 
extraction.  So, some metals may c ome into the oil from the machinery used , etcetera.   
So, these metal ions , they, if they are allowed to be there the y will obviously, 
oxidize . They will catalyze the aut oxidation process.  So, these metal chelators are used . 
What they do , that, they bind or chelate the these metal  ions and then therefore, they 
block them or they prev ent them from doing their , that prooxidant capacity activity , that 
is the from that working them a s a activator of the oxidation process at catalyst of the 
oxidation proce ss.  So, they prevent metal redox cycling , formation of insoluble m etal 
complexes like the steric hindrance of interactions between metals and lipids 
intermediate , that is , these process etcetera are there.  So, they basically bi nd the metal 
ions and theref ore. 
 
Then other group with the oxygen  scavengers , that is , the secondar y antioxidants 
like asco rbic acid, asco rbyl palmitate , erythor bic acid, sulfites , etcetera . Their structure is 
here given.  So, they basically , they scavenge the oxygen , that is they , say, they remove 
the oxygen molecule , alright , from the environment , that is , then, they stop t he reactions 
oxidation process , ok. 
 
  So, this antioxidant interactions or synergism. A s I told you  that is the various 
different antioxidants synergistic to each other , that is , synergism  occur s when mixture of 
antioxidants produce a more pronounced activity than the sum of the activities of the 
individual antioxidant when used separately , ok.  Like for example, that is if you are 
using antioxidant A and antioxidant B , separately . A has the activity X and B has the 
activity Y . Then if you  use A and B together you will get another antioxidant activity Z 
which will be higher than A and B . That is the , what called  synergism .   
So, primary antioxidants can be used in combination with phenol ic antioxidant or 
with various metal chelators , etcetera . That is , if you use primary antioxidant and 
secondary antioxidants  together , you get a better synergistic effect , like alpha  tocopherol 
and ascorbic acid.  Alpha toco pherol is a primary antioxidant;  ascorbic acid is a secondary 
antioxidant.  So, if you are ; if these two has a synergistic effect and when they are used in 
together they have the give the better result in the system ok.  Then now these were some 
of the pri mary and secondary an tioxidant, but they were mostly  of the synthetic origin.  
 
But now let us discuss about natural antioxidants because they are the various 
compounds like  polyphenols, vitamin A, beta carotene, vitamin C, vitamin E,  even 
selenium, spices extracts,  etcetera . They are present normally naturally in the various 
plant and they can be extracted from these plant materials and then they can be purified 
or used as a extract , etcetera . And then . And these are presumed to be sa fe by the 
consumer because in the recent past  particularly there were lot of literatures , and where 
the some undesirable effect on the  health of the consumers , when excessive amount of 
the synthetic antioxidants , etcetera were used, they are reported.  So,  the, their consumers 
are now well concerned that they wa nt more and more use of that is  a natural antioxidant 
rather than goi ng for synthetic antioxidants.  
 
So, the you know the tocopherol, vitamin E and its derivati ve these are naturally 
present even that is in the pulses, oil seeds etcetera ascorbic acid i s present in the fruit 
juices, beta carotene, selenium and so on.  Extracts of herbs and spices like rosemary, 
sage, thyme an d oregano they contain various phenolic compounds and such other 
compounds  which have very good antioxidant activity.  So, the tocopherols in plant 
extracts are potential antioxidants ok.  So, the tocopherols . This is the structure of the 
tocoph erols and here , that is a , it is a, you see , R1, R 2 and R 3.  So , depending upon 
whether this R 1 and R 2 and R 3, they are other methyl group or formyl group or 
combination of that , it becomes alpha tocopherol, be ta tocopherol, gamma tocopherol  and 
delta tocopherol.  
And all this , R1, R 2, R 3 are, as there is methyl group , it will become alpha 
tocopherol  and accordingly it is given here.  Then all this , there is the two are the methyl 
and one is the formyl , it becomes your beta  tocopherol and so on.  So, these , this  and 
tocopherols . They are antioxidant action , that is, they are transfer p henolic  hydrogen as 
well as scavenge a si nglet oxidation as a si nglet oxygen.  So, by these both , they function 
their antioxidant capacity is by antioxidant function mecha nism  function is by transfer of 
phenolic hydrogen or  scavenging of singlet oxygen.  
 
Flavo noids . They are mostly the secondary products of  plant metabolism . They 
acts as both metal chelators, superoxide anion sca vengers and hydrogen donors. The 
anthocyanins like catechin, flavanones, isoflavones, flavanols , etcetera  are examples of 
these major flavanoids which has good antioxidant capacity.  And they are present in 
many spices and herbs etcetera and t hey can be extracted from there. A nd they can be 
used like  quercetin, fl avanol or cyanidine 3 -glucoside  (anthocyanin ). These are . Their 
structural formula is given here.  So, they can be.   
 
Then fruits and vegetables are the excellent sources of n atural antioxidants like 
fresh fruits such as apples, pears, grapes, citrus fruits , etcetera or vegetables like potato,  
tomato, spinach, carrot . Certain . They. All these , they, contain various phenolic 
compounds and  wine is basically a very good source of anthocyanins.  So, obviously, it 
is said that is the wine consumption ofcourse, there is in control amount it goods it has a 
very good a ntioxidant capacity ok.  
 
Then in the tea and coffee also this epicatechin, epigallocatechin, chlorogenic 
acid, etcetera are the primary source of the antioxidant capacity.  And you see , what 
happens in the . They are present : epicatechin  or epigallocatechin , etcetera mostly  they are 
present in the green leaf.  When these green leaves are converted into or processed into 
black tea then epicatechin  or epigallocatec hin are converted into that thea flavin as well as 
polymeric theorubig in.  And  their antioxidant capacity is little reduced , although they 
have other health promoting  capacity activity.  So, but in the green tea when we process 
green tea these e picatechin or epigallocatechin , they remain intact because in the black 
tea production b y enzymatic action t hey are oxidized into thea rubig in an d thea flavin and 
theorubig in, ok. 
And that is why , it is said that as green tea they have they are good as an 
antioxidant  they  have more health value than that of the black tea because this is mainly 
because  of the these epicatechin , epigallocatechin these are the chlorogenic acid which 
are the  phenolic substances and the polyphenols etcetera which are present intact.  And 
of course, there one has to see that experiment and these j uices that is if you take that is 
fresh tea leaf juice , that is , this can be used in the  oil as an to prevent the aut oxidation 
process.  However, it is used has to be optimized , etcetera , that is , so that the doesn’t 
interfere with the oil color , flavors and so on.  
 
Then antioxidants in herbs and spices like rosemary, sage, g inger, turmeric, green 
pepper, lemon , etcetera they are the hub of various compounds like ca rnosic acid, 
carnosol, rosemarinic  acid and so on.  In fact, they have good ant ioxidant capacity we at 
IIT Kharagpur  in our laboratory conducted a project where that rosemary and sage 
extracts were used in the oil alright in various proportions  and we saw that our result 
indicated that us e of these extracts rosemary and sage extracts  which extended the shelf 
life of the oil not only the that is room stability, but also  it improved thermal stability of 
the oils.  So, this that is extracts of herbs and spices they have a great potential for  use in 
oil.  
 
And even the turmeric that is this turmeric the antioxi dants which are found are 
there  is a curcumin that is the or dimethoxy curcumin or dimethoxy curcumin etcetera 
that is this curcumin that is these three are the major compounds c urcumin, dimethoxy 
curcumin and  bisdimethoxy curcumin.  Their structure is given here and they again are 
very good source of antioxidant capacity.  This also in our lab we used to increase the 
shelf life of the  oil as well as that is because  they can be us ed not only as a natural colour, 
but the natur al antioxidant and their colour  of these compounds also goes very well with 
the colours of the oil.  Then the frying stability, frying quality of the produ cts where this 
in the oil where  these antioxidants that  is the healthy they extracted th ere is these 
compounds that is the extracts of turmeric or extracts of rosemary the things whe n we are 
used the both the oil stability as well as room stability as well as thermal stability, 
oxidative stability of the oil i mproved significantly ok.   
 
Then this phenolic acids such as chlorogenic acid, caific acid, ferulic acid et cetera 
they are the antioxidant major antioxidant present in soybean s and they have metal 
chelating  capacity that is they chelate the metals and they also scavenge  or quench singlet 
oxygen  ok.  
So, these are the isoflavones structure is given here t hat is the it is a rings and R 1 
and R 2 are here the so, flavones rings , ok.  And there are two that is gen stein and daid zein 
that is when R 1 is OH and R 2 both are  OH it is a genstein  and when R 1 is H and the R 2 is 
OH it becomes daidzein  and accordingly  that is this even antioxidant capacity of these 
two compound it is varies because of  this  presence of compound.   
 
Now that there are both there is one natural antioxidant you us e although there is 
a consumer trend nowadays trend in the market to use more and mo re natural antioxidant, 
but it has to be used in caution with caution because they  are bot h advantages and 
disadvantages of using natural antioxidants.  The advantages obviously, are readily 
accepted by the consu mers they are considered to be safe and there are no safety test 
required by regulati on if a component of food is a grass that is generally recognized as 
safe that is the chemical.  So, it can be used you can simply that is if you are using a plant 
extract, a herb extrac t etcetera in the oil you can.  
So, it does not invite any legal complications.  However, there is may be that 
using that natural antioxidant s may be usually more expensive  ok if purified form and 
less efficient if it is not purified.  So, that is a that is one problem with the or one 
challenge with the using na tural antioxidant because if you take the herb extract .  So, 
along with the compound that is in the extract th e antioxidant concentration may  be very 
very very less and they are not that effective.  Then if you take the natural compound 
extract the natural compo und from these that is extracts  ok, but if you g o for extracts and 
purification process it becomes the proc ess becomes ver y expensive ok.  
And also there is another problem that is if you go for purification you will like 
the particular rosemarinic  acid etcetera that is if you this use in the rosemary ex tract, but 
when you take it out purifies then it will can it is tre ated as a chemical and in that case 
one has to go and take the approval of the compete nt that is the legal agency or regulating 
agency in the country.  So, also properties of different preparation vary if not purified ok.  
If not purified so, may be that you have to that is wha t is the concentration and what  is 
the purification level that is unpurified form the concentration may vary at the compound 
may vary and the concentration may var y accordingly the its effectiveness may vary ok.  
And also and the unpurified form when you are you hav ing the herbs extract or spice 
extract it may have some it is not variable because there are  several compounds and 
might be some compound which are which  might have adverse effect on  the health that is 
so, safety always is not very much known about these natural antioxidant extracts etcetera 
ok.  And also there is the if you want to use these natural antioxidan ts unpurified form 
particularly  then the conce ntration of the extract or proportion of the extract quantity of  
the extract which is which might be required to be used in the  oil to get the desired effect 
all right may impart color it may include some after taste o r off flavor to the product.  
So, these  are some of the disadvantages of using natural an tioxidant, but all these 
thing can be taken care there is a trend toward use of natural antioxidant.   
 
Then another thing is the polarity of antioxidant is very important that is the polar 
antioxidants are more active in bulk oil system ok.  That is hydrophobic antioxidants that 
are located in the interface of the lipid and water that is you can see that lipid and there is 
water molecule and the lipid oil ok.  Then they can protect the lipid better than the 
hydrophilic antioxidants which are basically present in the water etcetera that is there you 
see that i s the these are the hydrophilic  antioxidants which are in the water ok.  Then 
hydrophobic antioxidant these are which they ar e in the oil present in the. 
So, this here is the oil water in oil emul sion basically in the this B. So, this it is 
surrounded  by also obviously, antioxidant is present in the oil water interface 
hydrophobic.  So, they can protect the oil better that is ok.  And there can be one other 
that is air where this oil and this contains both.  So, air in this is the hydrophilic sorry 
hydrophilic antio xidants are present in the air.  
So, this figure shows that yes this hydrophobic antioxidants are better more 
effective.   
 
Common factors t hat affect the partitioning properties of antioxidants obviously, 
is the  most important factor chemical structure of the compound that is polarity.  Then 
the also the type of the lipid substrate what is it is a this type of fatty acids which  are 
present there is that they are saturated fatty acids, unsaturated fatty acids, more  
polyunsaturated fatty acids all these will influence that the antioxidant properties  use 
doses required of the antioxidant type of antioxidant what is even the presence of  certa in 
surfactants are the composition of the various phases while water lubricant all  these 
phases they will influence the partitioning properties of antioxidants ok.   
 
So, the ideal antioxidants we have said what should be if you are in oil business.  
So, and you want to use an ideal and I want to use anti oxidant and you have to use if you 
want to make it more stable room  temperature stable as a thermo stable oxidation stable  
then antiox idants are required to be used.  
So, obviously, for selecting ideal antioxidant one should give this a considerati on 
like it should have no harmful physiological effect, there should be no objectionable 
flavor, odour,  or colo ur etcetera when they are added in the required prop ortion the 
antioxidants should be fat soluble.  So, that it easily mixes with the oil it should be 
effective at low concentration particularly its antioxidant potential antioxidant capacity 
should be at low concentration it should not  be absorbable by the body readily it should 
be readily ava ilable and  obviously, it should  be economical right.   
 
Then these are the application of natural antioxidant  for shelf life extension some 
case studies also like the conjugated dyes of canola oil wi th and without rosemary extract  
is as we seen here that is the here the yellow lines are showing that is whe re the rosemary 
extract is having 100 ppm and the blue lines there is no rosemary extract.  So, you can see 
conjugated dry in formation is reduced in the  oil which has rosemary ex tract ok.  This 
commercially available rosemary extract like liquid and oil soluble form in this 
experiment  was added to c anola oil and mixed well ok.  
And these oil samples were heated to about 204 degree Celsius in a bench style 
bench top fryers and once the oil reached that 100 gram sample of French fry cut potatoes 
were  fried for 5 minute and maintained at that temperature for 4 hours ok.  And then it 
these samples were analyzed for conjugated dyes formation and they are the  labels in the 
you see that these are the primary oxidation products and they were found more  in the oil 
which has no added rosemary extract ok.  So, this we have taken from the other refers, 
but similar work we also did in our laboratory  and the it gives similar effect ok.  Here i t 
is the another case is to the like canola oil ok, which having no additives or  it is having 
additive rosemary extract 1000 ppm ok.   
 
That is the and in this case an acid in value was measured it is a measurement of 
the secondary  oxidation  products of lipid and this indicated that the rosemary extract 
supplemented oil  sample that had lower levels of an acid in value during frying or 
heati ng than the control  sample.  
This indicates that the oxidative stability of the oil was improved by add ing 
rosemary  extract which I told earlier as well ok.   
 
This is another case study where oil stability index was measured ok.  And the 
samples which were collected during various stages of frying that is that using  canola  oil 
samples one was having no additive, other sample had rosemary extract 1000 ppm  and 
then during various oxidation in the frying process the samples were taken and the 
samples  were analyzed for oxidative stability using the instrument and give standar d 
AOCS protocol.  And the OSI values of oil samples decreased during frying and heating 
and particularly  those which were having rosemary extract ok.  And this data suggest 
that rosemary extract treated oil sample had a longer fry life that  it has a bett er heat 
thermal stability than the c ontrol oil with no additive.  
So, these three case studies this is a canola oil and this is a oil we can say that yes  
the plant extracts are rosemary sage and such other extracts they which have natural 
antioxidants  and  they have better potential for use in the oil.  In fact, when you are frying 
like potato chips or such other fried products when it is being  fried in the oil then in fact, 
if you assume turmeric ok.  So, the yellow color of this turmeric it also improves  the 
color it gives the very golden  delicacy brown color of the fried product and which is 
many a times liked by the consumers  golden product.   
 
So, the total finally, the total antioxidant capacity of a  compound of a product that 
it is an analyte freq uently is used to access the antioxida nt status of biological samples  
and can evaluate the antioxidant response against the free radical s produced in a given  
disease. So, torolox equivalent antioxidant capacity like TEAC or fe rric reducing ability 
of plasma  like FRAP and total radical trapping antioxidant parameter TRAP are different 
assays which  are described to determine the total antio xidant capacity of a sample. TEAC 
assay measures the ability of antioxidant to quench a ra dical cation in both lipop hilic and 
hydrophilic environments.  The CUPR AC and FRAP assays evaluate the chain breaking 
antioxidant potential and the redu cing power of the sample ok.  Here some of the values 
of the TEAC a nd TRAP values are given in the some common oils ok.  
 
Then two  two diphenyl picryl dihydrogen that is a DPPH assay wh ich is a it is a 
popular quick easy and affordable approach for the measurement of the antioxidant 
properties that includes  the  use of a free radical used for assessing the potential of 
substances to serve as a  hydrogen providers or as a free radical scavengers FRS.  So, you 
see DPPH that is R free radical RH ok, then it gives the NO 2 and gives a medical  that is R 
free radical ok . And with this that is here we can say RH it represents this antioxidant this 
antioxidant.  So, it gives R free radical and antioxidant come it protect the oil that is this 
is the antioxidant free radical is formed and it gives the DPPHH ok, which is a co lorless 
compound.  So, it gives the indicates that antioxidant potential of the oil.  
 
Oxygen stability index which is a American oil chemist soc iety approved method 
determines  the relative resistance of fat and oil samples to oxidation.  OSI can be used t o 
compare various oils to predict their respe ctive shelf lives and therefore  the analysis can 
be used to evaluate the effectiveness of antioxidan ts or determine how much longer  the 
oil can be us ed before it goes. But the oxygen stability index which is exp ressed as 
induction period commonly ‘IP’ is the time when the oils or fats or biodiesel etcetera 
achieve maxim um rate of oxidation indicated by an increase in the conductivity of de -
ionized water when the dr y air is passed through heated oil or biodiesel sample.  The 
effluent air carrying these volatile acid is contained in a separate container having de-
ionized water and then  IP is determined by the Ransiment apparatus Ransimen t test 
apparatu s as per the standard protocol ok.  The oxidati on stability of the fats, oils and 
their pr oducts plays an important role in determining the quality and so is an important 
parameter for  quality assessment of the fats  and oils.   
 
So, finally, I would like to summarize this lecture by saying that these 
antioxidants are very very important substances as far as the oil milling industry is 
concerned.  These antioxidants inhibit or delay the oxidation of a substrate when 
presented at a very lower concentration . They can be of two types primary and secondary 
antioxidants.  Primary antioxidants that is these are the antioxidant free  radical that does 
not initiate  another free radical due to stabilization of the radical  and secondary 
antioxidant they  act by reducing the effectiveness of prooxidants.  Total antio xidants 
occur naturally in the plant such as  polyphenols, pigments etcetera  and that is the TEAC, 
FRAP, TRAP etcetera are the effici ent assays which are described to determine the total 
antioxidant capacity of a oil.  However, these antioxidants they are u sed of course, thi s 
beneficial in the oil as far as the this oil stability is concerned preventing the oxidation, 
improving its thermal stability, oxygen stability etcetera, but it has that is both this 
antioxi dants which are from synthetic origin.  They are certain health concerns even the 
natural sourc es antioxidants they has to be used to they have to be used with proper care. 
So, that it is has to be used with proper care and proper control and monitoring in their 
use and effectiveness is very essentia l.   
 
 
These are the references which are used in this class.   
 
Thank you very much for your patience hearing.  Thank you.  Thank you.  
