Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 4 : Mechanical Expelling of Oils from Plant Sourc es 
Lecture 16: Pre -Treatment Techniques  
 
Hello, everybody.  Namaste.  Now, we are entering in the fourth module that is 
the fourth week ok.  And so far in the earlier 3 weeks in 15 lectures, we discussed  various 
aspects of nature and occurrences of the oil,  their chemistry, their physical, che mical, 
nutritional and other properties ok.  Now, we are entering into other aspects of the course 
that is important aspect that is how to recover these oils and fats from the various sources 
ok.  That in the earlier cl ass, we told you that is the one ma jor source is the plant source.  
So, this week 5 lectures, we will devote on getting the oil  or extraction various methods 
of extraction of oil from the plant sources ok.   
 
Then in this lecture is the pretreatment techniques various oil seeds before 
subjecting to the actual extraction process, they are to be preprocessed or p retreated that 
they are brought  into the form in which the can be subjected for the oil extraction to get 
the oi l of good  quality, oil seed they are given certain pretreatments.  So, in this half an 
hour, we will discuss about their p retreatment techniques methods like what are the 
various primary processing techniques like  cleaning, dehulling , crushing,  cooking, 
flaking etcetera.  Then thermal and enzymatic pretreatment processes, novel pretreatment 
techniques, then what are  the various treatment processes used by the industry and also 
finally, we will have some  idea some discussion about the common equi pment and 
machinery used in th e pretreatment of  oil seed.  
 
Because these pretreatment are very very important operations and it not only 
influences the  quality of the oil and meal which we get and also that is the quantity oil 
yield and so  on ok.  So, what are the various oil extraction techniques here in this slide it 
is given that is the  more than one method is often used for the getting the oil ok.  That is 
the there are two common methods are there which ar e used by the industry for the 
extraction of oil that is one is the mechanical extraction, other is the solvent extraction.  
The mechanical extraction includes cold pressing where the no heat is applied or hot 
pressing  where sufficient or significant amount of heat is used for getting b etter yield as 
well  as better recovery of the oil.  Then in the solvent extraction process there is a 
commerc ial process which uses organic solvent like hexane, isopropyl alcohol, so, 
petroleum ether , etcetera ok.  
Other method that is the super critical f luid extraction process that  using super 
critical carbon dioxide for extraction of the oil ok.  So, these are some of the methods 
which are used by the  industry for extraction of oil  from the oil bearing plant material 
plant sources of oils ok.   
 
And som etimes because all these methods there the recovery yield i s a varies like 
the mechanical extraction, cold extraction it gives less yield, hot ex traction gives more 
yield than the cold extraction, but solvent extraction it gives furth er more yield than that 
of the mechanical extraction.  And both the extraction processes etcetera they influenc e 
as I told you that is on the oil recovery as well as the quality both quality and quantity of 
oil and yield.  So, the and what are the paramete rs that are used in these proce ss. 
So, many a times even industry also uses pre press solvent extraction method like 
that  is the both a combination of mechanical extraction as well as solvent extraction both 
is used  that is whatever easily can be extract ed by mechanical pressing that is obtained 
by mechanical  pressing and then the reminder is sent to the solvent extraction and 
everything.  So now, that we will discuss that like mechanical expression in this like 
mechanical expression  it is expression is  a process of mechanically pressing liquid out of 
the liquid containing  solids and in this case liquid containing solids are oil seeds oil 
seeds that is they  contain liquid that is oil.  So, a screw presses, roll presses and mills, 
collapsible plate and frame filter presses,  hydraulic presses are the examples of wide 
variety of equipment which are available for  expression and processing or expressing the 
oil from the oil seeds.  The efficiency of a mechanical expression process cannot be equal 
to unity and in actual  operation it seldom exceeds 90 percent.  So, by the mechanical 
expression you cannot generally we generally do not get more than 90 percent recovery 
of the oil.  
 
Now, as I told you that the pretreatment because the let us say s oybean seed o r 
sunflower seeds or groundnut seed, peanut etcetera they contain the oil.  So, they have 
certain that is the seed coating they are out or wholly they are husky they  are all these 
things.  So, they are subjected to some preprocessing treatment and these in cludes like 
one important  pretreatment or preprocessing seed cleaning that is in this case that the 
foreign materials  such as stems, leaves, other seeds, sand and dirt etcetera are removed 
by screening and  aspiration.  There are standard methods availab le for the seed cleaning 
ok.  So, those are using those things that is these even the permanent magnets are 
electromagnets  which might be there in the by some contamination from the field or 
during threshing yard etcete ra  it may get contaminated.  
So, the y are used by using the magnets etcetera.  And this operation that is seed 
cleaning is usually carri ed out at the extraction plant just before processing just before 
sending in order to say if they make sure that whatever  the material is entering the in th e 
extraction plant that is clean it has no foreign matter  no impurities.  Because if there are 
impurities present in it, it will a dversely affect the quality of the oil.  So, proper seed 
cleaning will reduce maintenance cost, it will  increase capacity and also it will improve 
the oil and meal quality.   
 
The nex t operation is dehulling or deco rticating like you see in t he groundnut, in 
the sunflower oils etcetera castor oil all those things seed dehulling operation i s or 
deco rticating  is used. This treatment is particularly important in order to g et good quality 
of oil and meal  in its , particularly its colour and flavour.  The normal way of dehulling oil 
seed is first to crush the s eed in a meal alright and then the hulls and  the meals are 
separated by screening, air classification and gravity separation  in several steps.  And 
generally the moisture content of the oil seed is lo wered by 1 to 2 percent before 
dehulling and this is done in order to reduce the adherenc e of the meat with the hull.  So, 
that it dehulling operation becomes easy that is hull s are easily removed by simple 
passing between two rollers etcetera as you can see he re this is the hopper and there  are 
the rollers the between two rollers.  So, one ca n adjust the cleara nce etcetera and that is 
by some interaction they are th e  deco rticated or dehulled.  
 
Then after dehulling once you get these dehulled materials then it need to be 
crushed ok.  And this crushing is basically done in a roller meal to fac ilitate the next 
operation like  cooking and extraction ok.  And here basically the we reduce the particle 
size and which improves the efficiency of  the process and both the quality of the oil and 
also recovery ok.  Usually one or more pairs of rolls are used which may be smooth or 
corrugated.  The rolls in one pair can be run at equal speed or different speed, but mind it 
the  clearance between these two rolls should be adjusted properly according to the  size 
of  the grain alright. And you should not mill  it or crush it to a very fine very fine particle 
size ok.  Because if there is a too intense crushing it will produce large amount of fines 
and  which will lead to difficulties in the extraction process as well as with the 
clarification  of the oil.  So, these fines there when you pressing in the extraction process 
they will fine will  close and it will become a some sort of coarse material and it will 
create hindrance in the  flow of the oil ok.  Also these fines may come some of the fines 
may come into t he oil they may flow along  with the oil and come in with the oil and 
which create the problem during clarification  or increases the clarification process its 
cost and other things ok.   
 
Then following this crushing the next very very  important operation is the 
cooking or  conditioning that is before crushing and extraction the crushed seed is 
subjected to heat treatment  which is called  conditioning or cooking ok. This cooking or 
conditioning of the oil seed fulfills the objective lik e completion of  the breakdown of the 
oil cells.  You have seen in the earlier classes that these phospholipids are triglycerides 
they  are present inside the some cellular membranes and inside oil globules are there.  
So, this cooking breaks those membran e fat globule membranes etcetera cell membrane 
etcetera  and it releases the oil.  Also that the protein body that is heat calculates the 
protein and which facilitates the separation  of the oil.  There is a reduction of the affinity 
of the oil for the sol id surfaces ok.  
So, its fluidity will be increased by this cooking by heating in also heat results 
into  the insolubil ization of the phosphatides there is a because of heat these phosphatides 
they  become insolubilized and then their separation b ecomes eas y in the refining or 
degumming  processes.  Also this conditioning or cooking results in increased fluidity of 
oil by increase in  the temperature.  There is a destruction of mold and bacteria if there 
are any contaminated oil seeds then  this these are re moved they are destroyed they are 
inactivated enzymes are inactivated  ok and which obviously, has a better effect in the oil 
that is if you enzymes are inactivate d.  So, hydrolytic resins etcetera can it will be 
beneficial in that similarly the molds  etc etera which are some contaminated.  Then these 
molds if they are removed it will otherwise this mold they may ca use ketonic  rancidity  
and other things wh ich we discussed earlier ok.  
Then also there is a during heating and conditioning there is also there i s the 
heaters normally  there are pressure cookers where there are various chambers where the 
temperature, pressure  and moisture control operations are provided ok.  Oil seed is 
normally enters in the top kettle it goes to the in the bottom kettle it is  heated given 
proper condition and the top kettle that is where that some moisture is  removed in the 
bottom kettle from the bottom kettle the moisture is removed.  And depending upon 
whether the oil is subjected to the straight expelling process or straigh t  solvent extraction 
or prepress solvent extractions the moistures and temperature and other conditions  are 
properly adjusted in the cooker and then depending upon again also that which is the  
type of the oil seeds and what is it is a texture or hardnes s and other things and right  ok.   
 
Then after the cooking is next operation is the flaking ok.  It is essential for 
preparing oil seed for continuous solvent extraction process that  is  after the pressing if it 
has to go for the solvent extraction then these cooked conditioned  oil seeds they had to 
be made into a thin coherent flakes and this basically improves  that the flaking process 
improve the miscibility that is the process that i s the mixing of  the or proper flow of the 
solvent throu gh these prepared materials.  
So, that is for that purpose that is the also flakin g increases the surface area ok  
and it helps the continuous solvent extraction and no other form of oil seed will facil itate  
oil extraction by disruptive effect of rolling as well as by reducing the distances.  So, that 
the solvent and oil must diffuse in and out and the of the seed during the reduction 
process.  So, this flaking is very as either in the even someti me aft er mechanical 
expressing whatever the material is obtained like in the case of prepress solvent 
extraction process.  So, after a screw spelling or mechanical spelling whatever th e oil 
seed is obtained that is oil seed meal or cake it passed through some so rt of flak ing unit 
which is again having a two rollers and in this rollers their clearance and their speed can 
be adjusted to get a thin  flax etcetera as you can see here which comes out and it will 
then it is passed through  the solvent extraction.  L ike since thin level may be 0. 2 to 0.2 5 
mm and coherent flax of oil seeds like soybean or hydraulic expressed oil cakes are 
desired for solvent ex traction the flaking operation of the dehulled or cracked seeds or 
coarse grits of prepressed or pressed cake is carried  out by flaking rolls in single pass.  
And about 10 percent of the moisture content of the oil se ed is registered for formation of 
thin and coherent flax.  In case of soybean cracked beans are adjusted to a moisture 
content of 10 to 11 percent heat ed and flaked  while they are still hot and slightly plastic 
at a temperature of about  72 to 75 degree Celsius.    
Then there are other way of that is giving the pretrea tment like thermal 
pretreatment  where some roasting is given roasting also known as dry air roasting is one 
of the simplest  thermal treatment for oil seeds.  There are some roasters etcetera given 
here and the oil seeds  are heated in an oven usually is usually equipped with a rolling 
bucket by conductio n or convection through heated air currents at temperature between 
125 to 250 degree Celsius depending upon  the type  of seed etcetera.  
And then roasting parameters improve simple equipment and ar e easy to operate 
that roasting  processes i nvolve simple equipment and are easy to operate with a high 
capacity.  However, roasting process can be slow and inefficient and may produce 
hazardou s substances  when the oil seed is unevenly heated.  So, the roasting condition 
that proper that is there ha s to be arrangement as usual that comp lete oil seed  etcetera 
they should be properly heated evenly heated.   
 
Then steaming is another way is a moist heat method that us es the steam to 
transfer energy  and heat materials.  Steam treatments are typically conducted at a 
tempe rature below 100 degree Celsius  thus compound degradat ion can be mitigated. 
However, the oil seeds moisture content can increase.  In addition the presence of water 
which is highly po lar could result in loss of certain  polar nutrient compounds such as 
polyphenols etcetera is a equipment that is system given  for the steaming process where 
you see that the charging opening here the materials are  charged at this stage it comes 
and the there is where the steam exhaust pipe etcetera is  there and steam in this chamber 
the material unit is moving around it is a it is coming  into the contact with the steam and 
get properly heated steamed or steam heating.  And then finally, it comes into d ischarge.   
 
Then microwave thing microwaves are electromagnetic waves that tr ansfer 
energy through molecular  motion caused by dipole rotation and i on migration whereby 
the polar  molecules are instantaneously polarized and the intermolecular interactions 
generate a large amount of energy.  Microwaves can deeply penetrate a bed of oil seeds 
result ing in efficient heat transfer within a short operating time thus reducing the los s of 
moisture and nutrients.  
Water molecules in the oil seed can be vaporized to produce large  vapour 
pressures that disrupt cell membrane and cell walls thereby potentially increase the oil 
extractability.  The uniformity of the microwave treatment is determine d by the 
distribution of polar compounds in the seed layer.  Non -uniform di stribution of polar 
compounds can lead to uneven temperature distribution  which produces both 
undercooked and scorched material.  So, the proper control of the microwave process is 
required.   
 
This microwave pretreatment of oil extraction has many adv antages such as 
improvement in the extracted  oil yield and quality both.  
There is a direct extraction capability by other micro waves at the pores that is the 
oil get better extraction.  There is a lower energy consumption, it is a faster proce ssing 
time and r educed solvent levels that is the solvent that is if you give the mi crowave 
treatment and then give  the solvent extraction process this solvent requirement is also 
reduced considerably.   
In fact, the microwave treatment is a reported to increase  the oil yield, total 
phenolic content in the oil, phytosterol, alpha, beta, gamma, delta, tocopher ol, 
chlorophyll, saponification  value, palmitic and stearic acid , etcetera.  These are the 
increased you get a better recovery of all thes e in the oil, but t he also the acid value, 
peroxide value, iodine value, oleic and linoleic  acid and polyunsaturated  fatty acid 
etcetera, there yield sometime get reduced.   
 
Then infrared heating, infrared radiation transfers thermal energy through 
electromagnetic  waves v ia the penetration of infrared light  into a layer of oil sheets.  
Water molecules in the sheet vibrate at a frequency of 60,000 to 150,000 
megahertz  and  induce rapid internal heating in the sheet mass.  So, this heating decreases 
the moisture content leading to change in oil sheet structure as  they become more brittle 
and prone to breakage.  Infrared radiation has the advantage of more homogeneous and 
efficient heating than possible  with microwaves and thus leading to lower energy 
consumption and decreased ecological  footprint.  Infrared radiation is suitable for 
treating oil sheets with thin walls in the shallow  trays or shallow layers because the ray s 
with short wavelength do not deeply penetrate the  material.   
 
In enzymatic pretreatment in another potential treatment which is can be used this 
application  of the enzymes disintegrates the seed matrix by rupturing the polysacchari de 
protein colloids   system.  
Cellulo ses, hemicelluloses and pectinas es are the commonly u sed enzymes which 
are required to degrade the cell wall like cell wall consist of cellulose, hemicelluloses, 
pectin etcetera,  and so, these enzymes act primarily as a primary the cell wa ll which act 
as a primary barrier  to the oil accessibility.  So, these enzymes break those cell walls and 
therefore, it increases the oil mobility ok.  In the pl ant cells oil exists as a oleosomes  that 
is your 0.2 to 2 .0 micrometer in diameter,  which cons ist of the triglyceride surrounded by 
phospholipids and proteins.  So, the proteases are required to break down the peptide 
bonds of the proteins sur rounding the triglycerides.  
The efficiency of enzyme seeds pretreatment is dependent on t he factor such as 
temperature, pH, concentration, seed particle size, hydrolysis, duration, wa ter to seed 
ratio and agitation  because the proper environment, proper conditions for the enzyme to 
act is required to be given.  The application of a minimum amo unt of heat during enzym e 
pretreatment produces oil of superior quality compared to the thermal seed pretreatments 
ok.  Because if the more excessive heat is given it may adversely affect some the oil 
quality  even sometime this triglyceride the heat additi onal heat may cause degradation at 
the  esterification of the ok.   
 
So, the scanning electron microscope this is the picture s which is adopted from 
Neeharika et al.  that is the literature and here it shows that images that is en zyme treated 
untreated mus tard seeds are shown here and these figures clearly show that the 
application of enzymes for the pretreatment resulted in an increased extent of free oil 
release from the mustard seed.  And there was a clear indication of damage to the cell 
wall after the enzymatic treatment as you can  see here in this figure ok.  
Whereas, the comparatively it  was not that effective in the S oxhlet extraction ok.  
So, drastic charges in the seed morphology can be seen before and after the treatment you 
can see here that is these are the untreated seeds, these are the enzyme treated, here  
enzym e plus hexane and this is only S oxhlet extractor and you can see the difference in  
all this ok.   
 
And ultrasound pretreatment ok, this ultrasound pretreatment tec hnology 
generates a ultrasound waves which produces high energy bubbles when passed through a 
liquid.  The collapse of these cavitation bubbles on a product sur face induces the 
disruption of seed cell walls, particle size reduction and enha nced mass transfer of the oil 
content.  Gas mechanisms are involved in the cell wall disintegrat ion and particle size 
reduction  which include fragmentation, erosion, then capillarity, de texturation and 
sonoporation.  
The efficiency of ultrasound treatment i s influenced by fac tors such as frequency, 
liquid viscosity, solvent vapour pressure, external pressure, temperature and available 
gas.  In addition to improved oil and bioactive compound recovery, ultrasound seeds 
pretreatments  reduces seed oil extraction  time, solvent and energy cons umption and 
overall production cost.   
 
Then pulse electric field treatment is another very importa nt treatment which can 
be given  to oil seeds.  PEF treatment technique is a non thermal technology which makes 
it a promising technique for the  extraction of the high value seed oils.  Even pulse electric 
field treatment is applied to a materi al which are placed between two  electrodes at 
ambient temperature or marginally higher t han the ambient temperature.  
So, exposing plant cel ls to a given electric field induces  critical electrical potential 
across the cell membrane which causes an electrical breakdown.  And this induces some 
structural damage to the cell membrane through the  creation of pores in a phenomena 
called electroporat ion.  And depending upon the treatment type, pulse from the pulse 
energy, electrical field strength  and temperature, the cell membrane damage can be 
reversible o r irreversible and resultantly this increases the mass transfer of the cellular 
material into t he extraction medium.  And due to this non thermal nature, the pulse 
electric fiel d is a novel technique for the recovery of heat level bioactive compounds.  
And also that is the this electroporation which is cre ated it improves the movability  of the 
oil and you get a better yield, better recovery higher recovery of the oil that is  if they are 
given a this PEF treatment and then subjected to normal extraction process  either by 
solvent extraction or prepr ess you get a better high lead. And als o the quality of the oil is 
better because .  
 
Now there are some I will briefly  elaborate the commercial pretreatment process 
which are us ed for normally ground nut oil extraction it is the stripping, grading, drying 
and decortication.  These are the main  operations which the ground nut is subje cted to 
before it is subjecting  to sending to the actual extraction process by milling or by  pressing 
or solvent extraction  or screw spilling.  Here it is the schematic diagram design of a 
ground nut stripper or eve n a TNA U model of power  operated ground nut stripper.  
 
This is these are the designs are the ground nut decorticator ok which is manual 
operated  as well as a power operated manual operated decorticator  this is the CIAE  
model ok.   
 
Then in the soybeans, soybeans are subjected to different operations like threshing 
after  threshing that is the cleaning, come grading, then drying , there is a seed treatment 
dehul ling  after that it is blanched to because soybean they contain large amo unt of 
lipoxygenase  enzyme.  
So, the soybean must be blanched to inactivate the lipoxygenase enzyme  
otherwise there may  be a grainy  flavour and also this lipoxygenase may cause , catalyse 
the auto oxidation process.  So, that is it is blanched and then size r eduction and flaking.  
So, these are the normal methods of the a gain so, soy flakes or soy grit s are obtained.  
And then these are passed through the oil extraction process e ither by mechanical 
expressing or by solvent extraction.   
 
These are the schematic of the soybean blanching unit as well as soybean flaking 
machine the design etcetera given all dimensions  in these are in millimetre.  
 
Then for the mustard the common operations are cleaning and grading, drying and 
steaming and sto rage of course, because of the small size of the mustard seed and they 
are very  so ft in nature.  Normally the dehul ling of the mustard seed is not done by the 
industry and that is one  still challenge that is to develop a good size and good quality and 
efficient dehul ler  for the the rape  seed or mustard if it is developed.  And if it is dehul led 
before sending for pressing or extraction th en the oil quality particularly  from the and 
usability of the cake is improved ok.  Otherwise this seeds that is they these oil seeds 
mustard seed coat etcetera it contains certain compounds which are not good for health 
that is why this mustard seed cake is not  edible to human is not used for human 
consumption ok.  So, although there are that is the if the dehuller good  quality dehuller 
which can remove  the seed from the mustard seed, seed coat and without any crushing 
etcetera without  oil loss es that will be a good work.  
 
Then sunflower must be this is a pressing drying, cleanin g and grading and 
decortication  these are the pretreatment limited to the sunflower.   
 
In the custard cleaning, decorticating, crushing, steaming and d rying are the 
normal operations  to which the  castor  seed is subjected to before their extraction ok. This 
is a as of the GAU custard b ean decorticator are also the pi cture of the custard bea n 
shelle r the schematic diagram ok.   
 
Then olive oil that is for olive oil the commercial pretreatment is given that is first 
is the after harvesting and transport the optimal harvesting time is when the oil levels are  
high in the olive fruit, then harvest should begin before natural fruit drop.  The best way 
to transport the olive is in open mesh plastic cr ates that allow air to circu late and prevent 
the harmful heating caused by the catabolic activity of the fruit.  Otherwise if there is not 
proper air circulation, then the heat genera ted by the exothermic reactions,  etcetera they 
may adversely affect the both.  I will say they may spo il the oil speed and the oil quantity  
and quality will be adversely affected.   
Then next operation is the fruit cleaning and washing tha t is it entails two 
operations one is the leaf removal and finally, the washing of the oil.   
 
Then which is followed by milling olive fruit is made up of  approximately one -
third solid material, one -third water and one -third oil.  The objective of the first two step 
of olive oil product ion that is the crushing of the  olives is to produce a paste with easy 
extracted oil dr oplets. Two types of machines are used to crush olives that is stone m ills 
or stainless steel hammer mills.  Then mixing of the oi l paste that is the malaxation that is 
the malaxation  prepares the paste for separation of the oil from the poma ce and this step 
is particularly important if the paste was produced in a hammer mill.  The mixing process 
optimizes the amount of oil extracted through the formation of large oil droplets and a 
reduction of the oil water emulsion.  Mala xation  usually requires 45 minu tes to 1 hour.   
 
Then pretreatment given to the coconuts or the separatio n of nuts that broke the 
shell of the coconut and keep it in sun to dry and then separate the nut  from the husk on  
next day. Then in the copra making keep the nut in sun for more t han 3  days to make 
copra of required  moisture content and then it is followed.  Next operation is reheating 
where dry copra is again he ated in a dryer before chopping  into pieces to obtain copra of 
around 6 percent moisture content.  Chopping of the dried coconut cocra is done into that 
is a small pieces with the help  of a chopper cocra cutter.  Then it is followed by roasting 
where that is in the roasting process the  copra pieces  are fed into the steam jacketed 
kettles and cooked around 70 degree Celsius for about  30 minutes.   
 
Now, I will like to summarize this lecture by saying that  seeds pretreatment is 
reported  to increase oil yield, oxidative oil stability, b ioactive compounds recovery and 
formation  o f a new functional compound. So, this seed pretreatment is a very very 
important op eration for both oil yield and oil quality.  Among the thermal pretreatment 
technologies microwave and infr ared radiations are pr omising, but these are not 
performed on the same large production scales that of the roasting.  Application of novel 
seed pretreatment techniques such as mic rowaving, enzymatic digestion, pulse electric 
field and ultrasonication do not only im prove the oil  yield and quality  attributes, but also 
reduce seed oil extraction time solvent amount and the energy consumption.   
 
These are the references that are used in this lecture.   
 
Thank you very much for your patience here.   
