 
Page 1 of 24 
 Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Week – 02 
Lecture - 10 
 
Hello everyone. Namaste. Now, we are in the 10th lecture.  
 
Page 2 of 24 
  
In this half -hour time, we will discuss phospholipids and sterols that we will discuss the 
types, properties , and functions of phospholipids , and also specific phospholipids like 
lecithin. We will discuss its characteristics and its importance in food processing and th en 
sterols , particularly the plant sterols we will discuss in little detail.  
 
Now, earlier also we briefly told that phospholipids are lipids containing a phosphoric 
acid residue.  You can see here that there is a hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic tail.  In 
the hydrophilic head, it has a phosphoric group that is in the third carbon atom SN3 
normally.  So, they are found in all living cells whether they are of animal or plant origin. 
In humans and animals, phospholipids are concentrated in vital organs such as the brain, 
 
Page 3 of 24 
 liver, and kidney.  In ve getables , they are the highest in the seeds, nuts , and grains. As 
constituents of the cell membranes and active participants in the metabolic process, 
phospholipids are essential to our life.  
 
There are three distinct polymeric alcohol that provides the basic constituent of various 
phospholipids. The first of these is the glycerol and then the phospholipids containing it 
are referred to as glycerophospholipids . As you see that is the phospholipids  that are 
glycerophospholipids or sphingolipids.  So, glycerol and phospholipids that is which are 
the fatty acid s, two fatty acid s, and then phosphor and it is connected with another 
moiety.   
So, included here in addition to PC, PE , and PS that is phospha tidylcholine, 
phosphatidylethanolamine , and phosphatidylserine are the acetylphospholipids or 
plasmogens that are in the body fluids,  muscles , and egg , and the lysophospholipids and 
the phosphatidic acids these are the important  phospholipids which are pr esent. The 
second polyhydric alcohol is the amino -dihydroxy compound sphingosine, which is the 
basis of not only the sphingomyelin that is see n here sphingomyelin that is in the brain 
and spinal cord but also for the other glycolipids . All of these compoun ds based on 
sphingosine are also referred to as sphingolipids ok. The third polyhydric alcohol is 
inositol which is also included in phosphatidyl inositol.   
 
Page 4 of 24 
  
So, lysophospholipids that is the phospholipids also form complexes with protein s like 
vitelline in egg, oak, animal and plant tissues, and lipoprotein in blood serum and milk.  
So, the phospholipids form complexes with these proteins. They can form complex es also 
with carbohydrates like glycolipids, alkaloids, minerals, enzymes, choles terols , and other 
substances.  So, lysophospholipids represent a special class of compounds resulting from 
the chemical or enzymatic h ydrolysis of the phospholipids. The role of phospholipids in 
normal and pathological conditions as well as in cell metabol ism is of great biological 
significance.  You can see here that is the phospholipids where S1 and SN2 are the fatty 
acids and in SN3 it is a phosphoric acid group and that is the oxygen head group that is 
PLA2.  So, then this phospholipid is converted into lysophospholipids times tha t is in the 
lysophospholipids. You can see the difference between that there are only SN1 fatty 
acids, SN2 is alcohol and then SN3 is t he phosphatidyl group. So, that is how 
phospholipids and what is the difference between phosph olipids and lysophospholipids.  
 
Page 5 of 24 
  
 
Glycerophosphoglycerides, they are also called phosphoglycerides, are membrane lipids 
in which two fatty acids are attached in ester linkage to the first and second carbon of the 
glycerol, and a highly polar or charged gro up is attached through a phosphodiester 
linkage to the third carbon atom SN3 carbon atom ok.  Glycerol is a prochiral, it has no 
asymmetric carbon, but attachment of phosphate at one end converts it into a chiral 
compound which can be correctly named eithe r L-glycerol 3 -phosphate , D-glycerol 1 -
phosphate or SN -glycerol 3 -phosphate as the case may be.  
Glycerophospholipids are named as derivatives of the parent compound phosphatidic 
according to the polar alcohol in the head group like phosphatidylcholine and 
phosphatidylethanolamines , they  have choline and ethanolami ne in their polar head 
groups.  
 
Page 6 of 24 
  
The common glycerophospholipids are diacylglycerides or diacylglycerols linked to a 
head group through a phosphatidyl bond . See, phosphatidic acid which  is a 
phosp homon oester is the parent compound. Each derivative is named for the head group 
alcohol X, that is it is X which is present there, and at X what is the X compound based 
on that it is a name the phospholipidic name the two phosphatidic acids  here a single 
glycerol.   So, this is the glycerophospholipid general structure , and then here as I told you 
it is the X group which is there in the SN3 attached to the phosphoric acid group.  
 
This X , and what is that X based on  that the phosphoryl is nam ed that. For example, if the 
X is H then the resulting phospholipids become phosphatidic acid, ok. If it is 
 
Page 7 of 24 
 ethanolamine, then phosphatidyl ethanolamine, has a net charge at pH 7 is 0,  whereas, 
phosphatidic acid is negatively charg ed. Then if the X is chol ine, it becomes 
phosphatidylcholine and this is also normally called lecithin. Then if X is serine the 
phospholipid becomes phosphatidylserine, Phosphatidylserine also is negatively charged 
it has one negative charge.  
Then if the glycerol X may be glycerol  it becomes phosphatidyl glycerol ok and here it 
again has a one negative charge.  X may be monoenositol 4, 5 bio phosphate then it 
becomes phosphatidyl enositol 4, 5 bio phosphate. It has 4 negative charges at pH 7, of  
course. Then phosphatidyl glycerol i s known as cardiolipin the phosphatidin name has 
two negativ e charges. So, it is the X moiety which is attached to the phosphoric acid 
group of the SN31 in the phospholipid that decide s the name of the phospholipids.  
 
Then let us see the structure propert y relat ionships of the glycerophospholipids. The head 
group is joined to glycerol through a phosphatizer bond in which phosphate groups bear a 
negative charge at total pH.  The polar alcohol may be negatively charged as in 
phosphatidyl inositol 4, 5 bio pho sphate, neutral or phosphatidylserine , or positively 
charged like it is in the case of phosphatidylcholine  or phosphatidyl ethanolamine. These 
charges contribute greatly to the surface properties of the membrane, which  you can see 
here in this figure . Also, it has been shown that, yes that is the cell membrane is there . It 
has non -polar heads as well as non -polar  heads as well as polar heads.  The polar heads 
this is the simple way to dry phospholipids out . Both have  a pol ar and non -polar head.  
 
Page 8 of 24 
  
The fatty a cid in glycerol phospholipids can be any of a wider variety. So, a given 
phospholipid that is phosphatidylcholine for example, may consist of several  molecular 
spectra each with its unique complement or fatty acids.  Spectra  each with its uni que 
complement  or fatty acids. The distribution of molecular species is specific for different 
organisms, different tissues of the same organism , and different glycerophospholipi ds in 
the same cell or tissue. In general, glycerophospholipids contain 16 carbon or 18 carb on 
saturated fatty acids at SN1 position at its carbon 1 and contain 18 carbon or 20 carbon 
unsaturated fatty acids at second carbon, carbon 2, SN2 position.  So, that is in the 
phospholipids normally glycerophospholipids ' first carbon, carbon 1 is a satura ted fatty 
acid and in the second position , it contains gen erally unsaturated fatty acid. Within few 
exceptions or with few exceptions, the biological significance of the variation in fatty 
acids and head groups is not yet very clearly understood, but there  are some variations.  
 
Page 9 of 24 
  
So, now the phosphatidylcholine that is known commercially for its commercial name is 
lecithin.  It is very general and it describes a composition of the lipid constituents and 
surface active compounds that are present in the produc t rather than the chemical entity. 
That is although we say that it is chemically it is phosphatidylcholine, commercially 
when it is th ese gums or in general uses in these gums are taken from the refining process 
during degumming steps, then the se gums natural gums contain a mixture of polar lipids 
which are obtained that by during degumming process from the crude vegetable oils. And 
there formally the degumming operation, details of degumming operation we will discuss 
maybe in a week when we dis cuss talk about refining process.  
Here, these gums are taken, they are sprayed , and dried, and then these gums dehydrated 
gums or dried gums are used in terms of lecithin and they are used as emulsifier s in food 
processing operation s in many operations. So, chemically it may be phosphatidylcholine 
however along with that some other compounds also may be present.  This phospholipid 
fraction portion of the lecithin is mainly responsible for giving the functional properties 
or functions to the commercial lecit hin.  Commercial lecithin is an important co -product 
of the edible oil processing industry because of its dietary significance and multi -fathered 
functionality in the food system and industrial application it is widely used as an 
emulsifier in many foods.  
 
Page 10 of 24 
  
 
Lecithin has a long history of use in foods dating back more than 60 years . In 1930 that  is 
the year 1930, widespread use of commercial solvent extraction techniques for vegetable 
oil production and because regumming of crude oil became necessary for sh ipping 
stability.  A large supply of cr ude lecithin gums was produced.  Lecithin ingredients are 
now recognized as valuable product s that have both nutritional value and commercial 
value like they can be used they are used in food feed as well as for industr ial 
applications. Two of the edible applications of lecithin are the which are now still popular 
the one is the viscosity reduction in chocolate and the confectionary product that is 
lecithin has been found very useful in this purpose for this purpose. And the second is 
that lecithin is used for emulsification or anti -spatter properties in margarine. So, in 
addition to other early uses such as in bakery goods, pasta, textile s, insecticides , paints , 
etc. among others they are still active today the lecithin is being used for these products ' 
purposes.  
 
Page 11 of 24 
  
So, the compounds that are present in the commercial lecithin you can see here that is 
phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine are cationic and an ionic , and at the 
same time that is they are zwitter ions , and thus they can have some buffering act ion with 
both bases and acids. The PI that is phosphatidylinositol , however, is a relatively strong 
acid and therefore, is anionic. So, the phosphatidylchol ine, phosphatidylethanolamine , 
and phosphatidylinositol , and in this both R1 and R2 will be 350 into 17 hydrocarbon 
chains.  So, this is the chemical structure for most of the commonly occurrin g 
phospholipids in commercial. So, have been less than the compo unds that are generally 
found in commercial s.  
So, have been less than include phospholipids, anionic and zwitter ionic that is 
phospholipids have glycolipids anionic, hysterelglycoside , and zeternionic are esterified 
hysterelglycosidic and galactoside gly cerides etc.  
 
Page 12 of 24 
  
As far as the properties and food uses of lecithin as concern ed I already explained a little 
bit, but let us say lecithin mouth multifunctional properties of lecithin and its natural 
status make it an ideal food ingredient.  The main functio nal properties of lecithin are 
emulsification, antispatter, instantizing, wetting, dispersing, releasing, parting, viscosity 
modification , and many more even including baking applications.  These functional 
characteristics are primarily derived from the ch emical structure of the lecithins , which 
are the major phospholipids. This phospholipid molecule in the lecithin contain s two 
long-chain fatty acids esterified to glycerol as well as a phosphodiester bonding to a 
choline inositol or ethanolamine group.  
So, the phospholipids fatty acid end is nonpolar and thereby it has a lipophobic or fat -
loving property. The phosphodiester group with its constituents that is zeternionic or 
dipolar explain s the hydrophilic or water -loving properties of  this portion of th e 
molecule. Therefore, they have both water -loving which  is hydrophilic as well as fat -
loving lipophilic propert ies and that is why this has this keeps both these polar and 
nonpolar compound s together it acts as a bridge.  
 
Page 13 of 24 
  
So, uses of lecithin in commerci al products there are in commercial bakery items like 
bread, rolls, donuts, cookies, cake s, pies , and pasta product s it is used for crystallization 
control,  emulsification, wetting agent, it is used as a release agent li ke internal and 
internal both. Then  in the case of cheese product s like pasteurized processed cheese and 
cheese food or imit ation cheeses , this is used as an emulsifier or as a releasing agent.  
In meat and meat poultry processing it is meat and poultry glazes and basting 
compounds,  fat foo ds, vacuums etcetera it is used as a browning agent, phosphate 
dispersion, dietary supplement, release agent, emulsifier , and so on.   
 
 
Page 14 of 24 
 In the dairy and imitation dairy products like infant milk, formulas, milk and cream 
replacer s, egg replacers, imitation  eggs, whipped toppings in ice cream, flavored milk, 
flavored butter like garlic flavored butter or basting butter , etc. This lecithin is used as a n 
emulsifier, wetting and dispersing agent, anti -spattering agent or release agent , and 
miscellaneous applica tions even peanut spread as margarine peanut butter, it has both 
crystallization control as well as an emulsifier in peanut butter as I had to 10 percent of 
the less thing is used sometime s. In the sala d products, in the flavor and color 
stabilization , this is used to control the crystallization process as well as an emulsifier it is 
used.  
 
In the packaging aid s like polymer package, interior coating, sausage casing , or coating 
that the coating of cane interior or the sausage casing coating or stocking  net and all 
things release agent or s ealant as a sealant helps  the property.  
Then in the processing equipment like frying surfaces, extruders, conveyors, broilers, 
dryers, blender evaporator s, and all these things that it is internal or in product and or 
external release agent or is also used a s a lubricant in the equipment.  So, you can see th at 
lecithin has a large scal e void industrial application.  
 
Page 15 of 24 
  
Then another important group which are present in t he oils these are the sterols. The 
structures of ster ols are based on a steroid alcohol framework comparable  with that of the 
cholesterol. You can see the structure of cholesterol here.  
Here the molecules are planar and they are based on a tetracyclic cyclopentane and 
threonine system with 4 fused rings like  A, B, C , and D . These are the 4 fused rings . The 
hydroxyl group at the third carbon atom you see here the third ca rbonation the hydroxyl 
group , side chain at the 17 carbon atom has a side chain.  And 2 methyl groups are at C18 
and C like the methyl group i s at 18 and 19 C18 and C19 are the methyl groups. T hey are 
all angular to the ring structure and have beta stereochemistry that is abov e plane 
configuration. Cholesterol esters are hydrophobic and are used for the storage a nd 
transport of cholesterol.  
 
Page 16 of 24 
  
And so, the cholesterol is the main animal sterol . It contains about 27 carbon atoms 
arranged into 4 fused rings and a hydrocarbon chain as I told you earlier in the last slide.  
It is the precursor of bile acids, vitamin D , and steroid hormone s. It is synthesized 
primarily in the liver and adrenal gland from acetyl CoA or CoA style esters which is 
formed by an ester linked of a fatty acid to cholesterol.  The structure of cholesterol is 
visible through a transparent surface color module of the mol ecule.  In the chemical 
structure the rings are labeled A through D to simply reference to derivatives of a steroid 
nucleus and the carbon atoms are numbered in blue.  
You can see here that these carbo n atoms are numbered in blue.  The C3 hydroxyl group 
is pink in both representation s and is a polar head for the storage and  transport of the 
cholesterol.  
 
Page 17 of 24 
  
This hydroxyl group condenses into a fatty acid to form a sterol esters. Then plant sterols 
which  are generally th e major components of the unsaponif iable fractions of the 
vegetable oils.  Plant sterols or phytosterols are generally the predominant compounds in 
the unsupernifiable fraction of vegetable oil that generally account for about 1 percent of 
the oil.  
The main sterols belong to the 4 -desmethyl stero l family, but 4 -methyl sterols and 4 -4-
dimethyl sterols that is also called triterpene alcohol are present as minor comp onent in 
most of the oils. Apart from some exceptions the desmethyl sterols that are beta-
cytosterol the generally the most abundant and  are usually accompanied by variable 
levels of campesterol, stigmasterol, 5 -avenasterol , and other sterols.  
 
Page 18 of 24 
  
So, desmethyl sterol you can see here there is the sterol skeleton . You see that i t may be 
either A or this B ring which is shown here is mostly the same . The simpl e difference is 
that here the double bond posit ion you can see in the B ring.  Otherwise other is the same. 
So, this might be either A or B then the side chain that A, B, C, and D side chain is a 
then.  So, if the I  discussed then is A and this side chain becomes A like there is a C, A , 
and C it is brachychosterol . A and B will become camp esterol, A and G stigmasterol that 
is A and F is the side chain . This F becomes Sitosterol. Then A and H, H is here you see 
it is a saturated that is at 5 saturation saturated ring  is there it is 5 -Avenasterol. And when 
the side chain is B and H you can say B and H a gain it becomes 7 -Avenasterol. So, these 
are the trivial name s and accordingly , the IUPAC names are also given here.  So, these are 
some of the desmethyl sterols that are found in plant oils.  
 
Page 19 of 24 
  
4-methylsterol similarly that is structure main structure may be either C or D or E that is 
A, B, C, D, the structure which is the C or D or E, ok.  So, if again this skeleton is the  C 
and side chain if it is F then it becomes 24 -ethyllopanol, ok.  So, this here the IUPAC 
name if the structure is D like this where you see the here chain in this double bond 
positioning.  So, if the side is the main chain is D and the side chain is also  D then D and 
D the side chain is D . Here it becomes obtusiofoliol and it is a n IUPAC name is also 
there.  So, these are the differen t types of 4 -methylsterols.  
 
4,4-dimethyl sterols and triterpene alcohols are similar  like this structure may be here F 
or alpha and beta this in F it is the difference in you can see here just this group and this 
 
Page 20 of 24 
 bonds that main difference in alpha and beta ot her things are same almost. So, alpha -
amyrin or beta -amyrin that  is skeleton is F. So, if F is there a side chain is A then it 
becomes Cycloartenol or alpha -amyrin, beta -amyrin, cyclobranol, 24 -methylene  
cycloart enol, and so on. So, these are the different 4 -4-dimethylsterols and triterpene 
alcohols found.  
 
Plant sterols there is ste rols are characteristics of certain oils and can be used to detect the 
presence of this in oil in the foods.  Sterols occur in vegetable oils in free as well as in 
esterified form in relative levels that are dependent on the type of the oil. In the sterol 
esters of vegetable oils, the hydrogen of the hydroxyl group at carbon 3 is substituted 
with a fatty acyl or with ferulic acid , and in the case of gamma -oryzanols.  Due to their 
unique sterol profile vegetable oils can be authenticated by using their sterol  profile.   
That is gamma -oryzanol is a common constituent present in the rice bran oil it is a plant 
sterol.  So, the rice bran oil you can see that this from the paddy is when it is milled t hen 
you get husk and the bran, then bran is used for oil. T he oil see that is the husk portion is 
the rice germ the bran, and starchy endosperm. So, the bran just cover s the starchy 
endosperm , and this bran oil it is highly unsaturated fatty acids present it is vitamin E as 
well as gamma -oryzanol, these are the ga mma -oryzanol is the antioxidant  present in the 
rice bran oil.  
 
 
Page 21 of 24 
  
So, these are the major sterols present in common vegetable oils that are just coconut, 
cottonseed, olive, wheat germ , and rice bran oil. So, you see de smethyl sterols that are 
campe sterol  it is present in coconut oil at around 8 percent, cotton seed at 7 percent, 
wheat germ at 19 percent , and rice bran at about 24 percent.  
Similarly , cytosterol, stigma sterols , or the 5 -avenasterols , etc. are all present in this. Then 
4 methyl sterols are present  in the coconut it is present in the account of 7 milligram s per 
100 gram s, in cottonseed 12 milligram s per 100 gram s, and in olive oil , it has more 
amount tha n 68 milligram s per 100 gram s. In wheat germ also it contains 59 milligram 
per 100 gram and  the different function that is the specific compound, obtusifoliol, 
gramisterol, cycloeucalenol, then citrostadienol, all these are proportionate.  So, these are 
the 3 main compounds in addition to the obtusifoliol and gramisterol.  
Then, similarly , 4 methy l sterol they are present in 20 mg per 100 gram in coconut, and 
17 mg per 100 gram in cotton seed, but in olive oil their content is very high 292 
milligram s per 100 gram and in wheat germ  oil also it has got around 50.  So, the 
cycloartenol is 55 percent i n coconut, the cotton seed 12 percent, olive 18 percent, and 
wheat germ oil 25 percent. And these are present as gamma -oryzanol this 24 -methylene -
cycloart enol is also present in the rice bran oil. So, this rice bran oil contains around 105.  
5 milligram s per 100 gram s, this methyl st anol. There are other compounds present that 3 
main compounds and gamma -oryzanols and this 24 me thylene cycloartanol present.  
 
Page 22 of 24 
  
So, the food applications of plant sterols like this phytosterol are industrially isolated 
from th e distillates which results  from the deodor ization of the vegetable oil .  
Phytosterols are sometimes hydrogenated to produce phytostanols as the solubility of the 
sterols and stanols is very low which  is less than 1  percent at 25 degree Celsius .  It limits  
their application in food products.  Sterification of the sterols and stanols is , therefore, 
performed to make them fat -soluble and easy to incorporate in food products.  Two 
margarines  containing 8 to 9 percent sterols like Becel Proactiv of Unilever or s tanol like 
Benecol of Raisio or in the form of esters are now available in the markets in Europe and 
the United States.  
 
 
Page 23 of 24 
 So, now I summarize this lecture by saying that the minor components of lipids are an 
important cl ass of lipid and their sterols. Phospholipids are important for their role as 
emulsifiers. Lecithin is an important phospholipid that is used as an emulsifier purpose in 
chocolate products and many other confection ery and bakery products. Sterols are 
important for their role in providing ch aracteristic feature s to oils which are useful for 
their authentication.  Sterol -based food products present an interesting opportunity for 
new product development. So, both phospholipids and sterols including animal sterols 
and plant sterols are very very  important clas ses of compounds that are present in food 
fats and oils , and  they must be looked at carefully many commercial they are produced 
from the by -products of oil refining industry like either gums or even distillates of their 
deodorization process es. They have also as you have seen earlier that is they ha d many 
application s in many non -food industry operation s in pharmaceuticals etc.  they are used 
widely.   
 
So, these are the references which are used in this lecture.   
 
Page 24 of 24 
  
Thank you very much for y our patience here.  
