Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 05: Solvent Extraction of Edible Oils  
Lecture 2 3: Solvent Extraction Technology & Equipment  
 
Hello everybody. Now, we are in lecture 23 of this course and in this in the next half an 
hour or so, we will discuss various aspects of solvent extraction technology and equipment.  
 
The concepts which are covered in this lecture include solvent extracti on process, leaching, 
different types of leaching like fixed bed leaching, moving bed leaching, agitated solid 
leaching and then major type of solvent extractors like horizontal and vertical extractors, 
batch and continuous extractors and so on.  
 
 
In the  earlier lecture, we have seen the principle, mechanism and techniques. The extraction 
of oil from the oil seeds by means of a non -polar solvent and is basically a solid liquid 
extraction process . 
 
 
The extraction process is a normally taken after cleanin g, drying etc . that is seed is taken 
up 5 to 8 percent moisture content. And then it is subjected to various pretreatment like 
decortication/ dehulling, removal of hard cells if any  and the skin. These kernels are 
steamed which depends upon the type of the seeds . It is optional process necessary for low 
oil containing hard kernels that is steaming becomes important and then it is pressed. A 
screw press is common and then you get oil for edible oil. So, this is system for pressing 
and when  the hulls are obtai ned then these hull  are send for solvent direct extraction then 
it is pelletized or flagged and then sent to the extraction chamber. Alternatively in the case 
of prepress solvent extraction process after pressing oil goes here and the cape is then 
pelletiz ed and flagged and then it is sent to the extractor where it is brought into the contact 
between the prepared material flagged and pellets with the suitable solvent. So, it may be 
different types of extractor . The oil and solvent mixture that is the miscel la which  is flushed 
off that is the solvent is flushed off an d finally, steam stripping and this solvent is further 
redirected for the extraction process and you get the oil. The other hand that is after you 
get the miscella and then separately you get the  oil meal that is the residue remaining after 
the extraction and the meal also contains around 30 to 35 percent of the solvent. So, this 
also should be treated for making the meal because it is a good source particularly in some 
cases it has a good quality  of proteins. So, this can be used for food purposes or various 
other purposes feed materials etc . So, this is solvent is removed by desolventizers, meal 
toasting etc . So, these are the three major operations here that is in the case of solvent 
extraction process one is the extraction of oil, then you get miscella, then desolventization 
of miscella and then that is desolventization of the meal, meal desolventization.  
 
 
So, th e factors which influence the solvent extraction process include the physical 
characteristics of solid that is an open porous structure of the solid material is preferable 
because such a structure facilitate diffusion as well as percolation. Then the  solvent having 
higher solubility is preferable a low boiling point make the separation  easier. The 
temperature is another factor , the rate of extraction can be increased considerably by 
increasing the temperature in the structure. In the earlier class , we discussed little bit about 
this, but however, high temperature makes higher solubility  of the oil higher diffusion 
coefficient and lower miscella viscosity, but the very high temperature should be avoided. 
A number of process es like cooking, flaking have been proposed for increasing the porosity 
of the oil seed before solvent extraction . 
 
And choice of the solvent very important in the solvent extraction technology we should 
have a proper type of solvent that is an ideal solvent for extraction of oil from oil seed 
should possess the property like it should have good solubility of the oil, p oor solubility of 
non-oil components, it should be highly volatile like it should have low boiling point. So, 
that the complete removal of the solvent from the miscella and the meal by evaporation is 
feasible and easy. The boiling point should not be too l ow. So, that extraction can be carried 
out at somewhat high temperature to facilitate mass transfer. The solvent should have low 
viscosity,  
 
It should have low latent heat of evaporation. So, that less energy is needed for solvent 
recovery, it should hav e low specific heat. So, that less energy is needed for keeping the 
solvent and miscella warm. The solvent should be chemically inert to oil and other 
components of the seed flakes. It should be there should be absolute absence of toxicity 
and carcinogenic ity for the solvent and its residue. It should be non-inflammable , non-
explosive  and non-corrosive  and more importantly it should be commercially available in 
large quantities at low cost.  
 
 
The advantages and disadvantages of the solvent extraction process number advantages 
include the high oil yield as compared to mechanical extraction and it spends lower 
production cost and requires less time. However, the solvent extraction process has certain 
disadvantages . The expeller pressed oil is clean, more  pure, high in natural colors and 
flavors compared to the solvent extracted oils. Requirement of large volumes of solvent 
pressure requirement , etc. and the invariably result into the reduction or inferior in the 
quality of the oil as compared to those obt ained from direct expelling or pressing. High 
construction cost of the extraction and refining work shop. I t requires high maintenance 
cost and the presence of the residual solvent content in the meal . 
 
Solvent extractors are the heart of the solvent extraction processes equipment. They may 
be two type s, batch type and continuous type. In the batch proces s, in this figure there is a 
certain quantity of flax is contacted with a certain volume of fresh solvent here. The 
miscella  is drained off from the bottom of the solvent distilled and solvent is recirculated 
to the extractor until the residual oil content in the batch of flax is reduced to the desired 
level ok. The batch equipment has various arrangement or that is a seed is f ed from the top 
and as well as solvent and in this there is a pillar that is one can stir is provided which gives 
intimate mixing of the solvent and the oil . 
  
 
In the continuous type both the oil seeds and the solvent are fed into the extractor 
continuou sly. The different available types of the continuous extractors are characterized 
by their geometrical configuration and the method by which oil seeds and solvents are 
moved one in relation to the other. The continuous extractors  are further two types one is 
the percolation type other is the immersion type and even now there are modern extractor 
which are a combination of both percolation as well as immersion types . 
 
In the percolation method , solvent trickles through a thick bed of flax without filling the 
void space completely. A film of solvent flows rather rapidly over the surface of the solid 
particles and the efficiently removes the oil which has diffused from inside to the surface. 
This m ode of contact is preferable whenever the resistance to diffusion inside the flax is 
relatively low particularly when the flax is thin as well as they have the large surface area, 
they have opened tissue structure and so on. In the  immersion method , the so lid particles 
are totally immersed in a slow moving continuous phase of solvent. Immersion works 
better with the materials offering a greater internal resistance to oil transfer like if the 
particles are thick they are dense tissue structures etc.  
 
 
Leaching is a process of extracting the solute from the solid using the fluid. Here the fluid 
is the solvent. In edible oil extraction technique , the solvent is used to extract the oil from 
the oilseeds and the overall process of the leaching of the soluble ma terial using solvent 
involves is described: number one, the solvent is transferred to the surface of the solid from 
bulk solvent solution then optimum conditions should be provided so that the solvent must 
penetrate or diffuse into the solid. Then oil diss olves into the solvent, oil diffuses through 
the solid solvent mixture to the surface of the particle and then finally, oil is transferred to 
the bulk solution and many different phenomena encountered make it almost impossible or 
impracticable to apply any  one theory to the leaching action. Many a t imes, the  
combination of theories  are applicable.  
 
So, rate of leaching when dissolving a solid is very important. The resistance to mass 
transfer of the solute from the surface of the solid to the bulk solvent  is in general quite 
small compared to the resistance to diffusion within the solid itself. This has been found 
for leaching soybeans where the degree of agitation to the external solvent has no 
appreciable effect on the extraction rate. When a material is  being dissolved from the solid 
to the solvent solution, the rate of mass transfer from the solid surface to the liquid is the 
controlling factor. And there is essentially no resistance in the solid phase if it is a pure 
material. There are various mathema tical equations which can be used to find the time of 
leaching for obtaining a desired amount of oil in the solvent. And one such equation is 
represent ed by  
ğ‘ğ´
ğ´Ì…Ì…Ì…Ì…
=ğ‘˜ğ¿(ğ¶ğ´ğ‘ âˆ’ğ¶ğ´) 
where N A is the kg mole of A dissolving the to the solution per second. A is the surface 
area of particle in square meter, K L is the mass transfer coefficient in meter second, C A 
is the saturation solubility of the solute, A in the solution in kg mole per cubic meter and 
C A is the concentration of A in the solution at time T in kg mole per cubic meter . 
 
So, by multiplying both sides of this equation with the area A, the equation can be rewritten 
as  
ğ‘‰â…†ğ¶ğ´
â…†ğ‘¡=ğ‘Ì…ğ´=ğ´ğ‘˜ğ¿(ğ¶ğ´ğ‘ âˆ’ğ¶ğ´) 
âˆ«â…†ğ¶ğ´
ğ¶ğ´ğ‘†âˆ’ğ¶ğ´ğ¶ğ´
ğ¶ğ´0=(ğ´ğ¾ğ¿
ğ‘£)âˆ«â…†ğ‘¡ğ‘¡
ğ‘¡=0 
ğ¶ğ´ğ‘†âˆ’ğ¶ğ´
ğ¶ğ´ğ‘ âˆ’ğ¶ğ´0=â…‡âˆ’(ğ´ğ¾ğ¿
ğ‘£) 
This last equation  can be used for determining the time of leaching of the oil from the oil 
seed in some extent. The solution approaches a saturated condition exponentially and often 
the interfacial area A will increase during the extraction if the external surface becomes 
very irregular. If the solution material forms a very high proportion of the total solids, 
disintegration of the particles may occur.  
 
Fixed bed leaching is a type of solvent oil extraction technique that involves using a fixed 
bed column to extra ct oil from seed materials. The column is typically filled with the 
materials to be extracted and solvent is pumped through the column. As the solvent moves 
through the bed, it dissolves the oil and carries it out of the column. Fixed bed leaching is 
a con tinuous process that is often used in large scale commercial oil extraction processes. 
The advantage of this method include s the high efficiency, low solvent consumption and 
the ability to recover solvent for reuse. However, it can be difficult to control the flow of 
solvent through the bed and the process can be sensitive to changes in operating conditions. 
So, in the stepwise manner, this fixed bed leaching may be that is a solid material, then 
fixed bed columns into the solvent inlet, then solvent percol ates through the bed and extract 
the oil, then it comes to the solvent outlet, oil and solvent mixtures are obtained, then 
separator recovered solvent is sent again back and finally  get the final product that is the 
crude oil . 
 
So, this is you can say the  fixed bed leaching system here that is the here there is solid sheet 
solids are there and then it improves solvent is coming. So, it basically the it is the in this 
the solvent oils are getting dissolved into the solvent and finally, we get the miscella i s 
recovered from the product. So, this system has both again like any system advantages and 
disadvantages. Advantages of the fixed bed leaching include it is a continuous operation, 
high solvent to material ratio, there is a reduced solvent consumption and  it is a n automated 
operation which  can be made into continuous . However, the disadvantages include high 
initial cost, regular maintenance requirements, limited flexibility and it requires separate 
solvent recovery system . 
 
Then comes the moving bed leaching, there are a number of devices for stage wise counter 
current leaching where the bed or stage moves instead of being stationary. In the earlier 
case, bed was stationary, now it is moving and these are used widely in extracting oil from 
vegetable s eeds such as cotton seed, peanuts, soybeans etc. The seeds are usually dehulled 
first sometime even pre cooked often partially dried and rolled or flagged and sometime 
this preliminary removal of oil is accomplished by expression in the case of prepress 
solvent extraction process. The solvents are usually petroleum products such as hexanes 
etce and the final solvent vegetable solution called miscella may contain some finely 
divided solids. So, moving bed leaching that is extractors which operate on the prin ciple 
of moving bed leaching they are Bollman extractor, H ildebrandt extractors , Kennedy 
extractor, Bono tto extractor and Roto cel extracto rs. 
 
Vertical basket Bollman extractor consist of different various baskets which are fixed to an 
endless chain having descending and ascending leg enclosed in a vapor tight chamber . So, 
each basket has a wire mesh bottom. The chambers at the bottom of the vessel are separated 
by partition plate which hold the extract stream. Liquids percolating along the two legs 
flows down to these chambers. The solids are fed from a vapor tight hopper into the basket, 
at the top of the descending leg and a partially enriched solvent that is half miscella is 
sprayed on the solvent. This solvent is sprayed on the top bucket in the a scending leg and 
it percolates that and collects it in the bottom of the chamber as half miscella and finally, 
the full miscella is obtained and collected.  
 
The advantage of this system include that it can be integrated into a continuous process 
extracti on efficiency . In this system is high, there is a reduced solvent consumption and 
again it is automated operation. However, the disadvantages are the high initial cost, 
regular maintenance requirement, limited flexibility and also requires a separate solve nt 
recovery system.  
 
 
In the Hildebrand t extractor  system , the solid is immersed in the extractant. The system 
comprises of two long sections of tubes fitted with the screw conveyors inside. A feed 
hopper is provided on the one side of the horizontal section and the solid is loaded into the 
tube using this hopper soli d. Then the solid is transported to the other end of the slow -
moving screw conveyor . At the other end of the tube there is a another section  which is 
inclined which forms an angle with the  first tube and there is a solvent recovery port in the 
almost in the middle of the second tube  along with which the extractant or the solvent is 
pumped in. So, basically , there is a counter current movement where the  solid material and 
the solvent move in  the counter current way manner and it is transported through the 
horizontal tube in the first phase upward .  
 
In the same  immersion type Hildebrand t extractor, you can see here in the figure and this 
solid is carried out upward in the second half of the upward angle tube that is where it is 
drained and solid is ultimately discharged from the extreme end of the upward angle tube 
in the earlier case. The other design which is available here is the screw conveyors in a U 
shape . In U shape , the solids are cha rged at the top end in the one conveyor down across 
the bottom and then up in the other leg the solvent flows counter currently. In the screw 
extractors the solids move up in the slope while the solvent percolates down the slope here 
the solvent flows in c ounter corner to the solid through the extracto r. So, the advantage of 
this method is high oil yield, low solvent consumption and continuous process and 
disadvantage is the high initial investment cost and it has some safety concern.  
 
Then the other type  of rotor extractor is roto cel or carousel extractor.  It is a percolation 
system that obtains counter current extraction of solid through a sequence of discrete solid 
liquid mixing. It consists of a rotor divided into sector shaped cells. The rotor allows 
continuous introduction of direct discard of solid as it turns into a tight tank. Each cell 
passes under a special device for feeding the solid and under a series of solvent spray as 
the rotor rotates. Miscella  goes from one end to other in a counter current cross flow in 
relation to the raw material flow and is enriched of the extracted oil. Therefore, in the 
beginnin g, the miscella  is weak and the end of the process is sometimes concentrated. The 
extracted sol ution is filtered in each cell.  
 
The advantage is it is simple structure, it has easy operation and maintenance, high material 
layer, good immersion effect, good filtration effect, low fines content in the miscella , very 
good quality of crude oil can be obtained and the reducing and scaling of the evaporation 
system is another advantage of this process.  
 
 
Then bonotto extractor as you can see here in the figure it is an alternative tower design 
consisting of cylindrical vessel with a series of slowly ro tating horizontal plates. It is also 
an immersion type extractor. Solids are fed to the top of the column continuously you can 
see here in the figure continuously and are caused to fall through an opening into each plate 
beneath the in succession. This ele ment is introduced at the bottom of the column and flows 
upward. This extracted solution leaves a column at the top and it has a high efficiency per 
step, high operating area, low apparatus cost and in joule for in sensible for suspended 
substances.  
 
The Kennedy extractor is a stagewise device originally used for leaching tannins from the 
tan work. The solids are leached in a series of tubs and are pushed from one to the next in 
the cascade by perforated paddles while the solvent flows in counter current direction. 
Perforations in paddles permit drainage of liquid from solid between stages and the solids 
are scraped from each paddle. The number of tub s depends on the nature of the solid, 
solvent and the level of extraction desired. Since it has a horizonta l orientation , more flow 
space is required that is the drawback.  
 
Then horizontal basket extractor this is an oil seed inlet there are different basket and in 
this basket the material moves and solvent is falling through oil seed etc . This is a typical 
work house of solvent extraction type vegetable oil processing unit. In this system , oil seeds 
are loaded in chains of basket with perforated bottoms which moves in continuous cycle 
carried by a chain drive. As the basket move through the system progressively solvent is 
sprinkled on the basket. This solvent percolates through the leaves of the basket and 
collects in different sums. So, the basket is stored from one sum is used as an extractant for 
another stage after repeated extraction with the p rogressively dilute extractants and 
ultimately with fresh solvent the baskets are tipped mechanically and the seeds are 
discharged through a tube. In this system the seeds and the extractant flow in opposite that 
is counter current direction as you can see  here in the figure and finally, the oil comes . 
 
Then continuous belt extractor you can see in the figure it is the solids are fed at one end 
of the perforated inlets moving belt fresh solvent is fed at the solid discharge end the solvent 
is fed from here . You can see the liquid drains into catch basin and is pumped to the top of 
the adjacent section in the bed. The thorough put rate of the extractor can be adjusted by 
varying the speed of the belt. The height of the belt bed can be adjusted according to t he 
expected rate of the extraction and difficult percolation is compensation by the bed height.  
 
In agitated solid leachin g, finely ground solids which can be readily suspended in liquids 
by agitation can be handled in agitated vessels. These must be arr anged for continuous flow 
of both liquid and solid and out of the tank. The average holding time can be estimated for 
both the solids and the liquids separately in an agitated vessel by dividing the vessel 
contents by the rate of flow of solids and liquids . The average holding time should be 
adequate to provide the required leaching action. Short circuiting is a disadvantage 
encountered which can be eliminated by passing the solid liquid mixture through a series 
of a smaller agitated vessels such that the c umulative holding time is required leach time. 
The effect from continuous agitator that is the effluent from the continuous agitator are 
sent to a filter for separating liquid from the solid upon which the solid may be washed free 
of dissolved solids or to  a series of thickeners for counter current washes.  
 
Thickeners are the mechanical devices which are meant for increasing the ratio of solid to 
liquid in a suspension of finely -sized particles by settling and  decanting thus producing a 
thickened sludge a nd a clear supernatant liquid. They are generally installed before any 
filter to minimize the filtering costs. Since both effluents can be pumped and transported, 
thickeners are frequently used to wash liquid leached solids and chemical precipitates free 
of adhering solutions in a continuous multistage counter current arrangement and hence 
worth their use in a leaching operations also. The liquid content in the sludge varies from 
15 to 75 percent and is greatly dependent on the nature of the solids and liqu ids and upon 
the time allowed for settling.  
 
The continuous counter -current operations , as you can see here in this figure , involves both 
the thickeners and the agitators or grinders. The solids enters  the first set of agitators 
grinders and are mixed over with the overflow liquid from the second thickeners. Then the 
contents after thorough agitation or grinding enter the first thickener. The agitators along 
with the thickeners outside constitute the fi rst stage. The sludge from the first thickener 
passes to the second thickener where it is mixed with the overflow of the third thickener 
and the sludge is then transferred to the third thickness where it is mixed with the overflow 
from the fourth thickness  liquid from the fourth section and fresh solvent enters the last 
thickness. So, this is how the whole thing moves here in the fresh solvent you can see here 
in the last thickener it is moving. The overflow liquid taken out from the first thickener 
will ha ve the maximum concentration of solute. If necessary the sludge from each stage 
can be thoroughly agitated with the solvent in order to effect better separation.  
 
So, finally, I will summarize this lecture by saying that there are many phenomena 
encounte red making it practically impossible to apply any specific theory or one theory to 
the leaching action, but it may be a combination of principles and one has to accordingly 
properly select the process parameters. Fixed bed leaching is a type of solvent oil  extraction 
technique that involves using a fixed based column to extract oil from acid materials. 
Bollman , Kennedy, Bonot to, Roto cell and H ildebrandt  extractors are the different moving 
belt leaching type extractors in horizontal extractor systems. Oil se eds are loaded in chain 
of baskets with a perforated bottom which moves in continuous size circle carried by a 
chain type.  
 
So, these are the references used in this lecture and with this thank you very much for your 
patience here.  
