Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 05: Solvent Extraction of Edible Oils  
Lecture 22: Oil Extraction Techniques and Factors Affecting  
 
 
Hello everyone.  Namaskar.  Now, we are in lecture 22, and in this lecture, we will discuss 
oil extraction techniques and the factors affecting the extraction process.   
 
The concept we will cover in this lecture includes solvent extraction syst em and 
technology, hot water extraction, sox hlet extraction, and ultrasonication techniques.  The 
various chemicals or solvents used for extraction and the major factors affecting the oil 
extraction.   
 
 
You know, the oil extraction systems are generally situated near the farm field that provides 
the oil seed or the ports or railways capable of transporting the considerable volume of oil 
seed and oil products. So that the factory or these systems are continuously working for the 
required period and there i s no shortage of raw materials.  Industrial processing of edible 
oil involves solvent extraction, possibly after pressing.  Hexane -based processes achieve 
over 95 percent oil yield and mechanical expellers  in the earlier classe s. The general 
pressing result ranges from 60 to 70 percent oil. Solvent extraction effectively removes 
almost all residual oil and requires less maintenance.  Two main categories of the extraction 
system are direct solvent extraction and a prepress system followed by solvent extraction.  
The material can be put directly for the solvent extraction, or, in some cases, where the oil 
content in the seed is more than 20 percent, the source is first pressed and then sent to the 
solvent extraction.  So, direct solvent extraction is generally used  where the oil content in 
the oil seed is less than 20 percent, and these oils are directly extracted from the source 
using solvent.  Prepress solvent extraction is used when the oil content in the seed is more 
than 20 percent, and the seeds are pre -pressed  to remove excess oil, followed by the 
extraction using a solvent.  
 
The solvent extraction technique removes a solute component from the solid using a liquid 
solvent  called leaching or liquid extraction. In the earlier class, we discussed the various 
mass transfer operations.  The chemical oil extraction techniques were very effective 
because of high oil yield and consistent performance.  In addition , this method has a 
negative environmental impact because of the wastewater  generation,  higher specific 
energ y consumption , higher emission of volatile organic compounds, and fewer human 
health impacts . Now, the chemical or solvent extraction methods are different . There  are 
three methods  that are popular and important here that is one is hot water extraction, 
charcoal extraction , and then ultrasonication technique that is ultrasonication assisted 
solvent extraction.   
 
 
So, let us first discuss about the hot water or aqueous extraction. This is a traditionally used 
method that is the aqueous extraction is used tr aditionally  in many developing countries.  It 
involves heating oily material grinding with or without water and boiling with the  water to 
liberate the oil.  The oil which appears on the surface is collected and heated to remove the 
moisture this as  simple as  that. Solvent extraction is accomplished by grinding the seed and 
purging or washing the ground  seed or cake with a petroleum distillate with hexane being 
the most widely used chemical  for this purpose.  This process allows the oil in the seed to 
be releas ed to separate the solvent from the  oil. The oil solvent blend is then heated in a 
sealed chamber to remove the solvent by a  process known as flushing.  And finally, the 
blend is heated to around 100 °C to distill the solvent  of leaving only the oil.  And the  steps 
in this are that is a edible oil seeds, it is crushed, roasted and ground  after that is needed 
and then boiled with water and skimming of the oil and finally,  the remaining material 
meal that is the cake is left.  
 
 
 
So, this method has both advant ages and disadvantages.  So, the advantages of the aqueous 
extraction method are that is these are the traditional  non-commercial processes, oil 
extraction yields of approximately 5 percent are typically considered  satisfactory in this 
case. Additionally, t his process can also be utilized to extract the high quality protein that 
is the protein which is left meal which is left after the oil extraction, this quality of  the 
protein is very good in this process.  This process also is used to enhance the oil and p rotein 
extraction yields and to carry  out the extraction using gentler processing conditions, 
enzymes or surfactants can be  incorporated into the extraction medium.  Nevertheless, there 
are some constraints  to this approach.  Examples of the water aqueous extraction process 
include you have to have very finely  ground seed and which can cause dusting and this 
may lead to the explosion if the processing  area is not properly ventilated.  Also aqueous 
oil seed extraction inside include lower efficiency of oil ex traction as I have  seen earlier 
that is about only 50 percent that possible here ok. Then provision of breaking emulsion 
that might form during the process to separate  the oil and water phases, enzyme and 
surfactant costs and the treatment of aqueous efflu ent these are some of the major deterrents  
to the process and major drawback to this process.   
 
 
Then next very important process is the sox hlet extraction.  This soxhlet extraction method 
is widely used technique for the extraction of liquids  or oils from  the various food materials 
including edible oil and it is one of the very popular  method of oil determination even in 
the laboratory a testing laboratory, food testing laboratory ok.  This method involves as you 
could see here in the figure continuous extr action using a solvent typically hexane that is 
heated and then allowed to reflux over the sampl e for an extended period of time.  So, the 
feedstock oil seed it is ground and screen then weight a known weight of the material is 
taken then here in the extrac tor it is a in this round bottom flask where this solvent is put 
there and the material is put into the soxilate right. Then it is heated and once the heated 
solvent vapors come and in this soxilate in this sample is kept here and there is a direct 
contact  between the sample and the solvent.  And then the oil content which there in the 
sample in the oil seed it gets transferred into the solvent and then finally, solvent prizes 
here and then it is refluxed solvent again.  And then this from where there is a al so it is 
provided that direct siphoning system.  So, siphon so from this soxilate the oil is transferred 
into the flask and finally, in this flask we get the solvent and oil mixture that is a miscella 
is obtained here . 
 
Then advantages of the Soxhlet extraction include , a high extraction efficiency  that is 
because it is a continuous extraction technique it allows for the maximum extraction  
efficiency. It is a versatile process wide range of edible oils from different types of wood 
materials  can be ext racted in this apparatus.  It has a good scalability the method can be 
easily scaled up and can be used for both  small as well as large scale production of edible 
oils. However, the disadvantage of this process includes , time consuming process , typically 
takes for 6 to 8 hours or more than even longer time.  It requires high solvent usage . There 
is a potential for solvent contamination that is use of solvent in this method can potentially 
result in the contamination of the extracted oil . This Soxhlet apparatu s is expensive and 
many a times particularly large scale operations , it need maintenance.  So, it is a n expensive 
to acquire as well as maintain.  
 
Then the next technique is the ultrasonication techniques.  US extraction of edible oil is a 
superior method to release oil from the seed kernels  and fruits.  As a non -thermal extraction 
techniques ultrasonic extraction yields high quality edible oils  excelling by higher yields 
and a reduced processing time.  Ultrasonication assisted oil extraction can be done usin g 
vertical ultrasonic bath or horizontal ultrasonic bath and the probe type.  The probe type 
produces higher intensity sonication and can be dipped directly to the sample solvent  
mixtures. The bath type requires one or more transducers producing lower inten sity, but 
more uniform  US distribution.  The probe system is often preferred in the extraction 
industry due to its high efficiency .  
 
 
In this figur e, both the probe type as well as bath type  are shown . Here it is a vertical US 
bath and horizontal US bath.  In this case , there is a n ultra transducer are put into the top 
that is one over that is  the from the bottom these ultrasonic waves  are create d. And in the 
case of probe there is a n ultrasound generation there is probe which is directly  inserted into 
the solvent and sample . So, these are the different types of ultrasonic equipment.  
 
 
 
The advantages of this ultrasonic assisted extraction include high efficiency.  So, very short 
time period of time typically this process can be completed in 10 to 20  minutes  resulting 
in a high oil yield.  There is a reduced solvent usage . The oilobtained by this process resulted  
bette r quality and t here is high quality oil due to milder extraction conditions and  
versatility . The process is more versatile it can be used to ext ract oils from a variety  of 
materials including seeds, nuts, fruits and so on.  However, this process also has certain 
disadvantages like the equipment cost is one major factor  disadvantage. US is a complex 
process that requires precise control over the son ication  conditions . If the conditions are 
not properly maintained we can get a inferior quality of the oil . Limited scalability . US is 
a more suitable for a small scale oil extraction and the scaling  up of the process in an 
industrial level can be challeng ing.  
 
 
So, if we have a comparison between these three techniques that is hot water extraction  
this extracts oil from seeds or plant materials using hot water it is a non -toxic 
environmentally  friendly low cost and simple.  It however, gives low extraction yield it , 
takes longer extraction time and degradation  of the heat sensitive compounds.  Soxhlet 
extraction , in this system , oil is extract ed using a solvent typically exchange by  repeated 
boiling and condensation of the solvent.  This resulted in  high extraction yield , good 
reproducibility and suitable for large scale extraction and  the extraction technique . It 
requires high solvent usage, long extraction time and potential  for solvent carry over. The 
ultrasonication technique extracts oil using h igh frequency sound waves to disrupt  cell 
membrane and facilitate extraction using a solvent.  It has a very good efficiency rather high 
efficiency reduced solvent usage improved  oil quality and high versatility.  Equipment 
costs, complexity, limited scalabi lity and potential for oil degradation are  some drawbacks 
of this techniques.   
 
Now, let us see the factors affecting the oil extraction process.  In any processes that various 
factors affect both the quality  as well as quantity of the oil that is used by these methods. 
So, the major factors may include material type that is the type of the oil seed materials,  
the solvent type, the temperature and pressure, extraction time, equipment, other processing  
conditions etc.   
 
The type of the material  that is oil seed whether it is a seed, fruit, leaf and all these things.  
So, the composition of the material being extracted can significantly impact the extraction  
process.  Factors such as oil content, moisture content, particle size and the presence of 
other compounds  can affect the extraction yield and as well as its quality.  If the moisture 
content is high in the material, it may be more difficult to extract the oil  due to the presence 
of water and this can result in a lower extraction yield. Similarly, the particle size has 
important influence , a smaller particle size ha s larger  surface area which can make it easier 
for solvent to penetrate and extract the oil.  As a result , a smaller particle size can lead to 
higher extraction yields.  The oil content materia l with higher oil content will generally 
have a higher extraction yield.  However, if the oil content is too high, it may be more 
difficult to extract the oil due  to increased viscosity.  Composition of the material is another 
important factor. The presence of certain compounds such as proteins or fibers can interfere 
with the  extraction process and lead to lower extraction yields.   
 
 
Then type of the solvent is very important consideration.  The choice of the solvent can 
impact the extraction yield, quality and safety of the final products.  Hexane, petroleum 
ether, diethyl ether, ethanol, isopropanol, acetone, chloroform, methanol  and one butanols 
are some of the reported solvents for oil extraction.  Hexane is a non -polar solvent that is 
commonly used for oil  extraction due to its ability  to dissolve non -polar lipids. It is also 
relatively expensive and easy to handle.  Oil is a polar solvent, it is used for oil extraction 
particularly for extracting polar  lipids or other desired compounds.  It is also safer and  more 
environmentally friendly than hexane.  Chloroform is a non -polar solvent that is used for 
oil extraction in certain applications.  However, it is highly toxic and possess health and 
safety risk to the workers and has been  largely phased out in a favor of safer solvents. 
Methanol is the most commonly used extraction solvent due to its high polarity which 
could  produce high extraction yields.  
 
Petroleum ether is commonly used in food industry for extracting edible oils from hexane, 
from  seeds and nuts such as soybeans, sunflower seeds, peanuts, etcetera.  It is particularly 
effective at extracting non -polar lipids such as those found in vegetable  oils, but not 
effective in extracting polar lipids.  Diethyl ether is particularly effective in extracting non -
polar lipids such as triacyl  glycerol from oil seeds and nuts.  It has a lower boiling point 
than some other solvents making it easier to remove from the  extracted oil. Isopropanol 
can be effective at extracting both polar and non -polar lipids from oil see ds and nuts 
making it a versatile solvent for edible oil extraction.  However, it is not as strong a solvent 
as some other options which can lead to lower  yield of the extracted oils.   
 
In this figure, the effect of solvent type, temperature and agitation  and the oil yield  are 
described. Here,  n-hexane and ethanol are the two solvents.  In the other figur es, the effect 
of temperature  and n -hexane as well as ethanol is given. The other operating condition that 
is particle size is 0.5 c m that is solvent ratio  7:1 and agitation speed is 900  rpm in both 
case.  In the first case, the temperature is constant as 45 °C. In the other two cases, that is 
the temperature is varied.  So, you can see in as is can be easily seen in all the three figures 
that is n -hexane  provid es higher oil yield than ethanol at similar extraction conditions. The 
increase in temperature resulted in increase in oil yield and this has been seen in case  of 
each solvent in the figure you can see easily.  
 
 
 This is the effect of agitation speed on extraction of oil . Solvents  used in the extraction  are 
n-hexane and ethanol and the speed is varied from 300 to 900 rpm . In both the cases, the 
particle size is remaining the same like this 0.5 centimeter, solvent  to solid ratio is 7 :1 and 
temperature is n ormally 65 °C and 75 °C for n-hexane and ethanol respectively.  And again 
the same trend that is by increasing the agitation speed that is oil extraction  yield is 
increased and this solvent also having the here again that is it is a hexane is giving  better 
recovery than the ethanol.  
 
 
Similarly , that is the effect of particle size on oil extraction yield that is the particle  size 
other conditions are same.  The particle size is varying here from 0.2 cm to 1.5 and 2.5 c m. 
A is the n -hexane and B is the ethanol a nd in this case , also you can see the same increase  
in the particle . Reducing the particle size that is 0.5 centimeter has better extraction.  If you 
have lower particle size in the extraction ok, then for the longer time reducing the  particle 
size increasi ng the time of extraction will give you a better oil yield.   
 
 
Now the other factors are the temperature and pressure.  Both this temperature and pressure 
of extraction are important factors and that can significantly  affect the both oil extraction 
yield as well as quality of the extraction oil. So, temperature if you increase the temperature 
you have seen in the earlier slides that is  the extraction enhances the solubility of the oil 
with the solvent and which result  in the higher extraction yie ld. Howeve r, excessively high 
temperature can cause thermal degradation of the oil and other  unwanted chemical 
reactions leading to lower quality.  The optimal temperature for  edible oil extraction 
depends on the type of the oil seed and the  solvent being used, but g enerally it falls in the 
range of around 40 to 80 °C for the common oil seed as well as common solvents.  Then the 
pressure it again also has a very important influence applying pressure during  extraction 
can help to rupture the cell walls of the oil seeds a nd release the oil resulting  in higher 
yield. However, like temperature , the pressure also if you use excessive pressure it can lead  
to increased mechanical damage to the oil seed which can negatively impact the oil quality.  
The optimal pressure for edible  oil extraction depends on the type of oil seed and extraction  
method being used, but it typically ranges from 5 to 10 MPa  for hydraulic press  extraction 
and up to 50 MPa  for supercritical carbon dioxide extraction.  
 
In this figure , the effect of temperatur e and pressure on oil yield are shown. And these 
green bars are the ultrasound extraction and the other one is the solvent extraction  Soxhlet 
by Soxhlet apparatus.  And this in the next case that is the effect of the power here the 
temperature is increased  here in this case power is a power is 100 W, 200 W, 300 W and 
the temperature  is 40 °C and 60 °C. And you can see here again the both the power as well 
as a temperature they are having better  effect that is increasing the power as well as 
increasing the tempe rature of the extraction  increases the oil yield.  And in this  figure the 
same letter does not indicate any significant difference.  In this case , ultrasonic extraction  
this 100 and 200  they are not having much significant difference, but at the 300 there is  a 
significant difference.   
 
 
This figure here it is effect of temperature on oil extraction of a from rubber seed that  is oil 
extraction yield by supercritical extraction at constant pressure that is the pressure  is 15, 
24, 30  MPa  and the temperature is varied.  And the other , the effect of oil extraction yield 
by supercritical extraction at constant  temperature. The temperature is constant and the 
pressure is varied pressure is varied in this case  from 80  Mpa, 18 Mpa to 30  Mpa. Here in 
the first case , temperature is varied from 40 to 8 0°C. And you can see , in the figure , it 
indicates that the supercritical extraction  at 60 °C. It gives highest yield probably at constant 
pressure increasing a temperature reduces  the density of the supercritical fluid and lead to 
the reduction in the super reduction  of the supercritical fluid solvency power.  The 
supercritical extraction at 30 MPa  resulted in higher yield because solven t density is 
increased when operating pressure is increased resulting in greater solvency  power. Hence, 
more oil will be transported to the surface of the seed giving higher oil yield.   
 
In this figure , the effect of solvent oil extraction in rubber seed both by  the sox hlet method 
or the solvent extraction time on the oil yield  are shown.  So, h ere the n -hexane water, 
petroleum ether and ethanol water in the ratio of 7 0:30 is used in both.  And in this case that 
is the time also is varied 4 hours, 6 hours and 8 hours.  And you can see that is from the 
figure it is clearly indicated that n -hexane and petroleum  ether gave a higher yield than 
extraction using water and mixture of ethanol water that  is 70:30 volume by volume 
mixture. This obvious gap explains the polarity theory of the solvent and oil seeds in the 
solvent  extraction that is even both mixture is not ethanol and water mixture also is not 
giving  better whereas, n -hexane individually petroleum ether individually they are getting 
better  extraction.  So, polarity since the polar lipid dissolves and is insoluble in polar solvent 
it can since  the polar lipid dissolves and is soluble in polar solvent it can be said that rubber 
seed is a non -polar lipid . The maximum oil yields produced by 4 different solvents are at 
6 hours of extraction it can  be observed that the extraction using petroleum ether  gave the 
highest oil yield.   
 
The equipment type again they influence the both oil yield as well as quality.  The succulent 
apparatus these are known for their versatility and ability to extract a  wide range of oils 
from different types of seeds. However,  they are relatively slow and require a large amount 
of solvent.  Ultrasonic extraction equipment is fast and efficient and can be used with a 
variety of  solvents.  
 
Rotary evaporators they are fast and efficient, but they may not be suitable for all types  of 
seed and may require higher initial investment cost.  You can see here in the rotary 
evaporator , it is the concentration that  is vacuum concentration that is the mixture used and 
then under vacuum it is and the refluxed.  So, this rotary evaporator of cou rse, obviously, 
because of the vacuum it is maintained it  is a fast and efficient.  
 
The other processing conditions such as pH, moisture content and the presence of enzymes  
can also affect the efficiency and quality of the extraction process.  The pH of t he solvent 
affects the sol ubility  of the oil and the polarity of the solvent.  Generally, an acidic pH is 
preferred for the oil extraction because it enhances the solubility  of the oil in the solvent.  
However, if the pH is too low it can cause hydrolysis of  the oil and reduce the oil yield.  On 
the other hand, if the pH is too high it can cause saponification of the oil leading  to the 
formation of soaps that can reduce the oil yield. Similarly, the moisture content of the 
material affects the quality of the e xtracted oil and  the efficiency of the extraction process.  
If the material is too wet it can cause  emulsification of the oil in  the solvent leading to the 
formation of stable emulsion that are difficult to break.  Additionally, the presence of water 
can cau se hydrolysis of the oil leading to the decrease  in oil yield as well as increase in the 
free fatty acids.   
 
Enzymes can enhance the oil extraction yield by breaking down the cell walls of the 
materials  and increasing the solubility  of the oil in the solv ent. The type and concentration 
of the enzyme used can significantly affect the oil yield. For example, the use of pectinases 
can improve the oil yield by breaking down the pectin  in the cell wall of the material while 
the use of protease can improve the o il yield  by breaking down the pectin material in the 
cell wall.  However, if the enzymes are not properly controlled they can cause over 
hydrolysis of the oil  leading to the decrease in the oil yield.  Solvent to solid ratio is another 
important factor.  The amount of solvent used relative to the amount of solid material can 
significantly  impact the extraction yield.  Higher ratios can lead to higher yields, but may 
also result in the longer extraction times  and increased solvent consumption. The length of 
the time that the seed material is in contact with the solvent can affect  the amount of oil 
that is extracted.  Longer extraction times generally lead to higher yields, but may also result 
in more  impurities being extracted.  
 
The direct solvent extraction  and prepress system followed by solvent extraction are the 
two main oil extraction techniques  using solvent.  Hot water extraction, sox hlet extraction 
and ultrasonication techniques are the three  majorly used solvent extraction techniques.  
Material type, solven t type, temperature, pressure, extraction time, equipment and other  
processing conditions are the major factors which affect the edible oil extraction yield  as 
well as quality. So, it is very important that is during the extraction that is the process 
parameters  should be properly controlled, that is the machines should be operated at proper 
conditions,  so as to get better yield as well as better quality of the extracted oil.  
 
So, these are the references that are used in this lecture.  Thank you very much for your 
patience hearing.  