1 
 Food  Oils and Fats:  Chemistry  & Technology  
Professor  H N Mishra  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Module  6: Edible  Oils Refining  
Lecture  29: Bleaching  
 
Hello  everybody,  Namaskar.  Let us discuss  today  another  important  step of edible  oil 
refining  that is bleaching.   
 
The concept  which  will be covered  in this lecture  today  that is what  is bleaching,  what  is 
the concept  behind  this bleaching  process,  major  advantages  of the edible  oil bleaching,  
types  of bleaching  processes,  then what  are the bleaching  materials  used that the clay and 
adsorbents,  bleaching  equipment  and finally,  we will also discuss  some  of the major  
challenges  during  bleaching  process  and recommended  precautions .  
So, the bleaching  of the oil, in the earlier  classes  also. I think  you got some  clue what  the 
bleaching  is that is the oil which  is extracted  from  the plant  materials  or from  whether  it 
2 
 is seed or leaf or root or whatever  from  the plant  material  or from  the animal  sources  
etcetera.   
 
So, depending  upon  that the process  of extraction  their source  they may contain  some  
natural  pigments  in this like from  the plant  material  that is the green  color  chlorophyll  
which  obtained  even  the red color  compound  or yellow  color  compound  carotenoids  are 
present.  So, all these  carotenoids , chlorophylls , and other  such pigments  etcetera  they get 
extracted  into the oil and they are present  and there  they give some  redness  to or 
yellow ness or some  greenness  to the which  is which  is generally  not considered  a very 
good  quality .  
So, it is generally  that before  the oil is sent to the consumer  for its use these  pigments  
etcetera  are removed  and that is the process  of bleaching.  In the bleaching  process , there  
is the color  that is pigments  etcetera  or even  some  of the residual  soap that is which  was 
not removed  during  the neutralization  process  or some  even  free fatty acids  which  were  
not reduced  during  neutralization  process  etcetera  all these  are removed  in this system.   
So, bleaching  is the basically  a collectively  mainly  it is for the removal  of the pigment,  
but in addition  to the pigment  it may also remove  some  residual  fatty acids  soaps  etcetera.  
So, in this bleaching  basically  it involves  the addition  of bleaching  earth  which  is a type 
of clay and this earth  are added  to the oil this mixture  is heated  and agitated  to allow  the 
impurities  to get adsorbed  onto the surface  of these  bleaching  earth.   
The mixture  is then filtered  to remove  the bleaching  earth  and the impurities  which  are 
collected.  The resulting  oil has a lighter  color  and improved  stability  making  it suitable  
for use in a variety  of food and other  industrial  applications.   
3 
  
So, as you could  see this basically  this bleaching  is a physical  process  where  the 
impurities  from  oil are removed  with the help of certain  adsorbents.  The impurities  and 
the active  sites of the adsorbents  are attracted  to each other  by the Van der Waal  forces  of 
attraction.  The amount  of attraction  will depend  on several  factors  like amount  of 
electrostatic  force  on each of the impurities  and the adsorbent,  the size of each 
component,  the degree  of intimate  mixing  between  the oil and the adsorbent,  porosity  of 
the adsorbent  particles  and specific  area of the adsorbents.  These  are the various  factors  
which  govern  the bond  formation.   
 
So, the major  advantages  of the bleaching  of the oil obviously,  is there  is improved  color  
as I told you it helps  to remove  the pigments,  impurities , and other  substances  and it will 
improve  the appeal  of the oil, color  of the oil, appearance  of the oil. Then  it also improves  
the stability  because  the impurities  are substances  that can cause  the oil to spoil  or 
deteriorate  more  quickly  they are removed  during  bleaching  process.  Also,  it improves  
the flavor  and odour of the oil the bleaching  process . By removing  the impurities  that can 
affect  adversely  the flavor  and aroma  of the oil, odour of the oil. Then  it adds value  to the 
oil that is the bleaching  process  results  in a final product  with improved  value  to the oil. 
4 
  
So, what  is the bleaching  oil as I told you that is the it is physical  intimate  mixing  that is 
the some  of the adsorbents  such as neutral  bleaching  clay that is called  commonly  fuller  
earth  or acid processed  clay,  activated  charcoal , or silica  etcetera.  These  are the 
commonly  used any of these  either  a mixture  of these  depending  upon  the what  type of 
pigments  etcetera  that might  be present  there  and so, this bleaching  process  these  are the 
adsorbent  used and the process  reduces  the chlorophyll  and some  of the other  color  
bodies  present  in the oil. It reduces  trace  metals  like calcium,  iron, magnesium,  iron,  
ferric, sodium  etcetera.  It reduces  the level  of non-hydratable  phospholipids  in the refined  
oil and also it removes  decomposition  products  such as aldehydes,  ketones,  polymers,  
non-triglycerides  which  are produced  from  the oil oxidation.  So, these  proteins  are 
removed  during  the bleaching  process.  
 
So, the actual  what  is the bleaching  process  it may be that is the different  methods  
physical  bleaching,  chemical  bleaching  etcetera.  So, in the physical  bleaching  you can 
see there  is a series  of the steps  that is this method  basically  uses the heat and mechanical  
agitation  to remove  the impurities  from  the oil. The oil is heated  after the adsorbent  is 
added  and then it causes  the impurities  to float on the surface . The impurities  are then 
removed  by skimming.  The physical  bleaching  is a typically  used for oils which  have  
high content  of impurities,  pigments  etcetera  and is a relatively  simple  and inexpensive  
process.   
5 
  
The chemical  bleaching , this method  involves  the addition  of bleaching  agent  typically  a 
clay or activated  carbon  to the oil. The oil is mixed  with the bleaching  agent  and heated  
to allow  the impurities  to adsorb  onto the surface  of the bleaching  agent.  The mixture  is 
then filtered  to remove  the bleaching  agent  and the impurities  it has collected.  Chemical  
bleaching  is a more  complex  and expensive  process  than physical  bleaching,  but 
chemical  bleaching  is more  effective  in removing  the impurities  particularly  the pigments  
etcetera  are better  adsorbed  here in the physical  bleaching  they may not be removed.  So, 
easily  that is the physical  bleaching  just the oil is heated  and mixed  and given.  So, some  
of the impurities  they come  on the top and they are skimmed.  
 
Dry bleaching  system . In this process , the water  washed  and vacuum  dried  oil that is its 
moisture  content  should  be less than 0.1 percent  that is maximum  water  should  be in the 
oil may be 0.1 percent.  So, less than so, water  washed  and vacuum  dried  oil is used here 
as a feed to the vacuum  bleacher  where  only bleaching  clay is added.  The bleaching  clay 
could  be acid activated  charcoal  or neutral . Acid activated  clay is more  effective  in 
removing  the color  bodies  and the trash  metals  in the oil. 
So, the components  of the dry bleaching  clay you can see here in this figure  it has plate  
heaters . Plate heaters  that is oil is heated  to a temperature  of around  100 to 110 degree  
Celsius  and then hot oil is sent to the vacuum  bleacher  where  this oil and activated  
6 
 charcoal  activated  clay,  the clay at the rate of 0.5 percent  of the oil weight  or less is 
mixed  and agitated  at 120 rpm for about  30 to 45 minutes . The clay is added  here and 
then it is mixed  properly.   
 
Then  it is sent to the press  leaf filter.  In the press  leaf filter  there  it is where  this oil is 
filtered  and sent back  to the bleacher  until the oil is completely  clear  and also there  is a 
polish  filter.  These polish  filters  this is end of the filtration  process  that is oil is sent to 
press  filters  to reheat  the incoming  oil and finally,  it is sent to the oil cooler  where  oil is 
cooled  down  to around  40 degree  Celsius  using  the cold water.  So, these  are the different  
components  of the dry bleaching  system  and obviously,  this whole  process  is provided  
with all accessories,  piping,  instrumentation , and other  things  to measure  and indicate  the 
things  and flow control  valve  and all other  requirements.  
 
So, the critical  control  points  in the dry bleaching  process  include  number  one the 
incoming  oil quality.  When  the bleaching  oil is high in phosphorus,  soap, and moisture  
content , more  amount  of bleaching  clay will be required.  Soaps,  phosphorus  and moisture  
have  a tendency  to plug up the porosity  of the filter  bed, decreasing  the filtration  rate. 
Increased  bleaching  clay usage  also builds  up the cake faster  in the filter , reducing  the 
filtration  cycle  time.  Higher  soap in the oil produces  high free fatty acids.  Higher  amount  
of bleaching  clay reduces  the level  of tocopherols  and other  natural  antioxidants.  So, it is 
7 
 very important  that the oil which  is sent to the bleacher  after the neutralization  process  it 
should  have  a uniform  and consistent  quality.   
 
We come  to the wet bleaching  system.  It is also almost  similar  same  type of only thing  in 
the process  there  are some  little additions . The oil from  the water  wash  centrifuge  is 
treated  to the bleaching  clay in this reactor,  but just from  the water  wash  centrifuge  itself  
the oil temperature  bleaching  clay dosage,  mixing  method,  mixing  time etcetera  are 
similar  to those  in the dry bleaching  process.  So, after 20 to 30 minutes  of contact  time 
between  the oil and the clay, the oil leaves  the vacuum  reactor  and enters  the vacuum  
dryer  where  the moisture  content  of the oil is reduced  to less than 0.1 percent . See after 
the bleaching . But in the dry bleaching , the moisture  content  was reduced  before  it was 
sent to the clay to less than 0.1 percent.  So, the benefits  of this process  include  better  
bleaching  efficiency  and less clay usage.  
 
So, critical  points  for consideration  in wet bleaching  system  includes  that is moisture  in 
the free dryer.  So, the moisture  content  it should  be in the range  of 0.2 to 0.4 percent  the 
dry bleaching  system  maximum  was 0.01 percent.  So, the low moisture  benefits  of water  
bleaching  are not accomplished . If it is high moisture  more  than 0.4 percent  then the 
premature  binding  of the filter  screens  will be there.  So, the moisture  content  should  be 
given  in the given  range.  Then  absolute  pressure  in the bleacher  reactor , that is operating  
8 
 pressure  should  be around  500 Torr.  Then  if the more  very high pressure  is there , the oil 
would  have  higher  moisture  content.  Lower  pressure , the oil might  be too dry to derive  
the benefit  of the wet bleaching  system.  Operating  pressure  in the vacuum  dryer  finally,  
the vacuum  the maximum  operating  pressure  should  be 50 Torr and it allows  the oil to be 
dried  to less than 0.1 percent  moisture  before  filtration.   
 
Then  next is the vacuum  bleacher . Here is an assembly  you can see set up it is the again  a 
pressure  vessel.  The bleacher  is a pressure  vessel  with 3 to 4 baffles and the top entering  
agitator  is provided.  The agitator  has multiple  set of impellers  like axial  blades  which  
pushes  the oil downwards  continuously  then there  are radial  blades  which  are capable  of 
shear  action.  So, the adsorbent  and the oil are brought  to intimate  mixing  continuously . 
These are provided  baffles  to prevent  any vortex  formation  and the entire  oil in the vessel  
is turned  about  over twice  per minute  by these  things.  So, the other  arrangement  like 
feeder  arrangement,  feeding  bar that oil, bleaching  clay and all those  arrangements  are 
provided , and vacuum  is maintained.  So, oil is treated  that is the bleaching  material  is 
added , adsorbent  is added  and then under  vacuum  it is a heated  and treated  given  the 
proper  reaction  time for the adsorbent  to take place.   
 
So, in this process  the steps  involved  in the bleaching  process  of the edible  oil as you 
have  seen earlier  it is clear  now that is mixing  of oil and the bleaching  clay.  These  are 
9 
 mixed  together  in a control  environment  typically  using  a proper  mixture  or agitator . 
Then the bleaching , the impurities  and substances  that are adsorbed  including  pigments,  
gum,  waxes , and other  material  that can contribute  to the colour,  flavour  and stability  
etcetera  of the oil. So, once  it is mixed  it is given  proper  bleaching  reaction  time.  So, 
there  bleaching  takes  place . Then separation , after the bleaching  process  is complete  the 
oil and the bleaching  clay are separated  using  filter  press.  And finally,  washing , the oil is 
then washed  with water  to remove  any remaining  impurities  or bleaching  clay that may 
have  been  left behind.  So, these  are the steps  involved  in the bleaching.  
 
Now,  the types  of bleaching  clay and here also I told it is used bleaching  clays  are used in 
the chemical  bleaching  process  of the edible  refinin g. This may be type of the clay used 
depends  upon  the type of oil being  processed  and the impurities  that need  to be removed.  
Some  common  types  of bleaching  clay used are bentonite,  fuller’s earth,  activated  
carbon , and magnesium  silicate.   
 
Bentonite  is often  used in a refining  of soybean  oil, canola  oil, and other  vegetable  oil. It 
has a high capacity  for  adsorb ing impurities  such as which  are commonly  found  in 
combination  with the vegetable  oil. So, this bentonite  in combination  with other  materials  
it can easily  that other  bleaching  agent  it can easily  adsorb  the impurities.  
10 
 Then  fuller  earth , it is a type of clay that is used in refining  of palm  oil and other  tropical  
oils. So, fuller  earth  has a high capacity  for adsorbing  impurities  and it is also used to 
remove  colour  and improve  the stability  of the oil.  
 
Activated  carbon , it is a form  of carbon.  It has a high capacity  for adsorbing  the 
impurities  and it is effective  in improving  the colour  and removing  the pigments,  
improving  the stability  of the oil and this. It may be either  acid activated  charcoal  etcetera  
can be used as activated  carbon.  Then  magnesium  silicate , it has a high capacity  and 
adsorbing  impurities  and is particularly  effective  in removing  the pigment  from  the oil. 
So, depending  upon  this either  individually  these  are mixture  of these  things  can be used 
in proper  proportion  in the oil depending  upon  the type of the pigments  etcetera  that are 
present.   
 
So, here you can see that this is a slide  which  shows  the indicating  how two different  
types  of bleaching  earth  widely  used in vegetable  oil by the industry  remove  carotenes  
from  palm  oil. This is an acid activated  bleaching  earth , and this is the neutral  activated  
bleaching  earth.  In this, it may require  two-three  steps  that is intrapa rticle  diffusion  adjust  
that is the particles  etcetera,  carotene  plus oil etcetera  pass through  this and the material  
there.  So, in this materia l, they get adsorbed  here on this the acid activated  whereas,  in 
the neutral  case, you see that it is in this adsorbent  it is get adsorbed.  
11 
  
Now,  the bleaching  equipment . There are some  main  pieces  of the equipment  used for 
bleaching  of edible  oils or the one in the earlier  slide  you saw that the bleacher  that is the 
reaction  vessel,  that is the main  vessel  where  the bleaching  process  takes  place  it 
typically  consists  of a jacketed  stainless -steel tile which  are equipped  with a mixing  
mechanism  to ensure  uniform  distribution  of the adsorbent  clay.  So, that is called  
bleacher.  Then  clay dispenser , this is used to add the adsorbent  clay to the oil in the 
bleacher.  The clay is typically  pre-hydrated  and then added  to the oil in a control  manner  
to ensure  proper  mixing.  A vacuum  system  is provided , this is used to reduce  the pressure  
inside  the bleacher  which  helps  to remove  air and moisture  from  the oil and facilitates  the 
adsorption  of impurities  by the clay.  
 
Then  filters  like press  filters  and other  filters  are provided . These are used to remove  the 
clay and impurities  from  the oil after bleaching.  They typically  consist  of a series  of filter  
presses  or centrifuge  that separates  the oil from  the clay.  Then  heat exchangers , important  
component , this is used to control  the temperature  of the oil during  the bleaching  process.  
The heat exchanger  helps  to maintain  the temperature  of the oil at an optimum  level  for 
bleaching , which  improves  the efficiency  of the process  and then also vacuum  
maintaining  device  also systems  also. Then  pumps  are used to transfer  the oil and clay 
through  the bleaching  process  and to filters.  They t ypically  consist  of centrifugal  pump  or 
positive  displacement  pumps.   
12 
  
Now,  let us see briefly  the various  factors  which  influence  the bleaching  process.  So, 
number  one important  factor  is the properties  of the bleaching  clay.  The bleaching  clay 
must  have  certain  property  that is it should  have  high adsorption  capacity  to remove  the 
impurities.  It should  have  acidic  pH because  acid activated  clay they have  more  adsorbent  
affinity  that you could  see in the earlier  class that is the along  with the other  than the 
neutral  clay acid activated  clay charcoal  they can adsorb  the material  better.  It has a that 
is also the numeral  active  sites for the adsorption  of the impurities  that more  the active  
site more  will be the adsorption.  Of course,  it should  have  appropriate  porosity  and good  
oil flow rate through  the filter  bed. So, these  are the type of the properties  of the 
bleaching  clay.   
Degree  of mixing , the oil and the adsorbent  must  be in intimate  contact  for better  
adsorption  of the impurity . Proper  mixing  is a very essential.  For this reason,  the 
mechanical  mixing  becomes  a very important  factor  in making  the bleaching  process  
effective.  
 
Then  bleaching  temperature,  temperature  of the oil is critical  in bleaching  process  
because  it affects  the process  efficiency.  The viscosity  of the oil decreases  as the oil is 
heated.  This makes  it easier  to move  the oil around  the agitation  with agitation.  So, the 
temperature  has important  role. The temperature  increases  the contact  between  the 
13 
 adsorbent  and the adsorbates  in the oil. So, high temperature  however,  it may cause  
damage  to oil through  oxidation  and polymerization.  Low temperature , it may result  that 
the viscosity  of the oil may be very high which  reduces  the dispersion  efficiency  of the 
mechanical  mixe r. So, therefore,  optimum  temperature  is needed  for higher  efficiency  
and that will depend  upon  the type of the oil and other  equipment  etcetera.  So, proper  
optimum  conditions  of temperature  should  be maintained.   
 
Then  another  important  factor  is the contact  time between  the oil and the bleaching  clay.  
There  is a certain  amount  of time must  be given.  It is allowed  for the oil and the 
adsorbent  to remain  in the bleacher  vessel.  If there  is a short  contact  time,  the adsorption  
of the impurities  may not be complete.  If it is very long contact  time,  the acidic  clay may 
react  more  with the oil especially  with the chlorophylls  and it cause  their breakdown.  
And there  may be a higher  loss of the natural  antioxidant  present  in the oil. There  may be 
formation  of dimers  or polymers  in the oil if the contact  time is excessively  large.  So, 
again  the contact  time between  the oil and the adsorbents  should  be properly  controlled.  
 
Now,  the challenges  during  the oil bleaching  process  and suggested  precautions  include  
number  one, there  is selection  of right  bleaching  clay.  And yes, it is very difficult  to 
select  a right  type of bleaching  clay for the specific  type of oil heating  process  and the 
impurities  that need  to be removed  because  even  there  may be different  depending  upon  
14 
 the various  source  of the oil, even  type of pigments,  type of the materials  etcetera  
impurities  that we are telling  which  we want  to remove  during  this process  may vary.  
And obviously,  the material  again  that is the interactions  between  these  adsorbents  and 
the adsorbates  etcetera  that may depend  that is what  is the properties  in the earlier  class  
slide  we discussed.  So, although  it is difficult,  but it is very important  factor  that is the 
right  bleaching  clay which  has affinity  proper  environment  to be that is a to get adsorbed  
properly  that should  be selected.  Selection  of the wrong  type of bleaching  clay can result  
in ineffectiveness  or even  damage  to the oil.  
The control  of temperature  and time as we discussed  in earlier  slide . The bleaching  
temperature  and time are the critical  factors  that affect  the process  efficiency.  And it is 
important  to maintain  proper  temperature  and time controls  to ensure  that the oil is 
effectively  treated  and the final product  has desired  properties.  We have  discussed  that is 
if the temperature  and contact  time are more  or too less etcetera , high and low 
temperature  then what  will be the repercussion . So, it is very essential  that the proper  
control  time and temperature  it in during  the process.   
 
Then  filter  press  maintenance , regular  cleaning  and maintenance  of the filter  press  will 
help to avoid  problems  during  the bleaching  process.  So, proper  cleaning  and 
maintenance  of the filter  press  routinely  should  be done.  Then  environmental  protection , 
it is important  to take precautions  to prevent  the release  of harmful  toxic  substances  into 
the environment  such as proper  disposal  of the waste  and the implementation  of effective  
waste  management  procedures  should  be undertaken.  Quality  control , regular  quality  
control  checks  of the oil throughout  the bleaching  process  are important  to meet  the final 
products  quality  standards  and this can include  testing  of the oil for its colour,  stability  
and other  key properties.  
Now,  finally,  I will like to summarize  this lecture  saying  that the bleaching  of the edible  
oil plays  a crucial  role in improving  the quality  and stability  of the final product  and it is 
important , its importance  cannot  be overemphasized  in the edible  oil refining  industry  
very very important  process.   
15 
  
Optimization  of the bleaching  process  requires  an effort  to maximize  the interactions  that 
promote  quality  and minimum  detriment  to the oil. With a, there  is, whatever  bleaching  
clay because  you are adding  clay into the also type of the clay and all those  things  
interaction  and then these  clays  should  be properly  removed  effectively  all the whatever  
clay has been  added  otherwise.  So, it should  not that the interactions  etcetera  or this 
should  not lead into the quality  deterioration  in the oil.  
The major  advantage  of the bleaching  process  includes  improved  colour,  stability  and the 
shelf  life of the oil however,  if provided  the process  is done  effectively  and properly.  
Physical  bleaching  involves  the use of activated  carbon  while  chemical  bleaching  
involves  the use of bleaching  earth and so on among  the same  silicate  etcetera.  
 
The choice  of equipment  used depends  on the scale  of the operation  and type of the oil 
being  processed.  Challenge s during  the bleaching  process  include  the loss of desirable  
component  in the oil, the formation  of byproducts , and the difficulty  in removing  the 
adsorbent  from  the oil. To mitigate  these  challenges,  it is recommended  to use the right  
type of adsorbent,  optimize  the process  parameter s, and ensure  proper  filtration  and 
washing  of the oil after bleaching . Because  that is very important  whatever  the adsorbent  
has been  used in bleaching  clay earth  etcetera  that should  be even  if required  two stage  
16 
 filtration,  three  stage  filtrations  should  be done  to ensure  the filtration , removal  of all the 
clay from  the oil to as to maintain  its proper  natural  quality.   
 
So, with this these  are the references  that are used in this lecture.   
 
Thank  you for your patience  here.  Thank  you. 
