1 
 Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 6: Edible Oils Refining  
Lecture 28: Chemical Refining and Neutralization  
 
Hello everybody. Namaskar. Now, we are in the lecture 28. In this lecture in the next half 
an hour or so, we will discuss about Chemical Refining and Neutralization of Food Oil.  
 
The concept that I will cover in this lecture includes oil refining process , then chemical 
refining both batch and continuous, then stages of neutralization, biological 
deacidification , and nano -neutralization which is a new concept in the neutralization 
process.  
2 
  
This is the overall refining process earlier also in the two lectures I showed you.  So, 
today we will, in the degumming and filtration we already studied. So, this degummed oil 
is sent for the neutralization step or that is the where it is treated with the alkali caustic 
soda. So, this is also known as chemical refi ning. So, we will concentrate today in this 
lecture on the neutralization aspect or chemical refining.  
 
So, basically in the oil refining is a generic term , that is the different stages , that is 
treatment processes or steps involving the treatment of crud e oil starting from the 
extraction process till it is finally, packaged and sent to the industry for food usage it is 
oil is passed through various steps. So, this is told as refining process, but this refining 
further again may be a two process one is the  chemical refining and there is a physical 
refining. The neutralization which are talking about neutralization basically that is the 
removal of the free fatty acids, but when we talk about chemical refining or physical 
refining , the oil is treated with the  different as you can see here in the last class when we 
were thing degumming there also I told you, but here now it is specific treatment that in 
the when this oil , that is it is degummed , water degummed , the gums and lecithins  are 
removed , then it is deg ummed oil is passed through alkali neutralization, soap stock is 
removed then it is sent to the dewaxing , bleaching and deodorization. So, all these steps 
together when it is given to the oil it is known as chemical refining process.  
3 
 On the other hand,  the physical refining you can see here that is although except that that 
is the acid degumming is done, dewaxing is done then bleaching and then finally, 
deodorization , this alkali treatment is not done here though no chemical involvement . So, 
here the free fatty acids are removed by deacidification is done during deodorization 
process , distillation process. So, that is a physical refining. So, this is the difference 
between physical refining and chemical refining.  
 
So, when we talk about chemical refining as a whole so, means that is , this process has 
four major steps in the chemically refined oil means it will be subjected to degumming 
for the removal of phospholipids then it is neutralized where the free fatty acid , in the 
neutralization step particularly  the free fatty acids are removed and oil becomes neutral. 
And obviously, the acid free fatty acid so, it is treated with the alkali to neutralize for the 
removal , then comes the neutralized oil . It bleached in the bleaching step , the oil is 
treated with t he bleaching earth and heated to remove remaining impurit ies and color 
pigments. Then deodorization process finally, this step removes the order and taste of the 
oil by applying high heat and a vacuum . This step also helps to further improve the 
stability of the oil. So, of course, degumming we have studied earlier in detail bleaching 
and deodorization also we will study in details in the next classes. In today's class we will 
concentrate about neutralization aspect itself, but sometime in the industry all these 
process that is in the continuous operations are all these processes  are together. So, where 
necessary we will tell about briefly about the other aspects as such.  
 
4 
 So, the neutralization process that is neutralization means the oil here , that is the  it is also 
called chemical refining and then in this process the crude oil is pretreated with the 
phosphoric acid and neutralized with caustic soda that is pretreated with phosphoric acid 
means that is degummed oil. Degummed oil is taken for neutralizatio n and normally there 
is, in the neutralization obviously, either potassium hydroxide or sodium hydroxide a 
known amount depending upon the type amount and type of fatty acid that are present in 
the oil , a particular amount of a known amount of caustic solu tion is used. This caustic 
reacts with the free fatty acid in the earlier classes if you remember we discussed the 
saponification process. So, when this free fatty acid that are there in the oil , they react 
with the alkali potassium hydroxide or sodium hyd roxide and they form sodium or 
potassium salt of the fatty acid and that is nothing, but soap. So, this soap is formed and 
then this soap is separated there is a remaining soap is mostly removed from the oil by 
either water washing or separating the oil an d water in a washing centrifugal etc . 
And this is  mostly done in the industry for crude soybean oil, degummed soybean oil, 
degummed canola oil, crude sunflower oil, crude safflower oil, or crude and degummed 
cottonseed oil etc . All these are that is subjected to neutralization process before sending 
to the market.  
 
So, I hope it is clear by now to you that neutralization is a process which is used in edible 
oil refining to remove mainly the free fatty acids. It is an important step in the refining 
process because the free fatty acids can cause the oil to have an off flavor , an off order 
and decreased shelf life because if they are free fatty acids or the unsaturated fatty acids 
then it may cause auto oxidation and other problems  and even the more amount of free 
fatty acid in the oil seriously affects the properties and characteristic frying properties, 
cooking properties, other conditions of the oil. So, the neutralization process is very 
important it is carried out by treating t he oil with alkali solution as I told you usually 
sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide.  
So, the process if you see that what is the neutralization process it may be batch or 
continuous . First, we will discuss a batch proces s. In the batch process , what  is done there 
is a kettle which is provided with all accessories , it is basically a vessel which is called 
refining kettle or neutralization tank , and this kettle is equipped with an agitators and 
5 
 biofuels to provide vortex formation etc . and other contro l and measuring instrument and 
accessories like temperature measurement, pressure measurement etc . they are provided 
with this.  
 
So, the caustic solution is added in the kettle that is after acid pretreatment and the 
mixture is agitated at a slow speed . The degum med oil  is taken and, in this oil,  the caustic 
solution is added. The temperature of the neutralization first for the seed oils . The oil 
enters at a temperature of around 35 to 40 degree Celsius in this  and the free fatty acid 
and phosphorous cont ent are at the end of the reaction should be as low as 0.01 to 0.02 
percent and this free fatty acid and phosphorous at the end should be less than 5 ppm , 
respectively. So, accordingly depending upon how much is the free fatty acids initially 
present that is this amount of sodium or potassium hydroxide required can be calculated 
and then can be used.  
 
So, when the oil is sent to the reaction vessel , it is heated that is the reaction vessel is 
provided with the steam inlet and other assembly for heating the oil and measuring and 
indicating its temperature etc . So, oil is heated to 85 to 90 degree Celsius and once at that 
time 10 to 15 volume percent o f the deionized water is added  in the hot oil . The agitator 
speed is increased for obtaining intimate mixing between the oil and water to remove 
soap.  After this is a washing step , that is once the soap is formed earlier in the 
neutralization process then its temperature is increased and then water is added and water 
6 
 washing and draining steps are followed to remove the soap and even sometime 2 or 3 or 
4 washings are done to completely remove all the soaps. The oil is treated with alkali 
solution 1 to 3 aci d percent acid activated clay , the oil is bleached under vacuum at 
around 110 to 120 degree Celsius that is the after the neutralization , the activated clay  is 
used. The  details of this we will discuss in the next class.  
 
So, the critical points that nee d to be controlled and taken into consideration while this in 
the batch process of neutralization that is number 1 , agitator speed in the reaction 
medium you can see in the figure that these are agitators etc . are provided. So, its speed 
this agitator must  be operated at a low speed for neutralization at medium speed for water 
washing and high speed for bleaching. So, in all the 3 stages neutralization washing and 
the speed of the agitator must be properly adjusted so that because in the neutralization 
step it should be low that so that the soap is formed , it should not break it should not form 
emulsion . If you use a high speed , it will break.   
Next is the bleaching clay , that is bleaching clay requires higher dos ages of the clay as 
compared to the continuou s process . This is because the refined and water washed oil 
contains high levels of soap . PL deactivate some of the bleaching clay so not all of the 
clay is that is added is effective in reducing the color bodies in the oil. Then refining 
losses  are very high , comparatively high refining loss is there in the batch process as 
compared to the continuous processes.  
 
7 
 Now, the continuous process you can see here in the schematic. Here, that is the there are 
different mixers are provided , reaction vessel s, cooling tower , steam , they are generating 
and introducing things.  Oil temperature timers are there , then acid and alkali solution 
assembly for tanks , and assembly for the and all the systems required for proper mixing 
of the acid and alkali solution in the oil then a system for heating the oil. So, you this you 
see yellow line is that oil how it moves , these red lines , that is pink lines , acid and alkali 
solutions and the other is this water solution / So, this crude oil undergoes , in this case in 
the con tinuous process continuously that is such as heating, acid treatment, caustic 
treatment, mixing, soap separation , and water washing because these are the steps. So, 
these  are all continuous operations and in the system all the equipment and system are 
provided for all these processes. The caustic is added after acid treatment as you can see 
here in the schematic process.  And it increases the pH , reduces viscosity of acid gums, 
residual phosphorus level is low as it forms soap and it improves the removal of the non-
hydratable  phosphor lipids. With the use of this technique , even phosphorus level can be 
achieved lower than 20 ppm if the degum med oil is water washed properly . 
 
So, here some critical points which needs consideration that is the crude oil filtra tion is 
very important in the continuous processing operation . The  crude oil should be free from 
any meal, hull, dirt , etc. Otherwise , the centrifuge or primary separators get dirty soon 
and it will require more and more refining losses that  and there were more and more 
frequent cleaning and maintenance. Then crude oil pretreatment is another a very 
important step here.  Proper  acid pretreatment is essential for all crude oil and especially 
for those that have been derived from poor quality seeds or damaged during storage. So, 
the proper acid treatment so that these impurities etc . are properly removed . If you have a 
low acid treatment , cannot reduce the non-hydratable  phospholipids, a nd a  high acid 
treatment can cause the breakdown of the chlorophylls i n the crude oil making it more 
sensitive to photooxidation and will need higher caustic treatment etc . So, that is again 
here that is the proper acid treatment pretreatment of the oil is very essential step , 
necessary step to get the good quality neutraliz ed oil. Then uniformity of the crude oil 
composition, a non-uniform  feed quality can cause under or over refining of the oil and it 
may be difficult that to know that what is the exact amount of potassium or sodium 
hydroxide, its concentration, how much it  is used and process operation.  So, uniform 
8 
 crude oil composition is important. Similarly, uniformity of the crude oil flow, a variation 
in change of the flow can cause change in the oil or caustic ratio under or over refining of 
the oil.  
 
Then caustic s trength and temperature , that is very again the even the caustic solution 
sodium hydroxide solution . Normally it is recommended that between 1 to 3 normal 
solution should be used and how much it is there , that is depending upon the fatty acid 
present, but the normality is important because if you use normality higher than the 
optimum recommended, it may cause hydrolysis of the triglyceride and generate rather 
more and more fatty acids. If you use a very weak solution less than 1 normal, then it 
may form the  soap, proper soap formation may not be there, it may form rather weak 
emulsion and its separation from the oil may be a problem.  So, this is very important that 
the proper strength, proper amount , quantity as well as strength of the solution of sodium 
hydroxide etc . should be follow ed. Temperature affects the dispersion of the caustic into 
the oil, so proper temperature also. Then degree of mixing between the crude oil and the 
caustic solution. Poor  mixing leaves excess amount of free alkali in the refined  oil, it 
affects the free fatty acid content of the water washed refined oil. Then another important 
aspect is the contact time between crude oil and caustic solution.  It affects the reaction of 
the caustic with the non-hydratable  phospholipids . Then refin ing temperature , it allows 
the soap to separate from the oil, so proper. So, it is very important these are the factors 
should be properly and optimum conditions must be used.  
 
9 
 Then the equipment which are involved in the neutralization process as you could see in 
the schematic diagram in the earlier we showed. So, there are various equipment it is 
needed that is one is the neutralizer tank . These are the large cylindrical containers made 
of stainless steel that are used to hold the crude oil and the ne utralizing agents like caustic 
soda. These tanks are equipped with agitators that mix the oil and the neutralizing agent 
properly.  Agitators are stirring devices that are used to mix the oil and the neutralizing 
agents in the neutralizer tanks. Then pH met er, these are the instrument which are used to 
measure the pH of the oil caustic soda mixture in the neutralizer tank. The pH meter 
helps the operator to monitor the process or progress of the neutralization reaction and 
ensure that the pH is maintained wi thin the desired range that is very important.  
 
Then centrifuges of proper design and proper capacity because after the neutralization 
reaction is complete the mixture is soap stock particularly is separated from the oil and 
the soap that is us ed in  a centrifuge. So, the centrifuge spins the mixture at high speed 
causing the soap to separate from the oil and it is collected at the bottom of the 
centrifugal bow.  
Then filter presses are provided , these are used to remove the soap from the oil and it has 
been separated from the mixture in the centrifuge. The filter press uses a series of filters 
to remove the soap leaving behind the pure neutralized oil. So, the specific equipment 
used however, may vary depending upon the scale of operation and the type of oi l being 
processed.  
10 
  
The stages in the neutralization process include  pretreatment, alkali addition and then 
finally, reaction . In the pretreatment what is done is this stage involved the heating of the 
oil to a situation or to a suitable temperature to increase the fluidity of the oil and to make 
it easier to handle. So, after the oil comes to a proper temperature then the second stage is 
the alkali addition.  In this stage , the alkaline solution usually sodium hydroxide or 
potassium hydroxide is added to  the oil in a controlled manner as I told you proper 
amount and proper concentration , the alkali reacts with the free fatty acids in the oil to 
form soap molecules. It is given proper reaction time that is the reaction between the 
alkali and free fatty aci d take place over a period of time , typically , it may be 30 to 60 
minutes depending upon the quantity of free fatty acid present and quantity of the alkali 
solution used. During this period the oil is agitated continuously or intermittently to 
ensure unifo rm mixing that is giving proper contact between ensuring a proper contact 
between the acid molecule , FFA molecule , and the alkali. The amount of alkali used in 
the reaction time will depend upon the level of FFA in the oil.  
 
Soap separation in the next s tage. After the reaction , the soap molecules formed are 
separated from the oil . The soap can be further washed to remove any residual alkali.  
Then neutralized oil washing in the next stage . In this stage, oil is washed with water to 
remove any remaining soap and alkali. This stage is important to ensure that the final oil 
product is free of impurities and has a neutral taste and od our. Finally , drying , the final 
step in the neutralization process and this is usually done by heating the oil to remove any 
11 
 residual moisture from it. The oil can then be further processed such as sent to the 
deodori zation or winterization to improve the quality and stability or it can be sent to the 
further product manufacturing or bottling for market distribution.  
 
Another  one is the concept is re -esterification.  Re-esterification is a process used in 
edible oil refining to adjust the fatty acid composition of oil to improve the overall 
quality and stability of the oil. During the refining process , the oil is subjected to hig h 
heat and pressure which can cause the breakdown of triglyceride into fatty acids and 
glycerol. So, the triglyceride quantity may be reduced. This formation of free fatty acids 
can affect the flavor, o dour, shelf life etc . of the oil. So, re -esterificatio n involved the 
adding back a portion of glycerol that was removed during the refining process to the 
fatty acids that were produced.  So, this glycerol and fatty acid and proper reaction time 
and reaction parameters are given so that it re -esterifies fresh oil and oil quantity is 
increased, oil yield will increase free fatty acids are further esterified.  
 
So, this reaction results in the formation of new triglyceride which help to reduce the 
level of FFA in the oil. The process is usually carried out using  a catalyst such as sodium 
hydroxide or potassium hydroxide and takes place at a high temperature and pressure. 
The re -esterification process can be tailored to produce oils with a specific fatty acid 
profile depending upon the intended use of the oil. For  example, oils used for frying may 
require a higher level of stability to resist oxidation while oils used for salad dressing 
12 
 may require a higher flavor profile.  So, accordingly the re -esterification process can be 
used to adjust the free fatty acid compo sition etc . of the oil and there is also one inter -
esterification that we will take up separately in some class. So, it is an important step in 
the production of high-quality  edible oils as it helps to improve the overall quality, 
stability and shelf life of the oil.  
 
Then under the biological deacidification , it is a natural and environmentally friendly 
process as it does not involve the use of harsh chemicals or solvents. The process also 
results in a reduction of the levels of contaminants and unwanted  compounds in the oil 
such as aldehydes and ketones. It is a cost effective and sustainable alternative to 
traditional chemical deacidification process.  However, the process may not be suitable 
for all types of oil and the selection of the appropriate microorganisms and process 
conditions will depend on a specific characteristic of the oil  being treated.  
 
Nano neutralization , you can see here in the figure that i s a set up shown. This process 
utilizes the nanoparticles , typically made up of clay or calcium carbonate to absorb 
impurities from the oil for edible oil refining. Here , the oil is first heated to a temperature 
that makes it more fluid and easier to proce ss. It is then mixed with the nanoparticles , 
which have a high surface area to volume ratio.  The high surface area of the nanoparticles 
allows them to absorb impurities from the oil and effectively cleaning it.  
13 
  
You can see here that , how it is done in t his figure it is shown. Once the impurities have 
been absorbed by the nanoparticles , the mixture is separated to remove the particles from 
the oil. The oil is then further processed to remove any residual impurity and to improve 
its overall quality and sta bility. So, it is a relatively new technology in the edible oil 
refining industry and a promising alternative to traditional methods , such as chemical 
neutralization , due to its high efficiency and reduced environmental impact.  It is also cost 
effective an d scalable technology making a suitable option for large scale oil production. 
However, t here are much more things a suitable equipment, suitable system needs  to be 
developed and more R &D work is required before this process is made commercially 
viable pro cess.  
 
So, the refining efficiency finally, that is it is the generally considered to be the yield of 
dry neutral refined oil as a percentage of the volatile neutral oil content of the crude oil. 
That is what was the initial free fatty  acids and what percentage of free fatty  acids  that 
has been removed  the refining. So, the refining efficiency and refining factors are these 
two indicators which are used to judge the refining process.  
Refining  efficiency =Refined −oil yield
Crude  neutral −oil analysis×100 
Refining  factor =% Plant  loss
% Free  fatty  acid 
14 
 So, from that you can one can calculate the refining efficiency and then refining factor is 
a percent plant loss divided by percent free fatty  acids that is what are the total losses that 
has occ urred during the refining process and what is that percent divided by the percent 
of the initial free fatty  acids . So, that is the called refining factor. So, refining efficiency 
refining factor sometime even fatty acid factor , acid oxidation factors . These are some 
indicators , factors which are used to judge the refining process.  
 
Then refining byproducts obviously, the crude oils you see contains a number of material 
that are removed to produce neutral light coloured oil and these impurities have been 
considered waste products constituting a disposal problems. However, they can also be 
valuable byproducts when effectively recovered and processed and maybe toward the end 
of this course we will take up a few lectures on the oil in the processing industry 
byproducts and their utilization there we will discuss various aspects. So, two major 
byproducts from the refining process es are soap stock from the chemical refining and 
then other hydrated gums from the degumming process prior to caustic refining or the 
physical refining pretreatment stages. So, both these soap stock as well as gums they can 
be their ways to use it properly , used for the food , feed, or other that is industrial 
purposes even like soap stock can be used further for the breaking the soap and taking the 
fatty acid distillation etc . for making fatty acid all those things.  
 
15 
 So, finally, I would like to summarize this lecture by saying that the chemical refining is 
an essential process in the production of high-quality  edible oil s. Neutralization  is a 
crucial step that involves removing free fatty acid s and impurities from the crude oil . Re-
esterification is another important stage in the chemical refining , which involve s the 
addition of a fatty acid to the oil to increase its stability and shelf life. Biological 
deacidi fication is a new concept that utilizes enzymes to reduce the acid content of the 
oil. Nano neutralization is a cutting -edge  technology and utilizes nanopa rticles to 
improve the efficiency of the neutralized neutralization process and it reduces the amount 
of waste generated. Overall , chemical refining is a complex process that requires careful 
attention and the use of advanced technologies to ensure the pro duction of high -quality 
edible oils.  
 
These are the references that were used in this lecture.  
 
This thank you all very much. Thank you for your patience here. Thank you.  
 
