Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 6 : Edible Oils Refining  
Lecture 26: Crude Oil Characteristics and Processing  
 
Hello everybody.  Namaskar.  Now, we are entering the sixth module of this 
course ok.  And this module 5 lectu res will be devoted on Edible oil  refining.  You know 
that by the methods which we discussed in earlier mo dules whether it is a physical 
method or chemical method of oil extraction, mechanical or chemical means from all 
these  process whatever the depending upon the type of the method use d the oil which we 
get it  is known as crude oil.  And this crude oil contains certain undesirable components 
because of the  nature of the method  used.  
So, before sending it for it further food uses these crude oils need to be properly  
refined it is pass ed through various processing stages.  Even sometime it at least in some 
cases in some oils like virgin olive oils etcetera  they are at filtered.  So, there are 
different processes these crude oils are subjected to depending upon the nature  of the 
impuri ties present in it.  So, now in these modules we will discuss one by one what are 
the different impurities,  how these are removed, how the oil is made of a goo d quality 
for food purposes.  
 
So, in the lecture 26th in today's lecture in the next 2 5 to 30 m inutes we will 
discuss  about what are the characteristics of the crude oil a nd it is what are the process, 
what are the various components present in the crude oil.  What is crude oil?  Desirable 
and undesirable components in crude oil, removal of undesirable components from crude 
oil, oil refining process at a glance and then recent ad vances in the refining process that 
we will discuss in today's lecture ok.   
 
So, as I told you the crude oil it refers to the oil that has been extracted from 
plants or seeds, but the oil has yet not undergone the refining or processing.  It may 
contain impurities such as dirt, shells or other plant  matters as well as potentially  harmful 
substances like pesticide, heavy metal etcetera it might be there in this.  T he colour, taste 
and order of crude oils can vary depen ding upon the type of oil seeds  or nut that was 
extracted and from the method of t he extraction that was used.  
It typically has a high acidity level, high peroxide value and high moisture 
content.  It may also contain high free fatty acids content depending upon the extraction 
processes.  It may also contain high levels of waxes and gums which can affect the 
quality of oil.  So, these materials may be removed before the oil is passed subjected to 
food p reparations,  food uses ok.   
 
So, the composition of crude oil in general ok, as you k now that in earlier classes 
we discussed that is oil bas ically is a triglyceride ok. So, it should be primarily the 
composed of triglycerides which are a type of lipid made up of a glycerol molecule and 
three fatty acids ok.  So, the exact composition of the crude oil will vary depen ding upon 
the oil type or type of the oil seed or nut that was used for the extraction the raw material.  
Some com mon fatty acids which are found in the common or crude food oils include 
palmitic  acid, stearic acid, oleic acid, linoleic acid and linolenic acid.  Crude oil can also 
contain a small amounts of other compo unds like such as waxes, gums, phospholipids, 
pigments and vitamins.  It is important to note that crude oil is not suitable for 
consumption and it must be refined, bleached and deodorized for before it is sent for food 
uses ok.  
However certain oils even it is a that is they can be bec ause in the mustard  oil, 
people like the pungent  taste of the mustard oil.  So, it is just some even filtered double 
filtered must ard oil even olive oil that is natural olive oil.  So, they are also given some 
sort of refining treatment may be not all ok.   
 
So, this table gives you an idea of average compositio n of various components 
present  in the crude oil and when it is refined how it changes what a re the removed 
during refining process.  Like triglyceride you see crude oil may contain around 95 to 97 
percent triglyceride depending upon the process used and of course, after the refining it is 
go it goes may be 99 99. 9  percent or so, there is maximum amount of the impurities are 
removed.  So, the impurities may be considered as phosphatides 1.5 to 2.5 p ercent and 
after the refining  it comes  to as low as 0.003 percent. Then unsaponi fiable matters it is 
around 1.6 percent and it i s a nil it is almost completely  refined.  Plant sterols 0.33 in the 
crude oil where in the refined oil it may be 0. 13.  Tocophe rols in the crude oil it is 0.15 to 
0.21.  So, it is also the idea is because tocopherol it is a vitamin E it is antioxidant.  So, in 
the refining process the it should be process should be such th at these desirable  come 
these are the va luable component in  the oil. So, they can be retained.  So, here 0.11 to 
0.18 hydrocar bon like succulent etcetera 0. 014 may be 0.01 it is almost removed.  Then 
free fatty acids 0.3 to 0. 7 it should be brought down 0. 02 to 0.03 or minimum.  Space 
metals that is iron may be 1 to 3 ppm it may be that is it is brought to 0.1 to 0.3 ppm and 
copper from 0. 03 to 0.05 ppm it is brought down to 0.02 to 0.06 ppm in the  crude refined 
oil.   
 
So, the chemical composition and the contaminants of the vegetable oil if you 
take an overview   as I told you earlier also the oil contains around 98 to 99 gram per 100 
gram of triglyceride  ok.  And, this triglyceride includes fatty acid and glycerol and then 
remaining 1 to 2 percent  is the minor components like minor component may be natural 
components like phos pholipids,  glycolipids, unsapo nifiable minor matters waxes, 
pigments, carotenoids, tocopherol,  phytosterol, t riterpenoids,  etcetera. Then oxidation 
product that is which results from the oxidat ion of the fatty acids or other  triglyceride s 
etcetera the peroxides oxidized fatty acids aldehydes.  And, then chemical pollutants also 
may be present there  in the oil depending upon the process that is used for its extraction 
that is pesticides, heavy metal, toxic metals,  mineral oils, organic so lvent, aflatoxin, 
PAH etcetera.  So, these components might be present in this ok.   
 
So, just again these if we can categorize into this ma jor and minor non 
triglyceride component in the present in the crude oil because triglyceride is basically if 
you t alk  about pure oil it should it is a mixture of mixed triglycerides only.  So, anything 
other than triglyceride can be considered  as a undesirable matter or but  of course, there 
are some like tocopherols, vitamin E etcetera might be desir able component,  but others.  
So, the you can say major non triglyceride components in  the oil may be 
considered free  fatty acids, phospholipids, diglycerides and monoglycerides.  
Phospholipids are naturally present and these free fatty acids they may be result of the  
hydrolysis of the triglycerides, FFA and then diglycerides and monoglycerides.  Then 
other minor components may be tocopherols, sterols and sterol esters, tocotrienols  in 
palm and rice bran oils, color compounds like chlorophylls e tcetera they may get 
extracted during the extraction process and oil decomposition products such as polar 
compounds, polymer,  aldehydes, ketones and other volatile and non -volatile compounds.  
So, these might be present in the oil.   
 
So, obviously, the refining means there is the removal of th ese non triglyceride 
components  which are undesirable which are which can af fect our health adversely ok. 
So, refining is the important processing step to reduce or removes c ertain undesirable 
impurities from the crude oil as you can.  So,  you see here in the picture that is crude oil 
which has a that is all these various  component which we showed earlier.  So, it removes 
that is moisture, free fatty acid, off -flavors and pigments etcetera.  So, the refined oil is 
free from all these things  ok.  So, it refining it may be either physical process ref ining 
process, chemical process  that is even physical and chemical process also sometime are 
combined to remove the undesirable  components from the crude oil. The impurities 
which include major and  minor non triglyce ride compounds described in the  earlier slide. 
So, you can see even the crude oil, filtered oil and pro perly refined oil that there is  a 
difference in the colour and clarity of the oil can be sealed ok.   
 
So, the objectives of the refining process is removal o f undesirable or undesired 
non-triglyceride products from the crude oil that is these are the fr ee fatty acids, 
phospholipids, oxidized products, metal ion, colour pigments and other impurities ok.  
That is one first and foremo st objective of the refining process is that and at the same  
time as I told you earlier also that is the refined oil s hould contain that is the other  
preservation of valuable component like vitamin E or tocopherol wh ich are natural 
antioxidant  present part icularly in plant oils.  So, the refining process parameters should 
be used in su ch a way that is these natural components are kept there they are not 
removed also sterols , sterol esters, trocotrienols and etcetera these are the valuable 
component bioactiv e health promoting component. So, they should be retained in the oil.  
Removal of undesirable components, preservation of valuable components, minimization 
of oil  losses and protection of the oil against degradation that is another very important 
that is t he  to increase the shelf life of the oil, product its degradation during storage and 
transformation  these are the major objective of the refining process ok.   
 
So, again here you see that what are the undesirable co mponents in the removed 
during the re fining process that is include like free fatty acids  and how this free fatty 
acids are found that depends upon the extraction process if the temperature, moisture 
etcetera all this they may cause hydrolysis of the triglycerides ok.  And if there are more 
free fatty acids in the oil it may influence taste, smoking point etcetera if eating 
hydrolysis.  So, all these things are the effect and therefore, the free fatty  acid must be 
removed even the smoke point of oil with even 1 percent of more fatty acid in th e cotton 
seed oil or any other oil the smoke p oint is seriously depressed.  
So, that is very important that is the free fatty acid should be removed.  Similarly 
phosphatides are which are phospholipids they are a nat ural compound that is they are 
gums they give cloudy aspect to the oil, deposit resid ue in the oil flavors and dark color 
upon heating.  So, they also give a adverse appearance to  the oil they must be removed. 
Similarly , oxidation product that is the oxidase various aldeh yde, ketones etcetera and  
other  such products peroxide, peroxidized fatty acids etcet era which are the result of the  
oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids.  So, they again give the rancidity and the arrow 
flavor they adversely a ffect the stability or they adversely affect the color  etcetera of the 
product they should be removed.  
Then flavor that is the natural compounds of the seed au to oxidation process 
which give  the flavor they should be address component they are all removed.  Then 
waxes and pigments that is natural components o f the seed  they may naturally present in 
the some seeds and they come in the oil.  So, they also are removed.  Then metal are like 
iron or copper particularly that is the chemical pollutant, heavy me tal, pesticide, PAH, 
mycotoxin, dioxin etcetera what is m ade to remove all this that they  are the technological 
pollution during storage transport and processing and they should be  removed during 
refining process.   
 
So, the typical now if you see the typical refining tr eatment it may be two types 
one is the p hysical refining oth er is the chemical refining. The in the physical refining 
stages that is acid degumming, de -waxing , bleaching and deacidification  and 
deodorization process during this in acid degumming gums are removed and in fatty acid  
are removed in to de acidification and deodorization process and you get edible oil.  So, 
basically in the physical refining process it is a basically distillation is done.  The free 
fatty acids are removed during distillation during deodoriz ation and the phosphatides  a nd 
other impurities are removed prior to steam distillation.  So, that is basically physical no 
chemical is involve d here whereas, in the chemical  refining the free fatty acids that is and 
most of the phosphatides and other impurities  are neutralized with  an alkaline solution 
usually sodium hydroxide or so, so they are  removed.  So, here that is overview of the 
what are the when  we talk about oil refining.  
 
So, these are the basic steps of the oil refining that you can say crude oil that is it 
is degumming.  Degumming is one where the removal of phosphatide gums is done ei ther 
by hot water or by acidic water etcetera either on the extraction plant or refining plant 
wherever we will take up all these details in the next lectures, but there is the degumming 
is done and then this  degummed oil you get.  Then degummed oil is subjected to 
neutralization that is the  alkali neutralization which is  for the removal of so, free fatty 
acids.  So, that is also known as chemical refining that is neut ralization for with the 
caustic  so, use of caustic soda.  So, when you add sodium hydroxide into the oil it rea cts 
with the fat earlier in the  earlier classes we discussed this you get soap stock, this soap 
stock is removed separated  and you get neutralized oil, neut ral oil which is  free from free 
fatty acids.  
Then it is subjected to another that is the bleaching in t he bleaching step there is 
the pigments etcetera which are might be present into the oil they are removed either 
vacuum methods or by adding bleaching ea rth into it.  Then this if the earth is used then it 
is filtered and yo u get bleached oil and bleached  oil then next subjected to the 
deodorization treatment where it is oils are distilled to  the remove odors and flavors as 
well as free fatty acid.  In fa ct, refined oil even that is the various any technical peo ple 
also those are the trained testers also they should not be able to identify the actual origin 
of the oil if it is properly  refined ok.  It should be the refined oil should be the blend in 
taste and flavor.  So, you get deodorized oil and finally, it is then winte rization that is 
winterization whatever some waxes etcetera which has not been removed earlier here the 
oil is cooled  down and then the waxes  are separated upon cooling.  
So, that is cal led winterization.  So, these are the different important steps 
degumming, neutraliz ation, bleaching, deodorization  and winterization refining and 
finally, we get the re fined oil or finished oil which  is removed all the sort of undesirable 
components are r emoved from the oil.   
So, details of the process technology equipment etcetera of all these steps like 
degumming,  neutralization, bleaching, deodorization, winterization etcetera we will take 
up in the next classes lectures.  
 
But here we will I will just discuss that whatever the disadvan tages  of the 
conventional method these are all conventional method and then I will speak about 
something  of the novel method for refining as well.  So, energy consumption in the more 
in the conventional methods.  So,  needs more water uses that is used for chemicals may 
lead to the retention of some  residues in the finished product, more waste is generated  it 
needs the high temperature for the refining process which sometime even again adverse ly 
affects the quality and  heat labile  components are destroyed during processing and they 
are all these conventional p rocess  of refining are not eco friendly.  So, there is again like 
other cases in the extraction w e discuss here also there is a need to adopt more and more 
less ene rgy consuming method or more nove l technologies for the  refining as well.  So, 
the traditional methods we will take up in the next lecture s in details which is followed by 
the industry.   
 
Today let me briefly cover that what are the novel method or a dvances in the 
refining process  like the same method which are used for extraction etcetera.  They can 
also be novel methods can be used for refining l ike membrane refining uses semi  
permeable membranes to separate impurities from the oil, the purified oil  passes through  
the membranes while impurities are left behind then ultrasound assisted refining this 
process  uses high frequency sound waves to agitate the oil causing the impurities to 
become suspended  in the oil and then suspended impurities can you then be easily 
separated from the oil.  Then even enzymatic refining where it various enzymes ar e used 
to selectively hydrolyze  impurities such as phospholipids etcetera in the oil and the 
resulting purified oil  is then filtered to remove the residual enz ymes.  Then supercritical 
fluid extraction technology this also us es the supercritical fluid such  as carbon dioxide to 
extract impurities from the oil.  
So, the purified oil is then separated from the supercritical fluid by reducing the 
pressure.  So, the d etails again details of all these processes equipment,  process, principle, 
technical details are covered in my other NPTEL course like novel technologies of food 
processing  and shelf life extension application of these process in the or the extraction of 
the oil  I discussed in earlier lecture.  So, in this today how these process can be used in 
the refining o f the oil let us see briefly.  
 
So, the membrane technology you know this is a separa tion process it uses some 
sort of selective membrane and which w here and the which the material is passed.  So, in 
this case oil containing undesirable components these a re passed over the membrane.  
So, the undesirable components are retained on the membrane and the oil passes 
through.  So, accordingly the membrane is selected like that.  So, process of passing the 
crude oil through a series o f membranes filters and removes  the impurities such as gums, 
phospholipids and other component.  The advantages of this process include higher 
quality and stabili ty compared to the  traditional refining method, higher efficiency, lower 
cost and reduced environmental impact and  this can preserve the natural nutrients and 
flavor of the oil and it is a preferred choice  for high end edible oil product because there 
is no tempera ture involvement in the oil. So, the quality of the product is very good.   
 
So, these are various type of membrane which are used in th e case of oil dig up in 
process  and oil refining process that is ultrafiltration membrane, nano memb rane, 
multifiltrati on membrane two different types of ultrafiltration membrane depending upon 
because here the membrane as  I told you depending upon the size of the particles 
etcetera are there even has to take  up the different membranes of different pore sizes and 
differe nt molecular weight cut off.  So, ok.  So, the efficiency if you compare the 
conventional process and membrane process even extent of  impurity removal is more in 
the membrane process also the c ommercial feasibility is more. So, ultrafiltration and 
microfil tration membranes can be widely used to remove wax, gum or even  to decolorize 
crude oils successfully ok.   
 
Which are membrane they used for the dig up in process include ultrafiltration 1, 
2 and  3 and nano filtration membranes which are the ultrafiltration 1, 2 and 3 membranes  
are  made up of a polysulfone  polymer with a molecular weight cut off of in the range of  
2 lakhs 50,000 to 1 lakhs ok.  
The ultrafiltration 3 membrane is made up of a polysulfone and with a molecular 
weight  cut off of 10000.  The nano filtration membrane is made up of a cellulose 
triacetate with a molecular weight  cut off of 1000 ok.  So, these membranes should be 
thoroughly washed with deionized mineral water before use for  removing any sort of 
preservatives or stabi lizers.  So, basically the technology is that is the oil containing the 
impurities is passed through  these membranes ok.  So, this retentate is used as impurities 
and the permeate that is oil is obtained and the  basic thing is that you have to find a 
suitable membrane here for the depending upon the what  are the various impur ities.  
 
So, the it is the just this slide shows you the mode of filtration that is it may be a  
cross flow filtration or it is a dead end filtration the material is moving here.  Obviously, 
it is better it is a has a less pore blocking factors and clogging of the  membrane etcetera 
is less a problem in the cross flow filtration and in the dead end  that is the material goes 
vertically.  So, it has some problem sometime after sometime this the materials are 
retained at the surface  they become compressed and they ac t as a they reduce the flux.   
 
These are the vario us membrane morphology like non porous dense membranes, 
isotropic micro porous membranes, charged membranes or composite me mbranes, 
integrated asymmetric membrane or supported liquid membranes etcetera.  Th ere even 
charged membrane or functional membrane s ometime there is they depending  upon they 
are provided certain charged particle molecule and  which they make the whole the even 
the they allow the smaller molecules to pass through or they bind the charge a   lot 
because this oppositely charged particles are there functional groups they retain they  
interact with the certain groups and then retain them in the. So, these are the various types 
of membranes details are  this has been discussed in my earlier cours e ok.   
 
Then t he next technology is the ultra filtration step in edible oil refining process 
that is  th e crude oil is miscelli zed taken it is filtered then it i s passed through various  
ultrafiltration technique that is membrane filtration different membranes etcetera.  And 
you get permeate and the permeate is distilled physical refining you get the oil an d the 
retentate which is there lecithin removed even the sometime gums etcetera which is there  
these gums they are phosphatides they are lecithin t hey can be further subjected to  the 
processing and for the lecithin production.  So, you see here there is a diametrically or 
schematica lly it is shown the this is the  basically membrane the oil impurity is there 
miscella is  kept here or oil.  So, it is se parated ok.   
 
Then effect of you can see here dead -head filtration using different membranes of 
different  pore sizes 1.22, 0.45, 0.22, and you see that is a control membrane and different 
size membranes  ok.  And accordingly you see that the oil clarity  it is showing  that how 
the so, even removal efficiency like percent turbidity, percent TOC and percent  COD 
etcetera is shown here. And you can see that the pore sizes of the well they have the 
important membrane pore  size they have important influence on  the refining.  So, that is 
very important criteria.   
 
Then ultrasound assisted US refining this is a high frequency sound waves are 
used to  improve the quality of edible oil in this case.  The sound waves can be used to 
for various purposes such as for  degumming, the ultrasound  can be used to remove gums 
phospholipids and other impurities from the oil which can  improve the stability and self -
light the oil.  Also it can be used for decolorization purposes to break down the and 
remove the pigments  from  the oil which can improve the colo r and appearance of the oil. 
Even deodorization like ultrasound can be used to remove volatile compound from the  
oil which can improve the odour and taste of the oil.  Then the factors which affect the 
ultrasound refinin g include frequency and intensity of  the sound waves, temperature and 
composition of the oil.   
 
So, this is the principle of ultrasound refining the equipment here that is basically 
the ultrasound  probes in earlier classes also we discussed this equipm ent etcetera.  This 
ultrasound probe heat transfer this causes the bubble formation, bubble expansion, then  
bubble finally, collapse and then there is a explosion of the release of the energy.  So, it is 
a schematic diagram of ultrasound ref ining process ok. That is the ultrasound form 
radical caused by the squandering of a high magnitude of  energy.  These radicals speed 
up the reactions and hydroxyl radicals remove phospholipids from  the crude oil by 
dissociating the non -hydratable phospholipids into hy dratable form.  The advantages of 
this technology include less consumption of the acid and water, shorter time of the 
process, high quality oil and environmental friendly technology.   
 
So, finally, we summarize this lecture by saying that that crude oil obtained from 
the  oil seed come may contain various impurities like gums, waxes, free fatty acids, 
glycerides  etcetera.  So, these oil needs to be refined that is by the degumming subjected 
to degumming process,  then in the alkali refining and neutraliz ation, bleaching, 
deodorization, finally, winterization  all those things to remove all those impurities and 
before the oil is sent for t he food purposes  food uses. Alternative refining methods offer 
several benefits over traditional chemical refining  pr ocess including reduced 
environment impact factors, improved oil quality and reduced  cost.  That is even the 
traditional methods which are used for re fining sometime they are energy  intensive 
operations and they because of the pressure and temperature inv olved or even  chemicals 
etcetera which are used they may have some issues with the oil quality.  So, if there is 
advanced method, novel methods they can be used for refining except only  problem with 
the novel method is that cost of the setup if that is i n wise.  So, they give very good 
quality refined various membranes such as which can be used for degumming,  de 
waxing  and decolorization of the edible oil .  Membrane technology and ultrasound 
refining are considered to be promising methods owing  to their  high higher quality and 
stability compared to the traditional refining processes  ok, but only thing if they are the 
proper in the membrane technology proper selection  of the membrane and is a important 
criteria.  
 
So, this I these are the references which are used in this lecture.   
 
Thank you very much for your patience here.  Thank you.  Thank you.   
