Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 5 : Solvent Extraction of Edible Oils  
Lecture 25 : Novel Techniques of Oil Extraction  
 
  
Hello ev erybody.  Namaskar.  Now, in this lecture 25, we will discuss Novel  Techniques 
of Oil Extraction. T he traditional technologies that are used by the industry  have certain 
problems that is sometimes  if the process parameters etcetera are not  properly control led, 
they may lead to degradation in the quality and also they are  more energy -intensive  and 
costly processes.  The setup which is for the traditional oil extraction units etcetera, 
requires  more capital . They are capital and energy -intensive  processes .  So, there is a 
need for modernization of these units and with this , I will just discuss some  of the novel 
and emerging technologies that can be used for extraction of the oil from  oil-bearing  
materials.  These technologies include ultrasound -assisted  extract ion, microwave -assisted  
extraction,  high-pressure  extraction, supercritical fluid extraction, pulse electric field-
assisted extraction , and three -phase partitioning -assisted edible  oil extraction.   
 
In ultrasound -assisted  extraction, we use ultrasound wa ves to break down the cell wall of 
the plant materials , therefore, making it easier to extract  the oil.  In the case of 
microwave -assisted  extraction, the microwaves are used to heat the plant  materials which 
causes the oil to be released more easily.  High-pressure  extraction techniques use a 
pressurized solvent to extract the oil from  the plant materials. The supercritical  fluid 
extraction process uses carbon dioxide as a solvent in a supercritical  state to extract the 
oil from the plant materials.  The three-phase  partitioning method involves the use of a 
salt-saturated  aqueous solution and an  organic solvent to partition the oil from the 
aqueous phase.  And finally, the pulse electric field involves the discharge of  direct 
electric pulses into o leagin ous materials for a short duration of time.  All these processes 
result in efficiency  and a process that gives  both oil and meal  of good quality.  Good 
quality because most of these techniques involve  non-thermal processes  or alternate 
thermal processes and h ere the oil yield also is higher  as compared to the traditional 
processes.  So, let us see briefly one by one.   
 
 
Ultrasound -assisted extraction (UAE) has gained popularity in recent years because of its 
ability to improve the efficacy of various processe s. As a green and novel extraction 
technique, it is highly scalable as far as the extraction of oil and other bioactive 
compounds is concerned.  Its extraction mechanism is attributed to the production of 
cavitation bubbles, vibration, mixing, and pulveriza tion among other complex mechanical 
effects. Collectively, the processes disrupt the cell wall, increase the permeability of the 
cell wall, and intensify  the rate of mass transfer.  Increasing temperature and pressure 
generate more shear energy, turbulence,  and cavitation.  Cavitation, thermal, and 
mechanical effects are the prime cell wall degrading mechanisms during extraction and 
the combination of the three effects causes rupturing of the  cell wall.  Further, it increases 
the rate of chemical reactions and  reduces the size of particles.  These synergistic effects 
account for the reduced extraction time and facilitate mass transfer without significantly 
damaging the extracts  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
So, it is you  can see here the ultrasonic system. F or food-grade  processing  of edible  oils 
on an industrial level performance ultrasonic equipment is required to process  large 
volumes of streams of oil seeds in a continuous flow -through system .  So, from laboratory 
equipment  one needs  to convert it into a pilot plant  and finally, into industry . There is a 
significant need and various different systems are  available . One such system and its 
operation mechanism you can see how basically the various  high frequency ultrasound 
waves are used to break the cell wall and it increases  the flowability of the oil and gives 
better yield.  
   
Factors that influence the UEA extraction process are type of the solvents, their 
concentration, temperature, and time and frequency of the ultrasound waves , etc, that  
determine the effectiveness  and effici ency of the extraction process.  The thermal effect 
produced by high extraction temperature f avors solvent diffusion rates. On the other side , 
low temperature enhances cavitation and consequently , it increases the  yield.  The higher 
extraction time favors o il yield but induces unde sirable nutritional and sensory  changes in 
the extracted product.  So, here in this , I have taken from the literature that the 
ultrasound -assisted  enzyme extraction  process and yield when reported from about 15.8 
percent in pomegra nate seed to as high  as 91.35 percent in moring o oleifera  seeds .  In 
perilla seeds , the yield was reported using ultrasound -assisted  extraction of 50 percent  
and in flax seeds, it is 62 percent. The enzymes used normally are cellulase or 
immobilized cellul ase, pectinase , hemicellulase  or acetylase,  and other such enzymes and 
the different conditions used like temperature  generally may vary from 45 degrees  
Celsius to 55 degrees  Celsius . The  general time  of extraction i n the case of moringa was 
15 minutes , perilla seeds 30 minutes , flax seeds  30 minutes, and in the case of 
pomegranate seeds  2 hours.  So, these are sufficient to show how various factors like 
enzyme type, temperature , time , and other things  influence  the yield of oil from various 
materials.  
 
So, the advantages of the ultrasound -assisted  extraction process include increased 
extraction yield: UAE can improve the extraction yield of edible oils by facilitating the 
rupture of plant cell walls and promoting the rel ease of intracellular compounds, r educed 
extraction time:  UAE can significantly reduce the extraction time compared to traditional 
methods, which can save ene rgy and reduce processing costs, lower solvent consumption: 
UAE can reduce the amount of solvent needed for extraction, which is benef icial for the 
environme nt and reduces processing costs, improved quality of extracted oil: UAE can 
minimize the degradation of heat -sensitive compounds and preserve the quality of 
extracted oil, includ ing the flavour, colour & aroma, Scalability: UAE can b e easily scaled up 
to industrial production and integrated int o existing extraction processes, and 
Sustainability: UAE is a sustainable and eco -friendly method, as it does not require high 
temperatures or harmful chemicals, and generates less waste compare d to conventional 
extraction methods.  
 
Then microwave -assisted  extraction is another novel technology.  It is a trending 
extraction technique considered to have high throughput and extraction efficiency  when 
compared to other conventional methods of oil e xtraction.  Microwave -assisted  extraction 
relies on a microwave generator that delivers microwave  energy to a polarizable material 
consisting of the solvent and the oil-bearing  material.  Its mechanism is that this 
microwave radiation  interacts with the dip ole present in the sample  matrix causing them 
to oscillate in response to the changing electromagnetic fields . The oscillation of dipoles 
generates heat on the surface of the material and heat is  further transferred to the inside of 
the material by conduct ion. Also,  this microwave radiation interacts with the water 
present within the shell of  the oil-bearing  material resulting in a quick and uniform 
penetration of the heat  to the target tissues , and both these ok.  The oscillation or direct 
interaction that  is this heat generated by these results in  the formation of water vapor and 
the electroporation effect which disrupts the cell wall of the oil  seed enhances efficient 
extraction of the intracellular metabolites.   
 
 
 
The factors that affect the microwave -assisted  extraction processes include an increase in  
the temperature and power lead s to the faster movement of the molecule and reaction 
rates.  Non -polar solvents when used in microwave extraction demonstrate  a poor 
solvent -to-microwave  synergism owing t o their low dielectric constant. Further, the 
mechanism behind microwave heating is based on molecular or dipole rotation coupled 
with ionic conduction.  For these reasons, polar solvents are the most preferred for 
microwave extraction because they have a h igh dielectric constant, abs orb more MW 
radiations (high loss factor), and they promote conductivity .  Polar solvents have 
demonstrated superior results than nonpolar  solvents in most cases .   
 
So, again from the literature I have taken this data that thi s microwave -assisted enzyme 
extraction technology was used to extract the oil from various seeds  like example 
pumpkin seeds, yellow  horn seeds, Isatis indigotica  seeds, sandbox seeds , and so on.  In 
the case of pumpkin seed 65 percent oil yield was reporte d, the enzymes used were  
cellulose, hemicellulose, proteinase, beta-glucosidase,  and neutral proteinases.    
Microwave power used was 419 watts , temperature was 44 degrees  Celsius, pH was 5 
solute  to solvent ratio was 1: 10, and extraction time was 66 minute s.  So, similar  to the 
sandbox seed you can see that the range when the extraction  time was 5 min utes, solid 
liquid ratio of 40:1,  and microwave power was about 180 watts , the  extraction was 
obtained from 56 to even 72 per cent in the different varieties. I n the yellow  horn seed , the 
extract ion yield was around 60 percent .   
So, the advantages and disadvantages of the microwave -assisted  extraction processes 
include It is a new extraction technique that is a combination of microwave and traditional 
solvent e xtraction.  Microwave radiation is a noncontact source of energy; hence, it 
provides effective heating, minimized thermal gradient, and selective heating when 
needed. Extraction time is considerably low (15 to 20 min), uses less volume of solvent, 
accommoda tes both polar and nonpolar solvents, increases yield with good 
reproducibility, and yields superior sensory attributes, that is, colour, odour, and aroma in 
products.  The apparatus and experimental design for the MAE are sim ple and cheap and 
also can be used for a variety of materials with fewer limits on the polarity of extractants.  
One of the major drawbacks of MAEE in oil extraction is the oxidation of unsaturated fatty 
acids, particularly when volatile solvents are used. Presently, the use of green sol vents 
such as water and enzymatic aqueous  extractants is gaining popularity.  
 
Then we come to the high-pressure  assisted extraction.  This HPAE is a rather new and 
superior method compared to the other extraction techniques  because it avoids heating 
the s ubstrate and thus preserves the properties of the bio active  compound s and the other 
biological activities. According to this method, the oil from seeds is extracted by using 
organic or aqueous solvents  at elevated temperatures and pressures.  Different typ es of 
HPE  depending upon the pressure used can be categorized as high-pressure , medium to 
high-pressure  process , or low-pressure  process.  If the pressure is above 100 mega Pascal, 
this is a high -pressure  process.  If the pressure is below 10 mega Pascal, it is a low -
pressure process and between 10 and 100 mega Pas cal, it is medium to high. With regard 
to the operating temperature, the process can also be categorized as pressurized  liquid 
extraction which  is low temperature , or pressurized hot water extract ion if the  
temperature is high.   
 
So, the working principle of and mechanism of high-pressure  extraction you can see here.  
This is a high-pressure  generating system here.  It is a chamber where the material is 
kept. Drying  of oilseed  is necessary  if the  nonpolar solvent is being used. Then grinding 
of the sample to less than 3 mm just it is done to increase the diffusion  process and mixed 
with solvent in a sterile polythene bag then this material  is prepared and kept in a high 
hydrostatic pressure vessel  where the pressure is applied  maybe  100 to 600 mega Pascal 
for about 1 to 10 minutes and then screening of the residues and then this is further mixed 
with solvent and the process continue. During the extraction process, solvent, under the 
influence of la rge differential pressure, permeates very fast into the cells through the 
broken membranes, hence enhancing the mass flow process.  As a result, the compounds 
are extracted in a significantly shorter time as against other extraction techniques such as 
super critical  fluid extraction.  The applied pressure disrupts the plant tissues, interrupts 
the cell wall and the cell membrane, and facilitates the transfer of the soluble matter  
between the solvent and the substrate. The fundamental theory behind HPAE is the phase 
behavior theory, which dictates that the solubility of a substance is enhanced at higher 
pressure.  
 
The high-pressure  extraction process has the advantage  of preventing the thermal 
degradation  of the food constituents.  It acts rapidly and uniform ly over the substrate.  It 
retains high bioactivity and maintains the covalent bonds, requires less time , and gives  a 
high oil yield compared to most of the traditional extraction technologies  or even some of 
the novel technologies.  However, the disadvant age of this process is high investment 
cost, high  temperature resulting in thermal degradation , and low throughput because 
when you are increasing  the pressure of course, sometimes  this effect of the temperature 
can be brought down by having a proper suita ble arrangement in the setup.  
 
Then we come to the supercritical fluid extraction technology . SCF technology has been 
examined as an alternative technique for conventional oil and oilseed processing methods 
for more than two decades . Supercritical fluid e xtraction (SCFE) technology uses 
supercritical fluid at vapor –liquid  critical points  to extract oil and other plant 
components. The supercritical state is only achieved when the solvent is subjected to 
temperature and pressure beyond its critical point.  At the critical point, there is no 
distinctive gas or liquid phase and the solvent behaves more like a gas with solvating 
properties of a liquid.  The gas -like viscosity on the other hand results in high rates of 
mass transfer.  
 
A commonly  used solvent is CO 2 because it is inert, abundant, non -inflammable, 
nontoxic, possesses  moderate critical properties , and can easily be recovered from the 
reaction streams.  CO 2 is a solvent generally regarded as safe and its inclusion in products 
is not harmful to human hea lth. Moreover, recycling CO 2 in this technique avoids the 
greenhouse effect that is detrimental to the environment.  
 
This is a setup that is the mechanism of working the supercritical fluid extraction process.    
Here is the extractant which is high pressu re extractor where the feed or oil seed material 
is used  and in there this carbon dioxide storage or carbon dioxide cylinders are there , 
circulated  with the help of a pump or compressor.  The carbon dioxide as a high-pressure  
supercritical carbon dioxide i s passed through this extractor  where it comes into contact 
and dissolves the oil.  The oil and carbon dioxide come to the pressure reduction bulb 
where it is oil and carbon dioxide are separated.  The separation of the extract and finally, 
the carbon super critical fluid is recovered  and you get edible oil.  
 
So, that is basically raw material preparation and loading it into the extraction vessel  and 
in the extraction vessel there is intimate contact between the supercritical fluid , and 
desired conditions a re maintained  such as the  air pressure, temperature, etc. to increase 
the extractability . In p reparation for raw materials , the raw materials are ground or 
crushed to increase their surface area, which facilitates better penetration of the 
supercritical fl uid. The l oading  into the extraction vessel.  The ground raw materials are 
loaded into the extraction vessel, which is sealed and connected to the supercritical fluid 
extraction system.  The supercritical fluid, typically carbon dioxide, is pumped into the 
extraction vessel, where it passes through  the raw material and extracts the edible oil. The 
supercritical fluid has  a high solubility for edible oils, allowing for efficient extraction. 
Separation of the extract is t he extract containing the edible oil and  supercritical fluid is 
then passed into a separator vessel. The pressure and temperature are reduced, causing the 
supercritical fluid to revert to its gaseous state and separate from the edible oil.  The 
supercritical fluid is then condensed and recovered using a condenser, while the extracted 
oil is collected separately.  
 
The advantages of the process  are low extraction time, it  is an environmental ly friendly 
process, it is highly selective and no follow -up separation  steps are required to obtain the 
oil from the substrate  mixture.  However, it has a disadvantage that is in spite of having a 
simple extraction process  application of supercritical fluid extraction technology is 
limited due to high equipment  cost, particularly for industrial scale and large s cale 
process. M ajor SPE factors that are responsible like intrinsic factors include the 
temperature  and pressure that determine the physical sta te of the solvent and extrinsic 
factors encompass  characteristics of the sample and interaction of oil-bearing  cells with 
the supercritical carbon dioxide  and these influence  the extraction process.  
   
Pulse electric field (PEF ) assisted  extraction is a groundbreaking  non-thermal technology 
that is used to improve the extraction efficiency of vegetable oil from various oilseeds.  
The technology involves the discharge of direct electric pulses into the oleaginous 
material for a short duration of time (microseconds to mil liseconds) and high voltage ( up 
to 50 kV).  The oil -bearing material is placed between a high-voltage  electrode and a 
grounded electrode. The electric pulses traverse through the cell membrane and generate 
electric fields (up to 10 kV/cm), which disintegrate  the membrane molecules base d on 
their net charge. The separation of membrane molecules results in the formation of pores 
and increases the permeability of the cell wall  of the plant tissues. Consequently, the 
diffusion of solutes through the cell wall is  enhanced by electroporation, and this favors 
the extraction of intracellular substances like oil and other components of interest. Pulse 
duration and pulse interval are the two fundamental factors affecting the effectiveness of 
PEF treatment.  
 
This is the PEF-assisted  system where these are the electrodes  and in between electrodes , 
the sample is placed .  So, it needs first preparation of the sample, then extraction medium 
preparation, mixing , then  pulse electric field treatment, separ ation, recovery of the oil , 
and then further processing .  So, just after PEF treatment , it can be further subjected to 
the extraction process either  by solvent extraction or by any other  methods . So, PEF 
increases the pores.  
 
 The advantages of the sy stem PEF extraction are as an emerging physical technology it  
improv es the mass transfer operation. The PEF pretreatment on crushed oil seed increases 
oil yield and rec overy of bio -active compounds. The PEF is an effective de -
emulsification technique because it facilitates the coalescence of oil molecules contained 
in the oil in water emulsio n. The yield is improved through double mechanisms: 
electroporation from the tissues  and recover y of oil from the emulsion. PEF technology is 
a “cold technology” as the intensities applied hardly raise  the temperature of the mixture 
by 5°C and this helps in maintaining the quality of oil  yield . However, the disadvantages 
of this technology include high initial capital cost, high energy  consumption, limited 
penetration depth, complex process , and limited scalability.  
Three -phase partitioning (TPP) is a liquid -liquid extraction technique that is used to 
separate and purify components of a mixture based on their differential solubility in three 
immiscible phases.  In the case of edible oil extraction, TPP is used to extract and separate 
oil from other components of the mixture, such as water and proteins.  The TPP process 
involves the addition of salt to a mixture of the sample and a water -miscible organic 
solvent, such as ethanol or isopropanol.  The salt causes the separation of the mixture into 
three phases: an upper  organic phase , a lower aqueous phase , and a middle interfacial 
phase . The interfacial phase contains the target component, in this case, the edible oil.  
The interfacial phase is then recovered and the edible oil is separated from the  other 
components using various technique s such as centrifugation, evaporation,  or dialysis.  
 
In this figure , I have shown the mechanism of working TPP-assisted  edible oil extraction .  
First grinding of the oil material is taken from  the system, then addition  of salt  and t 
butanol , and then these ar e properly mixed and incubation  of the solution , given some 
time for the separation of the phases followed by the separation of phases  by 
centrifugation.  As you can see  here that is these are separated into three  layers, the 
uppermost layer, contains oil dissolved in t butanol , the lower dense layer includes 
carbohydrates, soluble fiber, salt etcetera , and the middle layer is the protein component.  
And then  now these are separated by suitable techniques . 
 
  Now, I will summarize that Ultrasound -assisted  extraction, microwave -assisted  
extraction, high -pressure  extraction, supercritical extraction, three -phase partitioning , and 
pulsed  electric field are novel oil extraction technologies.  The detail ed mechanism and 
working principle of the equipment and system of all these processes I  have described in 
my other course the novel techniques for food processing  preservati on.  But in this 
lecture , I just explained the application of these processes in oil extraction , how it is done, 
etc.  So, higher extraction yield, reduced extractio n time, lower solvent consumption , and 
improved quality are some advantages of these novel technologies.  However, there are 
some drawbacks like high er investment costs, low throughput, etc. which can be further 
improved through research  and development.  There are many places where work is 
continued and indigenous equipment  people are trying to develop systems  and 
equipment.  Once  the equipment cost is reduced all these technologies  can be versatile 
technology for getting more yield and even the drawback of the high capital investment  
can be compensated suitab ly by getting higher yield as well as good quality material both  
oil and meal.  
 
So, these are the references used in this.  Thank you very much for your patience.  Thank 
you. 
