1 
 Food  Oils and Fats:  Chemistry  & Technology  
Professor  H N Mishra  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Week 4: Mechanical Expelling of Oils from Plant Sources  
Lecture 20: Recent Developments in Oil Expression Technology  
 
Hello  everyone,  Namaste.  Now,  we are in the last lecture  of fourth  week.  This fourth  
week , we devoted  on mechanical  expelling  of oil from  plant  sources  basically  oil seeds.  
Here , we saw the various  pretreatments,  then pressing , and expelling.  We also took some  
examples.  So, now in this lecture  20th, in the next half an hour,  we will discuss  about  
recent  developments  and innovation s or novel  technologies  in oil expression,  novel  recent  
developments  in oil expression  technology.  
 
We will discuss  about  the advances  in both in the advances  in the pretreatment  
technology  like enzymatic  pretreatment,  cold plasma  pretreatment,  pulse  electric  field 
pretreatment,  ultrasound , or microwave  pretreatment  and also, we will discuss  briefly  
about  developments  in pressing  technology  that is particularly  the gas assisted  pressing.  
Otherwise  we saw the screw  spelling  and this hydraulic  pressing  which  are commonly  
2 
 used even  honey  pressing  that we discuss.  So, how that is the gas assisted  pressing  helps  
in the getting  better  recovery  that also we will discuss  slightly.  So, let us see first is the 
enzymatic  pretreatment.  
 
These  are the what  is the importance  of the pretreatment,  what  are various  pretreatments  
we already  discussed  in the earlier  class,  but here we will just see that is these  novel  
methods  of pretreatment,  how they are beneficial , or how they improve  the oil yield  and 
the quality .  
The vegetable  oil extraction  yield  can be increased  by using  enzymes  which  degrade  the 
oil seed cell wall components  and therefore,  facilitate  the oil release.  Enzymatic  action , as 
well as mechanical  and thermal  treatment , damages  the cell walls  and favors  the 
permeability  of the oil. A number  of enzymes  from  vegetable  cell degrading  
microorganisms  have  been  used to enhance  the extractability  of the oil from  oilseeds , and 
the amylases,  glucanases , proteases,  pectinases , etc. are a few examples  of the enzymes  
that have  like amylases  will break  the starch  molecule . Even cellulo lytic and 
hemicellulolytic  enzymes , they are also used which  break  the cellulosic  and 
hemicellulosic  materials.  Here , you see that enzymatic  degradation  of the soya bean  cell 
wall has been  shown  here.  
 
3 
 You can clearly  see in the picture  how when  the enzyme  treatment  is there,  the cell wall 
disintegrates  that is cell is separated . The cellul ase enzyme  is used or other  enzymes  are 
used, and then it eats away  or it breaks  down  the structure , this releases  that this makes  
the easy release  of the oil. The cell wall has to be degraded  to make  possible  the 
extraction  of oil from  oilseeds.  Degradation  affects  carbohydrates,  but the resulting  
component  must  not interact  with the product s to be purified.  Enzym atic treatment  offers  
a high yield  and a preservation  of valuable  extracted  components  because  there , mild 
conditions  are implied , even  the heat is not applied  and pressure  also. If at all it is used it 
is it needs  very less (little)  pressure  to be applied.  So, here a comparison  between  
enzymatic  and conventional  methods  for wrapped  seed oil extraction  is shown  in the 
experimental  setup.  
 
Here , that rape seed that is, let us see 100 parts  or 100 kg is milling  or rolling . It is 
pressed  to the water  treatment  then boiling , and then here in that chamber  experimental  
setup  container  that is these pressed seeds  are given  that is milled  and rolled  and boiled  
seeds and then enzymes  are added  here and it is given  for the proper  reaction  time.  After  
that, it is separated . With separation, it is washed , and you get oil 38 points  that is from  
100 kg. If it is there , about  38 kg of oil is obtained . Separation  is subjected  to further  
evaporation  it can be further recycled  to this enzyme  treatment  chamber.  And then 
finally,  it gives  molasses  of about  17 parts , and the drying  right  you get a rape seed flour 
of about  45 parts  or 45 kg.  
So, in both conventional  and enzymatic  processes  that is an aqueous  process . Pre-
treatment  in the conventional  process  is rolling  and toasting  whereas  in the enzymatic  
process  milling  and boiling  in water  as you could  see here these  are the pretreatment.  
Then  release  of oil, in the conventional  method ; after  the pretreatment , they are subjected  
to pressing  or solvent  extraction  whereas,  in the enzymatic  process , it is basically  the 
enzyme  reaction  which  causes  the degradation  of the fiber  causes  the degradation  of the 
cell wall cell structure  and releases  the oil. So, in the product , in the conventional  oil, you 
4 
 get the raw oil with lecithin , cakes, flakes, or extraction  residue  whereas,  in the enzymatic  
treatment , you get raw oil with lecithin , protein,  molasses  and hulls , these are the product.   
 
Then  here, in this you see that it is an effect  of liquid  from  the pressing  stage  that is more  
recovery  that is how much  you are getting.  The time is 20 minutes , 60 minutes,  and 120 
minutes.  This is the volume  of press ed liquid  from  the pressing  stage.  So, you can see in 
both the cases,  that enzyme -treated  in all cases  with 20-minute  pressing , 60-minute  
pressing , or 120-minute  pressing,  enzyme -treated  material  is giving  more  oil yield  or 
more  liquid  yield.  In the second  graph  you see here that is the time versus  the pressure.  
That is the pressure  increment  during  the first 45 minutes  for untreated  and treated  olive 
pastes . You see that first 45 minutes  in the cooked  material , cellul ase or pectinase  
enzymes  which  are used, there  the pressing  rate is more  rather  than the untreated  one. 
 
Here  in this, you see again  that is the effect  of the enzyme  concentration  on the  oil yield . 
In the case of cotton  seed,  sunflower  seed as well as soybean  seed and various  enzymes  
you have  taken  as cellul ase, hemicellul ase enzyme  or Aspergillus  fumigus  enzymes  that 
are contained  in those  seeds  etc. In all the three  cases , you can see that is the treatment  
that is the enzyme  concentration  the increase  in the enzyme  concentration  caused  an 
increase  in the oil yield  in all the three  cases . This figure  here, you see that effect  of 
5 
 enzyme  concentration  on the yield  of oil when  the hydrolysis  is carried  out in the 
presence  of solvent  during  incubation  of rapeseed  it is case of rapeseed.  And here, also 
again  alpha -amylase  and beta-glucanase,  and n-proteinase  from  the Bacillus subtil is and 
the proteolytic  enzyme  from  the Aspergillus  niger  was used and hemicellul ase from  
Aspergillus  niger  was used.  And all the three  cases , you can see that of course,  there  is up 
to 2 percent  weight  by weight  enzyme  concentration , there  is a steep  rise in the oil yield  
and after which  of course,  there  is an increase  is there,  but the rate of the oil recovery  it 
decreases,  but the increase  in the oil content  is there.  So, that depends,  but obviously,  this 
will all depend  upon  the what  are the other  conditions  like pH, temperature , and this 
moisture  content  in that because  these  are the parameters  which  influence  the enzyme  
activity  even  effectiveness  of your enzyme,  enzyme  activity  all these  things . 
 
Then , next novel  method  of pretreatment  is dielectric -barrier  discharge  cold plasma  
treatment.  Here , you see that the seeds  were  subjected  to dielectric  barrier  discharge  cold 
plasma  treatment  and then after that this was treated  the seeds  were  subjected  to surface  
electron  microscopy  (SEM ) studies  to see their effects  that is the plasma  treatment  effect.  
And this treated  material  was taken  where  the oil yield  determination  and whatever  the 
oil was obtained , it was analyzed  by GC analysis  or color  analysis  to see its quality  and 
the meal  was analyzed  for the protein  content.  So, this is the experimental  plan was study  
conducted  by Regel  et al. in 2020.  The process  parameter s, they considered  where  
voltage  up to in the range  of 15 to 23 kV, and exposure  time was varied  from  2 to 16 
minutes.  
6 
  
Here , it is the experimental  setup  for the dielectric  barrier  discharge  configuration . In this, 
you can see here there  is a plasma  treatment  and then 2 and 3, 2 is the dielectric  chamber  
is this one, and then there  are 3 and 4 lower  electrode  and upper  electrodes  and there  is a 
power  source  5 and 6 power  source  1 and power  source  2. So, sample  placement  is done  
here, you can see here. Inside  also in this sample , there  is a camera,  a fixer,  cylindrical  
box to see the sample , that is the inside  view  of the setup  of oil and schematic  diagram  of 
the oil acquisition  setup  this you can say that is where  is the how they are getting  the oil 
there  is the photographs  are taken  that is the photograph  of the system.  
 
From this experiment , they reported  that the highest  oil yield  was obtained  in 16-minute  
exposure  time for which  for 15, 18, and 23 kV were  28.6,  31.5, and 30.1 percent , 
respectively . The enhancement  of camellia  oil yield  treatment  time was a more  influential  
factor  than the applied  voltage.  One of the advantages  of CP pretreatment  is that it could  
rapidly  be done  or it could  be done  applied  at room  temperature , it is a non-thermal  
process  and while  the sample  treated  with microwaves  and need  to be cooled  down  after 
the pretreatment  because  during  microwave  heating  that of heat is generated.  In addition,  
a shorter  time period  resulted  in more  extraction  yield  considering  the CPP treatment  
compared  to the ultrasonic  pretreatment.  So, this CPP treatment  gives  some  better  effect , 
this advantageous  from  the microwave  and ultrasound  treatment . 
7 
  
Then  pulse  electric  field treatment , PF treatment  it is a black  cumin  seed was pretreated  
by microwave  and pulse  electric  field both and a comparison  were  done  in the control.  As 
you can see that the in the both a comparison  between  here the in the microwave  treated  
pretreated  the oil extraction  yield  was more  and almost  in the PF and microwave  they 
were  comparable , but much  higher  than the that was the control  ok. But if the oxidative  
stability  accordingly,  but oxidative  stability  was found  to be more  in the PF treated  oil 
than that of the microwave  treated  oil. So, this CM analysis  confirmed  that the 
application  of PF and microwave  pretreatments  will lead to the disintegration  of the cell 
and consequently  better  extraction  of oil from  them.  The highest  oxidative  stability  of 
cumin  seed oil obtained  was with the PF pretreatment  and then with the microwave  
pretreatment.  
 
Here  that is the it gives  that is the various  reviews  from  the literature.  That is what  are the 
different  pulse  electric  PF treatment  and the varying  conditions  and the cannabis,  
sunflower,  black  cumin,  sesame  and niacin  seeds  were  there  and the oil extraction  
methods  were  this cannabis  they were  treated  at a voltage  of 7 kV pulse  intensity  and 0, 3 
and 6 kV per centimeter  and pulse  duration  was 0.5 milli second . And after the 
pretreatment  that is the oil extraction  method  was cold pressing  using  a screw  press.  And 
the salient  findings  were  that as application  of pulse  intensity  of 3 kV per centimeter  gave  
8 
 a higher  yield.  This was reported  by Haji Moradkhami in 2018.  Shorstkii  et al. in 2007  
reported  that, in the case of sunflower  oil in the PF treatment  was given  in varying  
condition  and then followed  by solvent  extraction  using  hexane  under  continuous  shaking  
and they reported  that the pretreating  seeds  at 7 kilowatt  per centimeter , 15 megahertz  for 
30 microseconds  improved  oil yield  from  39.14  to 48.24  %. 
In another  study  on black  cumin  seed where  after the pretreatment , the seeds  were  
subjected  to cold pressing  using  a screw  press  it was reported  that pulse  electric  field 
pretreatment  of black  cumin  seeds  increased  oil extraction  efficiency  by approximately  
35 percent.  In sesame  seed, that PF treatment  followed  by cold pressing  using  a texture  
analyzer , it was reported  that oil yield  increased  by 4.9 % after the PF treatment.  In niger 
seed, that is highest  oil yield  was obtained  after pretreating  seeds  at 1.18 kilowatt  per 
centimeter.  
So, all these  reports , literature  reports  confirm  that, PF is a promising  pretreatment  for 
getting  not only the more  oil yield,  but also better  quality  of the oil. In the earlier  class , 
when  we were  discussing  various  pretreatment  then I told you how what  is the 
mechanism  because  when  you are giving  pretreatment  it creates  new pores  or enlarges  
the pore electro poration  takes  place  and which  increases  the fluid  ability  of the oil by just 
simple  pressing  the oil is increased.   
Then  the high-pressure  pretreatment , now another  novel  technology  and the process  flow 
chart  for the preparation  of Moringa  oleifera  kernels  for high pressure  processing  
pretreatment  prior  to solvent  extraction  and aqueous  enzymatic  extraction  is shown  here.   
 
So, there  is the mature  Moringa  oleifera  seeds  are taken , they are dehulled  hulls  are 
blown  off and then these  kernels  they are conditioned  at around  50 degree  Celsius  for 8 
hours  and then these  condition ed seed they are subjected  to grinding , sieving  or they are 
directly  these  condition ed seed they are used as such and here the additional  and 
grinding , sieving  conditions  are also varied.  Then  addition  of distilled  water  in 1 to 1 
ratio is done , they added  and then a portion  of it which  is given  to high pressure  treatment  
and high-pressure  treatment  200 mega pascal,  400 mega pascal,  500 mega pascal , and 600 
9 
 mega pascal  for 15 minutes  and at 25 degree  Celsius  and then they were  oven  dried  at 205 
degree  Celsius  for 1 hour then grinding  and sieving  and then passed  through  the solvent  
extraction  process . Or this high-pressure  processing  in the treatment  is given.  Then  
addition  of remaining  distilled  water  into 4 is to 1 micro  moisture  kernel  ratio and then 
aqueous  enzymatic  extraction  method  was used.  In oven  drying , grind ing, sieving , 
addition  of remaining  distilled  water  in 4:1. So, these  conditions  were  varied  and then it 
was subjected  to aqueous  enzymatic  extraction.   
 
So, a comparison  was made  between  solvent  extraction  and aqueous  enzymatic  extraction  
after giving  the high-pressure  pretreatment  and you can see here, this high-pressure  
pretreatment  is 50 to 250 mega pascal,  20 to 60 degree  Celsius,  10 to 60 minutes  generally  
resulted  in higher  free oil recoveries  and thinner  emulsion  layers  from  the ground  sieved  
kernel  than the whole  kernel , that is shown  here. That is oil recovery  percent  it is AEE 
aqueous  enzyme  extraction , HPPRun5 and HPPR un15, here you get better  oil recovery  in 
HPPR un15. 
 
Then  ultrasound  pretreatment . Already  ultrasound  application  has several  advantages  
earlier  it was reported  there  is a reduction  in the amount  of solvent  that is used for the 
extraction,  there  is a better  economic  and environmental  benefits  and features,  higher  
extraction  yield  of targeted  molecules,  there  is a reduction  in the extraction  time when  the 
10 
 ultrasound  application  pretreatment  is used, it results  in decrease  in the energy  
consumption  as well as higher  process  parameters.  You can see, ultrasound  again  it 
breaks  this is the cell and when  you are sonicating  at high speed  it results  into the rupture  
of the cell membrane  and because  of this that is oil body  that this causes  the rupture  and 
oil flowability  is moves  that is you get better  recovery  and even  the temperature  etc. is 
not much.  So, the oil quality  also is better.   
 
So, here in this an ultrasonic  treatment  in the watermelon , apricot , almond , and hemp . 
This ultrasonic  treatment  in watermelon  was used from  100 to 700 watt, 10 to 50 degree  
Celsius  for 5 to 25 seconds.  In apricot , it was for 42 kilohertz , 2.5, 10, and 15 minutes , 
and in hemp  ultrasound  treatment  was given  20 megahertz , 200 watt, for 10, 20 and 40 
minutes.  In all these  cases , that is in the watermelon  and apricot  after the ultrasound  
treatment  they were  subjected  to aqueous  enzyme  extraction  whereas,  the hemp  after the 
ultrasound  treatment  was subjected  to supercritical  carbon  dioxide  extraction.  These  are 
the literature  references  given.  So, in all these  cases  it was reported  that in the case of 
watermelon  ultrasonic  retreatment  at 700-watt, 40 degree  Celsius  for 25 seconds  showed  
higher  extraction  rate of 98 percent.  In the apricot  and almond , oil yield  for both was 
increased  with the range  of around  19 to 20 percent.  High yield  was exhibited  by hemp  
seeds  which  are pretreated  by ultrasound  for 10 minutes . So, all these  literature  reports  
say that, yes ultrasound  has a promising  method  for pretreating  seeds  for getting  better  
oil, both quantity  and quality.   
This is the microwave  pretreatment  if you see that is the experimental  setup.  So, the 
therapeutic  treatment  of oil seed schematic  representation  of a continuous  laboratory  
setup  where  this is a microwave  chamber . With the help of a suitable  pump , the untreated  
product  is sent to the microwave  chamber  where  it is treated  for suitable  time.  In the 
chamber , it is exposed  with the microwaves  and then after the proper  treatment  it is taken  
into the microwave  treated  product  in the container.  
11 
  
 
Whereas,  in this is a continuous  setup  it is also almost  same  there , is the seed inlet there  
are a screw  conveyor  and it is subjected  to microwave  horn and there  is also the it is 
conditioning  is done  with the water  steam.  Then  it comes  to the second  chamber , then it 
moves  to the third  chamber , the individual  chamber  the water  steam  is added  to make  it 
to condition  it and then it is treated  with the microwave  horn and microwave  finally,  the 
seeds  are taken  out. So, this is a large -scale  continuous  setup  and this is the laboratory  
scale  continuous  laboratory  scale  setup.   
 
So, the findings  of these  reports  were  there . Enhanced  yield  and or nutritional  value  of 
the seed as well as seed oils as well as meal  both was obtained . Reduced  extraction  time 
and energy  consumption  cost were  there  with the use of microwave  application.  These 
microwave  applications  generate  oil with an enhanced  content  of desirable  nutraceuticals  
such as phytosterols , tocopherols,  canolol s and phenolic  compounds  etc. which  increase  
the oxidative  stability  of the oil and also extended  shelf life. They also increase  the 
thermal  stability  of the oil.  
So, here there  is again  literature  reports , various  researchers  they have  reported  on the 
various  they have  studied  the pomegranate  seeds,  mango,  milk thistle,  black  cumin, 
12 
 hazelnut , etc. to varying  conditions  of microwave,  microwave  power,  then time that is the 
wattage  etc. and after the treating  with microwaves  they were  treated  with normally  
solvent  extraction  with hexane  using  soxhlet  apparatus  and or solvent  extraction  using  
hexane  and there  are continuous  shaking  or this black  cumin  was cold pressing  using  a 
screw  press  or hazelnut  cold pressing  using  a hydraulic  press.  
 
And in all the cases , that is whatever  the microwave  treatment  you are giving  and after 
the treatment  whether  you go for solvent extraction  or you go for a screw  expelling  or 
hydraulic  pressing  etc. In almost  all the cases , it has been  found  that, microwave  
treatment  gives  a better  yield  of the oil. Microwave  treatment  in the case of pomegranate , 
it was reported  that at microwave  pretreatment  at 600 watts  for 6-minute  increased  oil 
yield  from  27.73  percent  to 36.34  percent.  In the mango , the pretreatment  at 110 watts  for 
150 second  exhibited  highest  oil yield.  Oil yield  increased  in milk thistle  from  29.43  to 
32.33  and 35.41  after microwaving  for 2 and 4 minutes , respectively.  Similarly , in the 
black  cumin, microwave  pretreatment  at 2450  megahertz , 1100  watt and 123.5  minutes  
followed  by a cold pressing  using  a screw  press , that is it resulted  into the increased  oil 
yield  that is oil yield  was increased  by around  36.8 percent . In the case of hazelnut,  also 
microwave  irradiation  at 400 watts for 240 seconds  enhance  the oil yield.   
 
13 
 So, in this I have  just given  a again  from  the literature  report  a summary  of the novel  seed 
pretreatment  techniques  on the oil colour.  There  is increasing  the pulse  electric  field 
increase  the seed oil lightness  and aloneness  in the rape seed and this was reported  by 
Guderjan  et al. in 2007 . Similarly,  in the cannabis , it was reported  that increasing  the 
pulse  intensity  to 6 kilowatt  per centimeter  improve  the oil colour  index  from  119.8  to 
167.2.  In the case of rape seed  again , higher  lightness  and aloneness  were  exhibited  by oil 
from  the seeds  pretreated  at 7 kilowatt  per centimeter  and 120 pulses.  Zhao  et al. in 2016  
reported  that microwaving  walnut  seeds  for 2- and 4 -minute  produced  oil higher  in 
yellow ness. Their yellowness  was high. Similarly,  in another  experiment  with the orange , 
it was shown  that the microwave  pretreatment  decreased  the oil lightness  and yellow ness 
increasing  the microwave  time decreased  the oil yellow ness in case of palm  oil. Digestion  
seeds  with Natuzyme  and Protex  7 L produced  seed oil with greater  yellow ness in the 
case of hump . This is was reported  by Latif  and Anwar in 2009.  Mog himi and Farzaneh  
in 2018 , they reported  that in the case of black  cumin  higher  colour  index  was exhibited  
by oil from  seed pretreated  at 30 watts for 30 minutes.  Similarly , that is the novel  seed 
pretreatment  techniques  they influence  the oil quality  particularly  the antioxidant  presents  
in the oil the oil tocopherols  content.  
 
In the sunflower  oil, it was suggested  by Moradi  and Rahimi  in 2018 , they reported  that 
PEF pretreatment  enhance  the recovery  of tocopherol . They experimented  both PEF as 
well as ultrasound  and PEF they found  that better  in the recovery  of the tocopherol.  In the 
case of walnut , microwave  pretreatment  for 1 minute  resulted  in higher  tocopherol  
content.  In the rapeseed , tocopherol  decreased  in the seeds  where microwave  heated  for 3 
minute  and increased  when  the microwave  time was increased  to 7 minutes.  Also  seed oil 
individual  and total tocopherol  decreased  beyond  5 minutes  of microwave  heating  time.  
Fathi  et al. conducted  experiment  on milk thistle  and reported  that total and individual  
tocopherol  increased  with increase  in microwave  heating  time.  Similarly , Mohsemi  et al., 
they conducted  experiment  on niger seeds . They exposed  niger seeds  to microwave  
treatment  and pulse  electric  pretreatments  and they reported  that the amount  of alpha  
tocopherol  and delta  tocopherols  significantly  improved  by these  treatments.   
14 
  
Similarly , in the case of rape seed, that is the delta  tocopherol  increased  from  up to 30.07  
from  00 ppm after the seed pretreatment  with the microwave  as well as pulse  electric  
field.  In the hemp  seed, higher  amount  of total tocopherols  were  manifested  in oil from  
the seed digested  with natuzyme . Another  study  said that in the goldenberry,  it was 
subjected  to enzymatic  pretreatment  with Cellulase EC, Pectinase  L, in 1 to 1 ratio at 50 
degree  Celsius,  pH was 4.3, enzyme  concentration  was 2 percent,  and treatment  time was 
2 hours.  And in this case, that is these  are reporting  of Ramada n et al., that the beta 
tocopherol  and gamma  tocopherol  varied  from  about  2.1 to 2.11 gram  per kg and 1.08 to 
1.1 gram  per kg respectively  after seed enzyme  pretreatment . In the case of rapeseed , that 
is Guderjan et al., they subjected  it rapeseed  to pulse  electric  field as of 5 kV per 
centimeter  and 60 pulses,  7 kV per centimeter  and 120 pulses  for 30 µs. And they found  
that higher  alpha  tocopherols  were  exhibited  by oil from  seed pretreated  at 7 kV per 
centimeter  and 120 pulses.   
 
Then  finally,  let us see the gas assisted  pressing.  The gas assisted  pressing  uses the 
assistance  of carbon  dioxide  in at least one of the pressing  stages  in a modified  cage 
screw  press.  The g as assisted  pressing  is a promising  technique  for increasing  oil yield  
from  the oilseeds  as well as producing  the high value  animal  fodder  that is the cake 
quality  is also improved.  So, what  is done  dissolution  of carbon  dioxide  into the oil, it 
15 
 improves  the drainage  because  it results  into the reduction  in the viscosity.  It is displaced  
there  is displacement  by volume  expansion  or swelling  or there  is a reduced  adhesion  the 
reduction  in the interfacial  tension.  So, dissolution  of CO 2 that is the when  you CO 2 
assisted  pressing  it has advantages  like this. The undissolved  gas flow, it causes  the 
displacement  or entrainment.  So, GAP  improves  oil yield  by reducing  oil viscosity  and 
by a solid  volume  effect  which  describes  a displacement  effect  due to volume  increase  
through  massive  CO 2 sorption .  
 
This is the experiment  that is the set up experimental  setup  that is a prepress  seed educt 
and it is a passed through  a dryer  that is the condition ed and then it recycles  solids  comes  
filters  in it is oil product.  So, this is a gas assisted  press  and conventional  press.  So, in this 
they after drying  it is can be set the CO 2 gas will come  and then it is pressed  or in the 
conventional  press.  The gas is supercritical  carbon  dioxide , pressure  is around  12.55  
mega pascal , temperature  345 Kelvin , and mass  flow rate is 111 kg per hour.  This was 
reported  by Muller and Eggers  in 2014  and their experimental  setup  and on the basis  of 
their study  conducted  in this. These shows  that, their finding  suggested  that gas assisted  
pressing  has an advantage  in both the increasing  the oil yield  and in improving  the oil 
quality  getting  better  quality  oil as well as having  a better  effect  it gives  the improved  
quality  of meal  as well.   
 
16 
 So, these  are the oil samples  taken  as various  stages  from  the experiment  sample  1 and 2 
where  from  the cold press  seeds , sample  3 and 4 you can see here, they are from  the gas 
assisted  press  and sample  5 was from  the conventional  press.  The seeds  do not undergo  
any mechanical  pretreatment  in this case. These are the prepress , then gas assisted  press , 
CO 2 atmosphere  and conventional  press  these  are the three  setups . 
So, the experimental  procedure  includes  a preliminary  contact  time of 30 to 90 minute  of 
starting  material  with CO 2 8 to 20 mega pascal  aiming  at a complete  saturation  of the oil. 
Subsequently  the constant  mechanical  pressure  of 30 to 70 MPa  is applied  during  10 
minutes  followed  by the relief  of mechanical  pressure  and discharge  of CO 2 the oil and 
cocoa  butter  and it gives  that is this experiment  when  they were  analyzed  for both oil and 
quality  yield  as well as quality  and it was found  the both were  of superior  were  higher . 
The order  that is yield  was also better  by the in the gas assisted  press  and the quality  of 
the oil and meal  was also better.   
 
So, finally,  I will summarize  this lecture  saying  that the microwave,  ultrasound,  pulse  
electric  field, and enzyme  pretreatment  of oil seeds  they are vital for improving  the oil 
quality  that is these  are they can be considered  as a novel  technique  for the pretreatment  
of oil seeds  before  their pressing  or solvent  extraction.  However,  the quality  of the oil is 
dependent  on the technical  parameters  such as microwave  power,  ultrasound  power,  
pulse  intensity,  exposure  time,  enzyme  concentration  parameter  that influence  the 
enzyme  activity  and so on. The type of the enzyme,  pH temperature,  enzyme  
concentration , and pretreatment  time etcetera  reduces  the oil yield  and quality.  
Improvement  of the oil, antioxidant  properties  of the seed are pretreated  with a desirable  
development  given  in the oil application  in functional  foods  and nutraceutical  
formulation  because  this oil seed meal  also gets better  quality  and it has a better  
application  both as a food as well as feed.   
 
These are the references  which  are used in this lecture  this.  
17 
  
Thank  you very much  for your patience  here.  Thank  you. 
 
