Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 5 : Solvent Extraction of Edible Oils  
Lecture 24 : Miscella Distillation and Meal Desolventization  
 
 
 Hello everybody.  Namaskar.  Now, in the 24th lecture of the course today, we shall 
discuss miscella  distillation and  meal des olventization.  In this lecture, we will discuss 
the post-extraction  processes.  In the last classes, earlier class, we disc ussed solvent 
extraction technology and the various  types of extractors.  O nce the oil is extracted by the 
solvent extraction process, it needs  to be further  processed that is because the solvent has 
a certain quantity of oil mixed with it which is the miscella.  So, we need to recover oil 
from the miscella.  So, in today's lecture, we will discuss about post extraction processes, 
oil recovery  from miscella, what are the principles  and various methods of oil recovery 
like distillation , evaporation , membra ne filtration, absorption , and etcetera .  And then 
another importan t aspect like we get miscella, we also get the de -oiled cake, de -oiled oil 
seed material that is normally  called meal and this meal also has around 25 to 35 percent 
solvent in it. So, the m eal desolventization is another crucial  aspect.  So, we will discuss 
the desolventization  techniques, toasting, drying, cooling , and finally, the  meal 
desolven tizer toaster which is the latest development in the technology.  
 
 So, you see the post-extract ion process as I told you after the oil extractions , we get 
miscella and we get that meal and both they have the solvent.  So, the solvent needs  to 
recover from this.  So, the basic process of the oil extraction is to in the earlier class, we 
discussed immersing oil flakes or pretest cakes in selected solvents . These  solvents  
dissolve oil into it , which is miscella , and then miscella  is obtained and cake is obtained 
which also has the solvent.  So, the solvent vapors are collected or distilled, the miscella 
is distilled and that solvent  is vaporized and then solvent vapors are recycled after 
condensation and cooling.  And the meal as I told it also contains around 25 to 35 percent 
solvent.  So, after desolventization , the meal can be dried, and it  is a very good food 
protein, it contains protein and other  components.  So, the desolventization  process 
should be conducted in such a way that the eating  qualities of the proteins remain  intact.  
The solvent vapors volatilized  during this desolventization  process and drying is 
recovered  by condensation and cooling.   
 
So, here again, in this figure, I have shown the different stages in the industry which is 
used for the desolventization of the meal as well as the distillation of the miscella.  
 
First, we will take up oil recovery from miscella.  Recovery of oil is an important step to 
obtain crude oil as I told you and it is our effort that the oil should be triglyceride and 
should be as free as possible from any impurities that the last traces of the solvent should 
be removed from the miscella.  There are various methods that are used for recovery of 
solvents and those may be distillation, evaporation, membrane filtration, and absorption. 
We will take up one -by-one these processe s.  
 
Distillation is a common method used for separating the solvent from the miscella to 
obtain the oil in edible oil extraction processes. In this method, the miscella containing 
the solvent and the extracted oil is heated to a temperature where the sol vent evaporates 
and can be collected separately. The distillation process typically involves the use of a 
distillation column or still, which is a tall vertical vessel with multiple trays or plates. The 
miscella is introduced into the top of the column and  heated. The solvent, which has a 
lower boiling point than the oil, evaporates and rises up the column, where it is cooled 
and condensed into a liquid in a separate condenser unit. The condensed solvent is then 
collected and reused in the extraction proces s. The oil, which has a higher boiling point 
than the solvent, remains in the bottom of the column as a residue, and can be collected 
separately. This process may be repeated multiple times to increase the efficiency of the 
solvent recovery and oil extract ion. One advantage of the distillation method is that it 
allows for efficient recovery of the solvent, which can be reused in the extraction process, 
reducing solvent waste and costs. However, the process may require high energy input 
and careful control o f the distillation parameters, such as temperature and pressure, to 
prevent degradation or loss of the extracted oil.  
 
The next process is evaporation .  It is a commonly used method to separate the solvent 
from the miscella in the edible oil extraction process.  In this method , the miscella is 
heated to a temperature that causes the solvent to  evaporate leaving behind the oil . It is 
also similar to the distillation method earlier discussed, but in the distillation , it is a 
compact unit where evaporation condensation  etcetera is done in the same type of 
arrangement.  But here in evaporation , the collection of the miscella that is from the 
extraction process is collected and kept in a storage tank.  Then  this miscella is heated to 
a temperature that is high enough to cause the solvent to  evaporate which  is the basic you 
heat and the solvent comes into the form of a vapor.  The temperature used for the 
vaporization of the solvent depends  upon the boiling  point of the solvent, but it is 
generally in the range of 70 to 100 depending upon what  type of solvent has been used 
for extraction of the oil.  The third step is the separation of solvent vapor. This vapor is 
separated from the miscella by passing it through a condenser . There is  a separate unit the 
vapors are redirected to a separate condenser unit where these vapors cool down  and 
condense back into the liquid solvent. F inally, the solvent is recovered and collected in a 
tank and then it is sent to the further extraction process . The solvent c an be  reused.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Another  important technology for the recovery of the solvent from the miscella  is 
membrane filtration.  You know the membrane filtration in my earlier course I have 
discussed in another course  that is novel technologies  I have discussed about details of 
the membrane separation processes  ok.  Membrane filtration is a separation process that 
uses a semi -permeable membrane to separate components in a liquid. T he process 
involves passing the miscella through a membrane with pores small enough to allow the 
oil to pass through but large enough to retain the solvent molecules.The membrane acts 
as a physical barrier that separates the oil and solvent, allowing the oil to pass through 
and the solvent to be retained. Membrane filtr ation has several advantages over 
traditional solvent removal methods like distillation or evaporation. One of the main 
advantages is that it operates at lower temperatures, which helps to preserve the quality of 
the extracted oil. Additionally, membrane f iltration is a continuous process that does not 
require the use of additional solvents, which can reduce the environmental impact and 
cost of the extraction process. However, membrane filtration also has some limitations. 
The membrane can become clogged wi th impurities, leading to reduced efficiency and 
the need for frequent cleaning or replacement.  
 
Another  technique is absorption.  Absorption is a process used to separate the solvent 
from the miscella to obtain the oil. It involves passing the miscella  through a bed of 
absorbent material that selectively removes the solvent from the mixture. The absorbent 
material used is usually a porous solid or a liquid that has a high affinity for the solvent. 
The absorption process is typically carried out in a col umn or a packed bed. The miscella 
is introduced at the top of the column, and the absorbent material is packed in the column 
such that the miscella flows through it from top to bottom. As the miscella passes through 
the column, the solvent is selectively a dsorbed by the absorbent material, while the oil 
remains unabsorbed and exits the column at the bottom. Once the solvent is absorbed by 
the absorbent material, it can be recovered by desorption. Desorption involves passing a 
desorbing agent through the col umn, which displaces the solvent from the absorbent 
material. The desorbed solvent can be recycled back to the extraction process. One of the 
main advantages of the absorption method is that it can be used to recover solvent from 
dilute solutions. Addition ally, it can be operated continuously, which makes it suitable 
for large -scale operations. However, the absorption process may require high capital and 
operating costs, and the selection of the absorbent material can be critical to the 
efficiency of the pr ocess.  
 
Now we will discuss meal desolventization.  Once the micella is desolventized , we get the 
crude oil . Crude oil is sent for further processing, further refining , and utilization etcetera 
that we  will take up separately in the next module. But here another aspect that I told you 
that is the de -oiled material that is meal, it  is a good source of protein and it can be 
further processed for use in various  food preparations, in various feed purposes , etcetera.  
So, it needs  to be desolventized .  So, afte r the desolventization,  the de -oiled cake or meal 
can be obtained depending  upon the process used in the shape of flake, cake particles , or 
expanded pellet particles  that are soaked with the solvent.  This meal  typically contains 
about 55 to 70 weight perce nt dry solids, about  25 to 35 weight percent residual solvent, 
5 to 10 weight percent moisture , and less than  1 weight percent residual oil.  So, the de -
oiled acid material is normally at atmospheric pressure and its temperature  is around 55 
to 60 degree  Celsius . In many cases , the de -oiled acid material contains anti-nutritional  
factors , particularly in the case of soybean meal and other  materials.  So, these anti-
nutritional  factors can inhibit the digestion of the protein.  So, during the desolventizat ion 
process , this is also taken care of by proper toasting  or roasting these anti-nutritional  
factors are also removed.  So, the de -oiled acid materials I told you about over 95 percent 
of the de -oiled acid  material is passed through various stages like de solventizing, drying, 
toasting and  cooling or desolventizing, toasting, drying , and cooling and you get the 
protein -rich meal.  And remaining 5 percent of the material is passed through flash 
desolventizing and cooling  which finally gives protein concentra tes, protein isolates , and 
soy flour . These  flash desolventizing toasting cooling machines were recently developed  
especially for soybean meal desolventization .   
 
The steps here are desolventizing, toasting, drying , and cooling as you saw in the last  
slide.  So, you can say as DTDC process.  So, in the DTDC process , the solvent is 
removed from the de -oiled seed material and recovered  for reuse.  So, in desolventizing , 
you remove the solvent from the extracted oil by heating and evaporating it .  Toastin g 
reduces the anti-nutritional  factors, drying brings the material within the trading  limits of 
moisture , and cooling is done to bring down the temperature of the material  or 
temperature of the meal to near to the ambient temperature to remain flowable dur ing 
storage and transport .  These  are the resultant meal from the DTDC product , which is 
called oilseed meal and is a good protein source that can be used for food formulation.   
 
So, this is the DTDC system that desolventizing, toasting, drying , and cool ing processes  
can be  accomplished in a single vesse l.  In this  setup as you see it has an arrangement for 
passing that from the top that extracted  flake inlet is there, then it has various trays like 
pre-DT trays, hollow spray -bolt trays, sparge trays , variable speed  rotary trays,  and then 
VRS trays , dryer tray , and etcetera. T hese are the different trays which are provided in 
the system.  The system also has cyclones and there is a meal conveyor  system from the 
cyclone the  things are removed for separ ation and it is provided with a cooling tray , 
heaters , etcetera .  So, these are the components of the typical DTDC system.  
 
In the flash desolventizing and cooling process, the solvent is removed very quickly from 
the de-oiled oilseed material and recover ed for reuse without moisture absorption to 
protect  the integrity of the proteins.  The de -oiled oilseed meal is then cooled to near 
ambient temperature and the resultant  flash -desolventized  and cooled product is 
commonly referred to as flash -desolventized  material or white flakes and this is the 
system for the flash desolventizing and cooling process.  
 
Now, let us take into detail  the processes . First is the desolventizer  toaster in the DTDC 
equipment setup which we showed you earlier . The top of the unit  is the desolventizer 
toaster and then the bottom is the cooler and dryer.  It is used for the desolventizing and 
toasting process and is combined in one vessel called desolventizer toaster and the drying 
and cooling process  are combined in a separate vess el referred to as DC.  So, DT and DC 
are these two important , and in the whole setup that is the first T, then DC, and the 
required arrangement.  
 
After the prepared material has had its oil extracted in the solvent extractor, it is 
conveyed to the meal d esolventiser toaster, commonly referred to as the DT. The material 
entering the DT is typically at the extractor temperature of 60 ᵒC and contains 25 –35% by 
weight solvent. The primary purpose of the DT is to remove the solvent from the meal  
fraction so th at the solvent can be recovered.  DTs are vertical, cylindrical vessels with a 
multitude of horizontal trays. The extracted material enters at the top and is supported by 
the tray. The material is mixed above each tray, and conveyed downward from tray to 
tray, by agitating sweeps anchored to a central rotating shaft. The heat for increasing 
meal temperature and evaporating the solvent is supplied by steam, introduced directly 
and indirectly into the meal via the trays.  
 
So, you can see here the complete DT  process . The trays of the DT are designed with an 
upper plate, lower plate, and structural members between designed to hold pressurized 
steam. The DT has four different types of trays; pre -desolventizing trays, countercurrent 
trays, a sparge  tray, and a steam drying tray, and the arrangement of trays are shown here 
in this schematic diagram. So, let us see what the functions of individual trays are. The 
predesolventising trays have as their sole purpose the provision of conductive heat 
transf er through their upper surface to the solvent -laden material supported above. The 
steam is typically held at 10.5 kg/cm2 pressure within predesolventising trays, providing a 
surface temperature of 185°C.  The steam condenses within the trays, providing its  latent 
heat to maintain the 185°C tray surface temperature and allowing heat to be conducted 
into the solvent -laden meal layer above.  
 
 
 
A DT may have as many as seven predesolventising trays, or as few as one. The 
predesolventising trays are located in the upper portion of the DT and must allow 
ascending vapors from below to pass around them to the vapor exit at the top of the DT. 
Some manufacturers design disc -shaped trays, providing space for the ascending vapors 
to pass between the outside perimeter o f the tray and the shell wall, while others design 
donut -shaped trays, providing space for ascending vapors to pass between the inside 
perimeter of the tray and the central shaft. As an alternative to a large number of 
predesolventising trays, the upper se ction of the DT is often expanded in diameter so as 
to enable fewer, larger -diameter trays.  
Then next comes the counter -current  trays.  The purpose of counter -current  trays is to 
provide conductive heat transfer through their  upper surfaces in order to war m the wet 
material supported above.  Another purpose is to provide conductive heat transfer 
through their lower surfaces in order  to superheat direct streams swirling  below.  Also , 
these  counter current trays provide apertures to allow the direct stream to evenly ascend 
up through the trays and into the meal supported above.  
 
The steam is typically held at 10.5 kg/cm2 pressure within the countercurrent trays, 
providing a surface temperature of 185°C. Steam condenses within the trays, providing 
its latent heat to maintain the 185°C tray surface temperature and allowing heat to be 
conducted into the meal layer above and transferred into the direct steam swirling below. 
A DT will have from one to four countercurrent trays. The number of countercurrent 
trays is selected to achieve a target residence time of the meal contacting stripping steam, 
typically 25 to 30 min for soy bean meal and 60 to 90 min for rapeseed meal. The 
countercurrent trays are located directly under pre -desolventizing trays in center of DT. 
The apertures in trays must allow direct steam swirling below to pass through tray and 
into the meal supported above . There are three designs of countercurrent trays with 
differing apertures for allowing the ascending direct steam to pass through. Greater open 
area in the countercurrent trays allows for more uniform steam distribution and has been 
the trend in modern DT  design. The original countercurrent tray design used hollow stay -
bolts as apertures and generally had 1 to 2% open area for the vapors to ascend upward. 
A later design used hollow stay -pipes capped by a perforated plate, with generally 2 to 
4% open area f or vapors to ascend upward. The latest design uses hollow stay -pipes 
capped with stainless steel slotted screens, with generally 7 to 10% open area for the 
vapors to ascend upward. The steam is typically held at in this case also at 10.5 kg per 
centimeter square pressure  within the counter -current  trays providing a surface 
temperature of about 185 degrees Celsius.  Steam  condenses within the trays provides it 
is providing it is a latent heat to maintain  about a 185 -degree  Celsius tray surface 
temperature an d allow  heat to be conducted  into the meal layer above and transferred  into 
the direct steam below . 
The DT sparge tray has the dual purpose of providing a uniform means of introducing 
direct steam into the meal layer, and providing conductive heat transfe r through its upper 
surface to the wet material supported above. The direct steam introduced through the 
sparge tray provides approximately 75% of the total heat required for desolventizing and 
heating the meal in the DT. The sparge tray is typically desig ned with a plurality of 
apertures across its entire upper surface to evenly introduce direct steam into the meal. 
The size and quantity of apertures is calculated based upon the anticipated direct steam 
flow rate to provide a pressure drop of 0.35 to 0.70 bar. The direct steam supply is 10 
barg pressure saturated steam (185°C) and after passing through a flow control valve, its 
quality changes to 0.35 - 0.70 bar pressure superheated steam (150 -160°C). Therefore, 
the upper surface of the sparge tray is maint ained at approximately 155°C.  
 
Finally, that is to summarize the functioning of the desolventizing and toasting  that is the 
DT system , in the pre-desolventizing  trays solvent laden meal enters the DT at  a 
temperature of 60 degrees  Celsius and contains 25 to 3 5 percent weight  solvent.  The 
solvent -laden  meal is then stirred  across the surface of the pre-desolventizing  trays  by 
rotating sweeps . A shallow layer of around 150 to 300 mm meal depth is held above  each 
tray. M eal temperatu re is increased to approximately 68 degrees  Celsius . Approximately 
10 to 25 percent of the solvent is evaporated on the pre-desolventizing  trays. Then in the 
counter current trays material exists the pre-desolventizing  trays of the  DT and falls onto 
the top of the counter current tray.   Since most of the heat is transferred into the meal 
layer by condensation of direct steam , a deep layer of 1000 to 1200 mm meal depth is 
held above the tray.  The solvent -laden  meal is stirred above the top counter current tray 
by the rotating sweeps . The direct steam passes from below up through  apertures  in the 
counter current trays . 
 
As the direct steam penetrates the upper meal layer, it reaches the solvent -laden meal and 
condenses, providing direct latent heat to evaporate the solvent, which exits the meal 
layer as vapor. The condensation of steam causes the meal exiting the tray to be wet, 
typically in the range of 17 –21% moisture. Once the wet meal exits the top 
countercurrent tray, it has had over 99% of its solvent removed. On the remaining 
countercurrent trays and the sparge tray, the meal is typically held in a 1000 mm -deep 
layer, in order to provide residence time to allow solvent stripping and toasting. The wet 
meal is stirred above each tray by rotating sweeps. The final desolventising takes place as 
the ascending steam passing through the meal slowly strips out the final trac es of residual 
solvent, down to 100 –500 ppm. The meal temperature increases from 100 to 105 –110°C 
and the meal moisture decreases approximately 1% before the meal discharges from the 
sparge tray. The meal color darkens slightly, providing the meal with a t oasted color. For 
soybeans, anti -nutritional factors like trypsin inhibitors & urease are reduced on these 
trays by maintaining meal moisture and temperature elevated for a period of time.  
 
Then comes the drying and cooling process which  is DC process . After the solvent -laden 
material is desolventised, it is conveyed to the DC. The material entering the DC is 
typically at the DT exit temperature of 108°C, and contains 18 –20% moisture (for 
soybeans). The primary purposes of the DC are to reduce the moisture  in the meal to 
within trading rule limits and to lower the meal temperature prior to storage. DCs are 
vertical, cylindrical vessels with a multitude of horizontal trays. The desolventised 
material enters at the top and is supported by the tray. The materi al is mixed above each 
tray and conveyed downward from tray to tray by agitating sweeps anchored to a central 
rotating shaft. So, a drying and cooling system , that is the  DC system contains stream 
drying trays, air dryin g trays, and air cooling trays.  
 
The steam -drying trays of the DC are designed with an upper plate, lower plate and 
structural members between them designed to hold pressurized steam. The steam -drying 
trays have the purpose of providing conductive heat transfer through their upper surface 
to the wet meal supported above. The steam is typically held at 10.5 kg/cm2 pressure 
within the steam -drying trays, providing a surface temperature of 185°C. Steam 
condenses within the trays, providing its latent heat to maintain the 185°C tray surface 
temperature and allowing heat to be conducted into the wet meal layer above. A  DC may 
have as many as five steam -drying trays, or as few as none. The water vapour evaporated 
from the meal can be compressed in an ejector and have its heat recovered within the 
solvent extraction plant.  
 
The air -drying trays of the DC are designed wit h an upper plate, lower plate, and 
structural members between them designed to hold low -pressure air. The air -drying trays 
are designed with a plurality of apertures across their entire upper surface in order to 
introduce air into the meal. The air supplie d to each air -drying tray is first filtered to 
remove dust and then pressurized using a centrifugal blower. The air for the dryer trays is 
passed through a steam -heated coil between the blower and the entrance to the trays. 
After the air enters the trays, it flows upward through the meal at a nominal velocity of 
14–21 m/min, partially fluidizing the meal. The meal evaporatively cools and the released 
moisture is transferred to the ascending air. The warm, damp air exits the top of the meal 
layer and then mo ves through the sidewall of the DC to a cyclone collector in order to 
remove dust prior to discharge to the atmosphere.  
 
The major source of heat for the evaporation of the moisture in the meal is the high 
temperature of the meal exiting the DT or the DC steam -drying trays. When the meal 
drops in temperature from 108 to 38°C, the heat provided is adequate to reduce the meal 
moisture by 6.5%. For soybean meal, the trading rule moisture limit is 12.5%; therefore, 
if the incoming moisture from the DT, or the DC steam -drying trays, does not exceed 
19%, the DC will typically require no additional evaporative heat source in order to dry 
the meal. If additional heat is required to evaporate moisture from the meal, the air  
entering the meal dryer trays can be heate d up to  150°C prior to entering  the air -drying 
trays. The heat source may be recovered flash steam, hot glycol –water solution                                      
(oil cooler) , or fresh steam.  
 
The construction and working of air -cooling trays is similar to the air -drying trays. 
Ambient air is heated by approximately 5 °C by the energy of the blower before it blows 
into the air -cooling trays of the DC. The meal cools to within approximately 5 °C of the 
air temperature passing through the meal. Therefore, t he temperature of the meal exiting 
the DC is typically cooled to within 10°C of ambient air. A suction blower fitted 
downstream of the DC can thus reduce exit meal temperatures by up to 5 °C by avoiding 
the heating energy of the upstream blower. The dry co ol meal is conveyed from the DC 
outside the solvent extraction plant to allow size reduction and then on to meal storage. It 
is important to properly dry and cool the meal in order to prevent continued evaporative 
cooling in storage or transport, which wil l cause reduced flow ability , solidification, and 
bridging of the meal inside storage and transport vessels.  
 
Then finally, the flash desolventization  and cooling process which we discussed  a little 
bit. The alternative process path for de -oiled oilseed material leaving the solvent 
extraction process is flash desolventizing and cooling. The de -oiled oil seed temperature 
is at 55 to  60 degrees  Celsius, liquid solvent 25  to 35 percent , and moisture 8 to 10 
percent.  It is passed through  here where the high -velocity  stream of solvent -superheated  
vapors are at 150 degree Celsius .  The superheated solvent vapors convey the material in 
a loop -shaped tube at approximately 20 m/sec velocity. Specific heat in the su perheated 
solvent vapor stream is given up to provide the latent heat for the liquid solvent and some 
moisture in the material stream to evaporate. Processing time is approximately 2 sec. And 
the superheated solvent stream comes out at around 110 degrees C elsius. F inally, the de -
oiled cake when it is processed come s out of the flash desolventization coolers its 
temperature is around 110 to 105  degrees Celsius , the liquid solvent may be less than 1 
percent  or so , and the moisture content will be 6 to 8 perce nt.  The superheated solvent 
steam that comes out through the blower and heater  is recycled.  
 
The solvent level of 1 to 2% is too high to safely handle this flash -desolventized  material. 
Therefore, it is further conveyed into a flake stripper vessel and contacted with 
superheated steam to strip out the remaining solvent down to less than 2000 ppm. The 
flake stripper vessel may be a vertical tray type vessel, or horizontal convey or type 
vessel, or horizontal paddle mixer type vessel. To maintain the PDI of the meal as high as 
possible, none of the superheated steam can condense. Therefore, it is critical that this 
flake stripper vessel is traced with hot water and very well insula ted. For protein isolates 
and specialty flour applications, the desired PDI is as high as possible                                                          
(85 to 90 PDI). In these cases, heated surfaces in the flake stripper are maintained at 90 to 
100 °C . For protein concentrate applications, the desired PDI is commonly around 70 
PDI. In this case, moisture is sprayed into the flake stripper, and/or the heated surfaces 
are operated at higher temperatures.  
 
The temperature of the flash -desolventized mater ial exiting the flake stripper is typically 
90 to 100°C. This temperature is reduced to within 10 to 20°C of ambient by passing air 
through the material. In small -capacity plants, this cooling is accomplished in a dilute 
phase pneumatic transport system, w hile in large -capacity plants, this is accomplished in 
a DC (as described earlier). The cool product is commonly referred to as white flakes. 
For white flakes going into specialty soy flour applications, the air used in the cooling 
process must be filtered  through a biological filter to remove any bacteria. For white 
flakes going into a protein concentrates or protein isolates process, this is not critical as 
any bacteria will be eliminated downstream. For protein concentrate applications the 
integrity of t he flake shape is important and fine material needs to be screened away. For 
specialty flour applications and protein isolates applications, maintaining the shape of the 
flash desolventized material is not important, as size reduction is a normal process s tep 
downstream.  
 
I will summarize this lecture by saying that the oil extraction process  generates  miscella 
and oil meal  which can require further processing . Distillation, evaporation , membrane  
filtration , and absorption are  the oil recovery methods from  miscella.  The desolventizing, 
toasting, drying , and cooling process is used for removing solvent from  the de -oiled oil 
seed material that is a meal and recovered for reuse. The flash  desolventizing and cooling 
process remove d the solvent very quickly fro m the de -oiled  oilseed material and 
recovered it for reuse without moisture addition to protecting  the integrity of the proteins.  
  
 
 
And these are the references used in this lecture.  Thank  you very much for your patience 
hearing.  Thank you.  