Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 05: Solvent Extraction of Edible Oils  
Lecture 2 1: Oil Extraction Principle and Mechanism  
 
 
Hello everybody.  Namaskar.  We are now in the fifth module of this course , and this fifth 
module in the next five lectures, we will talk about solvent extraction of edible oil.  Today's 
lecture  will discuss  oil extraction principles and mechanisms in general .  
 
In general , oil seed processing, oil extraction techniques, solvent extraction, type of mass  
transfer operations , and Fick's law of diffusion.  
 
 
 
You know the oil seeds have been milled for a long time, but recently , with the increase  in 
soybean prod uction , seed oils have become the major group of edible oils. The production 
of edible seed oils required several unit operations , from the pretreatment  to refining the 
extracted oil.  In the earlier classes , we also discussed that the seed must first be subjected 
to various pretreatments for better extraction yield and o il quality.  Then, after the 
pretreatment, these oil seeds are subjected to extraction technique either  by pressing or 
solvent extraction or by both prepress solvent extraction processes . And finally, the oil 
which is obtained by these processes , like crude oil , is sent to the next step of refining.  
 
So, our country's main oil seeds are raw materials used for edible oil extraction , including  
sunflower seeds, soybeans, sesame, palm seeds,  rapeseed, olive seeds , and cotton seeds .  
 
 
If you want to understand solvent extraction technology, this oil extraction  from oil seeds 
using  a non-polar solvent is a solid -liquid extraction process . The transfer of oil from the 
solid to the surrounding oil solvent solution , commonly known as miscella,  involves three 
steps.  And what are those steps?  They are diffusion of the solvent into the solid, dissolution 
of oil droplets in the solvent , and distribution  of the oil from the solid particles to the 
surrounding liquids.   
 
Solvent extraction is a common technique used to extract edible oil from various oil seeds 
such as soybean, sunflower, rapeseed, peanut , etc. The process involves dissolving the oil-
containing materials in a solvent, separating the oil from the rest of the plant material.  The 
solvent is then evaporated , leaving behind the extracted oils.  So, you can see in the figure 
here that the prepared oil seed material is sent to the extractor, where direct and intimate 
contact is allowed between th e prepared seed material and solvent.  Then  oil gets dissolved 
into the solvent , and we finally  get the miscella, a  mixture of solvent and oil.  Now, this 
miscella is passed to the distillation unit where this solvent is evaporated , and for reuse , we 
get the  crude oil which is finally sent to the refining process . On the other end , the meal 
obtained after the extraction of  the oil seed material also has a significant amount of solvent 
in it.  So, this meal is sent to the desolventizer toaster or desolventization process , where 
the solvent is removed from the meal , and then this meal is treated for feed and  food 
materials . 
 
So, overall , the steps involved in the solvent extraction of feedable oil , as I told you , the 
preparation of oil seeds okay . The oil seeds are cleaned and pretreated for extraction , and 
this may involve removing impurities,  foreign matter, damaged roots,  etc. this step is very 
important as far as the  quality of the oil is concerned.  Then , flaking of the grind flaking or 
grinding  of the oil seeds is done to increase  their surface area and make them more 
receptive to the solvent extraction process.  Finally, the heart of the whole process is 
extraction with a solvent . The  flake or  ground oil seeds are then mixed with a solvent such 
as hexane or ethanol to dissolve  the oil from the oil seeds , forming a mixture called 
miscella.  The miscella is then separated from the solid materials using mechanical or 
centrifugal  methods. The distillation of the miscella in all it is subjected to is done to 
recover the solvent from the solvent oil mixture.  And then , the extracted oil obtained by 
this process is known as cooled crude oil , and then this natural  oil is sent to the next steps 
of the refining process to remove various  impurities that might  be present in the oil.  Finally , 
the refined oil is sent to the packaging of refined oil , or sometimes , in some cases , crude 
oil or crude virgin oil is shipped  to the packaging for further use and  consumption.  
 
 
This oil extraction process  involves the mass transfer of oil from oil seeds to  the solvent.  
So, it is important to know about the mass transfer principles in general.  Mass transfer 
refers to the transfer of a species in the presence of a concentration  gradient of the species.  
Under a concentrati on gradient mass transfer can occur by either diffusion or by 
convection.  Diffusion refers to the mass transfer that occurs through a stationary solid or 
fluid  in which the concentration gradient exist.  Whereas, the convection refers to the mass 
transfer t hat occurs across a moving fluid.  The fluid is here in this case moving in which a 
concentration gradient exist.  The primary driving force for the mass transfer is 
concentration difference.  When a system contains two or more components whose 
concentration varies from point to point  there is a natural tendency for mass to transfer 
from one point to the other.  Mass transfer requires the presence of two regions at different 
chemical composition  and mass transfer refers to the movement of chemical species 
prese nt in the medium.  The transfer of mass within a fluid mixture or a cross phase 
boundary is a process that  plays a major role in many industrial processes.  Mass transfer 
may occur in a gas mixture, a solid solution or solid.  Mass transfer occurs when there is a 
gradient in the concentration of a species and the  material moves from one place to other 
place.  The basic mechanism are the same whether the phase is a gas, liquid or solid.   
 
 
If we discuss types of mass transfer operations that is on a very broad basis all the mass  
transfers operations can be classified into four major types.  These are the direct contact of 
two immiscible phases, phases separated by a membrane, direct  contact of visible phases 
and use of surface phenomena.  In the direct contact of two immiscible phases this occurs 
during edible oil extraction using  solvent.  There is a direct contact of two immiscible 
phases.  During the extraction process the miscella which is a combination of oil and solvent  
that and the solid phase that is oil safe  materials are in direct contact with each  other.  The 
oil molecules diffuse from the solid phase to the solvent phase which is an example of  mass 
transfer between immiscible phases.  The solvent phase containing the dissolved oil is then 
separated from the solid phase  using mechanical or centrifugal methods.   
 
In the case of direct contact of two immiscible phases here there is a it refers to the physical  
contact between two fluids that are unable to mix or dissolve in each other.  In the case of 
edible oil extraction the two immiscible phases are the oil containing material  like oil seeds 
and the solvent such as hexane.  So, here these two are immiscible to each other.  Since the 
oil and solvent are immiscible they form separate phases when they come into contact.  
During the extraction process the oil containing material is mixed with the solvent allowing  
the oil to dissolve into the solvent phase.  This creates a mixture called micelle which 
contains both the solvent and the extracted  oil. Other operations where extractions are done 
using the concept of direct contact of two  immiscible phases may be gas -gas or gas -liquid, 
gas-solid, liquid -liquid, liquid -solid, solid -solid  and so on.  That is these two phases may be 
in different states of matter either it may  be gas -liquid,  liquid -liquid, liquid -solid and so on.   
 
So, let us see little bit more that gas -gas that is all gases are completely soluble in  each 
other and this category is not practically realized is very rare in actual step . But the gas -
liquid is an  important phase of mass transfer operations that is gas -liquid  mass transfer 
operations involve the transfer of a gas to or from a liquid.  The rate of mass transfer 
depends on several factors such as the concentration difference  of the gas in the gas and 
liquid phases, the surface area of the interface between the  two phases, the diffusivity of 
the gas in the liquid and the agitation level of the  medium.  And the example of this type of 
mass transfer operation includes removal of ammonia from  a mixture of a mmonia air by 
the means of liquid water.  
 
So, this gas -liquid mass transfer operations involves different phenomena like absorption,  
stripping, distillation and extraction.  In absorption, a gas is dissolved in a liquid from a 
solution.  This process is us ed to remove gases such as carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulphide 
and ammonia from a gas stream.  Stripping is the opposite of absorption where a gas is 
removed from a liquid by passing  another gas over it.  This process is used to remove 
volatile organic compounds from wastewater.  Distillation is a process that involves the 
separation of components of a mixture based  on their boiling points.  In gas -liquid 
distillation, a liquid mixture is heated and the vapour that is generated  is condensed and 
collected.  In extraction, a gas is removed from a liquid by contacting the liquid with a 
solvent that  is more soluble to the gas.  This process is used to recover solvents and 
chemicals from the process streams.   
 
Now, in gas -solid mass transfer operation, this refer s to the transfer of gas molecules  
between gas phase and a solid phase.  Examples include absorption, desorption, 
sublimation, drying and combustion.  Absorption involves the deposition of gas molecules 
onto a solid surface where they  adhere to the surface b y physical or chemical interactions.  
Sublimation is the opposite of adsorption where gas molecules are released from a solid  
surface.  Sublimation is the direct conversion of a solid to a gas without passing through the  
liquid phase.  Drying involves the rem oval of moisture from a solid by the transfer of water 
molecules  to a gas phase.   
 
 
Liquid -Liquid mass transfer operations in this case separation involving the contact of two 
immiscible or two insoluble liquid phases are known as liquid extraction.  An ex ample of 
this process includes extraction, crystallization, liquid -liquid chromatography,  emulsion 
formation and separation. Extraction involves the transfer of a solute from one liquid phase 
to another using a solvent.  Crystallization involves the precipi tation of a solute from a 
liquid phase by cooling,  evaporation or addition of a non -solvent.  Liquid -liquid 
chromatography involves the separation of components of a liquid mixture  using a 
stationary phase and a mobile phase.  Emulsion formation involves the  mixing of two 
immiscible liquids to form a stable mixture  such as in the production of solid dressing or 
in case of cosmetics.   
 
 
Liquid -solid operation refers to the transfer of solutes or particles between a liquid phase  
and a solid surface.  Examples here include extraction, crystallization, liquid -liquid 
chromatography, emulsion formation  and separation.  Filtration involves the separation of 
solid particles from a liquid phase by passing the  mixture through a porous medium.  Wine 
exchange involves the transfer of one ions between the liquid phase and a solid  phase.  
Leaching involves the extraction of solutes from a solid phase by contacting it with the  
liquid phase.  Adsorption involves the deposition of solutes from a liquid phase into a solid 
surface w here they adhere by physical or chemical interactions.  Precipitation  involves the 
formation of a solid phase from a liquid phase by the addition  of a precipitating agent.  
 
Solid -solid mass transfer operation refers to the transfer of solutes or particles between  two 
solids.  Examples of this include roasting, calcination, sintering and crystallization.  
Roasting  involves the heating of a solid phase to convert it into another form.  Calcination 
involves the heating of a solid phase to drive off volatile compo unds.  Sintering involves 
the heating of a solid phase to form a solid mass from a smaller  particles.  Crystallization 
refers to the formation of a crystalline solid form from a solution or  a melt.   
 
Now, after having understood these different processes, s eparation process or transfer  
processes, different phases etc, let us now consider Fick's law of diffusion  because Fick's 
law of mass transfer is a fundamental principle in the field of transport  phenomena that 
describes the rate of diffusion of a chemical  species through a medium.  It states that the 
rate of mass transfer through a medium is proportional to the concentration  gradient of the 
species and the diffusivity coefficient of the species in the medium. In this figure it is shown 
that is a medium of where there are high concentration materials, sometime it diffuses into 
and finally, it may come to  the low concentration material.  So, from high concentration the 
material transferred is become low concentration.  So, mathematically Fic k's law is 
expressed as  
ğ½= âˆ’ğ·(ğ‘‘ğ¶
ğ‘‘ğ‘¥) 
where J is the mass flux that is the amount of mass transferred per unit time per  unit area.  
D is the diffusivity coefficient that is the measure of how fast the species can diffuse  
through the medium and C is the co ncentration of the species and x is the distance.  The 
negative sign in this figure indicates that the mass transfer occurs in the direction  of 
decreasing concentration that is the high concentration is coming to a lower concentration.   
 
So, let us see app lication of the Fick's law in edible oil extraction process.  Based on Fick's 
law the solvent diffuses into the solid matrix and extracts the oil  which then dissolves in 
the solvent and is separated from the solid matrix.  In the equation J is equal to minus  D 
multiplied by dC by dx, the J represents the flux of  a solvent and in this case that is hexane 
into the solid matrix and the D represents  the diffusion coefficient of the solvent in the 
solid matrix.  The concentration of the solvent C is a function of both the time and distance 
x into the solid  matrix.  Therefore the concentration gradient dC by dx represents the change 
in concentration  of the solvent with respect to distance into the solid matrix.  The negative 
sign indicates that the flux of the solvent  is in the opposite direction  to the concentration 
gradient which means that the solvent flows from the regions of  high concentration to the 
low concentrations.  
 
 
 
 
  
Then let us talk about equimolar counter diffusion.  The concept of equimolar counter 
diffusion can be applied to liquid -liquid extraction  processes including oil extraction.  In 
this case two immiscible liquids such as solvent and the oil are contacted and allowed  to 
diffuse through each other in opposite di rections.  When the two liquids are present in 
equimolar amounts, they will diffuse through each other  at equal rates resulting in a 
uniform concentration profile across the interface between the two  liquids.  And this can be 
expressed mathematically  
ğ‘ğ´= ğ·ğ´ğµ(ğ¶ğ´1âˆ’ğ¶ğ´2)
ğ‘§2âˆ’ğ‘§1 
ğ‘ğ´= ğ·ğ´ğµğ¶ğ‘ğ‘£(ğ‘¥ğ´1âˆ’ğ‘¥ğ´2)
ğ‘§2âˆ’ğ‘§1 
ğ‘ğ‘ğ‘£= (ğœŒ
ğ‘€)
ğ‘ğ‘£=(ğœŒ1
ğ‘€1+ğœŒ2
ğ‘€2)/2 
Can you can see from this figure is the average  of or average total concentration  of A plus 
B in kg mole per cubic meter.  M1 is the average molecular weight of the solution at point 
1 in kg mass per kg mole,  rho 1 is the average density of the solution in kg cubic meter at 
point 1.   
 
 
Now, let us discuss the diffusion of component through non diffusing medium, the 
diffusion  of one component into another through a medium that is non diffusing.  And the 
most important case of diffusion in liquid is that where solute A is diffusing  and the solvent 
B is stagnant or non diffusing.  
ğ‘ğ´= ğ·ğ´ğµğ¶ğ‘ğ‘£(ğ‘¥ğ´1âˆ’ğ‘¥ğ´2)
(ğ‘§2âˆ’ğ‘§1)ğ‘¥ğµğ‘€ 
ğ‘¥ğµğ‘€= (ğ‘¥ğµ1âˆ’ğ‘¥ğµ2)
ğ‘™ğ‘›(ğ‘¥ğµ2/ğ‘¥ğµ1) 
Note that,  xA1 + x B1 + x B2 = 1 
ğ‘ğ´= ğ·ğ´ğµ(ğ‘ğ´1âˆ’ğ‘ğ´2)
(ğ‘§2âˆ’ğ‘§1) 
 
In the diffusion through non diffusion component particularly if we see understand it in the  
case of solvent extraction process, the diffusion of solute such as oil components through 
a non diffusing solvent is a common occurrence.  For example, when hexane is used as a 
solvent to extract oil from the seeds, the oil component  diffuse through the hexane solvent 
to reach the surface of the seed particles where they  are extracted.  In this case the hexane 
solvent can be considered the non diffusing component since it does  not have any 
significant mass transfer resistance to the oil components.  The oil components on the other 
hand are the diffusing component since they need to overcome  the resistance of the h exane 
solvent to diffuse through it.  The diffusion process can be described using Fick's law of 
diffusion which is states  that the flux of a component is proportional to its concentration 
gradient.  And in this case the concentration gradient of the oil com ponent within the hexane 
solvent  drives the diffusion process causing the oil components to move towards the 
surface of  the seed particles when they can where they can be extracted.  
 
 So, finally, I would like to summarize this lecture that as edible oil  extraction involves the 
mechanical and solvent extraction steps.  Solvent oil extraction involve the preparation of 
the oilseeds  material, flaking, grindin g of oilseed and extraction with a solvent distillation 
of the missile or refining and  packaging.  And this is a typical case of that is the mass 
transfer operation where the liquid solid  extraction takes place.  Even liquid -liquid 
extractions gas that is a even gas -solid, liquid -solid or liquid -solid  are the various general 
diffusion process.  But in this c ase of the solvent extraction process at least this in the case 
of extraction  you can say it is the liquid solid or then finally, distillation of the missile 
where  that is even that solvent is evaporated into the form of gases etc . So, this it is in order 
to have a proper process efficiency to control the process to have  proper equipment design 
etcetera.  It is essential to understand the mechanism of the extraction process and that we 
discussed  in this lecture.   
 
 
These are the references which is used in this preparing this lecture.  This thank you very 
much for your consideration.  
