Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 6 : Edible Oils Refining  
Lecture 27: Clarification and Degumming  
 
Hello everybody, Namaste.  Now, in this lecture 27 today we shall dis cuss about 
Clarification and Deg umming. 
 
The concept which I will cover today is the crude oil clarifica tion and mainly the 
filtration process, what are the different methods and equipment that are used for 
filtration of  oil.  Then another important aspect of oil refining that is the  degumm ing 
process, what is the  principles of it and mechanis m, then technology of oil degumm ing 
and we will also discuss  degumm ing methods and equipment ok.   
 
In the earlier class I gave you an overview of the oil refining process and what are 
the  various impurities which are removed at different stages.  So, the same just to refresh 
your memory you see that these are the major steps that is  the clarification, degumming, 
neutralization, bleaching and deodorization, these are the  important operations or steps  in 
oil refining process ok.  
 
So, the first step refining of oil in fact, starts with t he clarification of oil because  
depending upon the process that is used for oil extract ion whether it is a mechanical 
process or chemical process there are certain impurities that is the other than the 
triglyceride  also  they get extracted along with the oil and they come into the crude oil 
and I discussed  all these things in that.  So, in fact, that is before sending it to the for the  
food usage this oil need to be  refined and the refining of the oil starts straight aw ay from 
the clarification that is when the oil is kept in the storage tank then sometime it se ttles the 
impurities insoluble impurities etcetera they settle into the bottom and we say that some  
clarification has been  used.  
But the majorly that is it is aga in there are certain  equipment which are used that 
is these are the filtration.  So, filtration is a process used to remove impurities an d other 
unwanted particles from  the edible oil and the filter medium captures the impurities 
leaving the oil clean and clear  as you can see here that is the oil is subjected  to some sort 
of filter medium.  
So, the impurities are retained on the filter and the cle ar oil is allowed to percolate 
through.  So, various filter aids which are used in the filtrati on process they ar e diatomite, 
perlite or cellulose in conjunction with the permeable filters for the surface protection.  
The filtration process is usually repeated multiple t imes to ensure that all the oil  is 
clarified all the impurities are removed to the extent pos sible  and after the filtration 
process the oil may be further processed such as by deodorization, hydrogenation 
etcetera.  And normally it is sent to the other refining process, b ut there are certain oils 
which  are one stage filtration double filter, triple fil tered oil ther e also sometime after 
packaging  they are sent to the market particularly for mustard oil etcetera because the 
people like  the pungent test of the mustard oil and then olive oil and so on.   
 
Then now let us see what are the different filtration proces ses that is type of 
filtration methods which are used in the edible  oil industry. They include gravity filtration 
means in this case the oil is poured into a container with  a filter at the bottom and the 
impurities are separated from the o il due to the gravity  and collected in the filters.  Then 
the other method is vacuum filtration the oil is pour ed into a container and vacuum is 
applied which pulls the impurities through the filter medium and also  the other another 
common method important  method is pressure filtration.  In this oil is forced through the 
filter medium under pressur e which suppress the impurities  from the oil ok.   
 
Now, let us see the details of this that is some gravity filter equipment and system 
is  also shown here.  Se e this gravity filtration is a method used in edible oi l refining to 
remove impurities  and s olid particles from the oil. In this case the oil is poured as I told 
you earlier also into a container which contains  a filter medium such as diatomaceous  
earth or  cellulose which absorbs impurities and allows  the clean oil to pass through.  The 
process is commonly used in the refining of oil such as soybean oil, sunflower oil, canola 
oil etcetera.  It is a relatively simple and cost effective method for rem oving impurities 
and improving the quality of the oil you can see here some the pictures are shown.  Then 
the vacuum filtration here they told you the it is a process used in the edible  oil refining 
industry.  In this case the oil is passed through a filt er under a vacuum which helps to 
remove any unwanted  particles and improve the ov erall quality of the oil. The process 
can also be used to remove any remaining water from the oil which can cause  otherwise 
spoilage if not removed.   
 
Vacuum filtration is typically done after the oil has been degummed, neutralized 
and  bleached particularly that is in during the bleaching process the bleaching earth 
etcetera  which is done.  So, that is also removed using vacuum filtration.  So, before 
packaging this these filters vacuum filtration is added.   
 
Then pressure filtration then it is a method  used in the refining oil. In this case the 
oil is typically passed through a filter press which consists of a series  of plates with a 
filter medium s uch as filter cloth or paper in between then that you can  see here in this 
figure ok.  The plates are squeezed together under pressure which forces the  oil through 
the filter medium and traps the impurities between it ok.  This method is commonly used 
to remove particles such as sand,  clay and other debris that may  be present in the oil.  The 
filtered oil is then ready for further processing or refining such as degumming, 
neutralization and so on.   
 
As far as the filtration equipments  are concerned various syst ems or equipment 
few of them I showe d you in the earlier slides. Then some are there they are used in the 
oil refining by  the industry and they include press, plate and frame filter press, leaf filter, 
centrifugal separator, vacu um drum,  membrane filter press, bag filters and so on.   
 
So, plate and frame filter press as you can see here in this figure that is shown 
schematic  of a plane and frame filter.  In this case a plate and frame is there ok and this 
filtration equipment is commonly  used in the edible oil industry you can say these are the 
different plates and plates.  So, where the it works by passing the oil through a series of 
filter plates which are  typically made of cloth or paper which remove the impurities and 
solid particles.  The oil as you can see this arrow that is oil is passed through the press 
using pressure  and the filtered oil is collec ted for further refining ok. The plate and frame 
design allows for easy replacement of the filter media making it  a cost  effective solution 
for edible oil refining.   
 
Leaf filter operates by passing the oil through a series of f ilter elements usually 
made of metal or mesh as you can see here in this figure that is shown ok.  And these 
filters that is leaf filters they remove the i mpurities it is popular choice in edible oil 
industries it can be a vertical pressure leaf filter or a horizontal pressure  leaf filters.  The 
advantages of this system are it has high efficiency tha t is the filtration efficiency is high 
in this  case, it has a compact design it requires a less space and it has a ease of 
maintenance ok.   
 
Then centrifugal separator as you can see in the figure provided in the slide it 
works by spinning the oil mixture at high speed in a container  causing the hea vier 
impurities  to be separated due to the centrifugal force ok. This is you see it spins here the 
separated impurities are t hen removed while the purified oil is collected for further 
refining ok.  This is the oil discharge comes impurities are collected separately.  The 
centrifugal separators are commonly used in edible oil refining industry due to their 
ability to handle large volumes of oil and their high  separation efficiency.   
 
Vacuum drum filter again schematic of the vacuum drum filt er is shown here in 
this figure  it operates by passing the oil through a rotating drum that is partially 
submerged in a wet of filtrate.  The drum is covered with a filte r media such as cloth or  
paper which removes impurities  and s olid particles from the oil. As the drum rotates it is 
partially lifted out of the w et creating a vacuum that draws  the filtered oil through the 
filter media and into the collection area.  The va cuum drum filter is a continuous 
operation and the filtere d oil is collected for further refining.  Vacuum drum filters are 
commonly used in edible oil refining industry due to their high filtration efficiency and 
ability to handle large amount of oil.   
 
Membrane filter press ok, membrane separation process is  earlier also we have 
discussed  in this course ok.  It works on the by passing the oil through a series of filter 
plates you can see here  in this figure that is and these filter plates are made of semi 
permeable membranes which selectively removes the impurities and solid particles and 
allows the  clear oil to pass through.  
The oil is forced through the filter plates under pressure and  the filtered oil is 
collected on the other side of the membrane.  T he working principle of a membrane filter 
press is ba sed on the differential says in  the pressure on either side of the semi permeable 
membrane.  The membrane filter press is a continuous operation and it is  known for its 
high filtration efficiency.  Vac f ilters again you can see here in this figure it i s very 
popular filter that the system typically consist of a filter housing that contains filter bags 
made up of a porous  material such as polypropylene or nylon.  As the oil is pumped 
through the system it passes thro ugh the filter bags which traps  any solid contaminant 
while allowing the p urified oil to pass through.  
 
Bag filters are a cost effective and efficient way to remove impurities from edible 
oil and  they  can be used in a variety of applications including vegetable oil refining, 
biodiesel  production and animal fat processing etcetera ok.  So, after this clarification 
that is at least suspended and dissolved solids etcetera that is colloidally dissolved or  
other suspended solids or impurities dust all those things  are removed.  Then this filtered 
oil is a sent for the degumming process ok.   
 
And in the degumming as the name itself in case that is th e gum gums are 
removal of gums degumming.  Degumming is a process used in the production of 
vegetable oil a nd most of the this is soyabean  oil and such other oil ground nut and all 
those things which has high amount of  gums  and other impurities. The process typically 
involves treating the oil with wat er and an acid or an alkali to neutralize the gums and 
which are then separated from the oil.  Degumming can also be done using enzymes or 
other chemical treatments . Degumming is used to improve impurities such as 
phospholipids from the crude oil ok.  And it degummi ng process improves the quality 
and stability of the oil and is an important step I told you earlier also in the oil refining 
process it is a very very important step ok.   
 
So, the objective of the degumming process aims of the degumming obviously, 
they told you earlier also it the emulsifying action of the phosph olipid will increase if the 
oil losses during the alkali refin ing if they are not removed. So, the first and most 
important purpose of the degumming process is to remove  the phospholipids or which are 
also commonly known as gums.  Otherwise if they are not removed then these gums lead 
brown discoloration of oil after heating during deodorization process.  The salts may be 
formed with copper, magnesium, calcium and iron ac celerating oxidative degradation of 
the oil.  Certain phospholipids such as lecithin find widespread industrial application 
otherwise  it goes as a waste in the oil.  So, these is a phospholipids these gums etcetera 
use and th e gums that is they are further  processed into further preparation of 
phospholipids and this phospholipi ds that is further preparation of lecithin which is a 
emulsifier used commerc ially in many food products. So, if we see that categorize that 
the gums which are p resent in edible veget able oils  they are of two types mainly 
hydratable gums and non -hydratable gums.  Hydratable gums are those which are easy to 
remove by simple water washing and this step is generally done at the oil extraction plant 
itself that is in the oil extraction pla nts  this oil crude oil is treated with water alright and 
then this water soluble or that is a I  can say that the hydratable gums which they form the 
emulsifier they form the precipitate  they get agglomerated at the get precipitated and 
removed.  So, the se are the they are this is done in the water ex traction plant itself and 
then after removing hydratable gums the oil is sent to the  the non -hydratable gums which 
are hard to remove from the oil they require the use of a acid to convert to the non -
hydratab le  gums to hydratable gums for complete removal and this part removal of 
treatment with acid  general ly done at the refining plant. So, different water de gum 
different de gumming processes acc ordingly they include water de gumming, acid 
degumming, enzym atic de gumming and membrane de gumming.  So, these different 
methods can  be used to remove the gums.  
 
So, let us see first the water de gumming process you can see here in the figure 
that is there is a system this is a reactor vessel in this hot  oil is coming and it is mixed 
with the water that is simple thing and after that the gums which are performed that is  the 
warm water at the temperature of around 80 to 85 degree Ce lsius is mixed in the reaction 
medium with the water and then it is agitate d slowly for approximately 20 minutes.  The 
water dosage used is a usually based upon the expected amount of phospholipids that is 
phospholipids content of the crude oil.  So, the what happens when it is mixed with water 
and ho t water and oil and allowed t o stay for some time.  So, the hydra table phospholipids 
agglomerate at the interface of the oil and water capturing  the some of the non -hydra table 
phospholipids with them ok.   
 
And then the oil is also trapped by the phospholipids forming an emulsion 
refer ring to as gum or wet gums. So, after a certain reaction period is given may be 20 
minute, 30 minute or so depending  upon the type of the oil amount of phospholipids 
present etcetera.  These hydrated hydrated gums hydrated agglomerates gum they are 
separated either by decantation that is simple settling or continuously by the centrifugal 
method or other methods ok.  The extracted gums I told you they are processed generally 
to prepare food grade lecithin or commercial grade lecithin and which is used i n various 
food preparation in even in the fat and  oil industry in the margarine.  There is the 
vegetable oil which is further converted i nto a butter like product their  lecithin as I has 8 
to 10 percent lecithin is used as an emulsifier.   
 
Then batch water degumming you can see here the simple reaction i t is a crude oil 
and water.  It is a process used in the production of vegetable oil where im purities such as 
phospholipids and proteins are removed from the oil.  The process involves adding a 
small amo unt of water to the oil which causes impurities  to coagulate and form a gummy 
substance and which can be easily removed from the oil through  the centrifugation or 
filtration.  This process is typically used for oil such as soybean and canola oils ok.   
 
Soft degumming is a variation of batch water degumming process under the 
production of vegetable oil.  The main difference between soft degumming and batch 
water degumming is that in soft degumming less water is added to the oil which results in 
less coagu lation of the impurities and a gentler process overall. This results in a lower 
yield of gums and less damage to the oils natural properties.  Soft degumming is typically 
used for oil such as sunflower oil and corn oil.   
 
Then now we come to the acid degumming.  Acid degumming it is done at the 
refining plant.  Here dry acid that particularly is a suitable for processing  oils with low 
gum content such  as palm oil,  coconut oil or animal fats.  
So, that is dry acid degumming.  Here intensive mixing is imp lemented following 
the addition of acid to the preheated crude oil.  The conditioned gums are absorbed into 
the bleaching earth which are also added to remove the pigments etcetera and they are all 
separated by filtration.  The benefits of the dry acid deg umming process are efficiency as 
a result of low energy consumption  and low operation and maintenance cost.  It has a 
long service life that is the components are acid pro of, low investment cost and it is a 
environmental friendly process as no waste water or soap stock occur in this step,  ok.   
 
So, you can see the acid degumming process here crude oil water is coming here 
heated  and the there is a sy stem to introduce hot water. Then this acid that is acid from 
the tank concentrated  acid solution ok, or dry acid from the tank is pumped here it is 
mixed with oil alright a nd then again water is mixed and given the desired reaction time.  
So, the steps are that is oil is heated to 60 to 70 de gree Celsius, then acid at the rate of 
0.05 t o 0.2 weight percent phosphoric acid is added and mixed.  The hydration mixing 
time is allowed for about 30 minutes a nd then centrifugal separation done for the removal 
of the hydrated gums.  Then finally, the oil is vacuum dried to remove any traces of 
moisture that is.   
 
Then enzymatic degumming process here there is a enzyme soluti on that is the 
enzyme solution which is aqueous solution of citric acid, caustic soda and certain 
enzymes that is this  is  dispersed into the filtered oil at mild temperature.  You can see 
here there is this is the reaction medium ok, then the solution of that is condensate which 
can enzyme alkali and citric acid solution as there a h igh speed mixture the crude oil  is 
coming.   So, this oil is mixed with the enzyme solution sent to the reaction  medium and 
that in the  reaction medium that high speed rotating mixture is a used for effective mixing 
of the enzyme solution and oil and the conversion of non -hydratab le phospholipids i nto 
the hydra table phospholipid  is attained by the effect of enzymes and the rest process is 
same that is this agglomerates  are removed by centrifugal method and vacuum drying.   
 
Then again like in the earlier cases we discussed membrane degummi ng again  it 
is a very important  use method it is a novel technology of degumming and here that is t he 
it is a basically a physical  degumming process that uses membrane filtration system to 
remove impurities like phospholipids , etcetera from the oil and it is it do es not use any 
chemicals or enzymes to brea k down the impurities. So, it is also known as ester 
gumming alright the membr ane degumming of the oil if this  process the oil is first heated 
and then passed through a membrane filtration system.  The details of membrane 
filtration principles etcetera we have earlier discussed.  So, this system is typically made 
of different layer different types o f membrane like microfiltration  membrane, nano 
filtration membrane or ultrafiltration membrane as the case may be depe nding upon the 
size of the impurities present here gums etcetera.  So, these phospholipids and other such 
gums they are tra pped in the membrane while the purified oil is collected on the other 
side.  So, the advantages basic advantages of the membrane deg umming process include 
it is a continuous process, it has high efficiency with high a ccuracy, it is environmentally 
friendly as it does  not generate waste streams. It is used for soyabean , rapeseed, 
sunflower and palm oil etcetera ok.   
 
The membrane degumming process you see here it is shown in the picture her e 
schematic  diagram here mostly microfiltration and ultrafiltration process membra nes has 
been explored for this membrane degumming processes.  And this membrane degumming 
of the oil can be done in the two ways like degumming of the crude solvent free 
vegetable oil or even the degu mming of the oil solvent micella  also that is come in the 
from the micella  itself gums can be  removed only thing you have to  here select the proper 
type of the membrane and it is a pore sizes ok.  So, the one major problem that is a in and 
forth that is  seen here which occurs in this  membrane degumming of the crude oil is the 
drastic flux drop at the initial experiment stage and which is mainly attributed to the pore 
blocking concentration polarization and cake formation by the rejected solids normally if 
they block the pores and this.  So, it require freque nt cleaning of the membrane.  
 
Finally, there is a concept of to tal degumming that is the process t ypically 
involves a combination  of physical and chemical treatments such as the use of acids, 
enzymes and or heat.  This results in a higher purity oil with minimum impurities.  Total 
degumming is commonly used for refini ng of vegetable oils  like rice bran oil, sunflower 
oil, soybean oil and also used for industrial process for the purpose of there is a for  
example, for the production of less ethylene etcetera the total degumming process like  
you see here crude oil and i n this case the oil is subjected to all that is the water  
degumming, acid degumming, then centrifugation, pitching, deodorization etcetera, 
enzymatic  reaction, enzymatic.  So, may be the most all the process the water, acid, 
enzyme a nd so that the comple te removal  of the phospholipids is done ok and this is 
basically process for rice bran oil degumming  oil is given here ok.   
 
So, that there is a term degumming efficiency that is to j ust to see that how much 
of the  has been removed to evaluate the degumming efficiency of the process of 
degumming for  a given refined oil sample and analysis tests known as degumming  
efficiency is reported  ok. That degumming efficiency can be defined as that is in gram 
per 100 gram is defined as  is equal to that is the phospholipids that is  content in crude oil 
that is P 0 minus  the phospholipid content of the degummed oil divided  by phospholipid 
content of the  crude oil multiplied by 100 that is P 0 minus P d divided by P 0 into 100.  So, 
that gives the degumming efficiency ok.   
"Degumming Efficiency" (𝑔
100  𝑔)=(𝑃0−𝑃𝑑
𝑃0)∗100 
 
So, finally, I will summarize this lecture by saying tha t filtration and degumming 
are important processes in the refining of the crude oil o k, vegetable oil, animal fats, 
petroleum products etcetera.  Filtration is the process of separating solid impuri ties from 
liquid through a filte r medium.  Degumming of on the other hand remove the gums and 
other  impurities from the oils. Gums  are the subs tances that cause the oil to become 
cloudy and can negatively  impact its flavor and stability if they are not removed and that 
is why it  becomes a very important that in the refining of oil degumming is typically done 
by adding water and an acid to oil whi ch causes the gum to precipitate out the gums are 
then removed by f iltration or centrifugation. Together filtration and degumming help to 
improve the quali ty and stability of oil making them suitable for use in a variety of 
applications.   
 
So, these were the references that were used in preparing this lecture.   
 
So, this thank you for your patience here.   
 
