Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 8 : Animal & Dairy Fats  
Lecture 39: Butter  
 
Hello everybody, Namaste.  Now, in this 39th lecture  today, in the next half an 
hour, w e will talk about another very very common and important derived that is butter.   
 
We will discuss today what is butter and what is its compo sition, then different 
types of  butter or classification of butter, butter manufacturing process, how what are the 
different  churns, may be batch churn and continuous churn, then butter yield calculations 
and  finally, I will also tell you something important about packaging of butter.    
 
So, let us see what is a butter is.  Butter is a water in oil emulsion which is 
comprised of more than 80 percent milk fat, but also contains water in the form of tiny 
particles or tiny droplets.  Perhaps some of the solids not fats also are present t here. 
Usually butter is divided into two categories sweet cream bu tter or cultured or sour cream 
butter made from the bacteriologically soured cream.  Until well into the 19th century, 
butter was still made f rom cream that had been allowed  to sour naturall y.   
 
As far as the composition of the butter is concerned, it in general contains 80 
percent milk fat, 16 to 18 percent water, about 0 to 2 percen t salt, 0.7 percent protein. 
Specifi c energy of butter is 3140 kiloJ oule per 100 gram,  its vitamin A content is 2500 
international unit per 100 gram and vitamin D content is  55 international unit per 100 
gram.  The color of butter varies with carotenoid content which  makes around 11 to 50 
percent of the total vitamin A of the milk.  Hard bu tter is hard at low temperature, soft at 
room temperature and it melts when heated.  The water content that is present into the 
butter, it should be properly dispersed  in fine droplets so that the butter looks dry.  The 
consistency should be smooth so that  the butter is easy to spread and melts readily in the 
mouth.  
 
Different classification of the butter, there are various ways for classifying it and 
one is the based on the acidity of the cream and according to that t hat is the butter is 
classified  in swe et cream butter that is the butter made from the non -acidified cream in 
which no bacterial culture has been added to enhance diacetyl  content.  It has a pH of 
around more than 6.4 and acidity does not exceed 0.2 percent.  Then mildly acidified 
butter is made from partially acidified sweet cream,  they have a pH in between 5. 2 and 
6.3.  Then third category is the sour cream butter which i s made from ripened cream an d 
it has a pH less than or equal to 5.1 and acidity exceed 0. 2.  Then other classification of 
the butter is on the basis o f its salt content that is the salted butter in which the salt is 
added to improve flavor and keeping qual ity of the  butter.  And then other category is 
unsalted butter where it i s the butter which is primarily  made to produce further ghee or 
butter oil.  In this no salt is added that is unsalted butter.   
 
Then also the butter is classified on the basis of its consumption in daily use.  As 
per the Bureau of Indian Standards, the butter is a  table butter that is which is made from 
the cow or buffalo milk with or without ripe ning with the use of bacterial culture, 
addition of s alt, color, flavor etcetera. So this is the definition o f table butter as per the 
BIS. Classifying butter that is which is made from partial ly acidified sour cream, it is 
again made from cow or buffalo milk without ripening, wi thout the ripening and without 
the addition of any salt colori ng or flavoring substances.   
Then another way of classifying butter is the based on th e manufacturing practices 
that is the pasteurized cream or table butter that is which is made from obviously as the 
name  indicates that is pasteurized sweet cream.  It has mild flavor tha n the that made 
from non -pasteurized cream.  Then desi butter, desi butter is the one which is obtained 
from the traditional process  of churning dahi or malai.  
 
Then let us see what is the  sour cr eam versus sweet cream butter. Based a 
knowledge of cooling increased, it becomes po ssible to skim the cream butter  before it 
has gone sour and make the butter from the sweet cream.  Advantage of sour cream butter 
over sweet cream butter includes t hat is it is a richer  in aroma, it gives higher butter yield 
and there is a  less risk of reinfection after  temperature treatment as the bacteria culture 
suppresses undesirable microorganisms.   
 
However, this disadvantages of the sweet cream or sour cream butter are the 
butter milk will  also be acidified here and the butter milk which is obtai ned, it has a far 
lower pH than  butter milk normal butter milk which is one made from sweet cream.  This 
sometimes make it harder to dispose  than the sweet butter milk. It has more sense it is 
more sensitive to oxidation defects which give a metallic taste.  This tendency is a 
accentuated if the slightest trace of copper or  other heavy metals is present and th is 
considerably reduces the chemical keeping properties of the butter.   
 
Now, let us understand how butter is made.  Traditional method for making butter 
has been used or it ha s been made since ancient time even in our homes.  Even in the 19th 
century bu tter was still made from cream that had not been allowed  to stand and sour 
naturally. The cream was skimmed from the top of the milk and poure d into a wooden 
tub as you can see here in the figure.  The butter baking was done by the hand in butter 
churns.  The natural souring process is however a very sensitive one and infe ction by 
foreign microorganism then often spoiled the results. So, the commercial cream separator 
that is batch type wa s introduced at the end of the 19th century and continuous churns 
were commercialized in the middle of the 20th century.  Now, these commercial 
separator of the cream from the mil k that is centrifugal separator  and continuous churns 
are being used by the extensively by  the industry for manufacturing  butter.  
 
So, the butter manufacturing process here flow sheet you can understand that is 
the raw cream and this from the milk cream is separated in we discussed this separation  
of the cream in the earlier class.  So, you have the cream and then skim milk after the 
cream separation you get.  Skim milk may be pasteurized, stored or dried into making for 
making skim milk powder.  Then the cream is a standardized and pasteurized and after 
that sometime even in the industry the structure culture inoculation is done and t he cream 
is allowed to rip en or even  it is a it is not a standard nature natural sweet cream then 
directly it is.  So, after the for making sour cream that is aging and crystal lizing is 
allowed then finally,  the churning is done and after churning that is the butter gets 
separate d, fat gets separated  from this you get buttermilk and the butter and then i t is 
finally, worked and salted  packaged and stored and distributed this is the butte r making 
process in general. So, here you can say in the butter making the most important pro cess 
operation is the churning it is a critical step in the butter manufacturing p rocess and the 
characteristics quality property etcetera of this will depend on how the churning has been 
done.   
 
So, this is a batch and continuous production of cultured butter that is schematic it 
has  given and all the equipment etcetera also shown that is the there is a milk reception  
unit after this it milk is sent to the preheating and pasteurization then fina lly, cream 
separation  is done and then or the cream is sent to the next setup that is the cream 
pasteurizer and  from there it comes to the vacuum deaeration when used and then finally, 
culture room it  goes to the culture preparation cream ripening and s ouring then there is a 
some sort of a  where it is treated temperature treatment then finally, it comes to the stage 
that is  the churning or working batch here these are the churn that this is a pasteurized 
and cultured  cream is put into the churn churn operates etcetera and then it butter milk is 
collected  separately and butter is sent to the working section etcetera even this yellow 
line red  line and deep blue light blue etcetera all these lines.  So, in the process that is 
whether the milk is flowing  skim milk is flowing cream or butter  that is where from it is 
the flow diagram.   
 
So, the steps in it that is I tell the first thing is the collection of raw material and  
its standardization the cream it can be either supplied by a fluid dairy or separ ated from  
whole milk by butter milk manufacturer the crea m is then it should be sweet, p H should  
be 6.6, sat urated table acidity may be 0. 1 to 0.12 and it is not rancid and not oxidized  the 
cream is cooled and kept in a transitional storage tank where t he fat content is analyzed  
and if necessary it is adjusted to the desired value.  Then the pasteurization as I told you it 
is usually done  to at 82 to 88 degree Celsius and the high temperature is needed to 
destroy enzymes and m icroorganisms that would im pair the keeping quality of the butter.  
The skim milk from the separator is pasteurized and cooled bef ore being pumped to the 
storage  it is usually the concentrated and dried into skim milk powder.   
 
Then ripening is the important step for making sweet cream  sour cream butter the 
ripening  fermentation of the cream with the help of desirable starter culture that is mixed 
culture of normally Streptococcus cremoris , Streptococcus lactis , S. lactis , Leuconosto c 
citrovo rum or Leuconostoc  destra nicum  etcetera are generally used.  The cream is 
ripened in two stages in the first stage at 21 degree C elsius it is ripened  to pH 5. 5 and 
then in the second stage the pH is brough t down to as low as 4.6 percent  the temperature 
is maintained at 30 degree Celsius.  And the most of flavor de velopment occurs between 
pH 5. 5 to 4.6.  The lower the temperature during ripening the more is the flavor 
development relative  to the acid production and ripened butter is usual ly not washed or 
salted.  The typical butter flavor from the ripened cream is mainly the effect  of diacetyl 
and to a smaller extent of acetic acid and propionic acid that is formed during the 
fermentation  process during the ripening process.  And the aver age normal diacetyl 
content of the ripened crea m butter is 2.5 ppm and rarely over 4 ppm.   
 
Then aging and crystallization in the aging tank the crea m is subjected to a 
program of controlled cooling that helps to give the fat the required crystalliza tion 
crystalline structure. The optimum temperature of the Indian condition butter is usually 5  
to 10 degree Celsius and  the time requir ed for aging is 12 to 15 hours.  Then citric acids or 
sodium citrate at the rate of 0.2 p ercent may be added for flavor.  Then finally, comes the 
important step churning that is after the aging and the crystallizat ion of fat churning is 
done. Churning is most impo rtant process as I told you.  
The churning of cream consists of agitation at a suitable temp erature until the fat 
globules adher e forming larger and larger masses and until a rel atively complete 
separation of the fat from the serum fat and serum occurs.   
 
The churning that it may be from the aging tank the cr eam is pumped to the churn 
that there are continuous butte r making by a plate heat exchanger  which belongs to the 
requisite  temperature.  In the churning process the cream is violently agitated for 5 to 10 
minutes to break down the fat globules causing the fat to coagulate into butter g rains 
while the fat content  of the remainin g liquid butter milk decreases.  So optimum 
temperature of the churning may be 9 to 11 degree Celsius.  So basically in the churning 
process the butter grains and  butter milks are separated.  
 
Then finally, it comes to the after it is churned  the working and salting . After 
draining  the but ter is worked out that is kneaded  to continuous fat phase containing a 
finally,  dispersed water phase that is the fat granules which are o btained from the churn 
they are  needed properly they are worked on it.   And during this working that it gives a 
homogeneous blend of but ter granules and also water and  salt etcetera are added into it 
some water the fine dry and da inty dry food they are homogeneously mixed into it.  
During working fat changes from globular to  free fat water  droplet decreases in size and 
should not be visible in properly worked butter.  Salt is used to improve the flavor and 
shelf-life in batch proc ess about 1 to 3 percent salt is spread over its surface in continuous 
butter making process a  salt slurry of even 10 percent  concentration is added to the butter.  
So after salting the butter must be worked vigorously to ensure eve n distribution of  the 
salt. Overworked butter will be too brittle or greasy depending on  the weather the fat is 
hard o r soft.  Some water may be added to standardize the moisture content pre cise 
control of the composition  is essential for maximum yield.   
 
So here you see the effect of temperature that is the quality  of the butter and the 
texture of the butter which is f inally obtained it mainly and  the depends on the mainly 
and the cooling temperature uniformity in cooling and aging of the cream during 
churning.  The heat treatment of the cream prior to butter manufacturi ng largely 
determines the final  textural characteristics such as spreadability mouthfeel etcetera of 
the butter.  The butter produced from slow cooled cream had fewer crystals with a wider 
size distributi on whereas, the butter which is made from fast cooled cream as y ou can see 
here in the picture it had a it consiste d of a more uniform crystal.  So normally the 60 
micron size it in the figure here it is slow c ooling and fast cooling methods  is there is 
black, white is the first crystal fat crystal s, green is the water phase and  red is th e fat 
phase.   
 
Then the churn you can see that is here in the actually main equipment used for 
the churning  of the cream for making the butter you can see in the figure.  This rotating 
butter churn is introduced in the 19th century.  The rotating churn c onsisted mainly of a 
barrel which rota tes on an axis with the shelves  on various kinds to increase the agitation 
effect here it is there basically it is churn.  So butter is traditionally made in cylindrical, 
conical, cubical or tetrahedral ch urns with adjustable speed. B affles are fitted internally to 
improve the agitation.   
 
The degree of mixing depends on the amount of cream in the churn and on the 
area of revolution.  Low speed will not give sufficient turbulence, high speed will have a 
danger of cream is sticking to the periphery due to very high centrifugal against 
gravitational force.  So the best condition for churning that is maximum turbulence are 
achieved when the force  of gravity just exceeds the centrifugal force and that can be 
found out by m omega square  r that is this is less than mg.  The cream is churned at the 
churning speed of 60 to 100 rpm. It takes about 35 to 40 minute for the formation of the 
butter granules of peanut size.  The churn is usually fitted to 4 0 to 50 percent to allow 
space for forming.   
 
 
Then there are also continuous churn which are used in the industry.  These are 
classified into three categories based on their  process principle that is the machines 
operating on Fritz  process of or flotation churn ing where accelerated churning and 
working takes place.  Then machines other continuous churn of the machines operating 
on th e concentration of normal cream followed by phase inversion, cooli ng and 
mechanical treatment.  
Also t he other categories of the continuous churn are the mac hine operating on 
concentration  of normal cream, de -emulsification and re -emulsification into butter.  
Batch process is most commonly used in western Europe and India due to its simplicity 
and close si milarity with the batch process.   
 
So, here you see it shows the continuous production of that flo tation of the churn 
continuous churn.  So, after churning the butter granules are coming that is  the drying 
section and working  unit is done that is yellow portion is coming cream and then part 
line.  So, the cream is first as you can see in the figure is f irst fed into a double cooling 
churn cylinder fitted with the beaters that are drive n by a variable speed motor.  
The butter shaft is driven by a variable s peed V -belt drive.  In this cylinder is a 
four armed beater churning at 250 to 28 00 rpm with a walled clearance of around 2 to 3 
mm.   
 
The speed can be varied as required.  The pockets in the churning cylinder impart 
extra turbulen ce to the film of cream  thereby  enhancing the butter making action and 
improve the yield.  Rapid conversion takes place in the cylinder in and finished the grain 
butter grains and butter milk pass on to a separation section and called  the first working 
section that  is first work ing section is coming here where basically the butter is sepa rated 
from the  butter milk.  
The first washing of the butter grains takes place en route wi th recirculated chilled 
butter milk.  The separation section is equipped with a screw that ini tiate the working of 
the butter  while conveying it to the next stage.   
 
As it leaves the separation section the butter passes through a conical channel and 
is on  a perforated plate and then it goes to the squeeze drying  section ok where any 
remaining  butter milk is removed from it.  The butter grains then proceed to the second 
working sectio n and each working section has a separate motor that can operate 
independently at different speeds.  Salt, colour and moisture  corrections may be checked.  
The wate r content can be fitted in the outlet from the mac hines and the discharge butter is 
transferred for further packaging.   
 
Then we can calculate the butter yield.  There are separate various methods 
provided.  One is the separation efficiency E S.  It repre sents the fat se parated from milk 
for cream.  
ES is equal to 1 minus f S by fm where f S is the fat per centage in skim milk, skim 
fat percent w by w  weight by weight and the f m is the milk fat at percent weight by 
weight.  E S depends on the initial milk fat content and residua l fat in the skim milk 
assuming  optimum operation of the separator.  The principle determining factor for fat 
loss to the skim milk is fat global size.  Modern separators should achieve a skim fat 
content  of about 0.  04 to 0.07 percent.   
 
Where , fs = Skim fat as percent w/w ; fm = Milk fat as percent w/w  
ms
s ff1 E 
Then churning efficiency that which represents the fat sepa rated from the cream 
for butter  making is defined as E C is equal to 1 minus F bm by F C where f bm is the butter 
milk fat at percent weight by weight and F C is the cream fat at percent weight by weight.  
Maximum acceptable fat loss in butter milk is about 0.7 percent o f the churned fat 
corresponding  to a churning efficiency of around 99.3 percent of the cre am fat recovered 
in the butter.  Churning efficiency is highest in the winter method and lowest in t he 
summer methods.  
cbm
c ffE1
 
Where, f bm = Buttermilk fat as percent w/w; fc = Cream fat as percent w/w  
If the churning temperature is too high, churning occurs more quic kly, but fat loss 
in the butter milk increases. Fat for continuous churns assuming 45 percent cream 
churning efficiency should be 99 percent.   
 
Then we can also calculate overrun that is a composition  overrun which 
represents extra  material in the butter the other than the fat the percent composition  
overrun is equal  to 100 minus percent fat in butter divided by percent fat in butter 
multiplied by 100.  So, it giv es the overrun that overrun means that is what  are the other 
ingredient other  than the fat.  Then churn overrun is the extra yield of material obtain ed 
in butter after churning.  
Then percent churn overrun calculated by using kg of butter made  minus kg of f at 
churn divided by kg of fat churn whole thing multiplied by 100. Then package fill control 
is a calculated from the actual weight minu s nominal weight divided by nominal weight 
multiplied by 100.  So, this gives package fill control ok.   
 
 
 
 
Then finally, packaging of the butter obviously, there is a p ackaging should be 
done as soon  as possible after the churning to reduce the chances o f prime rose that is a 
color defect due to evaporation of the moisture from the surface of the butter ok.  So, the  
packaging of butter is done to protect against contamination , prevent moisture 
evaporation loss of weight, to prevent off -flavor development, to prevent its oxidation 
and other related  spoilage ok.  
So, packaging material which is used for butter is normal ly a parchment paper 
that is called butter paper.  It is wax coated papers, silicon or cardboard wax, that you 
could drum dried with food grade plastics, aluminum foil laminates or lacquered tin cans.  
The important thing is that the packaging material is  used it should be impermeable to 
water vapors, it should be impermeable to oxygen and carbon dioxide gases etcetera.  So, 
that there is a no surface evaporation from the moisture, there is a no ox idation  etcetera of 
the fat which is a major process in the deteriora ting the quality of the butter fat.   
 
So, finally, I will summarize this lecture by saying th at the butter a fat rich dairy 
product obtained by churning cream and working the granules is o btained into a compact 
mass. Churning is the most important and critical step in butter manufacturing.  The 
butter quality and texture depends mainly on the cool ing temperature, uniformity in 
cooling and aging of the cream during churning.  Butter produced from slow cooled 
cream had fewer crystals  with a wide range distribution  whereas, the butter produced 
from fast cooled cream consists of more uniform crystals.  Fritz  process is most 
commonly used method for butter manufacture at industrial level.   
 
These are the references that are used in preparation of this lecture.   
 
Thank you very much for your patience here.  Thank you.  
 
 
