Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Ins titute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 8 : Animal & Dairy Fats  
Lecture 37: Fish and Algal Oils  
 
Hello everyone, Namaste.  Now, in this lecture 37, in the next half an hour or so, 
we will discuss about fish and algal oils.   
 
We will talk about fish oil, its nutritional and health valu es, its manufacturing 
process, packaging materials and methods for the fish oil packaging.  Then also algal oil 
and their production.  Finally, we will also throw some lights on delivering omega 3 fatty 
acids into food products like stable algal oil forms and their usage.   
 
Let us see  what is a fish oil.  
It is the oil which is derived from tissues of oily fish.  Fish oil is recommended for 
a healthy diet because it contains the omega 3 fatty ac ids like ei cosapentaenoic acid 
which is commonly known as EPA and Doc osahexaenoic acid (DHA ).  And these are 
precursors to e icosanoids that reduce infla mma tion throughout the body.  Fish oil is a 
good dietary so urce of omega 3 fatty acids.  
Human body needs omega 3 fatty acids for many functi ons for muscle activity or 
even  to general health.  Fish oil has numerous beneficial effects to huma n body.  It 
prevents athero sclerosis, angina, heart attack, congestive  heart failure, arrhythmias , 
stroke, and peripheral vascular diseases.  Clinical trials have shown that it is also 
effective in treatment of many disorders including rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, cancers, 
etcetera.   
 
Let us see w hat are omega 3 fatty acids.  
There are two important omega 3 fatty acids as I told you include EPA and DHA.  
They possess essential biochemical functions.  EPA is c onverted into anti -inflammatory 
biochemical intermediate s whereas DHA can be made from EPA and in the most 
abundant omega 3 fatty acids in most ti ssues present in large amounts in the brain and 
retina.  DHA is required for brain development and functions, central nervous system 
development and for optimal visual activity.  Alpha linoleic acid is converted into EPA 
and DHA through a series of enzymatic steps.  
There is a fish oil supplements come in liquid form in capsule as well as in the pill 
forms.  Fish o il supplements might be helpful in case of high triglyceride or rheumatoid 
arthritis.   
 
Health benefits of fish oil you discuss ok.  It is effective in controlling heart 
diseases that is peo ple who eat dietary sources of fish oil at least twice a week ha ve a 
lower risk of dying of heart diseases.  Also it controls high blood pressure that is the 
mode st reduction in blood pressure occurs in people wh o take fish oil supplements.  
There is some evidence that beneficial effects of fish oils might be grea ter for 
people with  moderate to severe high blood pressure than those with mild blood pressure 
elevation.  Also it has high triglycerides and cholesterol reduction.  Omega 3 fatty acids 
can significantly reduce blood triglyceride levels.  They also appear to b e slight 
improvement in high dens ity lipoprotein that is HDL or good cholesterol or through an 
increase in the level o f low density lipoprotein that is the LDL or bad cholesterol 
although it was also apparent.  So, they improve that they increase that high  density 
cholesterol although there is some  time that is bad  cholesterol also increases.  
Then rheumatoid arthr itis studies suggest the fish oil  supplements might help 
reduce  pain, improve morning stiffness and relieve joint tenderness in people with 
rheuma toid  arthritis.  While relief is often modest it might be enough to reduce the need 
for anti -inflammatory medications.   
 
The nutritional fa ctt of fish oil that is the per 10 0 gram it gives around 902 
kilocalories.  It gives a saturated fat that is 21 gram, it 153 per cent of daily value that is 
out of if you take 100 gram of this fish oil then its cholestero l it gives around 766 
milligram  that is 255 percent of daily value and it is almost it does not give any 
carbohydrate  fiber, vitamins etcetera.  So, this is the it is you can say that is saturated fat 
gives a nd total fat and cholesterol.  
 
As far as the method of fish oil production is  the conve ntional method to obtain 
crude fish oil include that is again here the fishes are also ta ken the sorted  and their fatty  
tissues are trimmed, it is boiled and it is pressed in the unit and then decanted.  So, 
decanted by either  centrifugal method,  the press  plant an d crude fish  oil is obtained, 
moisture etcetera is evaporated.  Then there the remaining material dried, cooled and 
graded and it is a fish meal.  So, you get that is the process is similar to that whic h we got 
in the rendering that is some sort of trimming, chopping, crushing, heating, centrifugation 
and then drying this  and we get a crude oil and then meal.   
 
So, stages of fish oil refining and four groups of processing waste  which are 
obtained from  the fish oil that is the numbe r one you get the crude fish o il, then it is a 
neutralization  addition of alkaline solution that you have referred in the chemical r efining 
process.  
So, you get soap stock that is the unstable fatty tissues in alkaline solution is 
obtained.  So, that is ca n be further.  Then bleaching by adding the bentonite clay with 
activat ed carbon, then spent bleaching  earth is obtained and you get that is the oil, then 
oil is winterized, then the fish  oil wax t hat is stearin is separated during the winterization 
proce ss, then it is subjected  to deodorization and after deodorization , refined omega 3 
fish oil is obtained, the n  esterification that is inter esterification etcetera and distillation 
you get concentrated  omega 3 fish oil and here non omega 3 oils which are used for fuel 
or onsite processing  plant etcetera.  So, these are the some refining stages and at differen t 
stages which are the various impurities etcetera are obtained which are also used for 
making some useful products.   
 
Then wet reduction process to produce fish oil in this slid e is shown that is raw 
material  it is cooked, then drained pressed and the drainings ar e there that is pressed 
liquid is solids removal and then it is oil and water separation y ou get a stick water and 
which is evaporated an d different drying stages you get and  finally, you get fish meal and  
after this pressing in different operations you get variou s fish oil ok.  
 
So, this is the wet reduction process ok and in this little detail of the processing 
steps we discussed it is we t reduction process what happens in different stages like 
cooking steam  cooking ruptures the fat cells it calculates the protein and releases the oil 
and then  it is subjected to dewatering pre pressing and this here the cooked fish mass is 
screened  to s eparate free liquid from the solids and then in the pressing operation that is 
where  the mechanically it is it expresses the free liquid from the solid producing a press 
liquor  that is the oil and water and press cake which you saw in the earlier slide i n the 
process  flow chart ok.  Then press liquor operations this is a three step process it  
decanters separate fine solids  from the liquid fractions separators split the liquid fraction 
into f ish oil and water  that is called the stick water and there is a pulsing wa ter which 
washes the crude fish  oil before it is pumped to storage.  Then in the evaporation this is a 
stick water contains ab out 8 percent solids which are concentrated in multiple effect to or 
waste heat evapora tors to about 40 to 50 percent solid from 8 percent solid it is 
concentrated to 40 to 50 pe rcent solid and in the factory that is using steam dryers then 
the waste heat from the dryer can be used as a to heat the and evaporate the stick water.  
Then finally, in the drying process that i s a generally it is  done in two stages the solids 
from the decanter separation and the press cake  are mixed and partially dried.  The 
partially dried fish meal is then mixed with the conc entrated stick water and the  drying is 
completed to a bout 10 percent m oisture ok.  
Then in the  in the factory it is used steam and indirect hot dryer, but older factory 
still use the  old direct fired hot air dryers ok.  Then grinding, cooling and stabilization 
percent grinding re duces the particle size of the fish meal ok.  C ooling is done 
stabilization and the fish meal is cooled and antioxidant is added generally ethox yquin is 
the antioxidant of choice, but for certain markets natural antioxidant based and 
tocopherols are also used.  Then packaging is done ok.  The fish meal  is packaged in 50 
kg bags or 1000 kg totes th e fish milk can also be stored in bulk fillers or in silos.  
Then optional fish oil carbon treatment sometime is done that is if the cr ude fish 
oil is destined  for the omega 3 animal feed aquaculture or pet food  marke t and if analysis 
indicate the presence of dioxin, furans are poly aromatic hydrocarbons it can be treated 
with activated  carbon to reduce the level of these compounds ok.    
Then enzymatic hydrolysis process you can see here that is here this pasteurized 
first and then enzymes are added ok.  That is hydrolyzed fish proteins are reduced by 
employing proteolytic enzymes either from  the fish themselves that is aut olysis or silage 
or from other tissues ok.  The enzymes can be either an imal sources or vegetable or 
microb ial sources and they accelerate  the breakdown of the protein into a smaller unit 
you get the smaller peptides containing  proteins etcetera ok.  So, this is the enzymati c 
hydrolysis of the meal ok.  
 
Hydrolysis can also be a ccomplished chemically under acidic  or alkaline 
conditions by using  some of the newer enzymes available on the market.  A process can 
be developed to recover fish peptides of various length with specific functionality.  
Although the process can be used  with any fish it is p rimarily used for white fish or  offal 
low in oil.  In cases where oily fish are hydrolyzed the precursor must  recover the oil 
phase without denaturing the protein or fac e supplying a high -fat hydrolyz ed product or a 
protein product  with reduced functionality.  It has been difficult to achieve a 
commercially viable produ ct from fatty fish that is both  functional or lower in fat.  
 
Then the dry rendering proces s you can see raw material, pre -cooler, press, you 
get screen and waste he at evaporator then it is cooked or dried.  And after expelling , 
screen filtration , you get fish oil and the meal is obtained.  In the process the raw material 
is cooked to remove th e water essentially the drying process in the fish meal wet 
rendering proce ss. And the res ultant dry cake is then pressed  to remove any oil.  Because 
the water has been removed , the oil fraction the remove the lipid fraction can contain 
high level of phospholipids.   
 
The rendering process that is the dry rendering process wh ich is commonly used 
to prepare  animal proteins and fats is not normally used in manuf acture of fish meal and 
oil. However , the process is used with catfish by products.  The phospholipids normally 
hydrate in the wet rendering  process and are recovered with  the water fraction.  In the dry 
rendering process they are not hydrated and are therefore, remain dissolved  in the liquid 
or oil fraction. Since there is a interest in the fish oil phospholip ids it is possible to 
produce a  phospholipid fraction by hy drating  the oil also called degu mming oil.   
 
Then acid or alkali aided process for fish meal protein isolate and fish oil 
production.  Here the solvent fraction is solvent extraction is used to pr oduce fish protein 
concentrate and it is another process that coul d yield fish oil.  The manufacture of fish 
protein isolate involves the removal of most of the water and som e or all of the fats like 
you see raw mat erial it is homogenized and pH adjustment  is done.  And then it is passed 
to centrifuges where sediment is separated , fish oil is obtained and soluble fish proteins.  
And then it is subjected to soluble fish proteins subjec ted to p H adjustment centrifuges 
water  is obtained and fish protein.  So, the methods for making fish protein isolates are 
based mainly o n the use of chemical solvents to remove water, fat and fishy tasting 
components either from the raw fish or from the  fish meal. The recovered fat is usually 
mixed in an azeotropic mixture with  water solvent and water soluble  components.  
Separation of this azeotrope to recover the fat sometimes presents our problems.   
 
So, the process of onshore production of fish meal and oil  you can see mincing, 
heating, strainer and pressing.  So, after pr essing you got press crate and the liquid tha t is 
strainer and pressing you get the liquid.  So, it is used for centrifugation of solids get the 
stick water, centrifugation of  liquids , oil, the fish oils and from these stages that is 
evapora ted then stick water condensate  and after pressing the remaining material they are 
dried, grind, cooled a nd packaged  as a fish meal. So, by this it is a you get fish oil and 
fish meal ok.   
 
Then silage production , that is autolysis . Silage production is simplified low cost 
hydrolysis process , ok.  Silage might be defined as a crude form of hydrolysis.  Fish 
silage is a liquefied fish stabilized against bacte rial decomposition by an acid. The 
process involves mincing of the fish followed by the addition  of an acid or pre servative. 
The enzymes in the fish got break down the fish prote in into a smaller soluble units  and 
acid helps to increase their activity while preventing bacterial silage.  Formic,  propionic, 
sulfur ic and phosphoric acids have b een used . Normally , about 3 to 4 percent of the acid 
is added so that the pH remains at or be low or it is pH remains below 4.0.  Strong mineral 
acids require neutralization before feeding into the final product.  
 
Silage made from white fish offal does not contain much oi l or, but when it is 
made from fatty fish it is necessary to remove the oil. The composition of the silage will 
be very similar to the starting raw material.  Fish silage of the correct acidity is suitable or 
it is sta ble at room temperature for at least 2 years without decomposition.  The protein 
becomes more soluble and the amount of free fat ty acids increases in any fish oil present 
during storage.  Oil production offers a solution to the handling of fish waste w hen the 
logistics of delivering  the waste t o a fish reduction plant are not economical.  Silage can 
be produced in large or small containers both on th e vessels and on the source. If the 
silage is processed quickly to recover the oil, it is possible to make an acceptable fish oil 
product.   
 
If yo u discuss the influence of process parameter on fish oil p roduction, that is we 
take one or two case studies, that is case study  1 where there is a that is a Al dos et al.  
They used a pilot plant for preparing or upgrading herring byp roducts into fish oil and 
then they analyzed various operational effic iency and the product quality. The 
temperature of the heat exchanger and the speeds o f the pump and the three -phase 
decanters were  varied according to a 23  factorial design.  The initial amount of the 
oxidation products present in the c rude oil, its storage stability  and the yields from the 
different obtain ed products were determined.  
Multivariate data analysis and advanced screening stage show ed that temper ature 
of the heat  exchanger had neither influence on the quality nor on the yield in contrast to 
the speed of the omega phase or three -phase decanter that is D and the speed of the 
mono -pump that is MP .  Process optimization results showed that the quality  of the oil 
was influenced by an interaction effect between the speed of the MP , there is a mono -
pump and the decanter.  Oil s processed with the highest mono -pump speed were the most 
stable during storage.   
 
In another case study, Shahi  et al. in 2018, they did extr action of fish oil by 
leaching process where solvent is used to extract the desired solute and the later one 
separated. The extraction process was affected by leaching temperature and time which is 
reflected in terms of yield of oil.  It was observed that the time and temperature had a 
highly s ignificant impact on the yield . With increase in the level of both parameters.  
yielding of oil also increased.  The results obtained were optimized using RSM . And the 
optimum levels of v ariables were 82 degree Celsius temperature and 5 hours with oil 
yield value about 71 percent.  
 
In another study, there is a Bora n et al. T hey conducted a nd found the effect of 
storage temperature on oil quality of various species.  Fish oil extracted from horse 
mackerel, shad , garfish  and golden mullet  were used for analysis.  Crude fish oil obtained 
by a solvent extraction method were stored at 4 degree Celsius and 18 degree Celsius.  
Internal quality of the oil was evaluated with various para meters including iodine value, 
ester value, acid value, saponification val ue, peroxide value and thiobarbitur ic acid values  
and uns aponifiable matters at various time in terval for 150 days of storage.  And oil 
quality parameter except the iodine and ester value increased during storag e at both the 
temperatures.  
Acute oil stored at 4 degree Celsius preserved acceptable characteristics for 90 
days.  Acceptability tolerance was found to be 120 days for sho rt oil and 150 days for 
golden mullet , garfish  and horse mackerel oil stored at 18 degree Celsius.  The higher 
oxidative d eterioration was observed in shad  oils.  Among all samples, garfish  oil showed 
the greatest stability against oxidation.  Then packagi ng of fish oil, if we discuss the fish 
oil co ntained high unsaturated fatty acids, they are easily susceptible to oxidation and 
they are only exposed to air.  
 
So, packaging material should have high barrier properties, shou ld be moisture 
proof, it should  be oil resistant and impermeable to oxygen.  Larger quantities of fish oil 
are mainly packed in LLDPE/ nylon films or in glass bottles.  Bulk transportation in  food 
grade flexi  tanks made of 4 -layer ed polypropylene tubes  or polypropylene is preferred.  
Advantages of using flaxseed tanks are that they can ca rry 50 percent more bottles and  
therefore will serve on storage space packaging and transportation cost.   
 
Then let us talk about algal oil, that is certain algae s pecies are grown in 
agriculture  especially to produce algal oil. It can be made from a var iety of species 
including Crypthe codinium, Nannochloropsis , and Schizochy trium, Prototheca  and 
Ulkenia  etcetera.  The fatty acids in the oil might reduce swelling and help with the brain 
function.  Use algal oil for improved thinking skil ls, physical performance, autism,  
depression and  for many other purposes, but there is no good scientific evidence to 
support these uses.   
 
So, for the extraction and purification, first algae is dr ied using suitable 
technology, may be low temperature drying or vacuum drying may be preferred.  Then 
dried microalgae is used for solvent extraction process using the standard protocol and 
the crude oil which is obtained, that is the solvent i s removed and then it is added acid or 
base, centrifuge, bleach, deodorizer and package.  So, other standard methods for the 
refining etcetera that we discussed in earlier.  The process parameter may be of the 
refining and extracti on etcetera may be a little bit  changed.   
 
So, the algal oil fatty acid composition in this side c ontains around C10 caproic 
acid around 0.5, but the myristic acid are more in  number, palmitic acid also 9. 05 percent 
and palmitol eic acid is 2.2 percent.  And this is a steric acid it is a very low, but oleic aci d 
is about 19 percent linoleic 1 percent and DHA is around 47.42 and iodin e value it is 
around 234 in the case of algal  oil.   
 
So, as far as the usage of the algal oil corrosion that is application category and 
promotion  for the microalgae derived omega 3 PUFA production that is EPA and DHA 
products in the global  market tha t is it is used around infant formulation 14 percent, food 
and beverage usage 13 percent,  pet food 5 percent and these algal usage are about 43 
percent uses defined in the dietary  supplements like in tablets, powder, capsules, 
emulsions etcetera and 23 p ercent in pharma  and in clinical duties and about 2 percent.   
 
Now delivering omega 3 fatty acids into food  products, you know that fish oil  is 
rich in health promoting omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and th ese polyunsaturated 
fatty acids  are difficult to incorporate into the foods due to low water solubility and 
chemical stability.  So, the encapsulation technologies are used by which these  fish oils  
are they are covered they are some sort of coating or covering is provided  and this it is  
include that is  the stability can be used to overcome the dispers ibility and stability issue. 
Omega 3 in this colloidal dispersion can be used in a fluid form or they can be converted  
into a powdered form using a spray drying technology which facilitates  their handling  
and storage as well as in prolonging their shelf life all right and different forms in  which 
they can be liposomes or nano emulsions, emulsions, solid lipids, nano particles, there  is 
micro gels, filled micro gels, multiple emulsions, fi bers these are the various forms  
where omega 3 delivery system and of course, in that encapsulation technology making 
the  liposomes and converting it into powder we will take up separately may be in the 
next  module separate lecture we will discuss on th is particularly on the work which we 
have  also done in this area.   
 
And here  in this case nano -emulsion is one such the fish oil  is one of the most 
widely  used sources of omega 3 fatty acids for supplementation and it has grea ter health 
benefits than pl ant sources because of its higher concentration of e icosapentaenoic acid 
and do cosahexaenoic acid.  The incorporation of omega 3 fatty acids into foods and 
beve rages is often challenging due to their low water solubility, poor oxidative stability 
and variable bioavailability.  Nano emulsions offer a promising way to incorporate 
omega 3 fatt y acids into liquid food system  like beverages, dressing, sauces and dips.  
Nano emulsions are colloidal dispersion that contain a small oil droplets that is of radi us 
less than 100 nanometer and that may be able to overcome many of the challeng es of 
fortifying foods and beverag es with omega 3 fatty acids. The composition and fabrication 
of nano emulsions can be opti mised to increase the chemical and physical stabilit y of oil 
droplets as well as to i ncrease the bioavailability of omega 3 fatty acids.   
 
So, with this now I will summarise this lecture that is fish a nd algal oils are rich 
sources of omega 3 fatty acids and other bioactives.  Fissile has several health b enefits.  
However, it is quite unstable due to more PUFA content.  Materials that are impermeable 
to light, oxygen and moisture shou ld be used to pack fish oils . Both fish and algal oils are 
good sources of deliver ing omega 3 fatty acids in food  products.   
 
 
These are the references which are used in this.   
 
Thank you very much.  
