Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 7 : Modifications of Oils and Fats  
Lecture 35 : Trans -Free Modifications  
 
 
Hello everybody.  Namaskar.  Now, we are in the last lecture of the seventh module.  In 
this lecture 35 for the next half an hour or so, we will discuss about Transfree 
Modifications.  We will talk what are the types of fats and their sources , trans fat  and 
their ill effects.  Then what are trans fats, how the trans fats are formed during various 
modification  techniques etc., and their mechanism o f formation ? Then  we will see how 
this trans -free oil can be made, and how the formation of the trans  fats can be minimized 
or can be reduced that is trans free modification techniques.  
 
Fats are important for our body and it must be present in our diets to remain healthy.  Not 
all fats are equa l in terms of their effects on our health. Some are more beneficial and 
others may be unhealthy if one eats too much of them.  Some fats correlate with the risk 
for heart disease while others have a protective effect. More important than the quantity 
of fat is the type (or mix) of fat. Frequently, the ratio of good fat to bad fat is very low.  
 
Mainly if you see there are four types of fat that are mostly  consumed through foods like 
polyunsaturated fats, monounsaturated fats, saturated fats , and trans fats . Polyunsaturated 
and monounsaturated are the preferred fats. Saturated fats and trans fats are those that we 
should consume the least. These fats are posit ively associated with the development of 
insulin resistance and heart disease.  Trans fats have received much interest in recent years 
because of several  bad health effects as trans fa ts raise LDL  (bad) cholesterol, they lower 
HDL  (good) cholesterol.  High LDL along with low HDL levels can cause cholesterol to 
build up in arteries (blood vessels). This increases risk for heart disease and stroke.  
 
So, let us see what is the trans fat, how it is formed.  Trans fat, or trans -fatty acids, are 
unsaturated fatty acids that c ome from either natural or industrial sources. Naturally -
occurring trans fat come from ruminants (cows and sheep). Industrially -produced trans 
fat are formed in an industrial process that adds hydrogen to vegetable oil converting the 
liquid into a solid,  resulting in “partially hydrogenated” oil (PHO).  High trans fat intake 
increases the risk of death from any cause by 34%, coronary heart disease deaths by 28%, 
and coronary heart disease by 21%.  This is likely due to the effect on lipid levels: trans 
fat increases LDL (“bad”) chol esterol levels while lowering HDL (“good”) cholesterol 
levels.  Trans fat has no known health benefits.  Approximately 5,40,000 deaths each year 
can be attributed to intake of industrially produced trans -fatty acids.  
 
The effec ts on blood lipids from naturally occurring trans fat & industrially -produced 
trans fat are the same.  So, whether you a re consuming trans fat in the form of junk food 
like fried food etcetera  fried oil, or hydrogenated oil or you are taking the trans fat from 
ruminant animal sources  etcetera, it is its effect on the health of the body will be almost 
same  International expert groups and public health authorities recommend limiting 
consumption of trans fat (industrially -produced and ruminant) to less than 1% of tot al 
energy intake, which translates to less than 2.2 g/day for a 2,000 -calorie diet.  Margarine, 
vegetable shortening, vanaspati ghee, fried foods, baked goods, doughnuts, etc. are some 
foods containing trans fat in significant amounts . So, any heated oil if you are taking it 
will contain trans fat.   
Let us see how trans fa t is formed . Most of the trans fat in the foods we eat is formed 
through a manufacturing process that adds hydrogen to vegetable oil, which converts t he 
liquid into solid fat at room temperature. This process is called hydrogenation.  You can 
see here the process of hydrogenation , in the earlier class also we discussed  the details  of 
the hydrogenation process in this module itself.  Naturally  unsaturated oils  position are 
generally present in the cis form .  So, when it is fully hydrogenated fully saturated fatty 
acids are formed ,  there is no problem and this is H -H only, but when it is partial 
hydrogenation it gives  H and H comes in the transposition  and the opposi te side of  the 
bond.  So, partially  hydrogenated fats  contain more amount of trans fatty  acids.  Four 
main sources of trans fatty acids in the human diet include Industrially produced TFAs by 
partial hydrogenation of vegetable oils , TFAs produced during heat processes ,  TFAs 
occurring naturally in ruminant sources , and TFAs synthesized for utilization as dietary 
supplements . 
 
Industrially produced trans fatty acids that by the partial hydrogenation of vegetable  oils 
and in the again we discussed earlier that is in the hydro genation process reaction  
hydrogen is added to convert vegetable unsaturated fat into saturated fat.  Hydrogenation 
is based on the reaction of unsaturated fatty acids of either vegetable or marine oil in the 
presence of a catalyst, in general nickel. The objective is to inc rease the oxidative 
stability of oils by reducing the concentration of more unsaturated fatty acids and 
changing their physical properties, thus extending their application.  Hydrogenation 
depends mainly on oil temperature, hydrogen pressure, stirring speed , reaction time, and 
the catalyst type and concentration.  Hydrogen as you can see here MU FA and PUFA in 
the vegetable oils , are all cis as I told you 18:1, 18: 2, and 18: 3. So, in the natural they are 
all cis position.  Catalytic hydrogenation at high pressure and high temperature 
particularly the double bond will disappear completely you will get saturate d fatty acids , 
predominantly 18: 0 which  is stearic acid . When  double bonds partially  disappear,  that is  
they shift along the fatty acids chain , and in this process , trans  fatty acids are formed . The 
cis form is converted into transform , it may  be T 9 /10/11/12/13/ 14-18: 1, and different 
forms of the trans fatty acid depending upon  the hydrogenation conditions are produced . 
 
According to the process conditions, hydrogenation is classified as either partial  or total 
and either selective or nonselective.  So, this is the mechanism of the formation of the 
geometric and positional isomers in  the hydrogenation process you can see here it is 
shown in these  figures . Selectivity is relat ed to the preferential hydrogenation of more 
unsaturated fatty acids, which results in the lowest formation of saturated fatty acids 
possible.  To obtain high selectivity, it is common to use a low hydrogen pressure, 
moderate stirring speed, and high temper atures.  This leads to scarcity of hydrogen on the 
catalyst surface, which in turn favors  the formation of TFA.  With  other factors  being 
equal temperature has the larger effect  on the trans fat formation during the 
hydrogenation process .  
 
The formation of TFA during food frying is closely related to the process temperature 
and oil use time.  When partially hydrogenated fats are used, the formation of TFA is 
generally lower. However, the  high initial contents of these acids result in a larger 
concentration of trans isomers in fried food.  Several European countries have determined 
that the frying oil temperature must not  exceed 180°C.  In France, it has been established 
that the oil commercially used in frying must contain 3% alpha -linolenic acid at most. 
These measures not only contribute to decreased degradation of unsaturated  fatty acids 
but also result in a lower forma tion of MTFA and PTFA during  frying.   So, in that sense , 
the conditions of the heating oil type of oil which is being used, the degree of 
unsaturation present in the 3 -alpha -linolenic acids , etc. should be properly controlled 
during frying  to minimize the formation of monosaturated trans fatty acids or 
polyunsaturated trans  fatty acids.   
 
 
Here you can see the effect of h eating time in hours on the formation of MTFA 
monosaturated  trans fatty acids and obviously, the effect of heating time increases the 
percent relative area  of the MTFA , that is the formation of MTFA increases . A significant 
increase in MTFA in oil with increasing heating time.  A larger content of the PTFA 
group after 10 hours of  frying corresponding to an increase of 55.2% relative to the 
amount initially present in oil (2.1%) was observed.  The linear regression analysis of the 
results obtained by MTFA demonstrate d that the formation of these isomers was linearly 
dependent on frying time, with an isomerization ratio of about 0.3% per hour relative to 
the total fatty acids  in the oil. 
 
Trans fatty acid occurs  naturally in ruminant sources , let us talk about it. TFAs can be 
naturally produced in small amounts through the digestive process in the rumen of 
ruminant animals, such as cows, sheep, and goats.  These animals have a unique microbial 
ecosystem that helps them break down and ferment the plant -based food they consume.  
During this fermentation process, certain bacteria present in the rumen convert the dietary 
PUFAs into TFAs th rough a process called biohydrogenation . PUFAs are found in the 
cell membranes of plants and can be present in the diet of ruminants, mainly through the 
consumption of grasses and other forage.  There are microorganisms such as Butyrivibrio 
fibrisolvens and Megasphaera esdenii  in the rumen (a part of t heir stomach) of ruminant 
animals like cows, sheep, and goats, that play a role in the production of TFAs.  These 
microorganisms can transform polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), specifically linoleic 
acid, into different forms through a process called isomerization. As a result, two types of 
fatty ac ids called conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) are formed: 18:2 9c, 11t and 18:2 10t, 
12c. These CLAs can be absorbed by the animal or further processed through 
biohydrogenation involving the conversion of these fatty acids into other forms viz. 18:1 
11t, also know n as vaccenic acid, and 18:1 10t. These two forms can also be derived from 
other types of  fatty acids like alpha and gamma -linolenic  acids.  These modified trans 
fatty acids (MTFAs), including vaccenic acid, can either be absorbed by the animal's 
body or undergo f urther hydrogenation which can lead to the formation of stearic acid 
(18:0), which is a saturated fatty acid.  When these f atty acids are absorbed, they are 
incorporated into the  adipose (fat) and muscle tissues of the animal.  
 
The process involves the mi crobial transformation of linoleic acid into CLA in the rumen, 
followed by biohydrogenation to form MTFAs like vaccenic acid. These MTFAs can 
then be absorbed or further hydrogenated into stearic acid.  The schematic diagram shows 
the isomerases  and reductases involved in the  formation of acids 18:1 1 1 t and 18:1 1 0 t 
in ruminants from linoleic, alpha -linolenic, and gamma -linolenic acid s. As you see,  18:3, 
9 C, 12 C, 15 t  are converted into either 18 :3, 9 C, 11 t, 15 C or 18: 3, 10 t, 12 C , 15 C by 
isomerase and reduced to 18:2,  11 t, 15 C  by reductase . Thus, this  whole  series that i s 
either 18:3, 18:2 , or again 18: 3 with 6 C, 9 C, 12  C gives by these process es, either a 
different type  of MTF  is produced or finally, they can come  to the 18: 0 that is steric  acid 
whic h we discuss ed in the earlier .   
 
 If we compare the industrially generated t rans fatty acids and ruminant -generated trans 
fatty acids we see that is particularly the sources that is  TFAs are primarily produced 
through a process called partial hydrogenation of vegetable o ils. This process involves 
adding hydrogen to liquid vegetable oils to make them more solid and increase their shelf 
life in the case of industrially generated and Ruminant -generated TFAs that occur 
naturally in the digestive process of ruminant animals. They are produced by 
microorganisms in the rumen during the fermentation of plant -based food . The main 
TFAs produced industrially are artificial trans  fats, specifically isomers of oleic, linoleic, 
and linolenic acids . The main TFA produced in ruminants is CLA, which includes 
isomers like 18:2 9c, 11t and    18 :2 10t, 12c. Vaccenic acid  (18:1 11t) is another TFA 
produced in ruminants .  
 
Industrially generated TFAs can be produced in large quantities and are commonl y found 
in processed and packaged foods, including fried foods, baked goods, snacks, and 
margarine . Ruminant -generated TFAs are present i n relatively small amounts in the meat 
and dairy products derived from these animals . Consuming high levels of industrially 
generated TFAs has been linked to an increased risk of heart disease, inflammation, and 
other health problems. Therefore, there has been a push to reduce their prese nce in the 
food supply . Naturally occurring TFAs from ruminant sources may have different health 
effects than industrially generated TFAs, inclu ding potential health benefits of                               
CLA. However , more research work  is needed to fully understand their impact on human                      
health . 
 
Literature reports show that t rans fatty acids are also produced during food irradiation.  
The free radicals formed by irradiation of unsaturated fatty acids react with oxygen and  
lead to the formation of carbonyl compounds, which are responsible for associated 
changes in the nutritional and organoleptic characteristics of foods. Furthermore, 
breaking the double bond favors  the formation of TFA as its regeneration in the trans 
configuration reduces the free energy of the fatty acid.  Brito et al. (2002) evaluated the 
effect of increasing gamma radiation doses on TFA content in fresh bo vine meat 
following to irradiation. They observed that doses between 1 – 5 kGy were associated to 
an average increase of 80.4% in the amount of TFA.  Doses between 6 -7 kGy led to an 
increase of 106.5% in TFA content. At 8 kGy, it reached 139.1%, corresponding to 
11.0% of TFA. Thus, irradiation with doses between 1 and 5 kGy seem to be the most 
indicated to limit TFA formation.  
 
So, now that having known  how these are the trans fatty acids and how they are formed , 
let us discuss about what are the dif ferent trans -free oil modificatio n techniques.  Trans -
free oil modification techniques refer to various methods used to modify vegetable oils 
and fats to reduce or eliminate the presence of trans fatty acids (TFAs). These techniques 
are emplo yed to create healthier oil alternatives that do not contain trans fats, which are 
known to have negative health effects.  The techniques used are inter-esterification , high 
oleic oils, ble nding  of oil , and fractionation . 
 
The liquid oil s and tropical oils can be subjected to  full hydrogenation,  interesterification,  
and fractionation , and obviously, the conditions of the  process should be properly 
maintained in such a way  that it will lower  the trans -fat generation.  
  
Inter esterification we have discussed earlier, is a means of modifying th e structure and 
functionality of fats and oils to produce food ingredients for a range of applications. This 
process can help to reduce levels of SFA and TFA in some foods, by providing an 
alternative to the use of animal fats or partially hydrogenated oils, r espectively . 
Interesterification can be performed through enzymatic or chemical methods . By 
rearranging the fatty acids, interesterification can convert trans fats into non -trans fats, 
providing a healthier fat profile.  It allows for the modification of the melting point, solid 
fat content, and other physi cal properties of oils and fats and can enhance the oxidative 
stability of oils and fats, reducing the risk of rancidity and extending the shelf life of food  
products . 
 
There are two methods of  interesterification chemical inter esterification  and enzymatic  
interesterification . Just for reference , I have include d this slide, but details of  the 
interesterification process we had already discussed in the earlier class.  Enzymatic 
interesterification  uses microbial -sourced  enzymes  and gives  either a random or spe cific 
distribution of fatty acid, depending on the specificity of the lipases , and by this one can  
lower the formation of trans fatty acids . 
 
Here it shows the change in the percentage of solid fat with the temperature in 3 oil s, 
which  are palm oil, inter-esterified  palm oil , and inter-esterified  palm oil that is blended  
with the liquid oil and you can see PO, IE PO, and 75 percent IE PO. For both  the 
temperature and solid fat content the effect is shown  in the figure .  Also , the here  the 
saturated fatty acids percentage in  IE and non -IE oils used in the  application of spread s 
bakery and confectionery is shown . So, this bar diagram and the line show  the estimated 
effect of saturated fatty acids  intake and removing the inter-esterified  fats from foods by 
replacing those with non-inter-esterified  fats.   
 
High oleic oils can help in reducing the trans fat content in oil through a dif ferent 
approach, which involves the selection of oil varieties with a naturally high proportion of 
monounsaturated fats, such as oleic acid.  For example, high –oleic acid soybean oil (H -
OSBO) is a trait-enhanced vegetable oil having >70% oleic acid.  It is developing as an 
alternative for trans -FA (TFA) -containing vegetable oils, H -OSBO is predicted to repl ace 
large amounts of soybean oil in the US diet.  The advantage  of the high oleic oils is the 
avoidance of hydrogenation  as high oleic oils  with their inherent stability due to their 
high MUFA, often do not require  it. By avoiding hydrogenation, the risk of TFA is 
eliminated . High oleic oils possess high oxidative stability which reduces the need of 
hydrog enation and improves the shelf life.  Desirable functional properties, like good 
flavour stability and a high smoke poin t, making them suitable for various food 
applications.  
   
 
The blending of oils can provide oxidative stability during frying along with keeping the 
lower SFA content.  Some oils like olive oil and soybean are good for human 
consumption, but due to their high content of unsaturated fatty acid they are unstable at 
cooking temperature. Thus balancing fatty acid profile of these oils can be achieved by 
blending with saturate d oils like palm oil and coconut oil.  In relation to trans -free oil 
modification, the formation of structured lipid produced by the Such as the blend of high 
oleic sunflower oil and fully hydrogenated Crambe abyssinica  oil in the ratio 60:40 and 
50:50 have significant use in bakery and confectionery fat. various oil blends can be done 
to obtain Trans free bakery fats.  The blend of 50% stearin and 50% patawa oil showed 
the suitable melting point, SFC, plasticity and consistency at r efrigeration temperature as 
desirable for the food industry.  
 
So, here in this table , we have given some of the common blends  of the different types  of 
oil and their possible application.  But of course, for the blending of the oil every country 
has specific regulations , in India also in the FSSAI there are specific regulations that 
industries should follow for blending protocol as  per the recommended guidelines.  Cocoa 
butter is a major ingredient for confectionery fat. Cocoa butter equivalent, an alternative 
to cocoa butter, can be prepared by using a blend of 1, 3- dipalmitoyl - 2-oleoyl -glycerol 
(POP) rich fats with fats rich in 1,3 -distearoyl -2-oleoyl -glycerol (SOS).  A blend  of palm 
mid-fraction (PMF), palm stearin (POs) , and olive oil (OO) could be used as 
manufacturing shortening and cocoa butter substitutes with improved  features than an 
individual oil. Interesterified blends of lard and  soybean oil can  be used as a substitute  for 
human milk fat.   
 
Then fractionation of oil we discussed the fractionation technology in the earlier  class . 
Fractionation  of oil is a process used to separate oils into different fractions based on their 
melting points. This technique allows for the isolation of specific components within the 
oil, which can be beneficial for reducing trans fat content.  The steps in fractionation of 
oils are,  oil cooled to below its freezing point, causing the formation of solid crystals 
within the oil , as the oil cools, certain components with higher melting points, including 
TFAs and SFAs, solidify and form crystals. These solid crystals separate from the liquid 
portion of the oil.  The solid fraction contains a higher proportion of saturated fats, 
including trans fats, while the liquid fraction has a lower concentration of these 
components.  The liquid fraction can then be used as a trans -fat-reduced or trans -fat-free 
oil. The involvement of the temperature is much more here.  Theprocess parameters in 
this process can be adjusted in such a way pr operly optimized  to reduce the TFA 
formation.   
 
So, here an oil processing flow sheet  combining virtual trans -free modification 
technique s with both chemical and physical refining is shown .  See all the processes  
involved are neutra lization, bleaching , deodorization , and storage . It has deep 
degum ming, full hydrogenation, intere sterification , and fractionation as an additional 
process.  These are the conditions where there is a greater  possibility of trans  fat 
formation, in all th at process the parameters  would be properly optimized , and as we 
discussed in the earlier classes sometimes  controlling the pressure, the temperature , and 
other factors in a proper level so as to have minimum or no tr ans fat  formation .  
 
To summarize the lecture , trans fats have received much interest in recent years because 
for several bad health effects.  Margarine, vegetable shortening, vanaspati ghee, fried 
foods, baked goods, doughnuts, etc.  are some foods containing trans fat in significant 
amounts.  Trans fat can be produced by partial hydrogenation of vegetable oils, can be  
naturally present in ruminant sources, and can be produced during heat process  and food 
irradiat ion. Interesterification, high oleic oils, blending , and fractionation are the methods  
to carry out trans -free oil modification.  
 
 So, these are the references that are used in this lecture.  Thank you very much for your 
patience hearing.  Thank you.  
