Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Ins titute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 8 : Animal & Dairy Fats  
Lecture 38: Dairy Cream  
 
Hello everyone, namaskar.  Now in this lecture that is lecture 38, we will talk 
about Dairy Cream.   
 
We will discuss what is cream, its physicochemical properties, the n cream 
manufacturing process, where tubular bowl and disk bowl for cream making, cream 
separation methods both gravity  method and centrifugal separation method and also we 
will talk about skimming efficiency.   
 
So, let us see what is a cream.  For ages, cream has been recognized as the layer 
of fat t hat naturally forms on the top of milk when it is left undisturbed for some time.  
Cream is the term used to refer to the portion of the milk  that has been concentrated to 
contain a high proportion of milk  fat than the original milk.  
It contains all the constituents found in the milk.  The proportions of these 
constituents, however, can differ  significantly from that of the  milk.  For instance, the 
milk fat content in the cream may ran ge from 18% to as high as 85%, whereas the solid 
nuts fat, popularly known as SNF components ar e present in lower proportions compared 
to the milk.  As per the PFA rules of 1976, in India, cream refers to a produ ct derived 
from cow or buffalo milk or a combination of both which has a minimum milk fat content 
of around 25%.  This definition excludes sterilized creams.   
 
As far as the composition and nutritive value of the cream is c oncerned, fresh 
cream contains 5 times more fat than milk.  Fresh cream is rich in energy giving fat and 
fat soluble vitam ins that  is A, D, E and K and the contents of which may be depend upon 
the fat lev el of in the cream that is the content of vitamins may vary with the variations in 
the fat levels in the cream.  Different types of creams on the basis of their fat content  like 
table  cream and light  cream are those cream which contain fat that is milk fat in the range 
of 20 to 25%.  The cream containing milk fat in the range of 30 to 40% are categorized as 
coffee cream or whipping cream. Those creams which have fat content in the higher 
proport ion like 65 to 85% of the milk fat are called heavy cream or plastic cream.   
 
The chemical constituents of the cream composition normally it co ntains around 
45 to 68% water, its 25 to 60% fat, may be 1.6 to 2.5% pro tein, it may contain 2.4 to 
3.7% lactose about 0.3   to 0.56% as its total solids  content may vary from 31.8 to 54. 5% 
and solids non -fat fat may  be 4. 5 to 6.8%.  However, the higher the fat percentage in the 
cream,  lower will be the solids non-fat content.  If you have high fat co ntent, SNF content 
will be low. There is a formula to find out the percent SNF in cream can be calculated.  
That is the 100 minus percent fat in the cream divided by 100 minus  percent fat in the 
milk multiplied by perce nt solids non -fat in the milk.  
 
Using this formula, one can calculate how much will be the percentage SNF in the 
cream.   
 
Physico chemical properties of the cream, number one is viscosity.  It is a very 
important property.  It can be defined as the measure of the liquid's resistance to f low and 
this property is of significant commercial importance.  When it comes to cream, since the 
consumer's perception of cream's richness is of ten based on its viscosity.  
The factors which influence the viscosity of cream include the fat percentage.  
The higher the fat percentage, the greater will be the viscosity and vice versa.  Similarly, 
if the temperature is high, the viscosity will be lower and vice versa.  When separ ation 
conditions, higher the temperature of separation, the lower will be the viscosity  and vice 
versa.  In lower temperature of separation, however,  leads to higher fat losses.  
Then homogenization, single stage homogenization increases viscosity in direct  
relation to  the pressure used.  Double stage homogenization reduces the viscosity.  Aging, 
slow cooling of cream increases its viscosity.  Aging obviously will increase the viscosity 
and clumping, greater the degree of clumping,  the greater will be the vi scosity.  So, these 
are the factors wh ich influence the viscosity.  
 
Similarly, whippi ng quality. Whipping refers to the beating of cream to produce 
fourth or half of the emulsion of gas and air in a liquid. That is the whipping. In many 
dairy industry, bakery industry, many such industri es, whipping is done basically by the 
whipping p rocess. Air is i ncorporated into the liquid.  
Similarly, the air is incorporated in the cream and this makes many times that is 
whipped.  The cream is a special form possessi ng remarkable stability and it is used in 
cakes, in ice -cream making etcetera for decorative purposes.  So, the factors which 
influence the whipping quality of t he cream include fat percentage  and the most 
satisfactory fat content as far as the whipping is  concerned is 30 to 35 percent fat.  Then 
whipping temperature lowers progressi vely above 4 degree Celsius.  The separation 
temperature is 32 degree Celsius more satisfac tory than 38 degree Celsius.  
Aging for 24 hours at 4 degree Celsius is considered opti mum for whipping.  
Homogenization above 300 psi becomes detrimental to whipping.  Gravity reduces 
progressively and addition of stabilizers reduces the whipping quality.   
 
Specific gravity of the cream depends on its fat percentage.  It decreases with th e 
fat percentage decrease effect of f at percentage on cream and its specific gravity as you 
can see here.  
 
If the fat percentage is about 0.025, its specific gravity will be 1.037.  So, if you 
increase the fat content like for example, at 10 percent fat content specifi c gravity of 
cream becomes 1. 025.  Further at 15 percent of the specific fat content spec ific gravity 
becomes 1.108, 25 percent it becomes 1.008.  At 30 percent fat content specific gravity 
becomes 1.00 4 and 40 percent fat content in  the cre am, i ts specific gravity becomes 0. 995 
means that is the content of the fat i f it is the less specific gravity will be more.  More the 
fat content in the cream, specific gravity will be less. Similarly , percentage titratable 
acidity of cream that is  it can  be calculated using the  formula that is percentage serum in 
cream divided by perc entage serum in milk multiplied  by percentage titratable acidity of 
milk.  So, this gives percentage titratable acidity of cream.  The percentage of titratable 
acidity in fre sh cream should al ign with its fat percentage.  
Titratable acidity is indirectly p roportional to the fat percent.  Freshly separated 
cream typically has lower titratable ac idity compared to that of milk from which it was 
prepared from and this value can be calcul ated using the specific formula  that is given 
above.   
 
Then now let us talk about the fat separation or cream separation.  The cream is 
separated from milk for various purposes like  for standardization of the fat  content in the 
milk to obtain fat r educed or fat free milk th at is skin milk to concentrate milk fat for the 
production of high fat products or to recov er fat from milk for the making  butter for 
making ghee and so on.  So, the fundamental principle if you talk about the cream 
separation, it  depends on  the separation of two immiscible liquids having different 
densities under the influence of  gravita tional or separation forces.  
That is here you have one is the water and with the soli d not fat is there and the 
fat is there containing cream.  So , these basically are the two immiscible liquids and they 
have the different density and accordingly under the gravitational force or by appl ying 
centrifugal force they are  separated.  So, the milk you have a skim milk is a heavier part 
and the cream is the lighter part.  So, there are two methods of separation that is one is 
the gravity methods and other is  the centrifugal separation that is they get separated 
because there  is a gradient they are different in their density.  So, obviously they will be 
separated and this picture  here they are one of the very first separator the alpha -a1 charge 
manufactu re in 1882.  
 
So, let us talk about cream separation by gravity method in the figure here.  You 
see that where settle any liquid and in the liquid ther e are separate solids and they are 
having various densities.  You keep undisturbed obviously that the material that is when 
there is the low density material it will go on the top  and high density material will settle 
in the water that is simply by the gravitational force.  So, when the milk is left 
undisturbed fat globules because  they are of low density which were initially dispersed 
throughout the milk they will ri se to the top and form a layer of cream and this is known 
as creaming process and can be observed in half an hour or so.  If you just leave milk 
undisturbed for half an hour you  can see that the formation of its top layer in the cream 
layer.  
 
The rate of cream separation is decided by the different  density difference 
between the  fat and the serum as I told you.  The size of the fat globule and viscosity of 
the serum if the size of the fat globule becomes less then the separation will be difficult.  
That is what if you take normal milk and homogenized milk and in the homogenized milk 
where the size of the fat globule is reduced you get almost nil dependin g upon the 
efficiency of  the homogenization process are very difficult separation.  But in the whole 
milk becau se the fat globule size is more they come to the top.  So the flotation velocity 
can be calculated using the St okes law that is Vg is equal to  d-square rho s minus rho r 
whole thing multiplied by g divided by 18  η where Vg is the flo atation  velocity of the fat 
globule in m s meter per second.  
The fat globule larger the size they will have more fat.  The diameter of the fat 
globule rho s and rho t are densitie s of skim milk and fat and η  is the viscosity of the 
skim milk.  So with this one ca n find out the flotation velocity how much time it will take 
for the cream to come on the top depending upon  the size of the fat globules.  
 
So obviously the size of the rise of the fat globule on the top and the formation of 
cream will depend upon the si ze of the fat globule that is high er the size of the fat globule 
and rate of the cream separation.  More is the size of the fat globule higher will be the 
rate of cream separation it w ill come faster on the top.  
Similarly , temperature if temperature is mor e viscosity wi ll be less and velocity 
will be  more.  Clumping is more viscosity will be more and rate of separation will be also 
more.  So these are how that fat size of the flat globules temperatu re and clumping they 
influence the separation of cream or f ormation of cream.  Gravity based cream separation 
is slow and inefficient an d the dairy industry typically employs mechanized cream 
separation using a centrifugal machines even for small scale  operations.   
 
Centrifugal separation this method of cream separation is sim ilar to the gravity 
separation,  but here gravity as the driving force is replaced by the centrifugal force for 
which a centrifug al machine centrifuge is used.  
The centrifugal force is about 3000 to 6000 times greater than the gravitational  
force.  The centrifugal separator consists of a bowl holding a st ack of conical discs with 
holes  in the middle for milk to pass through.  We will see little later the centrifugal 
separator construction and work principle.  So the principle of centrifugal separation is as 
the cen trifugal force is applied the heavier skim milk particles are pushed towards the 
bottom side of each disc moving towards  the edge of the bowl.  At the same time the 
cream particles travel along the upper side of each disc towards  the center of the cream 
separator.  
Thus there is no mixing of cream and skim milk allowing for the easy discharge 
through the two separate outlets that are placed one above the other.   
 
The flotation velocity in this case can be calculated by replacing the gravitational 
acceleration by centrifugal acce leration that is ‘a’ is equal to r  omega -square.  So the Vc 
in this case is equal to d square multiplied by that  is Ps minus Pf divided  by 18 η  and here 
the ‘a’  is replaced by r  omega square.  Omega square is the 2 pi N by 60 where Vc is the 
flotatio n velocity of fat global under centrifugal force, r  is the radial position of fat global 
and omega is the angular velocity at the rotational speed of N that is in rpm.  The speed 
of the separator bow l and the disc diameter are two  important factors that affect the rate 
of cream separation.  
 
 
The higher the speed of the bowl or the larger the diamete r of the disc the greater 
will be the separation rate.   
 
Now you see here in the picture there is a centrifugal cream separator has been 
shown its various components that is this.  Here this is the right side it is a section 
through the bowl with a o utlet of a modern hermetic separator and it is the whole 
compon ent.  So in this section it has outlet pumps bowl, hood, distr ibution hole, disc 
stack, lock ring, distributor, sliding bowl bottom, body b owl and hollow bowl spindle.  
These are present in the top.  Here it is the frame, hood, sediment cyclone, motor, 
brake, gear, operating water system  and hollow bowl spindle.  So, these are the different 
components which are provided in the centrifugal cream separator.   
 
So, what happens in this from the given thing here that the milk enters through 
vertically  aligned distribution holes from the edge of the disc stack.  Due to centrifugal 
force the sediment that fat globules settle readily outwards or inwards  according t o the 
density difference relative to that the continuous medium that is skim  milk and the cream 
that is the fat globules has a lower density than the skim milk and  thus moves toward the 
axial rotation.  The skim milk moves outwards and then through a cha nnel between the 
top of the disc stack  and the conical hood of the concerned skim milk outlet that you see 
how it moves in the  yellow portion that is the cream will go toward the top side.  
When it moves there are various bowels like this the milk comes f rom there.  So 
obviously because of the centrifugal force here the skim milk it is heavier so it comes  to 
the bottom cream which is lighter it goes and this disc stacks are equipped with vertically  
aligned distribution holes you can see.  So, the finally , from these two holes that is the 
milk rise is cream goes on the top  it out from here and the skim milk it from other outlet 
that is how the cream separator  centrifugal cream separators work.   
 
So, here it is further shown that is steps involved in  the centrifugal separation of 
the cream.  Obviously, the electrical connection is switched on then separato r is allowed 
to acquired first the it is on the it gets the required that is the spee d that is what is the it 
moves like this 3000 or 4000 whatever spe ed is there it is there then s eparator is allowed 
to acquire  the speed and then milk is from the top the milk is fed into down the inlet tube  
into the separator bowels.  
So, here there are different disc one stacked one above th e above that the disc 
revolve s the density difference cream moves toward the that is m ilk is spread in the thin 
thing  over the different discs.  At down the inlet tube into separator bowels milk rotates 
and move through the series of aligned holes in the disc and as the disc revolves the 
density difference cr eam moves  toward the centre as you see here and the skim milk 
comes outer periphery.  Thus the cream and the skim milk are separated from each oth er 
under normal conditions skim  milk cream in the ratio of 90 is to 10.  And the cent rifugal 
separation is a faster process and a dopted by the industry for the cream separation.   
 
There are tubular bowl separator the principle is same that is the only thing that 
here the  bowls are the tubular form tubular bowl centrifuges utilized in the  industrial 
settings typ ically measures between  15 to 50 centimeter in diameter and  operates at a 
speed resulting in a settling accelerati on to up to roughly a 18 ,000 g.  
Meanwhile a laboratory models can generate up to 65,000 g acceleration.  These 
figures  first surpass the less than 1000 g acce leration typically produced by cylindrical 
solid bowled machines.  The bowl neck serves as the inlet for the feed slurry which is  
dispersed by a distributor  to prevent it from travelling too far along the bowl le ngth and 
most commonly used for  a small particle separation.  Here even a smaller particle size 
also they can be separated in this.   
 
Then disc bowl separator disc type centrifuge generates a n acceleration of up to 
around 12,000 g and thicken suspensions int o a thick slurry as  you can see here that is ok.  
And the bowl of the centrifuge is equipped with betwe en 50 and 150 conical disc 
that are spaced roughly 2 millimeter apart and they are used for separating the cream.   
 
As the suspension is fed into the di sc type centrifuge, it flows towards the 
machine axis you can see here it flows to the machines axis through the spaces between 
the disc.  Solid particles in the suspension settle on to the und esirable of each other ok 
slide  to outward along with the disc and are then plugged to the wall of the bowl by the 
centrifugal force.  After the solid particles have been separated from the s uspension, the 
clarified liquid  moves towards the center of the bowl and is discharged over a wi re 
located at the top or bottom of the centrifuge.  The thickened slurry or solids are typically 
discharged through pores at  the periphery  of the bowl.  
If in an opening bowl centrifuge, these pores open at a t imed cycle whereas in a 
nozzle discharge centri fuge, the pores continuously release the solids.   
 
So here type of the cream separator and uses I have summ arized in this table like 
cold milk separator, it produces skim milk, high quality various cr eam with less foam and 
partial churning of the milk wi th low capacity.  Warm milk separator it is used for high 
capacity but produces low viscosity cream and foam.  Hand -driven cream separators it is 
low viscosity and used for form scale op erations and is  economical power driven cream 
separator it is a high c apacity and used for dairy plants and of course it is little expensive.  
Open bowl cream separator it is low capacity and suitable for small dairy plants produ ces 
foam during separation.  
Hermetically sealed, air tight, foamless type process separ ators they  do not 
produce foam and perform clarification, separation and strain digestion.  It produces 
cream of high viscosity, better quality, ex pensive and regular maintenance  is required.   
 
Then here gravity versus centrifugal separations if you see that i s driving force in 
the gravity method, it is gravitational in other it is a centrifugal.  Rate of separation is 
extremely slow in the gravity method  whereas it can be practically instantaneous in the 
centrifugal method.  Motion of the particles in the vert ical in the gravity method whereas 
it is horizontal  in the centrifuga l method.  
Fat percentage of the cream which is obtained in the gravity met hod it may be 10 
to 25 whereas in 18 to 25 can be in the centrifugal method or even it can be c ontrolled by 
havin g controlling  the centrifugal force another parameter.  Fat percentage of the skim 
milk may be 0.2 or above wh en it is done by gravity method  but 0.1 or below in the 
centrifugal method.  It is normally gravity method is used for a small sca le, centrifugal 
method is used for large scale and fat recovery in the cream is around 90 percent in the  
gravity method  and 99 to 99. 5 percent in the centrifugal method.   
 
Cream manufacture centrifugal cream separator you see that it i s a centrifugal 
cream separator  machine whole milk process and the yellow line is the cream going it is 
standardized  and blue line is going showing the skim milk flow line.   
 
Similarly it is the production line of pasteurized whipping cream an d it has 
holding tube, product tube, past eurizer, booster pump, holding tube again, ripe ning tank 
and product pump and again here the yellow line is the flow line of the cream that is the 
cream is concentrated  here heating medium this red line and cold water is a light blue 
and deep blue is the  ice water.  So, this show how different through different machines it 
moves and  the cream can be concentrated here pasteurized whipped cream here in 
corporation can be done.   
 
Even standardization  of the cream is another for the cre am fat content can be  
modified to the desired level because many a times it is requ ired that cream of a 
particular  fat content should be used for particular operations.  And then it is a 
standardized by the cream level can be adj usted to desired content by the  process known 
as standardization where a precise amount of water or skim milk is add ed into  it. 
The difference between the water or skim milk depends upon the intended use of 
the cream.  For example, when the cream is used for butter preparation normally water is 
used for standardization  whereas, for making whipping cream, table crea m or coffee 
cream  normally skim  milk is used to a standard standardize the fat content in cream.  
Skimming milk is typically used for standardiza tion milk  for producing making beverage 
preparation or for drying purposes before being packaged for retail sale the standardize d 
cream undergoes homogenization and is subjected to suitable thermal processing.   
 
Homogenization obviously, is the process where it is cream in an oil in water 
emulsion to ensure fat content levels cream is mixed with skim milk it  must go undergo 
homog enization  and this process reduces the size of the fat globules and en hances the 
stability preventing  the separation of fat. Homogenizati on is the method of subjecting 
cream to a high pressure as it passes through a narrow open ing resulting the breakdown 
of fat globules into a smaller size and even distribution through the cream it is passe d 
through a very small hole.  
So, larger fat globules are b roken into a smaller one. This process is capable of 
production of cream particles with varying viscosity levels.   
 
Cream is typically subjected to lower pressure during homo genization compared 
to the milk  product whipping cream is not usually homogenized as this can  significantly 
decrease ability  to whip properly. To improve the whipp ing ability , stabilizer such as 
mono -glycerides are often  added to the whipped cream . In contrast , homogenization  is 
utilized to in the production of a spoon -able whipped cream products that serve as a 
dessert toppings when high -fat cream is used. To prevent fat separation , which increases  
the UH T pasteurization homog enization is also implied for UH T pasteurized whipping 
cream.   
 
Now the thermal processing of the cream actually the cream can unde rgo thermal 
processing through either pasteurization or  sterilizatio n method.  
Pasteurization  can be done through batch or  continuous process. Sterilization can 
be accomplished through either ba tch or using computer pressure counter pressure 
autoclaves known as retards or through c ontinuous method followed by a septic 
packaging. So, the time te mperature combinations for cream processes are generally 
higher compared to the milk proc essing due to the higher total solids content in the milk. 
So, in the case of batch p rocess for cream pasteurization  that is batch pasteurization 74 
degree Celsius for 30 minutes whe reas, continuous pasteurization  it is 85 degree Celsius 
for 25 seconds. For sterilizat ion batch sterilization of the cream is done at 115 to 120 
degree Celsius for 15 minu tes and UH T processing is done at 135 degree Celsius for 1 to 
3 seconds.  
 
After the cream undergoes heat processing , it is promptly cooled to a temperature 
below 10 degree Celsi us to prevent the proliferation  of the microorganisms that are 
resistan t to heat d uring its storage.  
Typically, the cream  is cooled down to a temperature of around 4 to 5 degree 
Celsius in practice. Once processed,  the cream is packaged in appropriate containers and 
stored at low temperature and it is kept below 5 degree Celsius. However, if the cr eam 
has been sterilized or in UH T cream it ca n be safely stored at room temperature.  
 
Then the ski mming efficiency, the quantity of fat that can be separated from the 
milk is influenced by various factors such as the design of the separ ator, the speed at 
which the milk is processed and the distr ibution  of the fat globules in the milk. Fat 
globules that are typic ally less than 1 micron in size  cannot rise at the given flow rate and 
hence by if they get carried away from the se parator  using the skim milk.  
Typically , the residual amount of fat in the skim milk falls within the range of 
0.04 to 0.07 perce nt. In such case the machine's ability to r emove fat is referred to as 0. 04 
to 0.07. If the flow rate of the machine is  decreased, the flow viscosity across the 
separation channel will also decre ase. As a result the  increased flow viscosity allows the 
fat globules to leave or to  have a longer rise time which facilitates their separation and 
subsequent discharge through the  cream outlet. As a c onsequence  the skimming 
efficiency of a separator is positively correla ted with a decreased throughput  and 
conversely a high throughput is associated with a reduced skimming efficiency.   
 
The factors affecting the skimming efficiency include separ ation temperature, 
bowl speed, disc opening and milk flow through the separator. Optimal ou tcomes have 
been observed for a  warm milk separator at a separation temperature ranging bet ween 45 
to 55 degree Celsius.  
At speeds between 4000 to 5000 rpm the skimm ing efficiency is sufficient. A 
smaller space between the discs results in higher separation efficiency. F or better 
separation efficiency  it is beneficial to use lower input feeds as it allows the milk to spend 
more time within  the separator for the fat g lobules to segregate.  
 
Even the size of the fat glo bules, presence  of air, acidity of milk, mechanical 
conditions of separato r, fat percentage in the cream and degree of agitation and 
temperature of the milk also in fluence the skimming efficiency  to a gr eater extent.  
 
Finally, I would  like to summarize this lecture  that cream is the term used to refer 
to the portion of the milk that has been concentrated  to contain a higher proportion of 
milk fat than the original mil k. Physico -chemical properties of the cream include 
viscosity, whipping  quality, specific gravity and acidity. Cream can be  separated either 
by gravity or by centrifugal separation meth od. The fundamental principles on which 
cream separation depends is a separation of two immis cible liq uids having different 
densities under the influence of gravitational or centrifugal forces. In this case, the milk is 
less dense than the skim milk component. In gravity method, milk is undisturbed , fat 
globules initially disperse throughout the milk rise to the top and the formal layer  of the 
cream. And then cream is separated and processed for various products for different  
purposes.  
 
 
So, these are the references used in this lecture.  
 
With this, thank you very much for your patience here. Thank you.  
