Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Ins titute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 8 : Animal & Dairy Fats  
Lecture 36: Animal Fats  
 
Hello everybody, Namaste.  Now we are in the 8th module of this course.  In this 
module, the five lectures will be devoted on Animal and Dairy Fats.  In the lecture today, 
we will talk about Animal Fats.   
 
We will discuss what are the different types of animal fats, lard, its types and 
characteristics, lard treatment, rendering and their process types, by -product adipose 
tissues and edible greases and tallows.   
 
You know that first before extracting the fa t from an imals that they are required to  
be slaughtered obviousl y using standard techniques. After slaughtering the carcasses 
which is obtained from t hat the fatty tissues, adipose tissues etc. are trimmed.  And then 
these trimmed fatty tissues are used for extraction of fat using suitable technologi es more 
popularly the rendering technology which is a heating process type of heating process.  
Different types and qualities of animal fats are produced using different rendering 
techniques or diff erent extra ction techniques.  
 
Let us first understand what is the animal fat.  When we talk about animal fat, 
what does it include?  As per the Association of American Feed Control Officials th at is 
popularly known as AAFCO,  animal fat is the fat which is obtained f rom the tissues of 
mammals and or poultry i n the commercial process of rendering or extracting.  There are 
different types of animal fat like cow fat, leaf  fat, chicken fat, bubbler fat,  inedible 
tallows and greases, rendered pork fat, lard and tallows.  S o, these are different types of 
animal fats.  So, let us talk about lard.  
 
Lard is fat which is obtained from pig in both its rendered and unrendered form.  
We can talk about lard as a pig fat.  It is a semi -soft white fat derived from fatty parts of 
the pig with a high saturated fatty  acid content and it does not include any type of trans 
fats.  This lard is mainly made of triglycerides of low saturated fat content.  It has more 
saturated fat content and less low saturated  or unsaturated fat content.  
It has around 40 percent of the saturated fat content.  It is a neutral in flavor.  So, 
it is ideal for making all kinds of foods.  If you look at the biological structure of the lard, 
it is a  purified internal fat obtained  from the abdomen of hog sauce line  that is Hog -Pig, 
Sus-genus or domestic pigs.  These are the animals which are used for obtaining lard.  
 
The characteristics of the lard are physical properties, col orless or aloe fat, the 
melting  point of leaf fat is around 43 to 48 degree Celsius, melt ing point of back fat is 30 
to 40 degree Celsius.  It consists of 40 percent solid triglycerides, 50 percent liquid 
triglycerides.  Solid triglycerides include mainly styrene and palmit ine whereas, liquid 
triglycerides  are olein .  These two solid and liquid triglycerides are separated by usi ng 
pressure at 0 degree Celsius  and sold as st earin and lard oil respectively.  The lard is 
stable and it is  a preferred fat for frying. Its acid value is around 3.4.  If you look at the 
saturated and unsaturated ratio in the lard fat, it is around 1.2. The saturated acids mainly 
which are present that is it is a p almitic acid around 26 percent,  stearic acid 14 percent 
and myristic ac id is less amount 2 percent.  Mono unsaturated f atty acids that is oleic acid 
C18: 1, they  are about 44 percent and  poly unsaturated fatty acids mainly the linoleic acid 
is 10 percent approximately.   
 
In this table, I have tried to give you the lard composition and the physical 
properties, major physical properties also I give in the last slide but here in little detail.  
This is you can see  its iodine value is around 57.  It is sedim entation point is that its AOM  
stability is around 54 hours.  Th at Met ller dropping point is 32. 5 degree Celsius and its 
oxidative stability index at 110 degree  Cels ius is around 16 hours.  Its tocopherol content 
if you see it has around 172 ppm alph a tocopherol, beta tocopherol, gamma tocopherol 
and delta tocopherols are about 30, 26 and 13 ppm.  Similarly, it has a good amount of 
palmitic acid as you  saw in the earl ier slide also and about oleic acid 43 percent.  
 
The other linolenic and arachidonic and all these are p resent in very small 
quantity. Its triglyceride composition if you look at tha t is SSS that is the tri saturated 
acids  are may be around 2 t o 5 percent  whereas, the SUS di saturated are m ore that is 
about 25 to 35.  Then SUU monounsaturated 5 0 to 60 and UUU that is the tri unsaturated 
acids are in the range  of 10 to 30.  Its crystal habit is beta.  Beta type crystals are more 
formed and solid fat index at  10 degree Celsius is 29 and at  40 degree Celsius is 2.2 that 
is obviously, increase the tem perature solid fat index lowers  down reduces.   
 
As far as the nutritional properties  of a la rd is con cerned that is a nutrition fat per 
serving size of 100 gram it gives aro und 902 calories.  Total fat that is around if you take 
100 gram that is it bec omes around 154 percent of per daily value.  Its cholesterol content 
is around 32 percent it gives a 32 percent of the daily value cholesterol.  And vitamin D 
around 102  international unit that is the  26 percent of the recommended daily intake.  
Vitamin E is around 0.6 milligram that is 3 percent of t he recommended daily intake.  
Choline is has around 49.7 milligram.  Its boom fat gives around 902 kilo calorie.  
So, these are some of the nutritional fat, vitamin C co ntent and calories provided by the 
lard.   
 
Now, let us see the preparation of the la rd. 
Obviously, as I told you first the after the slaughtering the c arcasses are washed 
thoroughly and break into the that is the fatty tissues etcetera.  They are trimmed and 
these are break into a membranous v essel at around 50 to 55 degree  Celsius.  And then 
these broken and macerated or crushed fatty t issues are melted, heated and la rd is after it 
is separated through muslin cloth or using other centrifugal methods etcetera.  And 
normally cooling is done prior to with proper stirring.   
 
These are the lard and la rd derived ingredient if you can s ee structure of 
mono glycerides  in the la rd it is shown here.  
And it has polychlor inated dibenzo -p-dioxin which is popula rly known as PCDD 
wherein that is structure you can see these are the these are the R groups.  And these R 
groups will be either chlorine or hydrogen commo nly there are in this compound there 
are five of these R's are  chlorine whereas, in th e polychlorinated dibenzofuran PCDF , ok.  
The structure you see that here you have a built in ring s five member rings connecting 
two hexane and this has R connected in the side chains and th is R is a chlorine or 
hydrogen commonly in this compound PCDF that is five of the R will be chlorine group.  
So, these are the some of the la rd ingredients which are present type of the ok.   
 
So, let us see what role does la rd play in our f ood or in our daily life ok.  
It is one of the  few edible oils with a relatively high smoke p oint and therefore, it 
is good for shallow frying and deep frying.  It is a you can say cheaper substitute of the 
cooking oils or other oils.  It is used also as a coating fat for as a shortening or as  a sprea d 
that is just similar to butter because of its characteristic melting properties and spread 
ability etcetera.  And it has as I told y ou earlier also it has no trans  fat an d around 40 
percent of the saturated fats are there.  So, it can be used in lard cake or in pie making and 
also lard that is used for rice  preparations, it  has used as a bread spread.  
Also it is sometime used as a lubricant in some of the machine parts p articularly 
food machines etcetera or for making soap lard is also used for soap m aking.   
 
Lard  treatment and medicinal usage if you talk about in the medicinal usage, Lard  
had been widely used around the world in folk medicines applied as a politics t hat is a 
poultice to burns, cuts and inflamed areas it is applied ok.  It is also us ed as a balm that is 
as a moisturizing and protective  hand cream to prevent against chapping and cracking 
this is another reason to include in the survival kit that is Lard  is commonly included in 
the survival kit.  Then mixed with weaves wax Lard  can be u sed to refurbish and 
maintain wood and leather.  It is its natural qualities of preservation make it applicable 
for almost any tool or  weapon.  
 
Now, let us discuss about the technology for obtaining the Lard  or extracting the 
Lard  that is it is a rendering process that is a simple heating process ok.  It is a thermal 
operation that is the trimmed fatty tissue s they are masqueraded or they are chopped and 
then they are heated using a suitable heating arrangement.  So, hence this heated as you 
could see that in the earl ier classes here the lipids fat  is confined in the adipose tissues or 
membrane cell membrane.  So, when you apply the heat the cell structure or membrane 
breaks down and it releases the  triglycerides.  Whereas, the membrane which is a 
proteinous material it coagulates.  
So, you get that is the oil from animal byproducts and underutil ized species 
etcetera can also be used rendering method is used.  And then this denatured protein 
material is separated by cent rifugation process, decantation  process or by other methods.  
So, once we get oil and we get that is the this sepa rated denatured tallows  etcetera  and 
edible regions etcetera which are used separately for making various products.   
So, rendering process may be of three types commonly it  is use d dry rendering, 
wet rendering and low temperature wet rendering ok.  And obviously, the conditions 
although all these are t he basically heating process as  heating, but obviously, the 
conditions of the rendering heating will influence or will  give you that proper conditions 
of the or proper quality it will help maintaining pro per  quality in the lard ok.  
And normally lard and tallows  are produced by dry and w et rendering method dry 
and wet  rendering method, but prime steam lard and recently obtained  by low 
temperature wet rendering  which gives a better quality lard ok.   
 
So, in this slide it is shown a dry rendering process you can say that carcasses 
which  are obtained.  Obviously, they are send here where this steam is supplied for 
heating it is a disk dryer.  So, direct steam is applied to the crust carcasses etcetera ok.  
The this is obtained that is well to the press where liquid is separated and it is the p rotein  
meal is obtained ok.  
Protein meal that is the tallows  and it is send for the for the process.  Whereas, the 
oil which is obtained here it is send to the decanter and then finally, it is separated and 
some of the residues etcetera of the solid residue and other things which  are there they 
are by centrifugal separator etcetera and filte red you get the lard here  this is the process 
of dry rendering.   
 
So, advantage of dry rendering include that is it can produce a good quality of 
tallows  because not much  that is the particularly tallows  it is which i s obtained after the 
extraction  of the fat it is quality is maintained in the dry rendering process.  And also 
recovery of the fat is better in this case.  However, it has the disadvantages like around it 
is a time cons uming process labour intensive up to 25 percent of the meat is lost in the 
gravy and f or good tallows  even visc era is a cut and w ashed making good tallows  ok. 
 
In the wet rendering process that is the here the fat it is used they are  ground and 
then it is subjected to it is steam and then into melting basis vessel.  The liquid is 
obtained liquid is a water to the dryer fr eezer and the water and fat is obtained.  So, this is 
a simple there is a dry rendering and wet rendering in the wet rendering there is a wet 
steam or sometime it is boiling water or the gentle heat is we t heat is applied  ok.   
 
So, and in the low temperature wet rendering process that is the crushing and 
preheating then tracing separating evaporation finally, drying and will these are the steps 
in low  temperature wet rendering process.  So, it gives a high quality fat with excellent 
colour characteri stics and increased fat yields meats and bone meals are low in fat content 
of upgraded quality and they are of high light  colour and  they are highly digest ible. So, 
low temperature wet rendering process gives a better recovery ok.   
 
Now, the tallow that is byproduct of edible tissue it is  rendered fat of cattle, sheep 
and goat it is tighter is more than 40 degree Celsius th at tighter signifies the degree  of 
softness hardness of the fats healthy animal have more tighter ok.  Physical properties of 
the tallow it is white, brittle, non -odorous and bland taste it is melting point is around 45 
to 50 degree Celsius and conge als has melting that is conge als are 37 to 40 degree 
Celsius.  It is a white, brittle, non -odorous and bland tasting material it reacts with acid 
to liberate  heat ok.   
 
The tallow composition and physical property if you look here  that is a it has 
around iodine  value of 45, it is a metal dropping point is around 46 degre e Celsius, it is 
AOM stability is 16 hours and it is oxidativ e stability index is around 3. 6 hours ok.  It has 
myristic acid around 4 percent, 24.3 percent is around palmitic acid and oleic  is 33 .6, 
stearic is 21. 2 and margar ic acid is 2.1.  So, these are the some of the and almost 
positional transfer at a c-8 into positional transfer at a c -8 arou nd 1.1.  This it is a in 
rumenic  that is conjugated trans 0. 9 ranges may be around 0.6 to 1.7 and her e linolenic is 
0.6 and other fatty acids also may be 0.4.   
 
The triglyceride composition like SS, S tri saturated fatty acids are 21.5, SUS di 
saturated 49, SUU monomer saturated 32. 5 and UUU tri saturated fatty acids are 1 and 
here its crystal  habit is normally it gives beta dash crystal, beta prime crystal it gives ok 
and solid two  fat index in this case also at 10 degree Celsius its SFI solid fat index is 36 
and  at 40 degree Cel sius its SFI becomes 7.  So, as you at higher temperature SFI 
decreases ok.   
 
Now, the mutton tallow, mutton tallow  is produced mainly in count ries with large 
stock of sheep and high consumption of mutton those areas around 450 m illion sheeps of 
and lamb s are slaughtered  yearly yielding more than 6 MMT  of meat ok and assuming 3 
percent of fat that is living weight this correspond to approx imately 0. 5 MMT  fat total fat 
or 0.2 MMT  of rendered  fat.  The fa tty acid spectrum of mutton tallow  resembles that of  
beef t allow  with the predominant fatty acids being palmitic, stearic and oleic acids.  The 
portion of fat trans fatty acids here of course, i s comparatively high and it is around 
approximately 10 percent.   
 
Then inedible tallow or beef tallow  if you make a comparison that is  inedible 
tallow  it is primarily derived from rendered beef tissue, but can contain other animal fats 
as well.  In terms of total volumes and economic value, tallow  is one of the most 
important animal fats.  The term inedib le does not define any specific grade or 
specification other than that the  rendering or processing was not conducted under food 
regulatory supervision.  
Edible animal fat in the United States can be rendered o nly in food grade plants 
under inspection of US Department o f Agriculture.  Edible beef tallow  has some 
similarities with the palm oil , the major saturated moiety in  both the materials is 
palmitate and the major u nsaturated is oleate.  Beef tallow  has more stearate and less 
linoleate than palm oil which enhances its oxidative  stability.   
 
Usage of tallow  can be used in making candles, it can also in making food that is 
for frying purposes etcetera, in making lubricants and it is also us ed in mainly medicinal 
purposes  and soups m anufacture.  Then edible greases, this food grade greases is a 
lubricant that  is formulated using synthetics  and delivers high performance without 
compromising safety and health.  
 
Food grade greases is us ed on high and slow speed chains , caster races and 
bearings , even  in making conveyor bearings and all types of ovens , etcetera made using 
food grade.   
 
Then why is food grade greases used?  The FDA has approximately 48 million 
people in the US, th at is 1 in every 6 persons get sick and 128,000 are hospit alized and 
3000 die each year from the food world diseases.  The FDA believes this is preventable 
which is why they h ave instituted the Food Safety and Modernization Act, it i s popularly 
known as FSMA. The FSMA main concern is focusing on food borne illne sses and not 
only responding to  it, but preventing it.  One way to do this is to take note of lubricants 
used to manufact ure and maintain the machinery which up until recently contained very 
toxic chemicals like barium, lithiu m, black graphite etcetera.  
 
Food grade greases are used in various food processing  equipment and other 
industrial  equipment applications. These include plane and rolling element bearings, 
joints, linkages and solids centralized lubrication system and enclosed gearboxes. Food 
grade gr eases must not only perform the same technical fu nctions as any other lubricant,  
but they have other demanding requirements including li ke restricting degradation from  
food products, chemicals, water and steam etcetera, exhi biting a neutral behavior when in 
contact with elastomers and plastics and being physiologically inert, odorless, tasteless,  
non-toxic and harmful.  That is harmless, they should not react with the food components  
and they should not interfere with the odors, tastes and other components  of the food 
material.   
 
Finally, I will summarize this lecture by saying that a nimal fat is obtained from 
the tissues of mammals and/or pou ltry in the commercial process of rendering or 
extracting.  Lard is a fat from pig in both its rendered and un-rendered form.  It is neutral 
in flavor and can easily be used in several foods.  Rendering is a thermal processing 
operation of three type s dry rendering, wet rendering and low temperature wet rendering.  
Tallow is a render ed fat of cattle, sheep and g oat.   
 
These are the references used in this lecture.   
 
Thank you very much for your attention.  Thank you.  
