Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 0 7: Modifications of Oils and Fats  
Lecture 3 1: Hydrogenation  
 
Hello everybody, Namaskar. Now, we are in the 7th module of the course and this 7th 
module that is 5 lectures of this module will be devoted on Modifications of Food, Oils and 
Fats. And today's lecture, lecture number 31 will be devoted on Hydrogenation.  
 
The concept which I will discuss in this lecture include what is the need of edible oils and 
fat modification, why do we modify fats and oils and then what are the various processes 
that are used to modify fats and oils and hydrogenation is one among the m. So, we will 
start with the hydrogenation process, what is the concept of the hydrogenation, how it is 
done both batch and continuous process, then operating variables for the hydrogen process 
and innovations in the hydrogenation process is a recent deve lopment that is super critical 
fluid hydrogenation and electrochemical hydrogenation process.  
 
So, let us see first why do we need modifications of food, oils and fats. You know that 
these oils and fats they are extracted from their sources in natural foo d, oils and fats, then 
they contain their triglyceride and in the triglyceride means that is glycerol and 3 fatty acids 
molecule are attached and these are all ordered  i.e. these are the mixture of mixed 
triglycerides. So, various that we have discussed in  detail in earlier classes. So, what it 
generally observed this the specific fatty acid profile and their distribution on the glycerol 
backbone in natural oils and fat they affect their functional properties like their 
crystallization, their melting behavi or, their specific heat all the properties etc are 
influenced that also we discussed in the earlier classes. So, it may so happen that a 
particular oil or fat by the virtue of its triglyceride that is 3 fatty acids in nature and its 
arrangement on the glyc erol backbone, it may not be suitable for a particular operation. It 
may not have certain particular characteristics which desired in that particular operation of 
the food process. So, this is done by the modification that is accordingly these triglyceride s 
are modified to suit the particular operations. To alter the physical properties that these 
particularly fatty acid positions, thei r unsaturated may be converted into saturated R1, R2, 
R3 where  a position may be interchanged. So, it is by interchanging t hese by modifying 
these fatty acids on the glycerol backbone or their nature, it may improve the physical 
properties of the oil, it may improve the stability of the triglyceride as well as it is done to 
achieve economic  benefits. So, these are the 3 major reasons for modifying oils and fats 
and modified oil or fat may be tailored way to suit a particular physical  operations, 
particular chemical operation in a particular product for particular specific product 
manufacturing or for introducing a specific char acteristics in the product. So, th is is the 
main purpose of the modification of oils and fats. So, the what are the processes now which 
are used to modify oils and fats ? Normally 3 process are there which is  used by the industry 
and these include hydrogenation, interesterification and then winterization are also called 
as crystallization. So, these are the 3 major oil and fats modification process. Now, we will 
take up all these one by one in this at their var ious detailed process for the operations etc . 
 
So, first we will start with the hydrogenation process that is the hardening oils you know 
that you must have seen that is vanaspati, there is some vegetable oils in the earlier classes 
we discussed that is t he it is basically because of the presence of unsaturated fatty acids 
that plant oils are liquid at room temperature. But these fats are the animal fats or other 
products which they are solid at room temperature they contain those mostly saturated fatty 
acids. So, the main process to make a liquid oil into a solid fat we must convert double 
bond unsaturated bonds carbon -carbon linkage to saturated that is C into C single bond 
carbon -carbon linkage. And this is done by bubbling the hydrogenation gas through it 
because you see if you see the recall our earlier class where we did the complete structure 
of this there are two. So, if in the double bond position further hydrogen is added then this 
bond is really converted into saturated one and the unsaturated fat ty acid will be converted 
into saturated fatty acids and accordingly liquid fat liquid oil will be converted into solid 
fat. So, that is the hardening oil sequence. So, this is done by bubbling the hydrogen gas 
through oil heated to 90 °C and the normally n ickel is used as a catalyst and this catalyst 
speed of the chemical reactions, but they remain chemically unchanged and they are not 
used up in the process. So, they can be finally, removed. So, that is the hardening oil . 
 
 
This process of hardening the o il is known as hydrogenation. So, hydrogenation is now you 
can say that it is a chemical process that adds hydrogen to the double bond. You can see 
here these are the unsaturated composition here and then in the presence of nickel hydrogen 
is added and dou ble bond is converted into single bond. So, unsaturated vegetable oil is it 
becomes vegetable key. That the further it is the you see that is oleic acid you know that 
oleic acid that is a stearic acid or palmitic acid, oleic acid, linoleic acid, linolenic acid. So, 
that is C18 acids which are this stearic acid there is no double bond single bond. Then it 
one saturated one unsaturation bond becomes oleic two unsaturation becomes linoleic three 
unsaturated bonds becomes linolenic acid. So, in a control condit ion finally, whether if 
linolenic acid is desaturated it will become linoleic acid, linoleic acid is desaturated it will 
become oleic acid and oleic acid primarily partly. It is the schematic representation of a 
hydrogenation setup it is basically a vessel  where all the arrangements I will tell you later 
also where all the arrangements for stimulate, hardening, catalyst addition, for heating, 
cooling all this thing and for giving the proper reaction. So, that the saturation of the oil is 
done. So, all these  arrangements are provided. So, under control condition hydrogen gas is 
added into the heated oil in the vessel there is a motor is provided which mixes the catalyst 
as well as hydrogen properly and provides the proper medium for the reaction and 
environme nt for the reaction for the conversion of the oil. So, it is a basically a 
heterogeneous reaction process which is complex in nature where reaction occurs between 
hydrogen, gaseous phase and the unsaturated fatty acid which is liquid phase and 
converting e ither all or some of the unsaturated fatty acids into saturated fatty acids.  
 
 
Then again a pictorial representation of the reaction mechanism in hydrogenation process 
you can see there is a catalyst. So, hydrogen gas is the adsorbed on the catalyst surf ace then 
unsaturated fatty acids also rear and then it gives the adsorption and finally, the 
hydrogenated fatty acids are given out by the desorption process and spent hydrogen gas. 
So, it involves adsorption and then desorption phenomena. That is the proc ess 
hydrogenation involves mixing and dispersion of the catalyst by a mechanical mixture, 
then diffusion of hydrogen gas through the means of oil to the catalyst surface, then 
adsorption of the reactants that is hydrogen and unsaturated fatty acids on the catalyst 
surface, then partial and complete saturation of the unsaturated fatty acids on the catalyst 
surface, then desorption of the catalyst a product reaction that is saturated fatty acid and 
the unsaturated fatty acids and oil molecules from the cataly st surface and finally, release 
of heat due to exothermic nature of hydrogenation reactions. So, this is basically typical 
sequence of the hydrogenation process.  
 
And the products of hydrogenation are very complex mixture because of the semi 
continuous o r simultaneous reactions that occur. There may be saturation of all double 
bonds or partially saturation of double bond depending upon the conditions, there may be 
formation of cis trans  isomers that is cis trans  isomerization of double bond and there may 
be shift of double bond locations usually to lower energy conjugated states. So, the purpose 
of hydrogenation is basically as I told you to change the naturally occurring fats and oils 
into physical forms with the consistency and handling characteristics w hich is required for 
their specific functionality even there is a selective hydrogenation which I will come little 
later that you by the process of selective hydrogenation by proper control of conditions one 
can prepare a solid fat of a particular specific  characteristics, specific consistency, specific 
degree of unsaturation etc. So, the effects of hydrogenation obviously, i f the unsaturated 
fatty acids become more saturated the iodine value of the oil decreases, the melting point 
of the oil increases, the  oxidative stability of the oil improves and a multitude of side 
reactions take place including the formation of certain alcohol and acids.  
 
So, this is the schematic of the hydrogenation process. So, the bleached oil then here it is 
the catalysts are ad ded the reaction hydrogen gas and then filtration black press solids are 
that is they are used the catalyst is removed and then oil is obtained. So, the post bleaching 
citric acid is added post bleaching clay and then filtration and hard oil. So, that is t he here 
reaction is hydrogenation reaction then after that bleaching  is done then finally, it is filtered 
whatever properly filter you get the hard oil or vanaspati .  
 
This is a schematic representation and the pathways which are involved in the 
hydrogena tion related chemistry of the hydrogenation process that is that lead to the 
formation of saturated fatty acids and cis trans  isomers unsaturated fatty acids are shown 
here you can see there is a double bond. So, the nickel the surface you are taking the 
hydrogenation catalyst and then in the first step you see how hydrogen is coming here and 
in getting adsorbed and the nickel. Then you get this here hydrogen that is it has come here 
and nickel catalyst then in the step 3 then again next this hydrogen the a nother hydrogen 
molecule again it is replacing here. It becomes hydrogen and hydrogen it is added. So, 
hydrogen is added in this and double bond which were there it becomes single bond it 
becomes saturated hydrogenated fatty acid and other alternatively th is side depending upon 
the process which are made selectivity and all those things that is you see if there is a n 
insufficient hydrogen then there is only one hydrogen there it may more neutral and here 
it is see that it may be cis or trans  even this hydro gen may be cis or transformation forms 
may be formed. So, that is depending upon how the oxygen sufficient hydrogen supply or 
insufficient hydrogen supply or other conditions prevailing in the system temperature and 
all those things it may be fully hydroge nated partially hydrogenated or even some cis forms 
may be converted into transforms and all these combinations and permutations may take 
place.  
 
So, this is the batch hydrogenator reactor and just schematic it is provided with the all the 
setups and accessories to conduct the hydrogenation process. So, it includes a mechanical 
agitator, it has the coils for heating and cooling of the oil then it is system for hydrogen gas 
is sparging hydrogen gas is sparger then temperature controller pressure control ler vent 
valve for the spent gases safety rupture discs agitator or seal protector, then rupture disc to 
protect the reactor against over pressurizing hydrogen gas flow meter with flow indicator 
gas flow totalizer and vacuum ejector or vacuum pump. So, the se are all these the 
accessories are arrangements provided into the reaction vessels to control the properly do 
the hydrogenation process in a batch system . 
 
 
So, dead end or recirculating hydrogenation reaction a compariso n. In a dead end type of 
reactor , heating of the incoming oil is through heat exchanger and in the recirculating type 
also the same heat exchangers are used . And the pressure in both the cases may be 34 to 
408kPa, but agitation in the dead end type reactor it is a mechanical agitation wh ereas, in 
the recirculating type reactor hydrogen gas circulation is used for agitation. In the vacuum 
system the vacuum pump is used for deaeration of oil in the dead end type reactor whereas, 
the hydrogen gas which is it removes the dissolved air and moi sture from the oil. Then as 
far as the gas vent that is in the dead end type reactor manual or automatic gas vent traps 
of the reactor are there whereas, in the case of recirculating type reactor different systems 
are used that gas purity meter is used and  vents for the recirculatory gas if needed ok. Oil 
vent is also used and moisture is removed from gas and gas is again compressed before 
returning to the reactor. The reaction time is fast in dead end type reactor whereas, it is 
slow in a recirculating typ e reactor and the quality of the product oil it is lower oxidation 
lower hydrolysis in the case of dead end type reactor whereas, higher end type recirculatory 
type reactor it gives higher oxidation and higher hydrolysis . 
 
So, as far as the batch process of hydrogenation is concerned you see here that is the oil 
enters the reactor under vacuum and it is heated to a temperature of 95 to 85 to 95 °C for 
about 15 to 20 minute for deaeration that is this heating of the oil it removes the dissolved 
oxygen and mo isture from the oil. So, that is the first step. Then the fresh catalyst there is 
a catalyst mixing tank in which that a small quantity of oil is taken and it is the nickel is 
used as a catalyst. So, nickel is which all because it is a nickel is highly pyr ochemical if it 
comes in open atmosphere it catch its fire. So, the same oil in which it is to be which is to 
be hydrogenated a small quantity of that oil is taken and concentrated solution of nickel is 
made and this nickel solution finally, is introduced with the third piping system into the 
reactor when the oil temperature has reached to 157 to 162 °C. The oil is heated and 
separately the nickel is being mixed in the catalyst and at the same time this oil is also 
being heated to that. And once it has come to around 160 °C temperature then the catalyst 
is brought to the with the proper port that is provided in the system it brought to the reaction 
medium and the case would be taken that finally, overall that is the rate of the nickel that 
is added is 0.01 to 0.02% So, that should be taken care of. So, the hydrogenation reaction 
then starts hydrogen gas is introduced once at this temperature nickel is added then 
hydrogen gas is introduced then heat generated from the reaction raises the temperature of 
the react or further and then this exothermic reaction is necessary that is steam supply there 
are the automatic control were provided in the equipment then the steam supplies 
automatically sort of because it is not required anymore because it is exothermic reaction  
and the heat generated from the reaction is sufficient to maintain the temperature of the oil 
to maintain the reaction. The reaction in the batch reactor is carried out either adiabatically 
or isothermally and once complete because there are the equipment  provided with this in 
the arrangement to take the sample out and the sample intermittently they are taking out 
and they are analyzed for their reflective index or as a iodine value to know the what is the 
final level of saturation and then accordingly the  need of the process the hydrogen supplies 
cut off the material is cooled down then it is sent to the filters where the these catalyst 
which were added they are properly removed they are filtered and the hydrogenated oil is 
sent for further process. There are two three policy filters are provided that is the catalyst 
should be completely removed and the chamber is also provided some system for the taking 
out the volatile vapors from the there . 
 
  
So, this is this was your batch process in a continuous hydr ogenation process that you can 
say definitely different batch equipment similar equipment arranged in a series alright. So, 
there is a n oil and catalyst slurry and oil they are they enter into the one reactor then from 
that they exit and that becomes entry  to the second reactor then come  of the second reactor 
will come a n entry for the second third reactor and so on. And each individual reactors  are 
provided with all the accessory and arrangement as we as I showed you which is provided 
in the batch reactors . So, this is basically it is a made in a series of vertical reactors where 
the refined and bleached oil enters at the bottom of the first reactor the reactors are jacketed. 
So, it is possible to either heat or cool oil in the reaction then in individual r eactor you can 
control the entry that the temperature pressure as per the requirement . Catalyst slurry and 
hydrogen are added to the oil entering the system the reaction temperature is carefully 
controlled with the help of a temperature controller on each reactor the oil passes through 
the reactors in plug flow which means there is no mixing. The sample is collected at the 
sample port for checking the reflective index and iodine value and at the end catalyst is 
filtered out from the reaction mixture.  
 
Then the type of hydrogenation process that is there are hydrogen reaction there is a brush 
hydrogenation . Brush hydrogenation is a high pressure about 3 to 4 bar and low 
temperature and this is particularly applied to liquid oil. It is designed to reduce the low 
level of linolenic esters that is 83 to around 4 percent by increasing the shelf life of the oil. 
This can be achieved by a light and highly selective hydrogenatio n of an oil within the 
oleic linolenic fatty acid group such as soybean, sunflower, canola oil etcetera which has a 
high amount of PUFA polyunsaturated fatty acid. Iodine value is kept low to suppress the 
formation of trans isomers as well as saturated fat ty acids. After hydrogenation it can be 
winterized or fractionated to produce a flavor stable solid oil or a high stability liquid 
depending on the extent of the hydrogenation. It is also useful very useful in the margarine 
oil blends, snack frying oils an d in specialty product formulations.  
 
Then next is the partial hydrogenation. So, in the partial hydrogenation process temperature 
is around 150 to 175 °C and pressure is maintained to 1 .2 to 3 bar in the reaction medium. 
So, the main objective of partial  hydrogenation is to convert a liquid oil into a semi solid 
fat that can be used as a component of a spread that is here partial hydrogenation not very 
hard not a complete hydrogenation. It is more extensive than the brush hydrogenation 
where polyunsaturat ed fatty acids are much reduced. Trans isomer formation is more active 
to one which results in an increase in the melting point affect the spread ability , overall 
response and breaking performance. The product is soft and plastic at room temperature 
with g ood oxidative stability. Used catalyst should be avoided as they enhance trans isomer 
formation. So, in the partial hydrogenation at least as far as possible the catalyst should not 
be reused ok. Then margarine and shortening  bases were produced from this method using 
this method and even coating fats are applying coating into various foods. They are also 
produced using this partial hydrogenation method.  
 
Then total hydrogenation total hydrogenation at the name itself indicates it is more 
extensive proces s in which virtually all unsaturated fatty acids are converted into their 
respective saturated analogs that is the oil becomes a very hard fat. The pressure is normally 
more than 4 bar in this case and temperature is above 230 °C or so. This product that is  hard 
stock which can be blended with a liquid unsaturated oil subsequently inter esterified. This 
hard stock is rich in stearic acid which are formed from polyunsaturated like C18 fatty 
acids. They are referred as hardfats or stearin. It contains only low  levels of unsaturated 
fatty acids therefore, very little trans fats.  
 
So, the operating variables which are important in this process are there is hydrogen process 
they have the three component s basically you see that one is the oil, then hydrogen gas a nd 
catalyst. So, these proper characteristics of all these must be properly maintained in order 
to get the proper result proper quality hydrogenated fat. So, the temperature, pressure, 
degree of agitation, catalyst that is both amount and type, purity of h ydrogen, feed stock 
source and feed stock quality are the variables that affect the hydrogenation process. So, 
now, first the temperature hydrogenation proceeds at a faster rate with increased 
temperature and increase in temperature decreases the solubilit y of hydrogen gas in the 
liquid oil while increasing the certain reaction rate. Therefore, with increasing temperature 
the supply of hydrogen towards the catalyst reaction surface will eventually be the limiting 
factor of the reaction. As the isomerization  reaction has a lower order dependency on 
hydrogen than the hydrogenation reaction, increasing temperature will boost the 
selectivity, but also the transformation.  
 
Then the pressure is another variable most fats are and oils hydrogenations are done at 0. 7 
to 4 bar pressure. At low pressure the hydrogen gas dissolved in the oil does not cover the 
catalyst surface while at high pressure hydrogen is readily available for saturation of the 
double bonds. The increased saturation rate results in a decrease in t he trans -isomer  
development and selectivity to produce the flatter saturated fatty acid SFI curve. Sulfur is 
a very important factor due to the difference in reaction order for different degrees of 
unsaturation. So, increased hydrogen pressure is helpful i n reducing trans fatty acid 
formation. However, this picture practice does not result a full elimination of trans fatty 
acid formation, but the obviously, if pressure is maintained lower level the transfer to acid 
formation is eliminated or at least lower down.  
 
The catalyst in the hydrogenation is reduced nickel supported on natural earth such as 
diatomaceous  earth etc. These supports have a high surface volume ratio which is an 
evident asset of the adsorption process. The high porosity additionally perm its swift mass 
transfer from and to the bulk phase. So, the powder of about 2 to 12 μm mean particle 
diameter is commonly formulated in solid droplets of hard fat such as palm styrene or fully 
hydrogenated oil in order to prevent the nickel from oxidizing and to facilitate handling 
and dosing. The type and concentration of catalyst is quite dependent on the purpose of 
hydrogenation. For example, if an increased oxidative stability of the oil is intended a high 
selectivity towards the towards the polyunsaturated fatty acid preferred. A good catalyst 
selection can help over a reaction period to wards more or less transformation and this is 
mainly true for nonselective condition such as high hydrogen pressure. The catalyst type 
itself has very little impact on the large quantity or trans isomer form. So, this again should 
be properly controlled.  
 
Now, let us talk about selectivity that is you know the hydrogenation controls the degree 
of saturation and the ratio of cis to trans  isomers and that is very important as far as the 
final product characteristics and its usefulness in various process ope rations is concerned. 
So, this should be properly conducted molecular arrangement of the on the triglyceride bag 
bowl it control the specific random distribution of fatty acids in the triglyceride. In the 
triglyceride linolenic, linoleic and oleic acid are  the hydrogenated at different rate 
obviously, because of their number of more unsaturated fatty acid or polyunsaturated fatty 
acid they saturate or hydrogenate at a faster rate than do the less unsaturated fatty acid. 
That is unsaturated monounsaturated f atty acid they normally desaturate or hydrogenate at 
a slower rate. And this a simplified reaction model making it possible to define selectivity 
as shown here. And if you see that linolenic is a getting saturated then linoleic converted 
to linoleic and it s rate of hydrogenation is K1, then linoleic to oleic rate of conversion is 
K2 and oleic finally, it is converting into stearic acid which is saturated fatty acid and if its 
rate is at K3.  
And linolenic selectivity  
𝑆𝐿1=𝐾1
𝐾2 
linoleic selectivity  
𝑆𝐿2=𝐾2
𝐾3 
So, that is how the selectivity is defined, but this model in this model the concentration of 
hydrogen at the surface of the catalyst is not considered. The rate constant will therefore, 
be influenced not only by the temperature and catalyst, but al so by the process parameter 
which influence the concentration of hydrogen at the catalyst surface. So, this also should 
be so, the considered while designing the models for selectivity while developing choosing 
the models for selectivity.  
 
So far there i s unsaturated oil oxidizes quickly leads to rancidity it has a very short supply, 
but the saturated and unsaturated fats are difficult consistency for food processing solid 
fats are with high melting points liquid does not stay in product well and can give  a soggy 
texture etcetera these are some of the problem associated. So, which are the industrial issue. 
So, what is the solution? You have partially hydrogenated oil shooting to specific 
applications. So, these partially hydrogenated oil can give better te xture for crackers and 
cookies they extend the shelf life of both oil and products are containing the oils they are 
easier to manipulate during food processing and help remove saturated fats from many 
products.  
 
Then innovations in the hydrogenation proc ess, they are super critical fluid hydrogenation 
the hydrogenation process involves pressure as a variable where hydrogen substrates and 
catalyst reacts. Now, the super critical carbon dioxide is utilized with its capacity for 
readily dissolving fat oil an d associated lipids. So, application of application is pressure 
and super critical carbon dioxide make it possible to merge them together to get better 
effects. So,  super critical  carbon dioxide  can serve to dissolve and transfer the hydrogen 
during the pr ocess of hydrogenation very effectively . 
 
So, the advantages of super critical fluid hydrogenation process that is it is a solvent less 
hydrogenation, it improves  mass transfer or reactants and products regulations of product 
distributors, reduction in am ount of hydrogenation required, higher product quality, higher 
rate of hydrogenation and less trans fatty acid formation . So, from a thermodynamic 
perspective hydrogenation considerably above its critical temperature that is minus 240 to 
240°C and pressure 12.8 atmosphere can be viewed as a super critical fluid having very 
little densification.  
 
Then electrochemical hydrogenation (ECH) electrochemical hydrogenation yields fat with 
minimum trans fatty acids content for the low operating tempera ture. It does not require 
high pressure and high temperature due to in situ  hydrogen generation and the reaction rate 
is slow forming less trans fatty acids. ECH process is a heterogeneous and the 
electrochemical reactor contains a cathode for reduction re actions ok. And anode for 
oxidation reaction with the electrolytic solution and these are between the electrodes. So, 
hydrogen donors can be transformed through a proton exchange membrane where protein 
derived from electrolytic water or electrolysis carry protons to the double bonds of 
unsaturated fatty acids. So, a combination of super critical carbon dioxide with ECH can 
also be carried out to produce fats with low trans fatty acids.  
 
 
So, the hydrogenated oil end product the examples are like liquid oi l thereby made by gross 
hydration, margarine bases by partial hydrogenation, shortening bases by partial 
hydrogenation again, stearin by total stearin that is complete hydrogenation by total 
hydrogenation and coating fats are normally by partial hydrogenat ion. So, depending upon 
what with the characteristic required in the end product various hydrogenation can be done.  
 
So, this is a complete setup for the schematic for the hydrogen, hydrogen from typical 
hydrogenation plant and all the that is oil inlet a nd the treating with the reaction, steam 
generation continuous process that is the batch hydrogenation reactions are provided in top 
tank, buffer tank, then spent catalyst filtration section catalyst is and then hydrogenation 
oil to the storage this is giv en.  
 
So, I would summarize this lecture finally, by saying that hydrogen, hydrogenation is a 
chemical process that adds hydrogen to double bonds. Hydrogenation can be of three types 
on the basis of the effectiveness namely brush, partial and complete hyd rogenation. 
Hydrogenation reactors are batched and continuous both. Batch reactors are again divided 
into two categories that is dead end and recirculating type, temperature, pressure, degree 
of agitation, catalyst both a mountain type, purity of hydrogena tion, gas feedstock, source 
and feedstock quality are the variables that affect the process. Supercritical fluid and 
electrochemical hydrogenation are researched recently and showed great potential for the 
industries and that should be tested.  
 
And these  are the references which is these used in this lecture only. Thank you very much 
for your patience hearing. Thank you.  
