Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 7 : Modifications of Oils and Fats  
Lecture 33 : Fractionation & Plasticization  
 
 Hello, everybody.  Namaste.  Now, in this 33rd lecture today, we will discuss about 
Fractionation and Plasticization.  
 
 The concept which we will cover in today's lecture includes the fractionation process, 
and types of  fractionation processes like dry fractionation, solvent fractionation, and 
detergent  fractionation .  Then we will also discuss some recent advances in the 
fractionation process like supercritical  fluid fractionation, and emulsion type 
fractionation , and f inally, we will conclude the lecture  by discussing plasticization.  
 
Let us see what fractionation means.  It is an important and versatile technique where the 
separation of fats and oils into fractions with different melting points is done.  Liquid oil 
is called Olein and solid portion is called Stearin.  The typical fractionation process 
involves preheating, cooling, crystallizing, and filtering. Fractionated fats and oils have 
been used to prepare a variety of foods such as margarines, shortenings, salad oils, frying 
oils, and confectionery products.  Oil is preheated and brought to a homogeneous state, 
then cooled where the formation of  nuclei takes place and then it is held at specified 
conditions where crystal growth takes place. A fter that , it is expose d to a certain 
condition , and  as the proper crystal growth conditions are different olein from stearin  is 
separated and filtered . Fractionate d fats and oils have been used to prepare a variety of 
foods such as margarine, chardonnay, salad oils, and frying oil and they have wide -
ranging  applications in confectionery products.   
 
Fractionation may be practiced merely to remove an undesirable component, which is the 
case with dewaxing and winterization processes to produce liquid oils that resist cloud ing 
at cool temperatures.  Separation of fats and oils fractions is based on the solubility of the 
component triglycerides.  Components of a fat or oil that differ considerably in melting 
point can be separated by crystallization and subsequent filtration fo r removal of the 
higher melting portions.  Different types of oils and fats can be separated  using multistage 
fractionation  may include st earin which is generally the vanaspati  you know . It has an 
iodine value of around 33, then mid -stearin  with an iodine value of about 45 , it can be a 
margarine . Then super stearin with  an iodine value of less than 15 which can sometimes 
be used as animal  feed. The hard PMF like palm mid-fraction  has an  iodine value is less 
than 36 . It is used in confectionery and so ft PMF with an iodine value around 47 is used 
as margarine.  Similarly, the oleine that is it is the liquid portion used in the frying oil has 
an iodine value of around  56.  The super  olein iodine value is 65 and it is cooking oil . 
The mid and top olein io dine values  are 60  and 70 . Top olein  is used in salad oil and the 
mid oleine and another fraction which has an iodine value of 54 .  
 
The principle  of fractionation is the oil is crystallized first and then filtered , which means 
here in the crystallization  and filtration the conditions are properly maintained in such a 
way that you can see  in the  figure  
[SSS -SSU-SUU -UUU ]   [SSS -SSU] + [SUU -UUU ] 
Where  S is the solid fatty acid or saturated fatty acid and U is the unsaturated fatty acid. 
So, here you can see different two sets  are thereafter crystallization and filtration that  is 
one set which has more solid  fatty acids  and the other set which has more liquid fatty 
acids , and then different combinations and permutations  can be done by properly 
selecting  the crystallization and filtration  conditions.  
Crystallization  
Filtration   
Various techniques  are available for fractionation, which  include fractional 
crystallization, short path distillation, liqui d-liquid crystallization, urea  complexation , 
fractional distillation, supercritical extra ction, extraction , adsorption, and membrane 
separation . So, these are all various techniques that are available for  the fractionation of 
oil and each technique you see has two common steps : selective  crystallization and then 
separation. There  are three ways of fractionation  crystallization that are dry fractionation, 
solvent fractionation , and detergent fractionation.  
  
So, let us discuss briefly the dry fractionation . Dry fractionation of fats and oils is based 
on the gradual cooling of the oil under controlled conditions without solvent.  When the 
oil reaches the desired temperature, the cooling is stopped and the solid TAGs are 
allowed  to separate from the liquid TAGs. The separation of the liquid (olein) and solid 
(stearin) fractions may be  performed by  centrifugation.  Used for palm oil and lauric fats.  
Dry fractionation processes include winterization, dewaxing, hydraulic pressing, and crystal 
fractionation.  Winterization is effective for the removal of small quantities of solid fat from a  
large  quantity  of liquid oil. Dewaxing removes  small quantities of waxes from certain 
vegetable oils  rich in unsaturated . Hydraulic pressing effectively removes small quantities 
of liquid oil from  a large  quantity of solid fat.  
 
You can see here a schematic  diagram of the dry fractionation process.  It can be 
continuous or batch operations. This is a feed tank where the feed oil is there and then 
there are different  crystallizers which are passed through these crystallizers and then there 
is a buffer  tank. So, from this buffer tank , it may be sent to  the vacuum filter if there is a 
continuous process or to the filter press in the  batch process . In the buffer tank , it also 
crystallizes  and then new crystal growth takes place , and then olein  and stearin  either in a 
continuous manner or in the batch process are removed . 
  
The advantages of dry fractionation include  that it is the  simple operating procedures 
involved. These are environmentally friendly processes  there is no need for chemicals  as 
processing  aids, it has a lower operational cost and no e ffluent output problems. 
However , there  are certain disadvantages is it has lower separation efficiency than the 
other two methods . The factors affecting the dry fractionation process include ini tial oil 
temperature, pre-crystallization  process, rate of cooling, crystallization time, agitation of 
the oil , final  crystallization, temperature , and separation or filtration process parameters. 
So, these  are the various factors  that should be properly c ontrolled in order to get the 
desired result.  
 
This slide shows the  multi -stage  dry fractionation of palm oil. So, you see there is a 100 
percent palm oil  with an iodine value of around 52 and then here it is palm stearin with  an 
iodine value of 36. So, it has about 15 percent palm stearin  in this as this is vanaspati  and 
the remaining 85 percent  is palm olein  with an  iodine value of around 56 . It is used as a 
frying oil. So, this again is prime palm olein  again has a 45 percent soft palm mid fraction 
iodine value of 46, it is margarine . About 40 percent of it is the salad oil that is it has a 
iodine value of more  than 64. This is a soft PMF , it has a 15 percent hard  PMF with an 
iodine value of 35, 30 percent mid olein  with an  iodine value of 53 whereas, the salad  oil 
has about 20 percent mid oleine with an  iodine value of 60 and 20 percent top oleine  
iodine value more than 6 7. So, these  salad oil s these are they can be considered very  cold 
stable oils and these margarine or soft can be considered cocoa bu tter equivalents because 
of their property  and their melting characteristics . 
 
Now  let us discuss the second topic which is solvent fractionation . It is an expensive 
method and, therefore, can be used only for high -value products. As the name suggests, it  
is used to describe the crystallization process of a desired fat fraction from oil that is 
solubilized in a suitable solvent.  It has been introduced to overcome challenges with bulk 
crystallization, such as slow heat transfer and high viscosity which limi ts nuclei 
movement.  So, the advantages of solvent fractionation include efficient se paration with 
improved yields, reduced processing times , and increased purity which  is more than 90 
percent purity . However, the disadvantages of the process are high capit al cost fo r the 
handling, high energy consumption and recovery of the solvent as well as increased 
cooling capacity  requirements.  
  
The choice of the solvent is vital as it influences the separation of polar and nonpolar 
lipids, it influences  the crystall ization rate, it influences the fractionation temperature and 
also the solvent  influences the properties of the fraction s. Acetone is found more selective 
in separating  TAG . Hexane concentrates polar compounds in the  stearin  phase such as 
FFA, mono , and diacylglycerols. The choice of the solvent depends on polarity which 
affects solubility of both major and  minor components.  The energy  required for solvent 
recovery is particularly the heat required  for the evaporation, explosion , or ignition risk 
and oxicology,  which  is probable carcinogenicity of the 2 -nitro propane. So, these are the 
factors on which this choice  of the solvent is considered.  
 
If you look at the technology of the solvent  fractionation  process fat is  first dissolved in 
the solvent an d then it is cooled to initiate  crystallization of the triglyceride with the 
highest melting point. Then filtration  is done to separate the crystals and finally, solvent 
evaporation for the recovery of the  targeted fractions . When solvent is added to the o il 
sample, the viscosity  is reduced drastically . In this  way, the TAG  molecule can  diffuse 
and attach to the growing crystals on the  surface and reduce the tendency  of co -crystal 
formation and dissolution in the crystal lattice leading to the formation  of favorable large 
crystals.  
 
Benefits of adding solvent include Solvent is generally added 1 to 5 times of oil weight.  
Oils and fats have a viscosity of approximately 30 mPa or more. Solvents have a very 
low viscosity which is required, acetone has a viscosity of 0.3 mPa. When solvent is 
added to oil, it reduces viscosity which in turn increases molecular diffusion and thereby 
has faster crystallization.  Due to the faster crystallization, processing time is much  less as 
compared to dry fractionation. T his also means that crystallizer volume can be minimized 
thereby reducing the cost of the  system.  As the filtration rate is proportional to the inverse 
of viscosity in the basic case, it will be easy to filter the slurry with the addition of 
solvent. This can enable the use of continuous filters  (indexing flat band filter) rather than 
batch filters (rotary drum filter).   
 
Here you can see that in this figure , the fractionation of the contaminant removed  from 
the void volume wash ratio of different amounts of the dispersion as defined  by the 
effective peclet number. You can see on the x-axis the void volume wash ratio  and the 
axis contains  the fractionation contaminant removed and the effective peclet number  is 
here.  When the effective peclet  number is more than contamination more amount of 
contamination or rate of contamination  removed is increased. It is increasing with both 
the void volume ratio and the contamination  removed. Cleaning of filter with a clean 
solvent is a must to maintain the  optimum separation efficiency all the time.  The most 
efficient form of filter cake washing is with “plug flow” displacement of the dirty liquid 
(liquid oil and solvent) with a clean one (pure solvent).  The concept of a “void volume 
wash  ratio” is importan t to understanding  the effectiveness of filter cake washing.  The 
void volume is the volume of  liquid held up with a unit quantity  of crystals. In practice, 
one will need 1.2 to 1.5 void volumes of  wash to achieve more than 90% SE.  
 
In detergent fractionat ion, an aqueous detergent solution (5% sodium lauryl sulfate) is 
added to the crystallized material to assist in the separation of the liquid olein and the 
solid stearin fractions.  Sometimes 2% electrolyte (magnesium sulfate  or aluminum  
sulfate ) is also ad ded to the solution  to assist in uniting the liquid olein droplets. Also 
known as the Lanza or Lipofrac method.  Stearin crystals will be wetted by the detergent, 
releasing the olein occluded in the crystals.  The water phase is separated. Separation can 
be performed by centrifugation in two stages for  complete separation.  Traces of detergent 
need  to be removed after processing by water washing.  Employed for palm oil and 
tallow . The advantages  of detergent  fractionation include high olein  yield and it has high 
separation efficiency , the  drawbacks  are high operating cost and high contamination 
chances.   
 
The recent advance  in the fractionation process is supercritical fluid fractionation . Similar 
to supercritical fluid extraction, it utilizes the properties of supercritical fluid (SCF) for  
selective recovery of targeted compounds. The SCF has a high solvating power at high 
pressure, which enhances the solubility of different components from the matrix 
(reduction of the density difference b etween the components) into  the SCF and 
subsequently impedes the anticipated physical separation.  SFF is performed using milder 
operating pressures and is often paired with SCFE, allowing  an effective improvement in 
the selectivity of the SCFE process.  A supercritical carbon dioxide extraction  of dry 
ginger was coupled with an online fractionation process to obtain gingerols -enriched  
oleoresin and volatile oil and t his was reported by Shukla et al  in 2019. The S FF can also 
be used  for the purification of us ed frying oils.  
 
Shown here is the process reported  by Shukla et al., 2019. You can see that laboratory -
scale  extraction equipment is used to extract ginger and the total yield is around 8. 6 
percent, it has around 28.3 percent volatile oil and 37.97  percent gingerols . Then the best 
conditions  were reported as 253 -micron meter  particle size, 276 bar pressure, 130 gram  
per minute feed rate, 40 degree Celsius temperature , and 153 minutes and then this 
process was  scaled up to 40 folds , and the same solv ent to feed ratio was used and you 
can see that  as a mixture extract here total y ield almost remain the similar to  that of the 
the laboratory  scale process. But when the conditions were optimized like  175 bar 40 
degrees  Celsius, the weight of the gingero l as you can see increased to about  37 percent 
or approximately 51 percent, and its purity was around 96 percent. This volatile oil yield 
was 2.77 percent and purity was 95.9 weight percent . The pressure was 40 bar and the 
temperature was 40 degrees  Celsiu s. This shows how  the solvent and operating 
conditions influence the initial conditions.  
  
The advantages are m ild fractionation temperature making it Ideal for thermolabile 
components.  The solvent can be easily separated from the end product.  The SC CO2 is 
non-toxic and traces of residual CO2 do not pose health hazards.  The disadvantages are 
low polar affinity  and high molecular weight components . The use  of co -solvent can 
address this issue . A small volume of co -solvent (0-20 mol%) can be added to increa se 
the polarity of SC CO2, increase  the solvating power , and enhance  the quantitative 
extraction.  Organic  solvents like m ethanol, ethanol, and hexane are commonly used as  
co-solvents . 
 
 
Then emulsion fractionation is another novel technique where emulsion  was developed 
followed by dry fractionation. This fractionation method is carried out based on the 
crystallization of low -viscous emulsion in which water and emulsifier are employed to 
reduce the viscosity of the oil system . The prepared emulsion was frac tionated according 
to the layer -melt crystallization method using a cold finger apparatus under optimized 
conditions , which is shown here in this schematic diagram.  Factors affecting efficiency 
are c old finger temperature , temperature of melt , agitation s peed , and c ooling rate . 
Emulsion fractionation shows great potential as a green alternative lipid fractionation 
technology because the process requires only water and a food emulsifier, as well as the 
capacity to address the oil entrainment issue from the dry fractionation . So, this is a very 
good potential technology for fractionation.   
 
Now, let us talk about plasticization . Edible fat and oil products appear to be soft 
homogenous solids.  Microscopic examination shows a mass of very small interlocked 
crystals that trap and hold by surface tension a high percentage of liquid oil.  These 
crystals are separate discrete particles and are capable of moving independently when 
sufficient shearing force is applied.  Shortening and margarine are examples showing the 
characteristic structure of a plastic solid.  Plastic solid will not deform on its own but can 
be molded into another shape by a little force.  Three conditions are essential for 
plasticity , which are, i t must consist of two phase s, one solid and another  liquid, t he solid 
phase must be dispersed finely enough to hold the mass toget her by internal cohesive 
forces, t he solid portion must be capable of holding the liquid while enough liquid must  
be available to allow flow when stress is applied.  
 
The consistency of the plastic solid should be maintained properly by adjusting the 
proportion of solid and liquid.  The more  the solid phase, the firmer the structure. 
Solidified fats should maintain their shape well at a solid content of as low as 5% and 
beco me rigid at 40 -50 %.  Crystal size is a very important factor that influences the 
structure of fats and oils. Edible fats and oils undergo  a series of increasingly organized 
crystal phases with cooling until a final stable crystal form is achieved.  With the  decrease 
in crystal size, the product becomes firmer, whereas increasing size  results  in a softer 
product. Similar to freezing, faster chilling produces small crystals have higher                                    
consistency range and are firmer. The sl owly crystallized product will be softer  with big 
crystals and lower consistency.  
 
The extent to which a fat is supercooled can affect not only the consistency but also the 
melting point of the solidified product.  In practice, the temperature to which the  product 
is supercooled, worked, and packaged is controlled to produce the widest plastic range 
for the individual product formulation . Working is done to remove the latent heat of 
crystallization.  Solidification of the supercooled  product without working or agitation 
will produce a firm consistency and a narrow plastic range.  The product will also lack 
smoothness of texture and have a non -uniform  appearance.  The degree of work applied to 
shortening and margarine differs due to the  finished product consistency desired.  
 
 
 Another parameter is gas incorporation . Normally the creaming gas is added to these  fats 
to incorporate plasticity . The creaming gas in a normally inert gas such as nitrogen is 
incorporated up to 13 percent into th e shortening.  Pre-creamed household s hortening has 
around 18 to  25 percent  air, regular soft tub margarine  has 4 to 8 percent , and whipped  
tub margarine has as high as 30 to 35 percent.  So, the incorporation of gas into the 
product is done to give a white  creamy appearance. Also,  the incorporation of gas gives a 
bright surface sheen,  the product becomes easier to handle,  and it becomes a less dense 
product.  There is  texture improvement , its homogeneity improves, and it has an 
increased volume because of t he incorporation  of gas and also reduced calories per 
serving. So, these are the advantages of the gas incorporation.  
 
 Now, I would like to summarize this lecture by saying that it is an important and 
versatile technique where the separation of fats and oils into fractions with different 
melting points is done.  Fractionation crystallization is of three types – dry, solvent , and 
detergent.  Solvent crystallization provides the highest separation efficiency.  Novel 
fractionation techniques are SCFE and emulsi on fractionation.  Edible fat and oil products 
have plastic properties  that appear to be soft homogenous solids but can deform when 
molded.  Shortening and margarine are examples of plasticization.  
 
These are the re ferences used in this lecture. Thank you very much for your patience  
hearing. Thank you.  
