Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 7 : Modifications of Oils and Fats  
Lecture 32 : Interesterification & Winterization  
 
  
Hello, everybody.  Namaskar.  Now, in this lecture 32, we will discuss about 
Intersterification and Winterization Processes .  We will talk about what is 
intersterification, what is the mechanism of intersterification  and its type, which may be 
chemical int ersterification or enzymatic intersterification and finally,  we will also 
discuss winterization or crystallization processes.  
 
So, let us see what intersterification is .
 Interester ification refers to the fats and oils 
reaction in which the fatty acids of triglycerides exchange positions from one glyceride to 
another, thereby altering the chemical composition as well as physical properties of the fats. 
Efficient way to change  and control  the melting properties of oils and fats.  The overall 
fatty acid composition, the degree of unsaturation , or the isomeric state  of the lipid system 
are not altered.  Under some conditions, the fatty acids are distributed in a more random 
manner than they were present originally.  Based on the catalysis, this method is divided 
into chemical & enzymatic interesterification processes.  Most importantly, the dreaded 
trans fatty acids are  not produced  unlike those in the hydrogenation and other heat 
process . 
 
You can see here in the picture  the chemical reaction of the preparation of  fats and oils. 
‘A’ is glycerol , ‘b’ is three molecules of fatty acids  and combine to form triglyceride ‘c’ .  
So, R 1, R 2 and R 3 this is a triglyceride.  So, in the intersterif ication process , the 
position of R 1, R 2 , or R 3 is interchanged. It is there is intersterification that ester 
linkages are formed  that R 1 comes to the position of R3, R 2 goes to the R1 position, R 3 
goes to the R2 or vice versa . Random distribution change is what  is done in the 
intersterification.   
 
The intersterification types may be different ways it can be done like acidolysis  and 
alcoholysis . In acidolysis  you see there is an organic acid , carbolic acid is used to change 
the position.  In alcoh olysis  that is it is basically alcohol is used . So, R 1, R 2, and R 3 is 
a triglyceride , that reacts with alcohol it gives glycerol plus a mixture of alkyl esters 
different ROCOR1 , RCOR O2, and ROCOR3.  
  
Then triacylglycerol plus glycerol it gives partial acylglycerol.  So, different types of 
products  depending upon the conditions can be made.  Then it may be glycerolysis, 
glycerolysis means triacylglycerol is reacted  with glycerol which  gives partial 
acylglycerols.  Then transesterific ation means ester int erchange. Trans -esterification is 
the most widely employed type of interesterification reaction used by the food industry.  
Trans -esterification results in the ‘‘shuffling’’ of fatty acids within a single  
triacylglycerol (TAG) molecule (intraesterification)  and among TAG molecules  until an 
equilibrium is achieved in which all possible combinations are formed.  
You can see that if you say that saturated S and unsaturated U may be  
SSS ↔ SUS ↔ SSU ↔ SUU ↔ USU ↔ UUU  
where that is all saturated here all unsaturated and then a combination  of saturated 
unsaturated.  So, all these combinations  and permutations are done and these are all 
achieved by controlling the proper conditions during the process.   
 
The effect of inter-esterification  is a process used to modify fats such as to change the 
overall melting profile, i mprove the compatibility of t he triglycerides in the solid state, 
improve the plasticity of the resulting solid by changing the crystallization properties, 
combine the pro perties of mixed oils and fat. IE can also be used to produce a waxy 
translucent for coating purposes and blend  soft oils with hard fats to a desired 
functionality and consistency. By combining IE and other modification processes, many 
products such as sho rtenings, margarine , and vegetable ghee with low trans -fat or no                      
trans -fat at all can be formulated  satisfactory quality of confectionery fats can be 
produced . So, this is used to get again that various fats and oils of required consis tency 
for  required functional usage.   
 
Let us discuss the different types,  chemical interesterification or e nzymatic 
interesterification. In the chemical inter-esterification  process , works through the use of a 
variety of chemicals as the catalyst. Chemical interesterification has been used to modify 
oils and fats into functional products for many decades. It leads to a random distribution 
of fatty acids on the glycerol backbone.  Chemical interesterification requires  high 
temperature and pressure which degrade the oils and fats and introduce impurities.  Loss 
of valuable minor components  such as tocopherols.  There may be high oil losses that is 
up to 10 percent or it is a risky operation because of the use of the chemical catalyst  
 
 
In the chemical ca talyst process , you can see here it is that inter-esterification  results  
when the oil is heated relatively to a high temperature of about 200 degree Celsius for a 
considerably  long period of time.  Chemical Interesterification can be performed at lower 
tem peratures (as low as 50 °C) than when it is carried out without catalyst.  Wwhen  it is 
carried out without catalyst and approximately 0.1 percent weight percent of  the catalyst 
on the basis of the weight of the oil is used.  So, the advantage of using metal  alkylates 
catalysts are high activity, ready availability , low  cost and ease of handling.  The most 
commonly used catalyst are sodium methylates or ethylate, sodium potassium  alloy and 
sodium or potassium hydroxide.  A few minutes after the addition of the catalyst reaction 
occur and reddish brown color is formed .  When the catalyst is dispersed in a dried oil 
maintained at 60 to 80 degree Celsius a  white slurry is formed.  So , the reddish brown 
color is a result of the formation of the complex between the sodium and  the TAGs.  
After the inter esterification reaction the catalyst must be inactivated and removed by a 
suitable  process.  
 
Two mechanism  for chemical IE  has been put forward that is enolate anion formation and 
carbonyl addition.  In the enolate anion formation as you see here the reaction begins 
when the sodium methoxide catalyst  attacks the acid hydrogen from the carbon alpha 
carbon to the carbonyl carbon  to produce  an enolate structure . This reaction produces a 
carbonation which is a strong nucleophile.  This enolate anion reacts continuously with 
other ester to groups till all the ester group  in the TAG may interact and move around 
from their initial position.  So, th is reaction continues.  This mechanism  is referred to as a 
Claisen condensation pathway.  
 
 
 The other is the carbonyl addition as  you can see here In this reaction, the alkylate ion 
(nucleophile) adds on to the slightly positively -charged carbonyl carbon at one of the 
three fatty acylglycerol ester bonds and forms a tetrahedral intermediate . The fatty acid 
methyl ester is then released, regenerating a glycerylate anion for further reaction .  The 
glycerylate  anion acts as a catalyst and transfer acyl group around the glycerol .  So, it 
should be noted that with the carbonyl addition mechanism both intra and inter 
esterification reactions  are possible that is within the same triglyceride or in various 
triglycer ide molecules  also. 
 
Acids, bases and their corresponding salts and metals are used for the IE which  can be 
subdivided into high and low temperature groups.  The term ‘‘interesterification’’ is often 
used to describe reactions that involve the exchange of acyl residues between an ester and 
an acid (acidolysis), an ester and an alcohol (alcoholysis), or an ester with another ester 
(trans -esterification).  High temperature catalysts  include metal salts such as chloride, 
carbonates, oxid es, nitrates and acetate s of zinc, lead, iron, tin and cobalt.  Low 
temperature catalysts includes alkylates (methylate and ethylate) of Na and Na/K alloy.  
Alkylates of Na are simple to use and inexpensive; only small quantities                                               
are re quired and they are active at low temperature less than  50 degree Celsius.   
 
In inter esterification process, one important parameter is the oil quality . Oil should be 
free from contaminants; minor components or contaminants will also consume the 
catalyst to a considerable degree. Should be free from moisture; affects the ‘pure 
reaction’ and consume the classic catalysts, such as sodium methylate, in the proportion 
of 1: 20. FFA content will also deactivate the catalyst, albeit less extremely, and                
often a bit of caustic soda is added prior to the reaction. Also, oxidation parameters such 
as the pe roxide value will lower the catalyst efficiency and thereby incr ease the cost of 
achieving f ull randomization.  So, the free fatty acid perox ide value etcetera should be as 
low as possible with the oil  before the inter esterification.  
  
Then catalyst in the light of the interesterification reaction, the active catalyst species 
needs to be an electron donor. Pure alkali metals such as Na or K w ere ideal for such 
reactions, and in small scale operations these proved successful. However, for larger 
operations alkoxides (sodium methoxide or sodium methylate) are the principal catalyst, 
because of their high reaction rate at rather low temperatures.  This catalyst allows for a 
relatively clean separation after the reaction. The applied concentrations of catalyst s 
generally range between 0.05  and 1.5%. The relatively broad range of catalyst dosa ge is 
due to the large  influence of the feed oil purity on  the catalyst activity.  
 
 So, this is a schematic of the commercial oil inter esterification plant. The yellow line 
shows the oil mov ement. There  is a catalyst handling unit, a reaction vessel, washing 
tank, vacuum dryer, then citric acid as a system, stack centrifuge  and an oil treatment 
cooler.  So, this is a alfalaval  schematic setup they provide the inter esterification plant . 
  
Then we come to the enzymatic inter esterification.  The IE process with the use of a 
biologically derived enzyme is known as enzymatic interesterification (EIE).  The demand 
of this method increases because of increas ing trend to avoid chemicals in food 
processing.  Lower capital investment cost as compared to the chemical process.  Different 
varieties of lipases are used in ind ustries because of their regiospecificity                               
and stereospecifity in production of specific structures. Ideally suited for targeted 
structured TAG manufacture.  The enzyme rearranges the fatty acids in the 1 -and 3-
positions, by con trast to chemical interesterification where all three positions are shifted 
randomly.  It can be batch or continuous. Reaction conditions are mild.  
 
This is the enzymatic inter esterification as you can see the process begins by blending 
two different oils  liquid oil and little solid o il of a particular consistency. T hese are 
blended and to initiate the reaction the blended oil is  pumped through a fixed bed of 
enzymes and this catalytic reaction creates six unique  components where this you see 
that differ ent colors shows the different types of the fatty  acids the interchange takes 
place.   
 
The substrate are first blended and then lipase 5 to 10 percent is added . There is 
pretreatment process of oil and catalyst lipase addition, deodorization , and finally , the 
inter esterification. The mixture is subsequently subject to react under different reaction 
temperatures 50 to  75 degree Celsi us for 3 to 48 hours. Lipase can be conditioned or 
activated prior to EIE to achieve full enzymatic activity, preven t hydrolysis of the 
substrate and excessive FFA production . Accordingly the enzyme can be properly 
conditioned or it can be properly activated . Enzymatic inter esterification reaction can be 
terminated by denatu ring the enzyme via heating or adding acetic acid (0.25%).  FFA 
(1.5-2.5%) is removed using phenolphthalein as indicator and by  titration method.  
Washed sample is filtered to remove moisture and enzyme.  
 
 Types of enzymatic inter esterification are non specific enzymes inter esterification these 
are used for the production of commodity fats to modify the overall melting properties, 
increasing compatibility within the solid phase and enhancing the plasticity of the final 
product . The other type is  specific enzymatic inter esterification , which  to produ ce tailor -
made products such as cocoa butter equivalents, anti -bloom agents, breast milk 
substitutes, and low calorie fats . Shown here is a fixed bed filtration system that is oil 
blend filtration  with enzyme bed added and inter esterification oil is obtai ned. 
  
Then continuous multi column enzymatic inter esterification  system. As you see it is a 4 
column reactor comprising of a temperatu re controlled SS feed tank of 150 kg capacity . 
The 4 temperature controlled enzyme columns each packed with 10 kg enzyme and a 
temperature  controlled SS product tank of around 150 kg capacity as you could see here 
is the  figure . Moisture free oil enters in the tank at 60 to 70 degree Celsius and it is 
continuously pumped  at a rate of 1.5 to 2.5 kg oil per kg enzyme p er hour from the feed 
tank into the  reaction columns which are packed with the 10 kg of lipase in each.  The 
temperature of the packed column is kept at 60 to 70 degree Celsius by a hot water 
circulation  system at which the reaction takes place  and finally , inter esterified product  is 
taken into the product container tank . So, this is a continuous operation.  
  
Now, we will see the crystallization or winterization process.  Winterization is a thermo -
mechanical separation process where component triglycerid es of fats and oils are 
crystallized from a melt. The two -component fractional crystallization is accomplished 
with partial solidification and separation of the higher melting triglyceride components.  
In this process, the fat is melted and heated to elimin ate any crystal memory. The molten 
fat is cooled down under controlled agitation and cooling conditions to produce crystals 
nuclei formed by the higher melting triglycerides. When the crystallisation has 
progressed far enough, the slurry is separated.  The whole process is carried at 5.6 °C 
traditionally and require 2 -3 days to produce the desired large crystals for filtering. Then, 
nuclei will grow to form crystals of the desired size.  So, basically the here the oil is 
cooled down and that is the cool down which is kept.  So, this oils that is crystals are 
formed they are converted into form crystals that is the crystallization process.   
 
Fat crystallization occurs in two steps. One is  the nucleation and  then the growth of the 
crystal .  In the nucleus the rate of nucleation depends upon the trigl yceride composition 
of the oil being winterized, the cooling rate of the oil, the temperature of the nucleation 
and the mechanical power input or agitation.  Then once the nucleus is formed then 
crystal enlarges. T he growth rate is dependent on the crystallization temperature time and 
mechanical input or agitation . So, on this the growth of the crystal will take place it will 
vary.  
 
Then there is also a solvent fractionation . Solvent fractionation is the term used to 
describe a process for the crystallization of a desired fraction from a mixture of 
triglycerides dissolved in a suitable solvent (e.g. hexane). Fractions may be selectively 
crystall ized at different temperatures after which the fractions are separated and the 
solvent removed. Solvent fractionation is practiced commercially to produce                                          
hard butters, specialty oils, and some salad oils from a wid e array of edible oils.  
 
Apparently this crystallization or winterization process looks very simple, but  in practice 
this physical process is complicated by the fact that the formation of nuclei depends  
upon the presence of any foreign particles that i s if there is any more foreign particles  
present in the oil more number of nuclei will be formed.  Even the proper agitation of the 
oil, the proper temperature, the triglyceride composition and  the ty pe of pretreatment 
followed by  that is given to the oil  or fat.  Even the triglyceride composition that is other 
it is a mixture of triglyceride with the fatty acids , nature of the fatty acid , long chain fatty 
acids, short chain fatty acid, unsaturated fatty acid, saturated all these  combinations and 
permutati ons will influence the crystal nucleus formation, and the crystal growth also and 
even at the sub cellular level the molecular packing of these crystals is very important.  
The processes are commercially done for winterization ,  process are properly control led 
crystallization process tempering that is to remove the heat  of crystallization at a proper 
level to get the proper size, fat etcetera for a specialty  uses like margarine etcetera are 
produced by this winterization and crystallization  process.  That  is application of this 
crystallization process . Historically winterization has always  been associated with the 
cottonseed oil . Liquid oils that contain fractions that solidify when chilled must be 
winterized or fractionated to remain clear at cool temperatures.  Winterized cottonseed oil 
was the standard salad oil.  Winterized soybean oil was rejected earlier due to flavour 
problems which can be eliminated using partial hydrogenation and then used.  Even 
sometime if you keep oil at the low temperature then solid impurity settle at the bottom 
and this is also used for the clarification, this winterization or this further you go that is 
the fractionation crystallization , which  is a fractionation separation process as well.  
 
As I was telling that even whe n you crystallized  oil, depending upon the nucleus 
formation and then  further conditions like control led removal of the latent heat of the 
crystallization it  will result in formation of the different polymers with various crystals 
packing  at the cellular  level. And depending upon that different forms like alpha forms, 
beta forms and beta prime forms , that is having different melting curve points like alpha 
form has a melting point of 54 degree Celsius, beta crystals have melting point of 64, 
alpha crystals have melting  point of 54 degree Celsius, beta crystals they have melting 
point of 50, 64 degree Celsius and  beta prime has melting point of 73 degree Celsius can 
be formed.  And even all these beta prime has a more suitability in the use of the bakery 
fats etcetera because of  their p roperty  they helps in incorporation of more amount of air 
with smaller bubbles  and it gives a good textural characteristics in the baked products .  
So, that is  the benefits of the proper crystallization, winterization we can get the fats or 
polymers specific polymers for a specific uses.  So, you see here how the liquid is there 
transition pathways that is exothermic transition and endothermic transition , proper 
control if you do , then it give that is the alpha form . It is a h exagonal form where 
hydrocarbons are self -packing .  And the polymorphic characteristics of the alpha form  
leads to unstable lifetime typically short . Then this beta form is a more stable it is a 
triclinic form . Beta-prime is a common ortho forming orthorho mbic form you can see , 
the circular crystal pa cking how it is there.  So, it has a meta stable lifetime  and range s 
from short to infinity that is the beta prime. If proper controlled crystallization is done, 
you will get either alpha form, beta prime form or beta prime and then it gives the 
polymers suitable for  particularly specific operations as in  margarine or in the bakery 
product or confectionery  product.  
 
So, with this now I will summarize this lecture that inter esterification is a type of 
modification process where fatty acids exchange positions from one glyceride to another.  
IE are of two types – chemical (where random arrangement of fatty acids occurs) and 
enzymatic (where targeted rearrangement is done at 1 & 3 positions).  Enzymatic IE is 
simplified and low cost and has major advantage of no                                                              
use of chemicals. Lipase as a n enzyme is added in enzymatic IE.  
 
These are the references which are used in this lecture.  Thank you very much for your 
patience . Thank you.  
