Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 0 6: Edible Oils  Refining  
Lecture 30: Physical Refining and Deodorization  
 
Hello everyone, Namaskar.  Now, we are in lecture 30 that is the last lecture of module 6.  In 
this lecture in the next half an hour or so, we will talk about physical refining and  
deodorization.   
 
The topics which are included in this lecture include what is physical refi ning, the 
deodorization  theory and principles, the deodorization process, various systems and 
equipment for deodorization  may be batch, semi -continuous  and continuous are also covered 
and then undesirable changes  in oil during deodorization process . 
 
 
There are chemical refining and physical refining  in the oil refining process , we will 
concentrate mainly on the physical refining which is  a removal of  impurities from the oil , 
particularly free fatty acids by physical means.  So, it involve the steps usua lly steps of 
degumming and that bleaching etc . and then deacidification . The chemical refining is done 
using caustic  solution sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide, but in the case of physical 
refining deacidification is done by steam distillation.  So, t hat is you can say the deodorization 
and deacidification both are done in this  case by that steam process by heat treatment.  So, 
that is what is the physical refining. So, it steps include degumming, decolorization that is 
bleaching and then deacidificatio n and deodorization together . 
 
So, deodorization is the process of removing or reducing the unwanted order and taste from 
edible oils.  The process is used to improve the quality and stability of the oil making it more 
suitable  for human consumption.  The d eodorization process also helps to reduce the level of 
free fatty acid that whatever  the fatty acids are not removed in the earlier processes they are 
removed here in deodorization  process and they obviously, can contribute to the shelf life of 
the oil tha t is if the  fatty acids free fatty acids are less then there will be less problem of 
rancidity in  the oil.  The main principle behind deodorization is based on the volatility of the 
other compound  as I told you it is basically the distillation this compound  are volatized and 
then they  are condensed and collected. Other compound have a lower boiling point compared 
to the oil and as a result they can  be removed from the oil by applying heat and vacuum.   
 
So, in this slide I have given you just a schematic rep resentation of the different  stages of the 
deodorization process.  You can see that here in that there is a heating of the oil then 
deodorization, heat  recovery, final cooling then de aeration  and finally, the schemes  are 
scrubbed off.  So, in the whole refining step , deodorization is the last step of the refining 
process.  It is the process in which the odors and flavors of fats and oils are removed resulting  
in a bland finished product. In fact, a properly deodorized oil should be bland in taste even 
experienced  testers also should not be able to tell the source of the oil if it is properly 
deodorized  because it will not contain any fatty acids, odors etc are totally removed.  This 
deodorization of refined and bleached oil is carried out under vacuum and a t an  absolute 
pressure of 1 to 6 mm of Hg.   
 
So, in the functions of deodorization , it reduces the free  fatty acids to brings it to less than 
0.05 percent and preferably it should be lower  than 0.03 or 0. 02 percent.  Deodorization 
process removes the odor iferous compounds such as aldehydes, ketones, hydrocarbons,  
lactones, alcohol etc which are generally produced from the decomposition  of the oil.  Also the 
deodorization process reduces the peroxide value of the oil to zero  removes any  such 
peroxide etc whi ch are formed.  Any residual trace metals picked up by the oil after bleaching . 
There will be some metal uptake  if any . They are reduced by a citric acid treatment that is in 
the end of the deodorization process  that is a compulsory about 0. 01 to 0.05 perc ent that 
there are regulations the limit is provided that the citric acid solution is added into  the 
deodorization vessel in the last and this citric acid it chelates the metal ions.  This is the 
essential step and it is not a substitute for the bleaching s tep this chelating  is mainly for the 
metals otherwise if it is not done and if some metal ions are present  they may cause oxidation 
of the fatty acid and whole process of refining may be defeated.  There is some increase in the 
amount of polymers conjugated  diner or other oil decomposition  products, but a detectable 
increase in the trans fatty  acids content in the oil depending upon the deodorization 
temperature . So, because you are giving a heat treatment. So, there are chances and there do 
occur some trans  fatty acids are part, but the conditions  in the process are control in such a 
way so as to minimize the trans fatty formation.   
 
So, the processing steps which are involved in the deodorization process include deaeration . 
It is basically to remove the dissolved  oxygen from the oil.  So, to which the removal of oxygen 
obviously, prevents the oil from oxidation and also the  moistures etc are removed in this 
process.  Then the after deaeration oil is heated to a temperature of abo ut 240 to 260 °C under 
vacuum and this causes the evaporation of the fatty acids and other compounds etc . After 
heating the steam distillation that blowing the steam  through the oil at 260 °C once the oil has 
been previously heated.  So, steam is blown and th is steam causes the evaporation of free fatty 
acid and then separately  it is condensed and this steams free fatty acids are distilled ok. And 
then as I told you towards the last stage is the citric acid treatment that is it is  used as a 
chelating agent bec ause you see under such a high temperature there may be  some  metals 
the corrosion etc although the all the piping and other containers  of material is used with 
high acid resistance and fatty acid they should be with resistant  the fatty acid vapor s. So, 
mat erial of construction should be that, but still there might be some chances that  there are 
some metals etc which are used in the preparation of equipment manufacture  of equipment 
they may get some into oil.  So, that is chelated by using citric acid then fi nal step is the cooling 
of the deodorized  oil to room temperature . 
 
So, in the deodorization process conditions , temperature is usually maintained at around  240 
to 260 °C to allow the efficient removal of unwanted order and taste compound.  Then a high 
vacu um is maintained in the deodorization tower to reduce the pressure  and prevent the oil 
from being exposed to air. The vacuum level is usually maintained at around 50 to 60  mm Hg. 
Then steam it is used to transfer the heat to the oil and to remove the volati le order  and taste 
compounds . The steam is usually supplied at a temperature of around 200 °C or more.  Then 
time of the deodorization process that is sufficient time need to be given for the  distillation 
of the fatty acid and other odorous compounds.  So, it  usually that is a 30 to 60 minutes 
depending upon the type of oil being processed  and the desired level of order and taste that 
is required to be removed.  Then cooling after the deodorization process the oil is rapidly 
cooled to prevent further  oxidation and to stabilize the oil for storage and transportation.  
 
There are two types of deodorization processes . They are physical deodorization and 
chemical deodorization.  So, physical deodorization is the most common method used in 
edible oil refining.  In thi s process the oil is subjected to high temperature and high vacuum 
conditions to  remove the unwanted order and taste compound.  The process is based on the 
principle of steam distillation and is carried out in a deodorization  tower which is equipped 
with a condenser to remove the volatile compounds from the oil.   
 
 
So, the steps involved in the physical  deodorization process you can see the schematic of the 
deodorization setup. So, the oil is first preheated to a temperature of around 95 to 100 °C to 
reduce  its moisture content and remove any impurities from it.  Then steam is introduced into 
the oil to remove the volatile order compounds this is  done in a deodorization tower where 
the oil is heated under vacuum to a temperature of  around 240 to 260 °C. And the n vacuum is 
maintained and cooling is done . 
 
So, the components of a physical deodorization system include the deodorization tower.  The 
deodorization tower is a vessel designed to hold the oil and subject it to high temperature  
and high vacuum condition. And accordingly the material of construction of deodorization 
tower is very important as  I told you it must withstand the fatty acid vapor.  It is typically 
made of stainless steel and is equipped with heat exchangers,  steam distr ibutors and a 
condenser.  Heat exchangers are used obviously, to heat the oil to the desired temperature for 
the deodorization process.  The heat exchangers can be steam heated or they can be 
electrically heated depending  on the specific requirement of the r efining process.   
 
 
 
Then the deodorization setup is equipped with a condenser which is used to condense  the 
volatile compounds that are removed from the oil during deodorization process particularly  
fatty acid vapors . And the condenser typically consists  of a coil or a plate heat exchanger and 
is designed  to efficiently remove the volatile compounds from the oil.  Vacuum pump is used 
to maintain the high vacuum condition in the deodorization tower.  It is typically operates in 
conjunction with a vacuum cont rol system to maintain the desired  vacuum level in the tower.   
 
 
Then there is a cooling system which is used to rapidly cool down the oil after the 
deodorization  process to prevent further oxidation and to stabilize the oil for storage and 
transport.  Then a whole setup is provided  which  is a properly controlled proper control 
system that  is used to manage and monitor the various parameters of deodorization process 
such as  temperature, vacuum, steam flow e tc so as to maintain the quality and to have a bett er 
efficiency process efficiency. The control system is typically computer control and can be 
programmed to optimize the process  conditions for specific types of oils.   
 
 
Chemical deodorization  is a less commonly used method of deodorization of edible oil . In this 
process , chemicals such as sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide are added to the oil to 
neutralize  the free fatty acids which are the primary source of the unwanted odors and taste.  
So, basically you can say in other words it is a chemical deo dorization also some sort  of 
chemical refining and neutralization process. So, the neutralized oil is then subjected to 
physical deodorization to remove the remaining  volatile compounds.  So, that is what in the 
neutralization and then deodorization that yo u can say a chemical  deodorization process.  
Then the equipment setup is similar here again it is give acid there is a degasser  is provided 
this is pre -treatment from the oil then oil is subjected from the top.  There are prior heat 
exchangers provided for final heating.  Then it is there for the distillation setup the vacuum 
system is provided then finally,  citric acid system that is addition of citric acid in the last stage 
and then you g oes to the cooling and transportation etc.  
 
In chemical deodorization  system , there are the steps which are used again  like pre -
treatment before deodorization the oil is pre -treated to remove any impurities  such as 
phospholipids which can interfere with the deodorization process and this is  typically done 
by degumming and n eutralization as we discussed earlier.  Then oil is heated to temperature 
of around 240 to 260 °C in jacketed vessel  and the high temperature helps to vaporize the 
volatile compounds . And to remove the undesirable colour, flavour, taste , etc. 
 
Then vacuum i s an oil is a subjected to a vacuum which helps to reduce the pressure  inside 
the vessel to facilitate the removal of volatile compounds and then finally, steam  stripping is 
done . Steam is introduced into the deodorizer to remove the volatile compounds.  Steam helps 
to carry the volatile compounds out of the oil and into the condenser where  they are collected 
and removed. Then cooling the after steam stripping the oil is cooled to a temperature of 
around 90  to 100 °C in order to stop the removal of the volati le compounds and to prevent  
the formation of new compounds.  And then it is further cooled to the room temperature . 
 
The components of a chemical deodorization system are pretreatment vessel these are  used 
for degumming and neutralization which are the fir st step of chemical deodorization  process.  
Then there is a heat jacketed vessel like in the physical deodorization system here  also it is 
there.  And the heated vessel is that is used to heat the oil to the desired temperature for 
chemical  deodorization process and vessel is typically jacketed to allow for even heating of 
the oil. So, in this vessel there is a n arrangement also where  this alkali  is to be added.   
 
The vacuum system is to create the desired vacuum inside the heated jacketed  vessel , which  
helps to  reduces the pressure inside the vessel and facilitates the removal of volatile 
compounds . Then steam generator is used to generate the steam which is used to strip the 
volatile  compounds from the oil.  The steam is introduced into the heated jackete d vessel and 
helps to carry the volatile compounds  out of the condenser. Then chemical agent handling 
system, this system is used to add the chemical agent such  as activated carbon or clay to the 
oil for removing of some colors like what  we do in the bleac hing.  Then chemical agent is 
typically added in the form of a slurry which is mixed with the  oil. So, in the same setup all 
these process that is the removal of the degumming, neutralization,  bleaching etcetera is done 
in the same.   
 
Then condenser , cooling system and neutralization tank.  The condenser is obviously, to 
remove the volatile compounds that are stripped from  the oil by the steam . The condenser 
may be a shell and tube type or falling film type depending on the specific  need of the refining 
proc ess. Cooling system is a there to reduce the temperature of the oil to around 90 to 100 °C 
in first stage and then finally, to the room temperature.  Neutralization tank is used to 
neutralize the oil and to remove any residual free fatty  acid that may have f ormed during the 
deodorization process itself because you are subjecting  the oil to such a high temperature.  So, 
this can also cause some breakage of the yeast and linkage some free fatty acids  etc might do 
for. So, that are also removed in the neutralization tank.  
 
So, the advantages of physical deodorization over chemical deodorization process that is  
physical deodorization is preferred over chemical deodorization due to its effectiveness in  
removing the unwan ted odour and taste compound and its minimal impact on the quality and  
nutritional value of the oil.  The system operates continuously and the deodorized oil is stored 
in tanks or drums for further  processing or for transportation to the consumer.  Chemical 
deodorization is less commonly used because it can introduce unwanted chemicals  into the 
oil and can also affect the flavour and order of the oil.   
 
The batch deodorizer , it is a vessel in the form of a vertical cylinder with dished  or cone heads 
and then  it has arrangement that is you see for internal heating pipe  that is the air are 
provided and then the number 2 is  the stripping strip  inlet port system. Then this from this 
A is for th e neutralized bleached oil inlet, B is for stripping strip  steam inlet  and from this 
point C the deodorized oil goes out and this went for outlet went  for the vapour.  Then here 
that is heating E point is that heating steam inlet and F is the condensate  outlet.  So, all these 
arrangements are provided in the same vessel.  So, s tripping steam is injected into the bottom 
of the vessel through a distributor, a device  for indicating oil temperature and a pressure 
gauge etc designed to indicate accurately  low pressures within the deodorizers are also 
provided.  And it has the advantag e of simplicity of design flexibility and ease of operation.  
 
Semi continuous deodorizer it consists of a cylindrical shell of carbon steel construction  with 
5 or more SS 304 trays stacked one above the other that you can see as here in this  vessel.  
Each  tray is fitted with a steam sparge and is capable of holding a measured batch of  oil. Oil 
is charged to the top tray where it is deaerated while being heated with steam to  around 160 
to 165 °C in the top tray.  Then at the end of the heating period the charge is automatically 
dropped to the second  tray and the top tray is filled with the fresh oil.  Then in the second tray 
the oil is heated to the operating temperature and again after  a time period it is automatically 
dropped to the third plate. And the o il from the first plate is dropped to the second plate, first 
plate again fresh  oil comes.  So, in this way the process continues.  When the oil reaches to the 
bottom tray finally, it is cooled to around 40 to 50 °C and discharged to a drop tank from which 
it is pumped to a polishing filter and taken out to the storage.  So, this is a semi -continuous  
operation . 
 
Then continuous operation again similar to that, but here the arrangement for oil inlet into 
the tops and then outlet is done in continuously and thes e are based on a series of steam 
agitated trays which are provided inside the vessel or  compartments of a stirred  vertically in 
a cylindrical cell . Steeping of free fatty acids and other volatile compounds and bleaching are 
carried out simultaneously  here in this setup.  The retention time per tray is usually 10 to 30 
minutes typically , liquid levels of 0.3  to 0.8 meter are maintained by overflow pipes or wires , 
and the counter -current  principles  introduces efficiency through more effective use of the 
jacket ed steam to introduce or  to reduce the quantity required and a smaller vacuum due to 
the small requirements or volume  of oil-treated  at a time.  So, this is a continuous process . 
 
So, let me give you here a comparison between the batch semi -continuous  and continuous 
system  of reauthorization.  So, first is the suitability of the process for various.  So, the batch 
system is suitable for discrete batches of the product or specialty products  and it can be used 
for making emulsifier and inter -esterified  products whereas, the  semi continuous system is 
more suitable for the products where frequent product change  over is needed.  It is not 
suitable for making emulsifier or inter esterified products.  Continuous system is suitable for 
continuous production of large volume of product with  minimum number of product 
changeovers. Also it is not suitable for making emulsifier or inter esterified products.  Then 
steaming strip usage that is pressure is generally 2 Torr . So, in the batch system it is a steam 
stripping usage is high around 3 to 4 percent of the  batch size by weight in old design and 1 
to 2 percent in new design and in the semi continuous  it is a 1.25 to 1. 5 percent of oil flow by 
weight in continuous 0.8 to 1.2 percent of  the oil flow and then 0.4 to 0. 7 percent per packed 
column.  Then production rate in the batch system is usually low normally say 7 to 8 hour per 
batch  regardless of the batch size. Then in a semi continuous it is 4 to 5 times of that of the 
batch deodorizer  and in  continuous process you  can have normally 5 to 8 times of that of the 
batch deodorizer  process.  Energy recovery in batch process is normally none and can be 
about 25 to 30 percent through  heat economizer if it is provided into the system.  In semi -
continuous  process , energy recov ery is relatively high  and it can be up to 65 percent  of the 
total heat input by using internal and external heat recovery system.  But in the continuous 
process , it is further again very high.  It can be as high as 85 to 90 percent of the total heat 
input b y using external heat economizers. Cost of deodorizer  per number or per kilogram in 
batch process is very high.  In semi continuous process normally 30 to 40 percent of the batch 
process and in continuous  process , it is further reduced . 
 
Now, let us see th e factors that affect the de odorisation  process.  Number 1 deaeration.  So, 
proper deaeration should be done to remove dissolved air and moisture to prevent oxidation  
of the oil and formation of oxidative polymers. And the negative impact of oxidative polymers 
and this will reduce poor flavor stability in the deodorized oi l, this will produce poor  flavor 
stability.  And this oxidative polymers can cause rapid fouling of the heat bleachers and 
deodorizer  system.  Then operating temperature and pressure are  important that optimum 
operating temperature  causes balancing of color pigments and the beta -carotene and other s. 
Low operating pressure must be maintained in the deodorizer , a high er than the normal  
operating pressure that is the lower vacuum . Low vacuum  reduces the ability of the  
deodorizer  to remove the odoriferous compounds from the oil.  So, that proper temperature 
and pressures will be maintained.  
 
Then amount of the stripping stream increases agitation in the oil which helps remove the  
volatile mat ter from the oil.  The stream expands under the reduced pressure increasing the 
specific surface area.  This enhances the contact between the steam, oil and the volatile 
components of the oil  owing to the expanded volume.  The steam can remove the volatile 
matters more effectively.  Citric acid content is used as a chelating agent to complex the trace  
metals like iron, calcium, magnesium etc. At higher temperature , the citric acid decomposes 
very little or no beneficial effect  of the oil.  So, the citric acid qu antity also is important.  Then 
cooling of the oil this will also be done with care and taking into consideration  of the type of 
oil being processed.  Oil high in PUFA must be cooled down to prevent the formation of 
undesirable flavors in the  oil.  
 
And the quality of the deodorizer  oil obviously, it depends upon the type of the deodorizer  
and process which is used whether batch process, semi -continuous  process or continuous 
process  which we have seen also a comparison in the earlier slide. So, obviou sly, that the 
physical attributes of the oil that  deodorizer  oil accordingly  the process objective is to get the 
better quality oil.  So, the deodorizer  oil must be analyzed properly and it should possess 
various physical  and chemical attribute and to fit i nto the quality system that is physical 
attributes  like it should be odorless, it should have clean taste with no unpleasant after taste  
and it should be light in color.  Similarly, there should be low maybe point less than 0.02 
percent FFA, low peroxide or  no peroxide value, maximum antioxidant should be there and 
there should be less amount of  decomposition products such as aldehyde, ketones, 
hydrocarbons etc . So, this should be the quality in the deodorizer oil and accordingly this 
should  be maintained by  maintaining the proper process parameters conditions in the  
deodorization .  
 
 
Some process parameters  are not properly maintained, there may be even some undesirable 
changes because  here you are treating the oil subjecting to oil so, such a high very hig h 
temperature.  So, there it may result to the deodorisation  losses and this losses in the 
deodorisation  process refers to the reduction in the quality and quantity of certain 
compounds of edible  oil during the deodorisation  process in oil refining.  Some of the common 
deodorisation  changes or losses in the edible oil include number  one most important loss of 
antioxidants that antioxidants such as tocopherols and carotenoids  they are important for 
preserving the stability and quality of the edible oils  and they are  present in the naturally in 
the plant oils.  So, during the deodorisation  process some of these antioxidants can be lost if 
the process  is not properly done and this can result in a reduction in the oil shelf life and 
stability  as well.   
 
There are certain oils where these flavor and aroma  is liked by the  consumers. They 
contribute to specific or characteristic taste and send to the product.  So, during the 
deodorisation  process some of these compounds are removed resulting in  loss of flavor an d 
aroma.  Then one another very  important aspect of this is the formation of trans fatty acid  that 
is the high temperature used during the deodorisation  process can cause the formation  of 
trans fatty acids which are unhealthy and have negative health impact s. So, the process must 
take care that , it should  result into as low as possible formation of trans fatty acid.  Then loss 
of color some edible oils such as palm oil contain pigments such as carotenoids  etc that 
contributes to their color and people like it  consumers like it. So, during the deodorisation  
process some of these pigments also can be lost resulting  in reduction in the oils color.  So, the 
deodorisation  process conditions should be maintained to  overcome these problems . 
 
So, finally, I will conclude this lecture by saying that as physical refining and deodorisation  
both these are crucial processes in the production of high quality food oils.  Deodorisation  in 
particular is essential to remove unwanted odors and flavors from  the oil also it is used to 
remove the pre fatty acids.  The conditions of deodorisation  process such as temperature, 
pressure and time play  a crucial role in determining the quality of the final product. 
Deodorisation  equipment including batch, semi contin uous and continuous systems are  
widely used in the country.  However, it is important to note that the deodorisation  losses can 
occur during the  process leading to a reduction in nutritional value and quality of the oil and 
this must  be taken care of by mai ntaining proper conditions or by optimizing using the 
optimized process  parameters.  So, it is essential to carefully monitor and optimize the 
deodorisation  process parameters  to ensure the highest quality and nutritional value of the 
final product.  
 
 
So, these are the references used in this lecture with this.  Thank you very much for your 
patience here.  Thank you . 
