Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 7 : Modifications of Oils and Fats  
Lecture 34 : Margarine & Shortenings  
 
 
Hello everybody, good morning. Now, I am in lecture 34 of this course and in this 
lecture, we will talk about margarine  and shortening which  is a very important type of 
modified fat that has a wide -ranging  application  in the bakery and confectionery industry.  
In this lecture,  we will discuss what the various types of modified fat are , and why we 
need to modify fat we have already discussed earlier.  Different  modified fats will be 
taken up in this and two important fats, like shortenings,  their types, characteristics , and 
functions , and the margarine, the manufacturing process  for margarine, their properties , 
and functional applications  will be discussed .  
The different types of modified fat include butter, oil, shortening , and margarine.  And 
here the bread is taken that if you use butter in the preparation of bread, if use oil in the 
preparation of bread, shortening and margarine all these types of  fats used in the making 
of the bread are shown . They have an important effect on the final product characteristics 
as you can see  here.  If the butter i s used, it will give less height  to, a compact, fine-
textured  product , but the crumb structure will be small.  Oil gives a moist product tall and 
light slightly coarse, but open crumb.  Shortening will give a tall and light, but coarse and 
dry, and crumbly  structure . Margarine gives  moist, but not light coarse, air pockets and 
salty  bread .  So, it has all these types of fat influence their  final product characteristics.  
That is why these modified fats particularly margarine, shortening etcetera their 
characteristics  are modified to suit the particular functional application in the food  
processing industries. More specifically we will take up here the bakery and 
confectionery industry .  So, the major functions of these products are to tenderize  the 
product and soften the texture of the product , add moistness and richness , to assist in  the 
leavening of the product when used as a creaming agent or when used to give flakiness  to 
puff pastry, pie doughs , or other similar products.  It is used to increase ke eping quality 
and to add flavor . 
  
Many different fats are available to the baker. These fats have different properties that 
make the m suitable for different purposes.  Among the properties, fat must be selected 
based on its melting point, softness or hardness at different temperatures, flavour , and 
ability to form emulsions.  Most bakery ingredients mix easily with water and other 
liquids and actually undergo a change  in form.  For example, salt and sugar dissolve in 
water; flour and starch absorb water and the water becomes bound up with t he starch and 
protein molecules, this gives a particular  desirable characteri stic in the products that is 
when ther e are proper interactions between  these components .   
 
Fat, on the other hand, does not change form when it is mixed with liquids or other 
bakery ingredients.  Instead, the fat is merely broken down into smaller and smaller 
particles during mixing.  These small fat particles then become more or less evenly 
distributed in the mix and you can see here that it is a successful emulsion that the fat is 
kept properly  in a small aliquot in a proper stable emulsion form whereas, the failed 
emulsion  here you can see in the picture.  It depends on what are the conditions , types of 
fat, how it is mixed with  and other  proper  conditions .  
 
 
 A uniform mixture of two un -mixable substances, such as fat and water, is called an 
emulsion  as you can see  in the figure shown . Mayonnaise is a familiar example of an 
emulsion from outside the bakeshop – in this case, an emulsion of oil and vinegar.  Ther e 
are emulsions of air and fat, such as that formed when shortening and sugar are creamed 
together in the production of cakes and other products.  Differen t fats have differing 
abilities to form emulsions. For example, if the wrong shortening is used in certain cases , 
the emulsion may fail because the batter contains more water than the fat can hold. Then, 
batter “curdles” or “breaks.”  When the wron g shortening is used you can see in the 
picture here . So, proper quality and quantity  of these components is very essential for 
proper mixing.  
 
Now let us talk about shortening . Shortening has historically been referred to as a solid 
fat added to dough to prevent the development of long strands of gluten in baked 
products . This results in crumbly, dense dou ghs that are required in the production of 
various confections.  Today, the term “shortening” typically describes a vegetable oil -
based ingredient.  Shortenings generally consist of nearly 100% fat. It may be made from 
vegetable oils, animal fats, or both . During manufacturing, fats are hydrogenated and it 
converted liquid oils into solid fats.  The shortening is important for many baked goods, 
such as pie crusts, because gluten creates a gummy or chewy end product. When fat is 
worked i nto dry flour, the fat creates a barrier between gluten molecules, thus preventing 
them from cross -linking once a liquid is added , and that influences the  final product 
texture.   
The application  of these shortening in baking  is, that it gives texture improvement. 
Shortening, with its higher melting poin t compared to butter or margarine, helps create a 
tender and flaky texture in baked goods like pie crusts, biscuits, and pastries.  Gives 
enhanced moistness  by its  ability to trap air during the baking process , it contributes to 
moistness, resulting in soft an d moist cakes and cookies.  It extends the shelf life. 
Shortening has a longer shelf life compared to butter due to its low moisture content, 
making it a preferred choice for baked goods that need to be stored for longer periods.  In 
cooking, Shortening has a high smoke point, which means it can withstand high cooking 
temperatures without breaking down and producing smoke. This ma kes it suitable for 
deep -frying, sautéing, and pan -frying.  Unlike butter, shortening has a neutral flavor , 
allowing it to blend well with other ingredients without overpowering the overall taste of 
the dish.  Other  application s are i cing frosting , and c andy making . Shortening is often 
used in icings and frostings to create a smooth and stable consistency.  Shortening can be 
used in candy -making recipes to prevent sugar crystallization and provide a smooth 
texture to confections lik e fudge, caramels, and truffles.  
 
 The shortenings  help in the incorporation of air, plasticity , consistency , and solid -liquid  
ratio are important characteristics of the shortening that depend  in part on the 
polymorphism . Beta prime  crystal gives a large amount of small air cell incorporation.  
So, it yields a whiter, creamier product that is tender and has a smooth texture  whereas , 
the beta crystals help incorporation of a small amount of large air cells.   So, it yields large 
clustered crystals with a waxy or  grainy  texture. So, polymorphs in the shortening are 
very important functionalities  to incorporate proper  characteristics . 
 
 Regular shortening has a fairly tough, waxy texture  and small particles of the fat tend to 
hold their shape in a dough or batter.  They can b e manufactured to be of varying degrees 
of hardness. Regular shortenings have a good creaming ability.  This means that a good 
quantity of air can be mixed into them to give a batter lightness & leavening power.  Also,  
this type of shortening melts only at a high temperature. Because of their texture, these 
shortenings are used for flaky products such as pie crusts and biscuits. They are also used 
in many other pastries, breads, and products mixed by creaming, such as  certain pound 
cakes, cookies, and quick breads. Unless another shortening is specified in a formula, 
regular shortening is generally used.   
 
Then emulsified shortening . These are soft shortenings that spread easily throughout a 
batter and quickly coat the particles of sugar and flour. Because they contain added 
emulsifying agents, they can hold a larger q uantity of liquid and sugar than regular 
shortenings can.  Thus, they give a smoother and finer texture to cakes and make them 
moister.  Emulsified shortening is often used when the weight of sugar in a cake batter  is 
greater than the weight of flour. Because this shortening spreads so well, a simpler mixing 
method can be used. Such cakes are referred to as high -ratio shortening. In addition, 
emulsified sh ortening is often used in icings because it can  hold  more sugar and liquid 
without curdling.   
The difference between butter and shortening is, that butter  has a highly desirable  flavor  
butter melts in the mouth butter and is more expensive than shortening.  But the 
shortening is intentionally flavorless , it do es not melt in the mouth . After eating pastries 
or icings made with shortening, one can be left with an unpleasant film of shortening 
coating in the mouth . Shortening is cheaper than the butter. Shortenings are manufactured 
to have certain textures and hardness so that they will be particularly suited to certain 
uses.  Many bakers and pastry chefs fee l that the advantages of butter outweigh its 
disadvantages for many purposes.  One may blend 50% butter and 50% shortening to get 
both the flavor  of butter and the handling qualities of shortening.  
  
So, now after having discussed shortening let us talk about margarine. Margarine in other 
words is also many a times known a s vegetable butter.  Margarine is manufactured from 
various hydrogenated animal and vegetable fats, plus flavoring  ingredients, emulsifiers , 
coloring  agents, and other ingredients.  It contains 80 to 85% fat, 10 to 15% moisture, and 
about 5% salt, milk solids, and  other components.  Thus, it may be considered a sort of 
imitation butter consisting of shortening, water, and flavoring.  Major categories of 
margarine are cake margarine or baker's margarine and pastry margarine .  
 
Cake margarine or baker's margarine is a type of fat used in baking, particularly for 
making cakes, pastries, and other baked goods. It is a solid fat that is specifically 
formulated to have certain  characteristics that make it suitable for baking applications.  
Cake margarine is typically made from vegetable oils, such as soybean oil or  palm oil, 
which are partially hydrogenated to solidify them. This process creates a semi -solid fat 
with a higher melting point than regular  butter, allowing  it to maintain its shape and 
structure at room temperature. Cake margarine has several advantages in baking. It 
provides a tender and moist texture to baked goods, enhances their flavor, and helps to 
create a desirable crumb structure. It is also easier to cream with sugar compared to 
butter, making it a convenient opti on for cake batters.  
 
Then pastry margarines , these margarine  are tougher and more elastic and have a waxy 
texture. They are specially  formulated for doughs that form layers, such as Danish dough 
and puff pastry. Puff pastry margarine, the toughness of these fats, is sometimes  called 
puff pastry shortening. However, like other margarine , it has a significant water content, 
which helps to give leavening power to the dough when it forms steam. Puff pastry made 
with this margarine will generally rise higher than pastry  made with butter.  However , 
since the fat doesn’t melt in the mouth like butt er, many  people find the pastry unpleasant 
to eat.  
 
So, the major operations in the preparation of the margarine  formation are the collection 
that is  it is made from a collection of vegetable oils that are  rich in unsaturated fatty acids 
or polyunsatu rated  fatty acids . More percent of polyunsaturated fatty acids  gives  an 
option to incorporate health options in the margarine.  The second step is hydrogenation 
which  changes  the chemical structure of the  vegetable oil to turn the fatty acids from 
liquid to solid .  Then this trans -fat formation , the process of hydrogenation leads to the 
formation of  trans fatty acid, but here the proper conditions are selected so that less trans -
fat is form ed, and then butter imitations that is for the impressions of butter. The end 
product is processed and designed to imitate butter where  emulsifiers, moisture , and other 
ingredients are added and it is worked out in a similar manner like which  is done i n 
traditional butter and you get a butter substitute or imitation butter  or vegetable butter . 
 
This process flow chart is the same which is discussed earlier fats, oils enter the raw 
material tank, then the deacidification process, decolorization , and hydrogenat ion 
process , that is, the decolorized , bleached , and deodorized oil is hydrogenated and even 
sometime after hydrogenation it is  deodorized.  Then it is mixed with salt, water, other 
ingredients, vitamin A, milk or milk solids , and so on and it is worked out then it is 
properly mixed to have proper emulsifying  action . Then it is cooled and kneaded firmly it 
gives in shape  forming process and you get margarine .  So, this is the step used. As just 
in brief as I told you earlier that is taking the  oil, solidifying it partially , solidifying it to 
bring it to proper consistency then adding to  other ingredient s, working out , and giving 
the shape of the normal butter. So, this is the process flow chart for the preparation.   
 
Here you see  that is the margarine process line, the tetra blend process line for the 
production  of butter and dairy spreads .  This is a very popular process and equ ipment 
machinery is available . As you can see here it consists of two block s that is  one is the 
dairy block where  in the cream concentration pasteurization cooling of the cream takes 
place and the other  block is the margarine block where in preparation of the mix and the 
phase inversion accompanied  by working and cooling takes place.  So, here you can see 
the yellow line is the one which is the fat oil cream with the 35 to  40 percent fat going.  
Then the orange line is the concentrated cream that is it is flow and then this blue line  is 
the flow of buttermilk  and this completely yellow line  here shows the flow of vegetable 
oil.  The other colors  like aroma, salt, heating media, cooling media , and the optiona l 
ingredients  are given by these  other colors , that is green, red, and light orange. I n the 
dairy block , you can see the first cream from the cream tank it  passes through the heat 
exchanger and the n it goes to the concentrator . So, it is a centrifugal cream concentra tor 
and cream standardization. F rom there it is sent to the pre-crystallization  tanks and then it 
moves to  the margarine block where it has an arrangement for the salt  dosage, which is  
optional (6).  Then vegetable oil tanks are there in the margarine bloc k, aroma dosages 
tank, a system  for mixing, then a butter tank is there , a high-pressure  pump, a scraped 
surface cooler  and pin rotors , and a silo with a screw conveyor to the bottom.  So, all the 
arrangements are there in both the blocks.  
 
 So, in the dairy  block as you can see in the figure here the process starts with pasteurized 
cream of 35 to 40% fat content. As the cream may come from another creamery or  a local 
cream storage tank, its temperature must be adjusted to 60 – 70°C before it enters the 
cream concentrator, a hermetic centrifugal machine. The degree of concentration, i.e. the 
cream fat content, is automatically controlled by the continuous stan dardization device.  
Fat contents of up to 82% are attained and then the cream is cooled to 18 – 20°C before 
being routed to a holding / pre -crystallization tank.   
 
 
This part of the process line starts with a batching station where the  product mix is 
prepared. Various ingredients are mixed together according  to the recipe for th e product 
in question. Thus concentrated cream is mixed  with appropriate volumes of vegetable oil, 
salt, and water phase, in that  order. After thorough mixing the mixtu re is pumped into a 
buffer tank (10). A new batch can then be prepared. The process is continuous from the  
buffer tank, from which the product mix is taken to the high-pressure  pump (11). It is 
then fed into the scraped -surface coolers (12), where phase inversion takes place. Before 
final cooling , the spread is held and worked by pin rotors (13).  Leaving the final cooling 
stage, the product enters the storage silo (14) from where it is pu mped into the filling 
machine, often a tub filling machine. The whole process is controlled by a process 
computer and a recipe computer.  
 
Then let us talk briefly about the merits and demerits of margarine . The merits include its 
spread ability . It is one of the most highly regarded attributes and margarine shows good 
spreadability at refri geration temperature as compared  to butter. Products with a solid fat 
index (SFI) of 10 –20 at serving temperature are optimal on a consumer panel . Then its 
consiste ncy and texture . Consistency is the measure of smoothness, evenness , and plastic 
state in margarine. Texture is a measure of the structure. This attribute can be altered to 
the desired  level by using different vegetable oils in the formulation as butter  has less 
scope to alter consistency and texture . Margarine contains minimum or no cholesterol in 
the product.  Margarine i s cheaper than butter.  
 
The demerits of margarine include , bland in flavour and taste . The flavor  and mouthfeel 
of margarine are weak as compared  to butter . There is possibility  of oil separation when 
the crystal matrix is inadequate to entrap the liquid oil. This occurs because of the 
transformation of the crystals to the β -form. The β -crystals continuously grow bigger 
(causing sandiness) until the network can no longer retain its lattice structure to entrap the 
liquid oil. The liquid oil then exudes from the product and the aqueous phase coalesces . 
β’ polymorph is the desired form in margarine. β’ has very small crystals so that it can 
incorporate a large volume of liquid oil in th e crystal network giving a smooth, 
continuous and homogeneous product. However, the β -crystals have the tendency to 
grow bigger and bigger into needle -like agglomerates. The large crystals impart a 
sensation of sandiness in the mouth . 
 
In packaging material that is generally recommended for margarine s are like th e material 
should be grease -proof , it should be impervious to light flavoring and arom atic 
substances,  it should be impermeable to moisture.  Normally parchment paper is used for 
packing butter, but it can be used for the packing  of margarine as well as aluminum foil, 
outer paper cotton with a PE layer inside, and plastic  tubs of PP or PS . It should 
withstand a storage temperature  of around 5 degrees  Celsius .  
 
Finally, I will summarize this lecture by  saying that the major fats used in the oil industry 
are butter, oil, shortening , and margarine.  A shortening is a type of fat, solid at room 
temperature, which can be used to give foods a crumbly and crisp texture such as pastry.  
Regular shortening and emulsified shortening are two kinds  of shortening.  Margarine is a 
spread used for flavouring, baking, and cooking. It is most often used as a substitute for 
butter.  Cake margarine  or baker’s margarine  and pastry margarine  are the two types of 
margarines.  
 
These are the references that are used in th e preparation of this lecture. Thank you ver y 
much for your patience here. Thank you.  
