Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 10 : Specialty Oils and Fats Products  
Lecture 47 : Tropical Exotic Oils and Butter  
 
 
Hello everybody.  Now, we are in the 47th lecture of the course and in this lecture in the 
next half an hour  or so, we will talk about tropical exotic oils and butter .  We will discuss 
the properties, composition, physicochemical characteristics, health benefits , and uses  of 
three major exotic butter like mango kernel oil an d butter, kokum butter and mowrah  or  
mahua oil and butter.  
 
So, first let us talk about mango kernel oil. Mango kernel oil is extracted from the kernels 
of the fruit of the Mangifera indica tree of the Anacardiaceae family.  The seed comprises 
between 9% and 23% of the weight of the fruit  and are often discarded as waste by 
processors.  The mango kernel represents about 20 % of the whole fruit and 75 % of the 
stone.  Mango kernel contain s 12 – 15 % edible oil.  
 
 
 
So, for extraction of mango kernel oil , the seeds that are after the pulping the mango 
seeds are sun dried to around 13 percent  moisture content and these dried seeds stones are 
roasted in a drum roaster or suitable equipment .  After roasting they are broken and 
kernels are obtained then kernels may be converted  into powder and then it is subjected 
to hydraulic pressing or solvent extraction.  It gives the mango kernel oil. Microwaving 
seeds at  power level of  300 W for 180 s  prior to  extraction  increased the oil  yield from 
5.65% to 8.90%.  Mango kernel oil then maybe subjected to fermentation and you get  
rhamnolipids in it.  
 
A different  method  which can be used is hydro distillation of mango kernel oil . The 
mango  kernel that is in the water is heated using  heating rods , there is a conductor that 
condenses  the water, and mango kernel oil is obtained . Sun-dried mango seed kernels are 
placed in a tank mixed with water. Heating rods placed in the base of the tank convert 
this wate r into steam. That steam carries seed oil  toward the condenser. This oil -water 
mixture is  further left in the tank  for gravity base  separation and  collection into  two 
layers and the  top layer is the mango kernel oil.  
 
The commercial pressing of the mango butter can be done by  a super -critical  carbon  
dioxide process . It has been found to be very effective in this case that dry ground  mango 
kernels are loaded into the extraction vessel then continuous supercritical  carbon di oxide 
extraction at 50 mega Pascal pressure at 40 degrees  Celsius temperature and  at a constant 
carbon dioxide flow rate of 30 kg per hour.  So at initiation carbon dioxide from the 
cylinder is passed through the chiller at 0 degrees Celsius and then pumpe d into the 
extraction vessel by a high-pressure  pump.  The fat is extracted from fat-rich CO2 by two 
separators at one end of the instrument . The  first separator operates at 80 mega Pascal 
pressure and 40 degree Celsius  temperature and the second separator  operates at room 
temperature and 55 mega Pascal and  desiccates the sample.  Then carbon dioxide is 
finally recovered and recirculated through out the run time.  
 
 So, you can see here that is the different pictures are shown here is collection,  processing 
and preparation of mango kernel butter . From the mango  tree you get mango and the 
fruits Mangifera sylvatica  with the big  kernels in left and the fruit of Mangifera indica  
with the pulp in right  as seen in ‘b’, ‘c’  is the seed of Mangifera syl vatica . Then the seed 
is broken and the kernel is obtained , that is the kernel is received by suitable metho d and 
then chopping of the seed is done . The kernel is sun dried kernel.  And this kernel 
basically here which is shown in picture is subjected to t hat extraction  of butter or oil . 
You can see here a comparison , this is the cocoa butter  and this is the butter obtained 
from the mango kernel . 
 
Mango kernel butter is considered to be a good substitute of cocoa butter.  If you see the 
melting characteristics of cocoa , it is used in confectionery  or ice creams like products  
because of its melting profile. So, the melting profile of mango kernel butter is almost 
similar to the cocoa butter as you  can see in these two figures.  Similarly F TIR spectra of 
cocoa and mango butter are also shown and the chocolate prepared using mango butter 
and cocoa butter is shown in the figure .  The melting characteristics of cocoa and mango 
butter mango seed see that the  T onset for cocoa butter is 24.83 an d mango butter is 
29.64.  And T offset in degrees  Celsius 43 and 45, T peak 33 and 36 and enthalpy change 
is -115 or -81.  So, almost the cocoa butter and mango kernel butter properties are very 
similar .  So, it can be considered a good substitute for coco a butter.  The FTIR, melting 
profile & melting characteristics of MKB is quite similar as of cocoa butter showing its 
potential to be used in confectionary as a cocoa substitute . MKB can be substituted at 80 
% level in place of cocoa in dark chocolate prepa ration . 
 
Here some studies show the  effect of accelerated storage conditions  on mango kernel 
butter that is there are two blends were used . Blend 1 contains mango kernel  butter and 
palm oil mid -fraction (POMF) 80 to 80 ratio, and blend 2 is  85 percent mango kernel and 
15 percent  POMF .  Storage conditions are 65 degree Celsius for 24 days where one day 
of storage represent  one month of storage at room temperature because it is accelerated 
storage . The lines here are mango seed oil and palm oil mid-fracti on mixture a nd it shows 
how the peroxide value  increase s with storage. So, these both contain  a high degree of 
unsaturated fatty acids which are susceptible to oxidation . The fresh MKB, and blends 1 
and 2 showed PV of 1.1 ± 0.0, 2.5 ± 0.1, and  2.4 ± 0.1 me qO2/kg oil, respectively.  The 
PV was found to be slightly high. Heat used for extraction of MSF by  solvent might have 
caused fat oxidation.  
 
That is the free fatty acids this shows that similar conditions  affect free fatty acids, the 
total phenolic content , and the iodine number that changes during storage.  The FFA 
values increased significantly during the storage. At 12 days of storage, the FFA values 
of all fats increased dramatically. On the last day of storage, MSF showed the highest 
FFA value . The total phenolic contents in MSF and MSF/POMF blends decreased  in 6 
days of storage. The phenolic contents decreased significantly upon storage. The iodine 
values decreased significantly during storage. The decrease of iodine values from day 0 
to day 24 of storage  was observed to be higher in MKB.  
 
This table gives the physicochemical properties of mango kernel oil t hat is free of fatty 
acid 0.22 percent, i t is light yellow to white in color,  the moisture content is 0.21 percent.  
It has an iodine value of 54 g iodine/100 g fat  and a melting point of 35.2 degrees celsius .  
It has a refractive index of 1.476 , a density of 0.911 grams  per cubic centimeter, and a 
saponification value  of 162  milligrams  KOH  per gram . It contains around 1.65 percent 
insoluble m atter and its melting point is around 35 that is it melts in the hand like this.  
So, the proximate composition of mango oil cake is crude protein 38 percent, but fat 12 
percent, ash content 3.7, fibre 4.9 , and carbohydrate 40 percent . It has a y ellow colo r and 
has a non-offensive odor. Oil ceases to flow at an increased temperature.  The high 
saponification  is indicative of use in the cosmetic  industry.  
 
Fatty acid composition of mango kernel oil is 27.27% of saturated fatty acids  and 72.73% 
of unsaturated fatty acid (UFA) as MUFA 67.51% and PUFA 5.22% . These are more 
stable than other vegetable oils. They are r ich source of stearic, oleic, palmitic, and 
linoleic acids.  High content of oleic and linoleic acids is source of nutrient  rich food oil.  
Saturated fatty acid (SFA) present are valeric, lauric, myristic, palmitic, margaric, stearic, 
arachidic, behenic, tricosanoic and lignoceric acids.  
 
Solid fat index of mango kernel oil at 20 degree celsius for crude is  55.5, refined is 55 
and at 30 degree Cels ius crude mango kernel oil has a solid fat index of 52 .8 and refined 
fat oil has a solid fat index of  52.1. Most commonly reported triglyceride s of mango 
kernel oils are 1, 3 -diste aroyl-2-oleoyl-glycerol  (SOS)   which constitute about 29.4 to 40 
percent.  Mango kernel oil is solid at room temperature and does not require partial 
hydrogenation.  Mango kernel oil is extremely resistant to auto oxidation.  It did not 
reveal any trans  fatty acids.  It also has a good qua ntity of sterols like beta-sitosterol is 58 
percent, s tigma -sterol is 10 percent, delta 5 avena sterols is 10 percent , delta 7 avenasterol  
is 19.1 percent.  
 
 Bio-active compounds here their structures are shown in the mango kernel oil . It 
contains  anthocy anins, isomang gifer in, kaemferol  and quercetin, gallic acid,  
protocatechuic  acid, ferulic acid, caffeic  acid, coumaric acid and ellagic acid.  So, these 
are the various bio -active components which are found in mango kernel oil . 
 
Accordingly, the bio -actives give a good antioxidant capacity . Highest degree of free -
radical scavenging and tyrosinase -inhibition activities.  Contained different phenolic 
compounds and consisted of stable fat rich in SFA.  Phenolic compounds inhibit lipid 
peroxidation of human LDL in -vitro.  Antioxidant property is attributed to SFA and 
MUFA as well as fractions of tocopherols, sterols, their esters and other phenolic 
compounds present as unsaponifiable matter.  It can be used as antioxidant in edible oil. 
Comparison of the peroxide value  showed that addition of crude MKO reduced the  
oxidation process.  Gallic acid present as an anti -inflammatory, anti -mutant and 
antioxidative  agent.  
Mango kernel oil is reported to have anti -cancer properties . MKO has anticanc er 
potential against human breast cancer cells with minimum cytotoxicity.  It is k nown as 
good alternative of synthetics for cancer treatment.  It  has a lot of skin curat ive properties 
like it treats dry skin, moisturizes the  skin, it is potentially active  phenol and bioactive 
compound which act as  anti -rash agent on  the skin.  It has the ability to remove 
blemishes and its  phenol s fight against aging.  The use of mango kernel oil relieves pain 
from fatigue d muscles. It also acts as anti -depressant due to the presence of phenolics. It 
exhibited antimicrobial effects  against Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus  aureus and 
Vibrio vulnificus. It has a ntimicrobial potential against Gram -positive and Gram -negative 
bacteria due to t he presence of potent bioactive mainly  owing to the presence of various 
bioactive compounds . 
 
 Let us talk briefly about the kokum butter.  This kokum butter is obtained from the fruit 
of the kokum tree.  It is native plant for the western coastal area of the Indian 
subcontinent.  Fruits have seed containing around 32 to 40 percent fat.  It is permitted for 
use as vegetable fat according to th e European Union chocolate  directive.  Kokum fruit 
contains 5 to 8 brown kidney shaped flattened 1 to 2 centimeter long and up to  1 
centimeter broad seeds.  The pericarp contains a secretion container and embryo contains 
the directly crystalline  fat and several aleurone  gains.  
 
 The physical and  chemical characteristics of kokum butter are, it is yellowish to  white to 
yellow ish light -grey in color.  It has  fresh, light smell similar to the cocoa  butter.  It has a 
mild taste and shelf life is very good upto 1 year.  It s reffective index at 20 degree Celsius 
is 1.4 52 to 1.469.  Its  iodine value is 35 to 37 gram iodine per 100 gram , acid value is 4 
milligram KOH  per gram.  It has around 1 to 2 percent unsupponifiable matter and its 
melting range 39 to 42 de gree Celsius.  
 
For the extraction of the kokum butter , the traditional extraction  method is cutting of 
kokum, then separating  of seed from the rind and pulp . The seeds are  then sun dried and 
the seeds after sun drying are stored for processing  or for ext raction.  There is s helling of 
the kokum seed by de huller , winnowin g to separate the hulls and  the kernels .  The 
kernels are steamed at around 10 percent moisture content for 20 minutes and then 
steamed  kernels  are subjected to oil extraction either by screw pressing or sometime the 
solvent extraction.  The crude oil which is obtained is boiled to a butter mixture in iron 
pans. Scum  rises on the butter /oil surface, then separation of the scum from  oil. Oil  
become s solid butter on cooling . Next day churning of butter is done in mixture then 
formation of cubes  or blocks of butter and  it is stored or marketed in cubes.  
 
 Solvent extraction yield s 44 percent of the raw kokum butter . In this process, kokum  
seed is  sun-dried , then extracted in soxhlet  apparatus  and separated in distillation unit.  
After sun drying, the kokum seed are  dried in an oven for 15 minutes , crushed and 
separated into different sizes. Crushed kokum seeds and solvents in the solids to solvent 
ratio of 1:10 is taken in the Soxhlet app aratus. The temperature of the heating mantle was 
maintained equal to the boiling point of the solvent. The extract was collected into a 
simple distillation unit to separate solvent from the kokum butter. The kokum bu tter 
collected is allowed to solidify at room temperature.  
 
 
 Then there is another method that is  three phase partitioning . It is a n ovel bio -separation 
and purification technique in which a salt (e.g. ammonium sulphate) and water miscible 
aliphatic alco hol (e.g. t -butanol) are added to an aqueous  solution containing proteins. 
For simultaneous  separation and purification of proteins, enzymes  and inhibitors from 
crude suspensions.  This method involves seed separation from the fruit, washed with hot 
water 3  to 4 times , then dried in a tray at around 70 degree Celsius the moisture content 
of the seed is  brought to a 10 percent , and subjected to shell separation. The shelled seeds 
are grounded  into fine powder of 1000 micron, then it is  prepared into a slurry,  that is 1 
gram powder in 16 ml distilled water. Then ammonium sulphate that is 10 to 60 percent 
weight by vol ume of the slurry is added and addition of t -butanol like t -butanol to slurry 
ratio is maintained 0.5 to 1 or 3 to 1.  Then it is properly mixed for 30 minutes and it is 
allowed to stand at 45 degree Celsius of in a water  bath for about 1 hour. The 3 phases 
were  separated  by centrifugation at 2900 gram for 10 minutes at 30 degree s Celsius . The 
T-butanol is evaporated to obtain the  extracted fat and then maximum  recovery of the fat 
is almost about 95 percent.   
 
As far as the application of kokum  butter is concerned, Kokum butter as a trans -esterified 
fat is a substitute for cocoa butter.  Kokum butter moisturizes the skin and there fore added 
to creams, balms lotions & antiwrinkle creams.  kokum butter is blended with shea butter 
in cosmetic products.  It can be used to produce soap and can also be used as a butter 
substitute.  
 
Then we come to the mowrah or m ahua butter that is Madhuca longifolia  fruit seeds 
contain 60% lipids, but it is under -utilized for oil production.  The s eeds of Madhuca 
longifolia  show a good commercial potential as a source of vegetable oil.  It is 
commercially known as mahua or mowrah butter which is pale yellow in color and 
remains as a semi -solid under the tropical temperature conditions.  Its h igh oil cont ent 
indicates suitability of mahua seeds for industrial use as it  reduces production  cost. 
 
For the mowrah butter  extraction , the mahua  seeds are taken, the seeds are crushed into 
fine granules then subjected to solvent extraction and separation of lipid and seed cas e is 
done and you get mahua bio -oil separation as shown in the figure. Mahua seeds are sun 
dried for a week and then kernel is separated. Kernels are oven dried at 60 °C for 72 h to 
remove excess moisture and then grounded.  Ground mahua seed is mixed with solvent 
(1:10 ratio) &  allowed to react for 10 min at  37 °C. Heterogeneous solvents prepared as a  
mixture of diethyl ether ( C2H5)2O and e thanol (C2H5OH) in 3:1 ratio  are used. Afte r 
reaction time the material is centrifuged at 3500 rpm f or 20 min.  
 
In ultrasound assisted extraction of mahua butter has been also proved beneficial . Seed to 
solvent ratio  used is 1: 10, the extract ion time is 20 minutes at 50 kilohertz frequency and 
they are finally, and centrifuged  at 3500 rpm for 20 minutes.  And after this the removal 
of excess solvent is done that is the sample is centrifuged . The centrifuge d sample 
consists of two main layer , an upper layer liquid layer that consists  of solvent and oil and 
lower layer is that of the solid cake.  So, pre treatment of liquid layer with 38% H CL 
PURE or KCL is added at a con stant dilution ratio of 1: 5.  Then finally, oil is carefully 
separated using a separating funnel and stored in appropriate containers .  
 
The compositi on of fatty acids of mahua oil  is around 23 percent palmitic acid, 34 
percent oleic acid, 14 percent linolenic acid and 23 percent stearic acid and some small 
amount of  caprylic , capric , lauric  and alpha linolenic acid . You can see from the data here 
that palmitic, stearic, oleic and linolenic acid are the main  fatty acids of the mahua oil.  
They are rich in the saturated fatty acid l ike 39 to 52 percent that mahua  saturated  fatty 
acids contain ranges from 32 to 48 percent of MUFA and low PUFA, that is the 
polyunsaturated fatty acid such as  linolenic acid are comparatively lower around 9 to 15 
percent . You can see here that is in the about 24 percent is the palmitic acid , about 22 
percent stearic acid, around 14 percent is linoleic acid, 37 percent is oleic, and 14 percent 
is  linolenic acid. A rachidic is very at about 1.49 percent . Here also in the bar diagram , a 
comparison between th e total poly total pufa, total monomers ,  total saturated fats such as 
C 18:2, C 18:1, C 18:0 and C 16: 0 of major oil like mahua butter, shea fat ,  cocoa butter, 
palm oil, sunflower oil and soya bean oil is given . You can see the sunflower o il total 
pufa is maximum, but in other cases  that mahua butter almost meets the cocoa butter and 
they are close by in the values.   
 
TAG  compositi on in the it is given that is PP O plus POP 11.9 and PPL 1.19, OOO that is  
trioline you can say 9.85 . TAG profile of mahua butter shows closer comparison to that 
of palm oil. Palmitic, oleic a nd steric acids could be responsible for the semi -solid nature.  
Among the TAG molecules of mahua butter, OOP is the most dominant followed by POS 
and OOS.  Mahua butter also had considerable amount of POP, POS, and SOS molecules.  
 
In sterols and tocopherols , total content of the sterols is around 120 to 460 milligram  per 
100 gram.  It contains beta -Sitosterol  68 to 81 milligram per  100 gram, camp esterol 12 to 
20 milligram per 100 gram and also significant amount of s tigma sterols and 
isofu costerols.  Tocopherols content is 328 gram per 100 gram where  alpha tocopherol is 
maximum 68 and followed by  gamma tocopherol 17 and trocotrienol is 4, less quantity.  
Other components which are present in mahua oil include butyrosper mol, oleodip almitin  
and cycloart enol, t araxaster, beta  Amyrin, oleodipalmit in, palmitodolein  and so on.  
 
Physico-chemical properties of the mahua butter are  as follows. I ts refra ctive index is in 
the range of 1.459 to 1.462, density 0.9166 gram per cubic centimeter,  melting point 25 
to 29 degree Celsius, its iodine value is 84 to 90  g iodine per 100g fat , it peroxide value 
2.78 me q per kg, ac id value 3.55 mg KOH per kg and its smoke point is 169.6 6 degree s 
Celsius , that is it can be heated up to 169  degree s Celsius .  It can be used for cooking 
operations up to this temperature.  So, mahua butter has a limited shelf life and it easily 
becomes rancid.  So, it need to be kept under proper conditions . 
 
Application s of mahua oil are that it can be used as a substitute for cocoa butter, it is used 
for cooking and all manufacturing of chocolates, it can be used for skin diseases, and 
remedy for several other health issuea.  It is used  instead of hydrogenated fat as they are 
trans free, they are similar to hydrogenated fats  and they are used with the bakery 
purposes.  So, they have various these mahua fat series, they have very good bio active 
lipids and their stability and functiona lity are good.  So, they are used in food 
applications and of course, for the stabil ity and functionality also they  are sometimes 
used for bio fuel generation.  
 
 Finally, I  will summarize this lecture by saying that the compatibility of kokum butter in 
terms of fatty acid is a promising alternative to cocoa. MKO could be become valuable 
resource to produce high value of vegetable oil ric h in oleic and stearic acid. MKO 
important source of UFA and has the potential to be used as nutrient rich food 
oil.Madhuca longifolia seeds could be considered as novel commercial source of 
vegetable fats.  It is anticipated that  tropical butters will gain higher popularity because  
fats have mild distinctive flavor, yellow color and stability without hydrogenation, it has 
high percentage of unsaturated fatty acids, and  the fat is both desirable and inexpensive 
as a raw material.  So, this gives that a positive strength through this o il, but of course, 
this mahua oil etcetera is underutilized, but it has a great potential to be used as a food 
source and cocoa butter.  
 
These are the references that were used in this lecture.  With this thank you very much for 
your patience here.  Tha nk you.  
