1 
 Food  Oils and Fats:  Chemistry  & Technology  
Professor  H N Mishra  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Module  8: Animal  & Dairy  Fats 
Lecture  40: Ghee  (Butter  Oil) 
 
Hello  everyone.  Namaskar.  Now,  we are in the last lecture  of this module  8 and in this 
lecture, we will talk about  ghee.  It is also popularly  known  as butter  oil.  
 
We will discuss , what  is ghee.  What  are the ghee  manufacturing  methods  both batch  
process  as well as continuous  process?  We will also see, y ou find that there  is a major  
significant  difference  in the flavor  of butter  and ghee  and ghee.  So, what  are the flavor s? 
How  flavor  is generated  in to butter?  I will throw  some  light then finally,  the quality  of 
ghee  and the packaging  of ghee  we will discuss.  
So, let us see what  is ghee?  You can see here in the figure , it is a very popular  very 
common  product  at least in Indian  households.  Ghee  means  the pure heat clarified  fat 
derived  solely  from  milk or curd or from  cooking  butter  or from  cream  to which  no color  
2 
 or preservatives  are added.  It is a pure clarified  butter  oil or ghee.  It has been  used 
extensively  for delivery  and religious  purposes  in India  since  Vedic times ; you can say 
3000  to 2000  BC; the records  are available.   
 
Even  today  also in most  of the holy occasions  you say, this ghee  is used in performing  in 
various  purposes.  Generally, the extra  fat of milk is best preserved  by converting  it either  
into butter  or ghee  and I will say that ghee  is a it has a product  which  is more  stable , 
supply  properly  provided  if it is properly  handled  and take.  Cream  can be churned  into 
butter  and then heated  to develop  ghee.  Ghee  flavor  is developed  when  the fat is heated  
with milk solids  at high temperature.  India  is one of the larger  producers  and exporter s of 
ghee.  Approximately  30 to 34 percent  of the milk produced  in India  is converted  into 
ghee.   
 
So, you see the composition  of ghee . Ghee could  be in liquid , semi -solid , and solid  state 
based  upon  the temperature  at which  it is stored.  Ghee  can be made  from  any milk 
however  cow and buffalo  milk ghee are generally  performed  that is among  this also 
buffalo  milk ghee.  In holy occasions , that is for pooja  etcetera  however  the cow milk he 
is used more  commonly.  Ghee  made  from  cow milk is yellowish  or golden  yellow  in 
color  due to the presence  of carotenoid  in it whereas  the ghee  made  from  buffalo  milk is 
whiter  in color.  
3 
 So, on an average  composition  of cow ghee  and buffalo  ghee  has been  given  in this table  
that is moisture  content  in both of them  is to the tune of 0.2 to 0.5 percent  that is it should  
be completely  almost  free very negligible  moisture  content  might  be present.  Fat is 
around  99 to 99.5 percent  in either  case. Carotene  in cow ghee  it is around  3.2 to 7.4 
milligram  per gram.  Cholesterol  that is it contains  milligram  per 100 gram.  In cow milk, 
it is 302 to 362, in buffalo  milk it is in the range  of 209 to 312. 
Vitamin  A international  unit per gram , it is 19 to 34 in cow ghee  and around  17 to 38 
international  unit per gram  in buffalo  ghee.  Tocopherol  content , in cow ghee  is in the 
range  of 26 to 48 milligram  per gram  whereas,  in the buffalo  ghee  it contains  around  18 
to 31 milligram  per gram.  Percentage  of free fatty acids  as oleic  acid, may be around  in 
the range  of 1 to 3 percent  in cow ghee  as well as in buffalo  ghee  both.   
 
As for the AGMARK  standard , the Baudomin  test for the ghee  should  be negative , 
whether  as a special  as well as general , then B.R. reading  at 40 degree  Celsius  should  be 
41.5 to 45. Reichert Meissl  value  should  be a minimum  of 23. Polenske  value  should  be 
in the range  of 0.5 to 1.2, and moisture  content  in no case no more  than 0.3 percent.  Free 
fatty acids  should  be more  than it should  be a maximum  of 1.4 percent , and the 
phytosterol  acetate  test should  be negative.  So, this is the AGMARK  standard  of ghee.   
 
4 
 Now  steps  for ghee making  let us discuss , that is ghee as I told you, ghee  could  be 
prepared  using  milk or milk-based  fat rich  products.  However , white  butter  is the most  
commonly  used raw material  at the industrial  scale  for ghee  preparation.  
So, the steps  involving , involve  the concentration  of milk fat, then the breaking  of fat in 
water  emulsion  to bring  the fat in the continuous  phase . Because  in the butter  or the 
cream , the fat is available  in the form  of fat in water  emulsion.  So, now here in the ghee 
there  is water  is removed  and fat is brought  into continuous  phase.  In the process  there  is 
a development  of typical  ghee flavor . There is also control  of moisture  and removal  of 
ghee  residue.  In the cream  or the butter  if there  is any proteinous  matter  etcetera  is there , 
that are precipitated  or denatured  and that is removed.  So, the most  common  step in all 
ghee  making  process  is a thermal  treatment  of white  butter  that is butter  is heated  at 
around  110 to 120 degree  Celsius  for about  15 to 20 minutes  and during  which  the heat 
catalysed  reactions  result  into the development  of the extensive  aroma  which  provides  
flavor  to the ghee.  
 
So, the common  methods  for ghee  manufacture  are desi indigenous  methods , direct  
cream  method,  creamery  butter  method,  pre-stratification  method , or continuous  method.  
In desi cream  method , there  is the fresh  cream  milk is converted  into curd and the curd is 
then churned  to form  butter  which  is clarified  using  heat to develop  ghee.  In direct  cream  
method , cream  is separated  from  milk and then it is clarified  into ghee.  In creamery  butter  
method  usually,  unsalted  creamery  butter  is heat clarified  in steam  jacketed kettle  
whereas,  in other  pre-stratification  method , or continuous  method , white  butter  is 
preheated  and butter  milk is removed  top two layers  are classified  clarified  to form  butter.   
So, in the process  flow chart  of the desi milk method , you see the raw milk, heated , and 
malai  collection  after cooling , and the addition  of culture . This we already  discussed  
earlier  then it is churned  you get butter  that is makkan  and the butter  is heated  at around  
110 to 120 degree  Celsius , you get clarified , filter ed, and the ghee . 
 
5 
  
So, desi method  takes  place  in five stages  that is heating  the milk and separating  the 
malai  and curd,  boiling  milk and converting  it into churning  to proceed  butter  and butter  
milk,  boiling  butter  and separating  clarified  fat. and clarified  fat is filtered  using  a strainer  
to get the ghee.   
 
This method  is the mostly  used method  at the household  level . It is in Indian  homes  it is 
also used.  The desi indigenous  method  is not adopted  by organized  dairy  due to several  
reason s.  
What are the limitations  of this method ? The quality  of the ghee  is highly  inconsistent  in 
terms  of chemical  and sensory  attributes  because , no standardized  method  is used in the 
homes , not compatible  for large -scale  production , the fat recovery  is generally  low, and 
low keeping  quality  and high acidity  is there.  So, ghee residue  cannot  be used due to 
acidic  in nature.  
So, there  have  been  some  modifications  suggested  in the desi method  in the indigenous  
method.  So, basically  to overcome  the problems  which  we discussed  in the last slide  as 
well as to improve  the keeping  quality  of the ghee.  What  are those  modification s? That is 
a pre-filter milk before  use, number  one. Preferable  boiling  conditions  for milk before  
making  dahi. Cool  milk to room  temperature  before  adding  starter  culture  for dahi 
preparation.  
6 
  
Then  setting  of dahi should  be under  controlled  condition ; that  is, acidity  should  be 0.8 
percent  it requires  16 to 18 hours  in winter  and 8 to 10 hours  in summer.  During  summer  
use cold butter  during churning  to reduce  fat losses  in the buttermilk  and thereby  
improving  the recovery  of fat in ghee  and then heat this makhan  at around  temperature  of 
100 degree  Celsius  for ghee  making  and strain  ghee  properly  so as to make  it completely  
free from  the residues.  So, these are some  of the modifications  that are incorporated  in 
the desi method.  The next is the direct  cream  method.  
 
As you see here, there  is the cream  obtained  that is there  are standard  methods  of cream  
separation , we discussed  in the earlier  class.  So, you get the cream  and this cream  is from  
the raw milk pasteurized  cream ; it is standardized  or concentrated  to about  60 to 70 
percent  fat content.  Then  this cream  is boiled  at around  115 degree  Celsius  and it gives  
clarified  fat and curd, it is filtered  into ghee  means  that is in, from  cream  it is directly  
made ; the butter  process  is eliminated.   
It is a commercial  method  used for the manufacture  of ghee  in India  by industry  also used 
it. The major  advantage  of this method  is that there  is no need  for butter  preparation  as 
the cream  is directly  converted  into clarified  fat or butter  oil. So, the additional  step of 
butter  making  is eliminated.  There  is the longer  heating  time for removal  of moisture  may 
require  4 to 6 percent  loss of the butter  fat in the ghee  residue  and about  70 to 80 percent  
7 
 fat cream  is recommended  to minimize  the losses.  However,  it is very difficult  to get a 
cream  of 70 to 80 percent  fat content  because  it will require  very precise  and difficult  
standardization  process.   
 
The ghee  kettle  and boiler  as you can see here in the figure  that is; it is basically  the 
where  the cream  or butter  is heated  it is a very simple  device.  It is a ghee  boiler  called  or 
steam -heated  jacketed  kettle  made  of stainless  steel SS304.  It is generally  used for 
making  or for boiling  the cream , and this kettle  is fitted  with an agitator.  Steam  control  
valve  pressure  and temperature  gauges  are provided.  At the bottom  of the vessel  there  is 
an outlet  valve  or a hollow  SS tube is provided  in the center  for the removal  of the ghee ; 
or also there  are some  kettles  which  have  a simple  that is simple  pan tilting  device  this is 
used for removing  the ghee.  For better  operational  controls , the steam  controlling  
mechanism  and steam  pressure  and temperature  gauges  are also provided , and raw 
material  is either  unsalted,  melted  butter , or a cream.   
 
In the creamery  butter  method , unsalted  creamery  butter  it is melted  at 60 degree  Celsius , 
and the ghee  is made  and ghee  is put into the ghee  kettle  boiler  where  it is boiled  at 115 
degree  Celsius  and then clarified  plus fat plus a curd is obtained , it is filtered  and clarified  
fat or ghee  is obtained.  
8 
 So, it is a standard  method  used in the organized dairies.  Raw material  used is unsalted  
creamery  butter  (white  butter ), thus called  creamery  butter  method.  The butter  is heated  
in a ghee  boiler  same  as in the case of direct  cream  method . The major  advantage  of the 
this method  are labour  saving,  physical  exertion,  exposure  to uncomfortably  high 
temperature  and humidity  during  actual  ghee  making  process  compared  to the direct  
cream  boiling  method  because  a much  lower  quantity  of the water  has to be used here in 
this process.   
 
Then  let us see pre-stratification  method . This is the again , in this method , the cream  of 
38 to 40 percent  fat is taken , it is pasteurized  at 80 degree  Celsius  for 15 minute , then 
cooled  and aged  cooled  to around  7 degree  Celsius  aged  for 6 hour.  Then , churning,  
butter making, the butter  is melted  at 80 degree  Celsius  for 15 minute  then it sent to the 
ghee  boiler.  After  that, it comes  to pre-stratification  method , that is here the ghee  is 
filtered  into three  ways  that is top, middle , and bottom . Top layer  is denatured  protein  
that is contains  curd particles  etcetera , middle  layer  is fat, and bottom  layer  is the 
buttermilk  that is 80 percent  moisture  and 70 percent  SNF.  
So, the top two layers  are clarified  to form  ghee; means  bottom  layer  is discarded  and the 
top two layers  are taken ; boiling  is done  at 115 degree  Celsius ; it is filtered  cooled  and 
ghee  is obtained.  So, it is the pre-stratification  method.   
 
9 
 The advantages  of the pre-stratification  method  include  economy  in fuel consumption  is 
better  as compared  to direct  clarification  method.  Ghee  produced  has lower  acidity  and 
FFA, lower  ghee  residues , and a higher  shelf  life of the ghee  obtained  from  this method.   
Critical  control  points  in ghee  production  are - cooking  temperature  should  be in the 
range  of around  110 to 120 degree  Celsius  the time normally  for 15 to 30 minutes.  Filters  
without  cuts and clean  holes  etcetera  should  be used.  In general , 80 liters  of full cream  is 
required  industrially  to produce  a 1 kg of ghee.   
 
The continuous  method ; The continuous  method  was developed  by the N ational  Dairy 
Development  Board, Gujarat.  The continuous  method  consists  of receiving -cum-heating  
vat for cream /white  butter,  gravity  separator  (not used when  cream  is the feed material ), 
then scraped  surface  heat exchanger  that is commonly  known  SSHE , coupled  with 
vapour  generator,  vapour  separators , and positive  displacement  pump s to move  the raw 
material  through  the different  units  are used.  The continuous  production  preserves  the fat-
soluble  vitamins  better  than in the conventional  method  for ghee  manufacture.  The major  
objectives  of the continuous  methods  are to ensure  uniform  quality  and greater  economy , 
and to reduce  human  labour  by introducing  automation.   
 
So, it consists  of receiving -cum-heating  vat pressurized SSHE  coupled  with vapour  
separator  and a pump.  The raw material  is melted  in the vat and then pumped  into the 
10 
 balance  tank.  It then enters  the scrap  surface  heat exchanger  and vapour  separator  where  
the flash  vapour  is separated  out. The product  then goes to secondary  stage  where  flavour  
development  is completed  and if cream  is used then the third  stage  is necessary.  Ghee  
residue  is removed  by standardizing , filtering , and clarifying  devices.   
The advantages  of this method  are - there  is a larger  volume  can be used here,  it is easier  
for automation,  high fat recovery,  there  is no problem  of foam,  less scale  formation , and 
high heat transfer  coefficient . It is a compact  design  and, in this method,  the even  CIP 
clean  in place  is possible.   
 
So, how that the flavour  generation  during  ghee  manufacture . It is the most  important  
parameter  in ghee  production  is the flavour  generation.  The flavour  generation  depends  
on various  intrinsic  and extensive  factors  such as source  of milk,  fermentation  of cream  
and butter,  aging,  thermal  conditions  like boiling  etcetera , and the ghee should  be rich, 
nutty,  pleasant , and a little caramelized  flavour  it should  have . It should  have  a rich nutty  
flavour  pleasant  and caramelized  flavour.  So, boiling  of ghee  results  in thermal  
decomposition  of fat, lactose,  proteins  which  are present  there  although  in small  quantity , 
and amino  acid. These forms  carbonyl  compounds,  free fatty acids , and lactones  which  
are responsible  for the flavour  generation.  Maillard  reaction  and caramelization  reactions  
are the major  reactions  which  are responsible  for flavour  generation  in ghee.   
 
11 
 You can see pathways  for the flavour  generation  like beta-ketogl ycerides  they with the 
action  of lipase , they are converted  into beta-ketoacids  and then they are decomposed  by 
thermal  decarboxylation  that is carbonyls  and methyl  ketones  which  are responsible  for 
the flavour.   
So, simultaneously  unsaturated  fatty acids , they undergo  oxidation  and thermal  
decarboxylation , they give various  carbonyl  compounds.   
Triglycerides , they are subjected  to thermal  or lipolytic  hydrolysis , they give free fatty 
acid and then free fatty acid further  go various  reactions . So, that it gives  you the flavour.   
Lactose  and fat, thermal  hydrolysis  results  into hydroxy  acid formation  and ring closure  
and then it goes converted  into lactone  and then lactose  is further  decomposed  and it 
reacts  with various  compounds . And finally,  in the system , there  will be various  
carbonyls,  methyl  ketones  and other  compounds  etcetera  which  are responsible  for the 
ghee  flavour.   
 
As far as the quality  of the ghee  is concerned ; it is found  in three  states  ghee  depending  
upon  the storage  temperature  liquid , semi -solid , and solid.  Ghee  quality  can be checked  
based  on its granulation,  flavour,  colour , and appearance.  Granulation  is an important  
quality  criteria,  higher  temperature  of clarification gives butter  grain  due to high 
phospholipid  content.  When  molten  ghee  is cooled , large  coarse  grain  are formed  and 
suspended  in clusters  in the liquid  phase.  Formation  of the nuclei  is initially  staged  for the 
crystallization  of ghee during  cooling . Rate  of cooling  also affects  the nucleus  formation.  
The granular  form  is due to certain  content  of glycerides  of higher  melting  saturated  fatty 
acids  especially  palmitic  and stearic.  So, buffalo  milk ghee shows  more predominant  
granulation  than cow milk ghee.   
The normal methods  which  are used that is other  than the sensorial , physical , and 
chemical  evaluations . There are various  other  methods  which  are used to control  the 
quality  check  in ghee ; that is one is the refractive  index.  
 
12 
  
You know  that popularly  either  hand  refractometers  or airway  refractometer s; they are 
used to measure  the refractive  index  of these  materials.  It is the ratio, refractive  index  is 
the ratio of velocity  of light in vacuum  to the sample  medium.  It is in the range  of 1.4157  
to 1.4566 for milk fat and is less than that in the other  oils and fats. Thus , this can be used 
as an indicator  for adulteration . If you found  the refractive  index  is less than that it shows  
that there  is a adulteration  of ghee  with the vegetable  oil etcetera.   
 
Iodine  number , in the earlier  class , we have  discussed , it is the amount  of iodine  absorbed  
by 100 grams  of fat or 100 ml of fat under  a specified  condition.  It should  be in the range  
of 26 to 32 for milk fat. Normally , it is used for study  of the oxidative  rancidity  of oils 
and fat, since h igher  the unsaturation  greater  the chances  to go rancid  and it is a 
commonly  measured  by Wig's method.  So, that is see that find iodine  number  and this is 
normally  less because  milk fat generally  contains  saturated  fatty acid.  
Saponification  value , another  that is a saponification  number , it represents  the average  
molecular  size of fatty acids  in the milk fat. It should  be in the range  of around  210 to 
233, the value  for milk fat. Saponification  value  is more  useful  in detecting  the presence  
of adulterants  that is mineral  oil such as liquid  paraf ims etcetera  in the ghee  as they are 
not acted  upon  by alkali  and as such a sample  does not form  a homogeneous  solution  on 
saponification.   
13 
  
The mechanism  of saponification  and how the soap is formed  in the earlier  classes  we 
had discussed  in detail,  but here also just I have  given.  
 
Then , Polenski number , it is the amount  of 0.1 normal  KOH  or sodium  hydroxide  
required  to neutralize  steam  volatile  water  insoluble  fatty acids  distilled  from  5 grams  of 
fat under  a specified  condition.  The caprylic  acid or capric  acids  are indicated  mainly  in 
Polenski number  and it should  range  from  12 to 24 for milk fat.  
Then , R-M value , Reichert's Meissl  value , it is the amount  of 0.1 normal  KOH  or sodium  
hydroxide  required  to neutralize  steam  volatile  water -soluble  fatty acids  distilled  from  5 
gram s of fat under  specified  conditions . Butyric acid and capric  acid are indicated  mainly  
in the R-M number . It ranges  from  17 to 35 for milk fat.  
So, this Polenski number , Iodine  number , Reichert Meissl  value  etcetera , they should  be 
in the specified  range .  
Then  comes  finally,  the packaging  of the ghee , again  like the butter  we discussed  here 
also. Under proper  packaging  conditions , ghee  can be stored  for up to around  6 to 12 
months ; under  ambient  conditions , ghee on exposure  to light, moisture , air, and metals  
etcetera  get oxidized , deterioration  even  in a traces  of moisture  if it is present  you must  
be doing , that it is in our homes  also that is our mothers  or housewives  and when  they use 
spoon  for taking  out the ghee  from  the container  they make  sure that spoon  is dry 
14 
 completely . They will just rub it, clear  it and it should  not because  even  if the traces  of 
moisture  content  is goes there ; at low moisture  content , the rate of oxidation  is very high.  
So, butter  is oxidized  by auto oxidation  process , it is deteriorated.   
 
So, basic  properties  of the packaging  material  which  is used for packaging  butter  is also 
good  for packaging  the ghee  etcetera ; that  is only thing  that it should  be the packaging  
material  should  be inert it should  be nontoxic, non-tanting , low cost, easily  available , and 
it should  be that proved  to rough  handling  it can be handled  properly . In thin cans, ghee  
should  be filled  without  leaving  any space  for air that is very important  that air, oxygen  
etcetera  or air,  mois ure etcetera  that is ok. So, ghee is normally , it is exposed  to light, it 
will be oxidized ; if it is exposed  to air, it will be oxidized ; if it is exposed  to water  
vapour , it will be hydrolyzed ; if it is exposed  to metals , copper  and iron etcetera , it will 
become  rancid.  So, the packaging  material  which  is used for ghee  it should  be 
impermeable  to light, air, water  vapour , metals , and so on. 
 
So, finally,  I will summarize  this lecture  by saying  that ghee  is a pure heat clarified  fat 
which  is derived  solely  from  milk or curd or from  cooking  butter  or from  cream  to which  
no colour  or preservatives  are added.  Ghee  can be prepared  at home  or at industrial  level  
with different  methods.  Now,  continuous  process  is developed  and some  industries  are 
using  it. In all processes , boiling  at 110 to 115 degree  Celsius  for about  15 to 20 minute  is 
15 
 common  and very important  process  as flavour  development  occurs  during  this stage.  
Boiling  of ghee  results  in thermal  decomposition  of fats, lactose,  protein , and amino  acid 
and forms carbonyl , free fatty acids , and lactones  which  are responsible  for flavour  
generation.  Exposure  to light,  moisture,  air, and metal  can deteriorate  ghee  or can cause  
its spoilage.  So, therefore,  ghee  should  be prevented  from  these  conditions.   
 
These are the references  that were  used in this lecture.   
 
With  this, thank  you very much  for your patience  here.  Thank  you. 
 
