Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 0 9: Cooking & Frying Oils  
Lecture 43: Seed Oils  
 
Hello everyone, Namaste.  Now, in this 43rd lecture of the course, we will talk about  seed 
oils.  
 
We will discuss characteristic properties, manufacturing process, packaging and storage  
conditions of major seed oils that is groundnut oil, sunflower oil, mustard oil, sesame oil,  
soybean oil and fla xseed oil.   
 
Let us start first with the groundnut oil.  You know groundnut is an important oil seed 
crop in the world with over 100 cultivating  countries. The groundnut or peanut species 
belong to the family Fabaceae  commonly known as bean,  legume or pea family.  The 
kernel of groundnut contains approximately 45 to 55 percent oil.  The oil extracted from 
the groundnut or peanut is also known as arachis oil which is a mild  tasting vegetable oil 
with a light  yellow transparency, clear color and luster.  And ple asant fragrance 
accompanied by a good taste and relatively easy to digest. The groundnut oil comprises 
of more than 80 percent unsaturated fatty acids with around  42 percent oleic acid, 38 
percent linoleic acid and around 20 percent palmitic, stearic,  arachidic acid along with 
some other unsaturated fatty acids in the trace amounts.  It is a rich source of all B 
vitamins except vitamin B 12. It also is a rich source of minerals, phosphorus, calcium, 
iron, vitamin E, various fatty acids  and it contains good qu ality proteins approximately 28 
percent protein and carbohydrates.   
 
Process flow chart here for the peanut oil manufacturing normally the  groundnut which is 
first operation is it decorticated  and then the kernel is  obtained and hull is obtained.  The 
kernels are conditioned and they are expelling conditions that is from because the kernel  
of the groundnut is very soft. So, just by first initially simple application of pressure some 
significant quantity of oil  is released.  So, that is done by expelling the oil is obtained and 
the oil is then subjected to filtration, that is you get expelled ground nut oil and  
conditioning gum conditioning,  neutralization, washing, bleaching, deodorization or other 
refining proces s that which we discussed earlier.  I have deal t with all those operations 
that what are how the ground  nut can be decorticated  in any general process.  So, after 
expelling the cake which is obtained that this cake is further subjected to solvent  
extraction and after solvent extraction it is passed into  the normal neutralization,  
bleaching, degumming and deodorization operations and the de -oiled cake which is 
obtained was processed for removal of the solvent and other process which we already 
discussed in  earlier lectures in this course. And the cake tha t is the ground nut cake after 
the proper removal of solvent  residual , it can be us ed for its protein quality and carbon 
quality . It is very good and it can be used for many food product developments.   
 
Then we talk about sunflower oil, sunflower oil is t he non-volatile  oil pressed from the  
seeds of the sunflower.  Sunflower oil is commonly used in food as a frying oil and in 
cosmetic formulation as  an emollient sunflower oil is primarily composed of linolenic 
acid which is a polyunsaturated  fat and it also  contains oleic acid that is the 
monounsaturated fat.  So, here again the process flow chart for the sunflower 
manufacturer  the sunflower seeds  are collected and then its removal of the cells etc . The 
cleaning, grinding using  a standard post harvest operati ons. Then the seed is obtained and 
the seed is pressed like ground nut here sunflower seed  also is a very soft. So, just it is 
pressed oil is obtained the crude oil and the meal is then the meal is  again it is subjected 
to solvent extraction.  So, remainder  a part of the oil is obtained by pressing and a part is 
obtained by the  solvent extraction.  So, generally there is three pressed solvent extraction 
and then the crude oil  which is obtained either by both the method s. They are filtered 
refined like refinin g treatment like degumming, decolorization, neutralization  etc then 
deodorization and finally, the packaging these oils are packaged . 
 
 
So, this is the process flow chart sunflower oil seed cleaning. So, clean seed dehulled 
then kernel is obtained and the  hulls are blown off.  The kernel the dehulled kernels they 
are used now expeller expelling like screw spelling  are just simple by mechanical 
pressing the oil is obtained and it is subjected to crude  oil it is refined and you get the 
refined sunflower oil.  The cake which is obtained the cake is then again it is sized or 
flagged and  it is subjected to solvent extraction treatment using the standard operating 
protocol.  You got this all process in general process parameter and their effect on the 
quality . So, de-oiled cake is obtained and it is further utilized for the poor product 
manufacture.   
 
So, extraction and refining of sunflower oil schematic presentation you see here the 
grains , the sunflower grains are obtained . Then it is passed to the fluted mill s crew press 
where is from the screw press it is  the oil is obtained and oil it is filtered and first cold 
press sunflower oil can also  be it is also available in the market as a cold press sunflower 
oil. Then this oil cake which is after a screw spelling th e oil cake which is obtained it  is 
passed to the solvent extraction.  Dry cake after and after the solvent extraction this now 
degumming, neutralization, bleaching,  mineralization, deodorization and refined 
sunflower oil. So, this gives complete process flo w chart for the sunflower oil 
manufacturing.   
 
Now, because this sunflower oil it has a very good quality of the polyunsaturated fatty  
acids then.  So, there are certain effort to control or the minimize the damages to these 
free fatty acid rather.  So, the re are some researchers are already working they have 
reported that minimal refining  process for sunflower oil which results into obviously, the 
minimum changes in the quality  characteristics particularly MUFA:PUFA  ratio and other 
things help well.  So, cru de salt flower oil is in this case subjected to that some changes 
that the refining  process traditional refining process is little bit change. So, here approach 
here is to retain the desirable minor component otherwise in the traditional  process this 
tocop herols and other antioxidants etc that they are also removed.  So, in the minimal 
refining process the change which is suggested here the approach here  is to retain the 
desirable compounds alright.  Overall that is a study had been reported where it was 
conducted to  produce neutralized sunflower oil using calcium hydroxide, magnesium 
oxide or sodium silicate  as an alternative to strong alkalis like NOH and this is used in 
NOH is used in the conventional  neutralization process.  So, this people researchers have 
tried to replace this conventional alkali refining  with the magnesium oxide, calcium 
hydroxide or sodium silicate etc , and evaluated  their effectiveness by response surface 
methodology or other statistical method.  And the estimated optimal parameters for 
neutralizations are reported for the sunflower seed oil were  reported as the calcium 
hydroxide at the 0 .3 percent, concentration 5 3°C and 19.7 minutes magnesium hydroxide 
0.3, 8 % concentration 57 °C and 17.8 minutes . Similarly, sodium silicate at 0. 81 percent 
concentration 55. 7°C temperature  and 19.1 minute . These are the optimum conditions 
and these conditions are reported to better  retain the desirable components in the 
sunflower oil in comparison to the conventional process.   
 
Mustard oil has about 60 percent monounsaturated  fatty acid including 42 percent erucic  
acid and 12 percent oleic acid.  It has about 21 percent PUPA like 6 percent omega -3 
alpha -linolenic acid and 15 % omega -6 linoleic acid and it has about 12 percent saturated 
fats. This optimu m ratio of omega -3 and omega -6 fatty acids and low content of saturated 
fats make mustard oil more beneficial and preferred over several other oils available in 
the market.  Even also the mustard oil is reddish brown or amber in color and it is known 
for it s strong smell and pungent sharp flavor.  The pungency of the mustard oil is due to 
the presence of allyl  isothiocyanate in it and  many fact that is the consumers they like this 
pungent flavor and taste of the  mustard oil.  And accordingly there are in the m arket even 
the mustard oil double filter mustard oil  is many or even Kachi Ghani mustard oil is just 
after filtration.  Otherwise in the refining process there is characteristic flavor is lost. So, 
this fatty vegetable oil is obtained by pressing the mustar d seeds . 
 
The mustard seeds also are very there is a soft in nature and very small.  So, just by simple 
pressing , the oil can be extracted.  So, the mustard seed it is taken and then it is a 
obviously, cleaning and one precaution  is to be taken into the mustard seed that is the 
moisture content is controlled between  may be less than 9 percent or approximately 9 to 
12 percent.  If the moisture content goes beyond this then during when it is crushed then 
this moisture  may cause the activation of the enzymes etc. And this enzymes may convert 
this itocyanates etcetera into hydrocyanic acids that results  some water toxicity in the 
particularly cake.  And that is the reason why the mustard oil seed cake is a normally not 
good for human  feed because of this convers ion. So, if this care is taken that this it 
ensured that the proper moisture content and or some  heat treatment is given so that the 
enzymes are inactivated before the seeds are cracked  etcetera ok.  So, the it is a then 
crushed mustard oil it is crushed in  kool hoos are processed oil  is very popular in India 
here that Khadi and village industries commissions they are have  they use that kachig 
ghani oil they are available in the market.  And also this the kachig ghani normally in the 
earlier classes we have d iscussed detail  how it is operated that is the bullocks etcetera is 
used to operate this machine that is a  solar monitor in the villages and the kbic ghani's are 
there where this bullock power  animal power is replaced with the electrical motor power 
and, b ut this kachig ghani oil  oils are considered to be very good.  
 
Then sesame oil it is again an edible oil that is edible vegetable oil derived from  sesame 
seeds.  The oil is one of the earliest known crop based oil worldwide mass production is 
limited  due to the inefficient manual harvesting practices ok.  Oil that is made from the 
raw seeds which may or may not be cold press and it is used  as a cooking oil.  Oil made 
from the toasted seeds toasted sesame seed is used for a distinct to nutty aroma  and taste 
because during toasting operation typical taste is developed and which is transferred  to 
oil although it may be unstable for frying which makes the taste burnt and bitter.  Sesame 
oil is composed of the linoleic acid there are 41 percent, oleic acid 39 perce nt, palmitic 
acid 8 percent, stearic acid 5 percent and other acid in small quantity.  
 
 
Like other cases here also sesame oil is again a soft seed ok.  So, post harvest operation 
subjected after that is harvested from the field then seed  cleaning, then clean seed is taken 
it is conditioned and then subjected to first press expelling  ok. So, first press oil is 
obtained and then the cake is obtained then again it is conditioned  and subjected to 
second press expelling.  So, first press expressed oil and seco nd press expressed oil are 
taken these are the expressed  oil and then degum, neutralization, bleaching etcetera all 
the standard refining operation  it is subjected to and you get expelled refined sesame oil.  
And then now the cake which is obtained upper fi rst pressing or second pressing later on  
this cake is subjected to again solvent extraction to improve the efficiency of oil to 
recover  most of the oil from this cake is further subjected to solvent extraction process 
and the solvent extracted oil is a sen d for the refining, degum refining at the standard 
protocol  and you get the solvent extracted refined sesame oil ok.  
 
Then again this because of this specific characteristic qualities extraction of sesame seed 
oil using  this compressed propane and superc ritical carbon dioxide that is it people have 
worked  ok and they have reported that is the in the solvent and the supercritical although  
the supercritical carbon dioxide in earlier we discussed that in the extract solvent 
extraction  that is it is an emergi ng process that is can be used for almost all oil.  So, for 
the sesame oil the extractions were performed in a laboratory scale unit in a  temperature 
and pressure range of 313 to 333 K and 19 to 25 mega Pascal and carbon  dioxide for 
carbon dioxide and 303 t o 333 K and 8 to 12 mega Pascal for propane extractions  
respectively.  And the results of the study which was reported by Corosso et al it indicated 
that the solvent  and density were the important variables for the carbon dioxide extraction 
while temperatur e was the most important variable for the extraction yield with the 
propane.  The extraction with propane was much faster than that with the carbon dioxide 
due to the  fact that propane is a better solvent for vegetable oil compared to carbon 
dioxide.  Econom ics of extracted oil its oxidative stability determined by the DSC and 
other  chemical methods ok or profile of the chemical profile of the constituents by THH 
determined  by the GC were similar in case of however, both the solvent whether it was 
carbon diox ide or it was propane. The mathematical modeling of the extraction kinetics 
using the second order kinetic presented  good results for the extraction of this sesame oil 
with both the solvents.   
 
Now soybean oil another very good very important oil soybean oil is a vegetable oil 
extracted  from the seeds of the soybean it is glycine max.  It is one of the most widely 
consumed cooking oil and is the second most consumed vegetable  oil you can say 
worldwide.  The second order soybean oil is also used as a base for  printing ink like 
soybean and  oil plants.  Soybean oil has 16 gram saturated fat, 23 gram monounsaturated 
fat and 58 grams of polyunsaturated  fat per 100 gram. The major unsaturated fatty acids 
in soybean oil triglycerides are the polyunsaturated  alpha lin olenic acid it is around 7 to 
10 percent, linolenic acid 51 percent and monounsaturated  oleic acid is 23 percent.  It also 
contains the saturated fatty acids, stearic acid like 4 percent and palmitic acid  10 percent.   
 
 
Process flow chart for the soybean o il soybean oil manufacture that is the soybean seeds  
they are taken there is three method like screw pressing, solvent extraction or even  
extruder expelling.  This can also be used for the obtaining for obtaining oil from the 
soybean it contains  around 20 p ercent oil or so.  So, soybean seeds are cleaned, fallen 
matter are removed then it is cracked dehulled and  the hulls are blown off and after that 
seeds are dehulled the cotyledons of soybeans are  conditioned flagged and then these 
flags are subjected to th e solvent extraction process  ok. Of course, the flag the conditions 
to have to more pore and then the rest is that is  after the solvent extraction you get that 
the steam says is a paraded distilled you  get solvent extracted oil crude oil and then that is 
the crude oil is subjected to the  and the meal which is obtained it is meal solvent that is 
group stage meal etcetera.  And then the crude oil obviously, it is sent to further standard 
refining protocol.  For the screw spilling that is the soybeans are cleane d soybean 
cotyledons that is a dried  it are cooked and then it is sent to the that is moisture content is 
adjusted ok.  And it is conditioned and then it is sent to the screw spilling and here the 
settling  and polish filter.  So, get the crude oil and the me al which is obtained it is a then 
partially de -fatted  meal then it is again sent to the solvent extraction process. And the 
extrude along the seed it is passed through extruder in a extruder barrel seeds  are work on 
and some of the oil is collected and the n remaining is through solvent extraction.  So, 
normally prepress solvent extraction is used ok.   
 
 
The process flow chart  of oil refining  is given , here the oil is subjected to filtering then  
gums are removed and then they  are used for lecithin production.  And then this de -gum 
material is a n alkali neutralization, centrifugation to remove  the soap stock then it is 
washed centrifuged vacuum drying to remove any traces of moisture  etcetera from it.  
And then subjected to bleaching where bleaching ea rth is used filtered deodorization that  
is the steam physical refining you can say then distillate which is obtained by during  
deodorization. Then it is used for making flavor component minor volatile fatty acids 
etcetera are removed  and then the polishing  filter subject it is that is you have been oil 
which is obtained  after filtration it is used as a salad or cooking oil.  And also there are 
some reports that reporter has suggested there is a some minor changes  in the traditional 
process there is a minimal  refining that is the after filtering gum hydrating  settling or 
centrifuging then gums are removed.  And then it is a some adsorbent or added or 
bleaching filtering physical refining or adsorbent  filtering then gum gas purging or soft 
deodorization.  So, the re is some process parameter that is so, that the changes which may 
take place  originally in the traditional refining process they can be minimized.  So, it is 
also this oil is also used in salad and cooking oils . 
 
Also let us briefly discuss the effect of supercritical  carbon dioxide extraction parameter 
on the soybean oil yield.  There is a series of operational parameters of supercritical fluid 
extraction of soybean  oil like pressure in the 300 to 500 bar , temperature in 40 to 60 °C, 
carbon dioxide mass  flow rate 0.1942 -0.436 kg per hour and particle size may be 0.238 -
1.059 mm were investigated  in the laboratory scale apparatus.  The results show that the 
extraction yields were significantly affected by the applied  operational extraction 
parameters.  The in crease in pressure, temperature and solvent flow rate improved the 
extraction  yield.  The extraction yield increased as the particle size decreased depending 
upon decreasing intra  particle diffusion resistance.  The mass transfer coefficient in the 
fluid pha se increased with the increase in extractor  size, while the mass transfer 
coefficient in the solid phase was independent of the  extractor size . 
 
Then flaxseed oil, the flaxseed is an annual herb belonging to the Linaceae  flowering 
famil y. It is one of the  oldest cultivated plant and was used in Egypt before 6000 BC.  Oil 
in Mesopotamia, Rome and Greece to make te xtiles . Flaxseed oil was used for in a 
embramine and ferrous as a medicine.  The seeds are 4 to 7 millimeter long, smooth, flat 
and light brown. The y usually contain 41 percent oil, 28 percent or so dietary fiber and 
approximately 20 percent  protein.  Flaxseed are one of the most important oil seeds as 
they contain about 38 to 44 percent  oil rich in omega 3 fatty acids and linolenic acids.  1 
to 5 perce nt lignans that possesses very high antioxidant activity, 10 to 31 percent  good 
quality protein and around 28 percent dietary fiber are there.  Besides its use as an 
essential oil flaxseed oil also finds applications in manufacturing  of paints, dyes and 
animal feeds.  
 
 
So, this is the process flow chart for flaxseed oil. This is also flaxseed also is 
comparatively a soft seed.  So, it is majority of the oil is extracted by cold pressing.  So, it 
is just cold pressing treatment oil settling, filtering and cold  pressed oil and  then the meal 
which is obtained it is solvent extraction.  So, solvent is triple.  So, you get cold press oil 
or solvent extractor oil the crude oil it is sent to the refining  treatment degumming, alkali 
refining, bleaching, militarization a nd deodorization and the meal  is toaster, dry cooler 
and then the de -oiled meal is obtained.  
 
Then ultrasound assisted extraction of flaxseed oil using immobilized enzyme that is 
another  study which was reported by some researcher and Herrer and aqueous enzymatic 
process assisted  by ultrasound extraction that is AEP -UE was used for the extraction of 
oil from flaxseed.  And the highest oil recovery was 68 percent which is obtained when 
the ground flaxseeds  was incubated with 130 unit per gram of cellulose, pectinase and 
hemicellulose for 12 hour at  45°C and the pH was maintained at 5.  The IC50 values of 
the oil obtained by AEP -UE and organic solvent measure methods were measured  as by 
DPPH scavenging assay and these were 2.27 mg per ml for AEP -UE and 3.31 mg  per ml  
for OSE methods.  The AEP -UE derived oil had 1.5 percent higher content of unsaturated  
fatty acids compared  to the OSE derived oil that is organic solvent extraction derived oil.  
AEP -UE is a promising economically friendly method for large scale pre paration of 
flaxseed  oil. 
 
So, the quality control in seed oil manufacturing the typical problem of the vegetable oil 
processing  is to ensure consistency of the output product quality.  And one parameter that 
mostly affect the quality is the presence of wax which command commands  control at all 
stages of process that is refinement, address removal, freezing etc. So, statistical methods 
of analysis can be used or it can be usually applied to the improvement  of the vegetable 
oil processing to optimize param eters consistency to enhance process  efficiency to 
improve economic performance as well as to access process stability.   
 
Researchers like Kleymenova et al., (2021)  in their study used statistical tool like  
histograms, skew chart, skew diagram and Pareto chart etc and they analyzed various 
methods  and they reported there is major finding of their study was that the occurrence of 
process  flaws, occurrences of process flaws that would result in product rejection had a 5 
percent  probability of happening at all stages of the process.  Moreover, the analysis of 
process stability with maps of averages values average values  and ranges leading to the 
finding that the process itself is a satisfactory unstable  satisfactorily unstable.  So, cause 
and effect relationsh ip of influencing factors such as quality of the feedstock,  where the 
main cause of flaw in the production process.  So, an effective corrective action module 
should accordingly be in place for every possible  flaw in the manufacturing process to 
maintain bo th the quality of the oil as well as meal.  
 
Then packaging of the seed oils, packaging oil of the oil is mainly done to protect the  oil 
from outside environment as any food especially after the completion of the process.  So, 
that oil can retain color, fla vor, freshness for a larger period of time a packaging of  oil is 
also done to increase its shelf life.  So, as the temperature increases water holding capacity 
of oil increases hydrolytic reactions  occur due to the presence of moisture mainly due to 
the hyd rolysis of oil to glycerol and  free fatty acids that results in off -flavor.  Thus proper 
packaging between prevents the hydrolytic rancidity even the oxidative rancidity  of oil 
caused due to oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids change the aldehydes and keto nes are 
the final products of oxidation which are responsible for the rancid odor of the  oil. So, 
this is the presence of natural antioxidants and pigment this unrefined oil are less prone  to 
the oxidation than refined oil . 
 
So, the accordingly the packag ing material should be selected proper packaging material  
ok. For the seed oil like LDPE it is a low density polyethylene it is a heat stealable inert  
odor fre e. It acts as a barrier to moisture and has high gas permeability it is less expensive 
therefore,  widely used and has ability to fusion welded to itself to give good tough 
strength like  seals.  
 
Then PET can be made into film by blowing or casting melting point of PET is higher  
than that of PP which is around 260 °C and due to the manufacturing  conditions does not 
shrink below 18 0°C. PET is ideal for high temperature applications it is also act as a good 
barrier of oxygen  gas and water vapor. Then glass is also used for packaging of the oil 
now a day the glass container has been  used and it has t he obvious advantages like it is 
transparent and the product is displayed  over this . It acts as a strong barrier to moisture 
gases, odors and microorganisms and do not react  with food products and it are reusable 
and recyclable suitable for they are suitab le for heat processing when hermetically sealed 
and they are rigid to allow stacking without  container damage . 
 
Then flexible packages also nowadays are become popular and because the high 
packaging cost  of the rigid and semi rigid containers are and the lack of assurance of 
quality and quantity  in buying losses lose oil and it has led to the introduction of flexible 
pouches and retail  packs.  Flexible packaging materials have the advantages like optimum 
balance between cost and benefit,  lower storage and h andling cost it is a and these are 
amenable to high speed FFS machine.  In fact, the FFS machine are available and you can 
get oil pouches now where they are  available in the market from very small pouch to 1 
kg, 2 kg, 100 gram and so on.  
 
So, finally, I will summarize this lecture by saying that seed oils are widely used for  
cooking and frying operations.  The seed oils contain high amount of polyunsaturated 
fatty acids and some seed oils like polyene  or flax seed etcetera they are good sources of 
omega fa tty acids, some seeds mustard oil  they are known for their characteristic pungent 
taste which is liked by the consumers and  manufacturing of seed oils require critical 
control of process parameters during their  pressing extraction and refining so as to ensure 
good quality all the particularly to  retain the natural antioxidants which are present there 
as well as to destroy any undesirable  compound volatile and they should be properly 
packed to ensure their stability during transportation  and handling.  To avoid that is the 
packaging material should be proper it should have sufficient resistance  power strength to 
control the oxidative rancidity, hydrolytic rancidity etc . 
 
 
 
So, these were the references that were used in this preparing this lecture.  Thank  you very 
much for your patience here.  Thank you.  
