1 
 Food  Oils and Fats:  Chemistry  & Technology  
Professor  H N Mishra  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Module  9: Cooking  & Frying  Oils 
Lecture  42: Frying  Technology  
 
Hello  everybody,  Namaste.  In today's  lectu re, we will discuss  about  Frying  Technology.   
 
The concept  that we will talk about today  is what  is frying,  its basic  theory , and principles  
of frying , we will try to understand.  Then , we will also discuss  the technology  of frying,  
what  are the various  methods  that are used for frying  foods  and equipment,  physical  and 
chemical  changes  which  take place  in oil as well as in the food during  frying , and then 
the product  quality  changes  that is, what  are the various  quality  changes  that take place  in 
the food during  frying  operation.   
So, let us see the frying.  What  is frying?  Frying  is a relatively  complex  heat and mass -
transferring cooking  process  where  physical,  chemical , and organoleptic  changes  are 
2 
 taken  place  because  of the interactions  between  food and the oil in which  the food is 
being  fried.  
 
Oil plays  an important  role in frying.  Actually , it is the only medium  in which  the 
continuous  heat and mass  transfer  take place  during  the processing  operation  during  the 
frying  operation.  This is a unit operation  mainly  used to alter the eating  qualities  of a 
food.  It has a preservative  effect  that results  from  the thermal  destruction  of 
microorganisms  and spoilage -causing enzymes  etc. during  the frying  process.  There  is a 
reduction  in water  activity  at the surfac e of the food or throughout  the food if it is fried  in 
the form  of thin slices.   
 
Let’s discuss  briefly  the theory  of frying.  When  the food is placed  in hot oil, the surface  
temperature  rises rapidly , and water  is vaporized  or evaporated  as steam.  The surface 
then begins  to dry. The plane  of evaporation  moves  inside  the food and a crust  is formed , 
which  is normally  observed  in the fried  food at the surface.  The surface  temperature  of 
the food then rises to that of the hot oil; that is, the surface  temperat ure will equalize  with 
the hot oil temperature.  The internal  temperature  rises more  slowly  towards  100 degree  
Celsius , and the rate of heat transfer  is controlled  by the temperature  difference  between  
the oil and the food and by the surface  heat transfer  coefficient.  The rate of heat 
penetration into the food is controlled  by the thermal  conductivity  of the food.   
3 
  
Now , what  is the behavior  of food during  frying  that is; what  are the various  occurrences  
during  frying.  Let’s see the chemistry , basically  the chemistry  of frying  we will try to 
understand  now.  As I told you, when  the food material  is put into the oil i.e. hot oil then 
water  is continuously  released  from  the food into hot oil, and this produces  a steam  
distillation  effect , sweeping  volatile  oxidative  products  from  the oil. The released  
moisture  agitates  the oil and hastens  hydrolysis.  Blanket  of steam  formed  above  the 
surface  of the oil tends  to reduce  the amount  of oxygen  available  for oxidation.  Volatiles  
may develop  in the food itself  and are from  the interactions  between  the food and oil. 
Food  absorbs  varying  amounts  of oil during  deep  fat frying.  Full amount  of oils or fats 
are carried  with the food, even  from  5 to 40 percent  by weight  of the food.  For example,  
potato  chips  have  a final fat content  of around  35 percent  resulting  in need  for addition  of 
fresh  oil in different  batch  operations.  Food  itself  can release  some  of its endogenous  
lipids  into frying  oil or fat. For example,  fat from  the chicken ; when  you fry the chicken  
then the fat contained  in chicken  is the released  into the oil. And consequently , oxidative  
stability  of new mixture  may be different  from  that of the original  frying  oil or fat. The 
presence  of food causes  the oil or fat to darken  at an accelerated  rate.  
 
So, let’s see what  are the different  types  of methods  of frying  that is two common  
methods  which  are used may be shallow  frying  or deep  fat frying.  Shallow  frying  is a hot 
oil-based  cooking  technique.  It is typically  used to prepare  portion -sized  cuts of meat,  
4 
 fish, potatoes,  patties  such as fritters , and similar  products.  Shallow  frying  can also be 
used to cook  vegetables.  It is a medium -high to high heat cooking  process.  Temperatures  
between  160 to 190 degree  Celsius  are typical  of the shallow  frying  process,  but it can 
also be performed  at a temperature  as low as 150 degree  Celsius.  Of course,  at the lower  
temperature  the time required  for the frying  will be little more  longer  fry period  of time.   
Then , deep  fat frying  which  is also referred  to as that deep  frying  sometimes  is a cooking  
method  in which  food is submerged  in hot oil at a temperature  typically  between  178 or 
180 to 190 degree  Celsius.  In deep  frying , oil can reach  temperature s of even  more  than 
205 degree  Celsius  in some  cases.  Traditionally , lard but today most  commonly  used oils 
which  are used for deep  frying  that are the vegetable  oil like sunflower  oil, palm  oil, and 
this even  sometime  in some  places  coconut  oil, mustard  oil, or soybean  oil. So, all that is 
plant  oils, they are used. As opposed  to the shallow  frying , here the conventional  frying  is 
done  in a frying  pan. This deep  frying  is done  in a frying  pan. So, here you see that 
shallow -frying  and deep -frying  figures  are shown.  So, role of oil in the frying , that is, it 
has to perform  certain  role that is number  one it influences  the fried  food behavior, 
flavor, texture,  mouthfeel  and aftertaste.  Even there  are several  examples  of the food 
which  are processed  using  shallow  frying,  deep  frying , and using  different  oils and there  
is a difference  in the texture,  taste,  appearance  of the food frying  with the both the 
methods.   
 
So, again  the common  frying  methods , if you see little elaboration  that the pan frying,  
saute  or stir frying,  shallow  frying , or deep  frying.  These  depend  upon  what  is the volume  
of oil used,  other  characteristics,  time, and temperature  of the frying,  and even  the 
method  per equipment  used can be categorized.  Like for example,  in pan frying , the 
volume  of oil used is 15 cubic  centimeters;  in the saute  or stir frying  also the simil ar 
volume  is 15 cubic  centimeters  in general.  Whereas,  in the shallow  frying , it may be 500 
cubic  centimeter s, or in deep  frying , even  it is 1000  cubic  centimeters . 
The characteristics  of the products  which  are fried  in pan frying,  saute  frying , etcetera  
that is cooking  in a small  quantity  of preheated  hot oil or fat in a frying  pan or on a flat 
surface,  it is in the pan frying.  But in the saute  frying , saute  pan is used.  In shallow  
5 
 frying , it is a shallow  frying  pan is used.  So, there  is a different  change  in the 
characteristics  of the material  after the construction  or design  of the frying  pan which  is 
used.  Then , in the deep  frying  that is cooking  in a preheated  deep  oil or fat, the deep  pan 
is used.   
The method , also accordingly , I have  given  pan frying  is the griddle,  cooking  on a lightly  
oiled  preheated  griddle,  then saute  is cooking  in a small  quantity  of hot fat and oil is 
preheated,  fast frying  at a work  frying  pan. Then , deep  frying  is a conventional  fried  until 
cooked  and golden  brown  until materia l is fully cooked  and it becomes  in golden  brown  
color.   
 
So, here you see that just this graph  I have  taken  from  the literature  reference  is given  
here, to show  what  are the various  changes,  that is with time as well as with increasing  
the value  that is the changes  like the value  of the total unsaturation.  You can see that as 
the time of the frying  increases,  the total unsaturation  of the oil increases.  Whereas,  the 
value  of volatile  compounds  first, it will increase , and then after sometime , it may 
decre ase. The polymeric  material,  polar  material,  viscosity,  foaming , and free fatty acids , 
there  you see that is the increase  or decrease  and then after sometime  it becomes  constant.  
Even  the peroxides  you see, it is first increases , remains  constant  for some time, then 
decrease s. So, these  are the various  changes  depending  upon  the characteristic s, 
temperature , and all those  things . Different  changes  in the oil will take, and obviously,  
these  changes  in the oil will have  an effect  on the food characteristics  as well.   
So, here you see what  is happening  in the frying  when  you are giving  a heat source.  So, 
various  reactions,  that is aeration,  absorption,  vaporization,  hydrolysis,  dehydration,  
polymerization , all these  various  reactions because  when  you are giving  the heat, the oil 
is getting  heated , from  the oil the heat is being  transferred  into the food and from  the 
food, moisture  is being  transferred  into the oil. So, these  different  operations , heat and 
mass  transfer  operations  influence  the product  characteri stics as well as the 
characteristics  of oil also change.  
6 
  
Now,  let’s talk briefly  about the frying  technology  and equipment , that is, number  1, 
microwave  oven  or microwave  frying.  It is the quickest  heating  system  using  
electromagnetic  waves.  Now,  you know that microwave  ovens  are very common.  So, this 
can also be used for frying.  The range  of electromagnetic  waves  is around  300 megahertz  
to 300 gigahertz  with 1 mm to 1 meter  wavelength.  The use of microwave  as a heating  
power  source  during  frying  can be defined  as a new alternative  frying  way which  is not 
only the method  of improving  the fried  product,  but also helping  to reduce  the production  
cost in the industrial  level.   
 
Advantages  of the microwave  frying  include , that it is the quickest  heating proce ss, it 
reduces  the process  time accordingly , and the total oil content  in the fried  food or fried  
product  is reduced  to very low in this case.  The schematic  you see here, there  is a 
microwave  cavity , and there  is a magnetron , which  is a system  to transport  the 
microwaves  into the cavity . It is a power  control  unit then a vacuum  gauze , etcetera , or 
provider  valve , and vacuum  pump.  So, these  are the accessories  and instruments  required  
in the microwave  system.   
So, the main  obstacle  in the microwave  system  is transferring  the heat evenly.  This 
obstacle  can be overcome  by combining  this technology  with other  systems  like vacuum  
frying  or ultrasound -assisted  system  to improve  the attributes  of the fried  products.   
7 
  
Vacuum  frying , a vacuum  frying  setup  is shown  here. It is a process  known  as pressure  
frying  where  the frying  operation  is done  in a vacuum  tank without  the presence  of air. 
The main  advantage  of frying  in vacuum  condition s is that it helps  to reduce  the boiling  
point  of water  and air, which  means  high temperatures  like those  at normal  atmospheric  
nations  are not needed  here.  The absence  of air during  frying  helps  to stop or reduce  the 
changes  of lipid oxidation,  acrylamide  formation,  discoloration , or it reduces  the 
browning  reactions  and helps  to achieve better  nutritional  characteristics  or other  
properties  in the fried  product.   
 
So, this is a schematic  arrangement  of vacuum  frying  equipment.  You see here, that the 
pressure  is provided  at the basket  lift for lifting  the food, pressure  gauge  etc. and air, 
vacuum  pump , condenser  is provided , this is the system . So, here, high quality  fruits  and 
vegetables  chips  have  already  been  started  to be processed  by the manufacturers  utilizing  
this technology , this vacuum  technology . Because  of the superiority  of this product  
characteristic  quality  of the product  which  is obtained  by this method. It  has become  the 
choice  of technology  for the manufacturer s or for the industr ies. It reduces  energy , it 
improves  retain  quality  in the food fried  product  better.  It also has some  drawbacks  such 
as high installing  cost, and  it is a time-consuming  process . Combining  with other  
technologies  like pre-drying  and microwave  heating , the obstacles  could  be minimized.   
8 
  
Then , radiant  frying . There are three  types  of heating  systems  which  are used like 
conduction,  convection  and radiation  heating  system s. The radiant  heating  system  deals  
with exposure  of the heat through  the substance  from  an infrared  source  at the 
wavelength  ranging  from  0.78 to 1000  millimeters . The infrared  radiant  heating  system  
shows  more  thermal  efficiency  and responses  with much  faster  heating  ability  than the 
microwave  system.  Infrared  heating  has vast applications  in many  food processing  
operations  like drying,  pasteurization,  baking,  sterilization , and blanching  and so, it also 
can be used accordingly  for the frying  operations.   
 
This is figure just show s the wavelength  and frequency  ranges  for different  technologies  
like for example,  radiant  frying , you see the visible  spectrum ; it is a frequency  in hertz 
1015 and wavelength  in this same  like 1 to 10 and then IR becomes  10 to 102. 
So, these  are the different  ranges  of the frequency  or wavelength  for this different  
technology.   
Then , ultrasound -assisted  frying . Ultrasound  has been  applied  comprehensively  in 
different  food processing  system  as a non-thermal  synergistic  system  to enhance  the 
production.  The acoustic  waves  used in this treatment  range  between  220 kilohertz  and 
10 megahertz.  Ultrasound  is mostly  used in drying,  extraction,  pasteurization,  and 
sterilization , and now also it is becoming  a popular  choice  in frying  operation.  Use of 
9 
 ultrasound  is a relatively  new and novel  technology  for the snack  food manufacturing  
industry.  Use of ultrasound  treatment  during  vacuum  frying  helps  to produce  a bette r-
quality  product  with low oil content  and crisp ier with a high efficiency  of production  rate. 
It has been  reported  that the use of ultrasound  during  frying  helps  to increase  the heat 
transfer  rate during  frying  because  of micro -vibrational , sponge , and micro-streaming  
effects  due to the incorporation  of ultrasound.   
 
Applying  ultrasound  during  frying , the microstructure  becomes  more  porous  and is 
ruptured  with microscopic  holes  in some  cases.  This type of microstructure  resulted  in 
faster  moisture  removal  which  leads  to make  the processing  time shorter.   
Obstacles  in ultrasound -assisted  frying  include  that this ultrasound  produces  an 
unbearable  amount  of sound  which  may not be good  for the health  of the person  
operating  the equipment.  If it goes for the production  in an industrial  scale,  it may cause  
injury  may be aural or concentration  for the production  workers.  And for this reason , the 
systems  will be made  soundproof , which  may make  it slightly  expensive.   
 
Schematic  of the ultrasound - and microwave -assisted  vacuum  frying  equipment  is shown  
here in this figure.  It has one oil tank,  then microwave  source  and heating  system,  
ultrasound  source  and vacuum  pressure  balance  system,  then there  is a vacuum  chamber  
number  4 here,  then frying  chamber,  circulation  pump,  electric  cabin  door system,  
10 
 blending  and centrifugation  system , and controller  and operation  panel etc. that is 
controller  where all the switches  and buttons  are provide  to control  the system . So, this 
US and microwave -assisted  vacuum  frying  equipmen t is provided  with all these  
accessories  and then this can be used to control  the product  can be treated  with the 
ultrasound  to create  pore etc., which  will improve  or helping  the oil, moisture  in the top 
operation  and heat transfer  and mass  transfer  durin g frying  and the microwave  that is 
used to heat the things  and then the vacuum.  So, all these  things  are combined  into one 
setup  and it gives  a better  efficiency.   
 
You can see here that is a microstructure  electron  micrograph  for the center  of the fried  
beef meatballs  during  the ultrasonic  power  of 0 watts  where  no ultrasonic  power  was 
used,  then ultrasonic  power  of 200 watts this B, and C is the ultrasonic  power  of 400 
watts, D is the 600 watts and E is 800 watts. So, ultrasonic  power  was increased  and the 
frying  temperature  was maintained  at 160 degree  Celsius  and frying  time was for 10 
minutes.  So, this figure  had a magnification  of 3000 × and bar 100 µm . So, you can see 
that microstructure  and pore changes , they are clearly  visible  that when  ultrasound  power  
is increased  that it creates  more  structural  changes , causes  more  holes , etcetera , and this 
helps  in the proper  heat and mass  transfer.  You can see when  there  is no ultrasound  
applied  and when  there  is more  maximum  of 800, there  is a visible  change  in the 
structure.   
 
11 
 Then , air frying  is a rapid  cooking  technology  of food using  a high velocity  of blowing  
air. It is an oven  designed  to solve  the slowness  of a conventional  oven  by using  a fan to 
move  the air into the oven.  Instead  of submerging  into the heated  oil, in this frying  
system , the sprinkle  of oil is applied  to the product  with air circulation.  It has been  found  
that air frying  show ed less than 68 percent  gelatinization , higher  than 59 percent  starch  
digestibility  whereas,  conventional  deep -frying showed  about  91 percent  gelatinization  
and 54 percent  digestibility.  It is also reported  that air-fried  french  fries showed  
significantly  better  color  characteristics  which  means  air frying  helps  to reduce  the 
Maillard  reaction.  One of the patented  air frying  systems  uses re-circulation  of the gas 
through  the filters  and heater s through  the filters  and heaters  and then returns  the air to 
the air fryer  cavity  during  a cooking  cycle.  
 
The limitation  of the air frying . This system  also has some  limitatio ns like other  methods , 
that is, the air-fried  product  has limitations  as it might  turn out the food bit dry mouth feel. 
It affects  the flavor  of the food due to the absence  of oil. It might  have  high acrylamide  
formation,  higher  risk of burning , and case hardening.  Air frying  is costly  and has the 
least influence  and the least inefficient  frying  process  compared  to the other  frying  
operations.  To overcome  the limitations  of air frying , it may also need  to be combined  
with microwave  energy  or other  means  such as radiofrequency,  induction  heating , and 
other  thermal  means  to further  heat the product , which  may improve  the efficiency  of the 
process.   
12 
  
So, here it is an air frying  system  schematic . The main  section  inside  and how it works  is 
you see that then food products  here and the microwave  hot air is coming  that is the fan is 
used to blow  the air and heat is provided  and there  are time control  electronics , 
temperature  controls , etc. So, inside  the oven , that is, along  with the fan, the oil is 
sprinkled  over the product.   
 
Spray frying . It is another  kind of novel  frying  system  where  the sample  is not placed  into 
the oil rather  the heated  oil is sprayed  toward  the sample.  The efficiency  of this frying  
system  depends  on the rate of spraying  oil. It has been  reported  that compared  to air 
frying , spray -frying  resulted  in a lower  oil uptake  by around  45 percent  and had better  
colour.  Textural  properties  are reported  to be better  in the air-fried  product.  The air-fried  
rice crackers  had better  texture  compared  to the spray -fried  crackers.   
13 
  
The scanning  electron  microstructure  of potato  chip produced  by different  frying  
technologies  is shown. A is t he atmospheric  frying  sample i.e.  normal  frying  which  is 
done  by deep  frying , then air-frying  B, C is the vacuum  fryin g, D is the microwave  
vacuum  frying,  E is the ultrasound -assisted  vacuum  frying , and then F is the ultrasound -
microwave  vacuum  frying.  And you see \how the structures  it gives.  Obviously,  every  
technology  as can be seen  in this microstructure  of the produc t, has its own influence.  
Accordingly , this microstructure  changes  during  the process  will have  their own effect  on 
the quality  of the product.  
 
Now,  there  are sometimes  some  pre-frying  treatments  that are recommended  to reduce  
the oil uptake  in the mater ials. Pretreatment  like blanching , different  types  of drying , and  
ultrasound  and pulse  electric  field treatments  are found  favorable  to lower  the oil content.  
The sponge  effect  of ultrasound  treatment  before  frying  also helps  to reduce  the cell 
strength , which may also result  in the production  of low oil content  in the food product.  
Pulse  electric  field is a newly  invented  non-thermal  technology  that is used to inactivate  
enzyme reactions  and enhance  the mass  transfer  rate through  the cell membrane  or 
perme able permeabilization.  It is a well-known  effective  pretreatment  for frying  and 
preservation , which  is reported  by many  researchers.  Other  pretreatment s, such as 
different  types  of coating  have , also a positive  effect  on reducing  the excessive  oil uptake  
by the product.  The use of higher  oil temperature  during  frying  causes  lower  oil uptake.  
14 
  
Similarly,  post-frying  treatments  to reduce  the oil uptake  are, that is, the fried  product  the 
oil content  can be reduced.  There  are operations  like cooling,  use of absorb ent, and 
centrifugation  in vacuum  fryer  during  the de-oiling  process.  Using  the fried  product  at a 
high temperature  and using  a high absorbent  paper  for removal  of the surface  oil help 
reduce  the final oil content  of the fried  product.  Pressurization  plays  a vital role in 
vacuum  frying.  It can increase  or decrease  oil absorption  in the product.  It has been  
reported  that the centrifugation  process  helps  to reduce  the oil content  of potato  chips.  
The ultrasound  treatment  and vacuum  fryer  were also report ed to reduce  the oil content  in 
final fried  food.   
 
Now,  the quality  changes  in oil during  frying  and cooking.  Obviously,  frying  is an 
unusual  unit operation  in that the product  of one food during  the food process  (cooking  
oil) is used for the heat transf er medium  in another . And the effect  of frying  on food, 
therefore,  involves  both the effects  on the oil, which  in turn influences  the quality  of the 
food, and the direct  effect  of the heat on the fried  food product.   
So, first, we see the effect  of heat on the oil. The major  reactions  occurring  in oil during  
frying  are hydrolysis  that is moisture  release  from  the food,  oxidation , polymerization , 
and thermal  degradation.  Prolonged  heating  of the oil at the high temperature  used in 
frying  in the presence  of moisture  and oxygen  released  from  foods, causes  oxidation  of 
15 
 the oil to form  a range  of volatile  carbonyls , hydroxy l acids,  keto acids , and epoxy  acids. 
These cause  unpleasant  flavor  and darkening  of the oil.  
 
Here , you see, the various  quality  changes  in the food that is the earlier  we show  that 
there  is oil uptake,  then the moisture  loss. So, it may result  in a non -enzymatic  browning,  
water  vaporization,  beneficial  compound  degradation,  and crust  formation  resulting  in 
starch  degradation.  So, these  are the various  quality  changes  that may take place .  
 
The effect  of frying  temperature  on the fried  food quality . The direct  effect  of heat on 
fried  food product -development  of characteristic  color,  flavor , and aroma  in the crust  of 
the fried foods. These  eating qualities  are developed  by a combination  of Maillard  
reaction  and compounds  absorbed  from  the oil. The texture  of the fried  food is produced  
by changes  to proteins,  fats, and polymeric  carbohydrates  as a result  of the Maillard  
reaction  in the crust.  The fat content  of the food increases  owing  to oil absorption  and 
entrainment.  So, these  are the various  effects  which  affect  the food quality  of the food.   
There is the food ingredient  that influences  the f rying  in developing  flavor  in the fried 
food.  How  is it there?  The various  ingredients  like sugar,  amino  acids,  sulfur  compound s, 
lipids , and phenol ics are there.  The interaction  results  like the sugar  pyrolysis, 
caramelization  of the sugar,  formulation  of the Maillard  product , and their decomposition  
16 
 product are responsible  for both desirable  and as well as undesirable  flavors  developed  
during  frying.  
Then  changes in amino  acids  like direct  pyrolysis,  deamination  interaction  with the 
volatile,  aldehydes,  and formation  of Maillard  product  because  these  amin o acids  also are 
associated  with the sugar  and Maillard  products  and extricate  degradation  etcetera  these  
are the causes  during  frying.  Then  pyrolysis and oxidation  and pyrolysis interaction  with 
aldehydes  of the sulfur  compounds.  Similarly , oxidation  and cleavage  interaction  with 
amines ; interaction  with sulfur  compounds  of the lipids ; phenolics  are oxidation  of 
pyrolysis of phenolics.  These  are the various  ingredients  responsible  for the changes  in 
the product  quality.  
 
So, finally,  I would like to summa rize this lecture  by saying  that the quality  of both the 
frying  oil and food get changed  during  frying.  Some  volatile  and non-volatile  compounds  
are produced  in oil during  frying.  Acrylamide,  a carcinogenic  compound  is produced  
during  frying  by the Maillar d reaction . Thermal  stability  is determined  by the onset  
temperature  and can be defined  as the temperature  by which  the oil starts  to decompose.  
So, oil frying,  ultrasound -assisted  frying,  vacuum  frying , etc. are different  frying  
technolog ies. Combined  frying technolog ies, several  types of pre-treatments , and post-
treatments  always  result  in the reduction  of oil content  in the final fried  food.  
But one thing  is important , this fried  product , that is, if the frying  operation  is done  in the 
absence  of oxygen  like vacuum  frying , etc., then it will definitely  result  because  the 
effect  of temperature  as well as the effect  of air which  causes  the oxidation  of the product  
and results  into the formation  of various  compounds  and many  of these  compounds  might  
be toxic  sometimes.  So, there can be chances , if this oil intake /uptake  of oil and residue  
oil content  in the fried  food etcetera.  All those  things  can be properly  controlled  if the 
frying  operation  is done  in a proper  manner.  So, that is important , and one more  care 
should  be taken  is the conditions  of the frying  technology , it should  be such that at least 
minimum  if we are able to control  or check  the transformation  that is the formation  of 
trans  fatty acid in the fried food as well as acrylamide.  These  two are the major  as the 
acrylamide  content  and the conversion  of cis to trans  fatty acid during  frying  operations.  
17 
  
So, the frying  process  technology  or equipment , etc. is selected  in such a way that these  
two occurrences  are minimized.  So, it will be nothing  better , otherwise , it gives  a very 
good  paste  and from  a color  point  of view , the fried  product  appears  much  better.   
 
So, these  are the references  that are used in preparing  this lecture.   
 
Thank  you very much  for your patience  here.  Thank  you. 
