Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 10 : Specialty Oils and Fats Products  
Lecture 46 : Tree Nut Oils  
 
Hello everyone, namaskar.  No w, we are entering module 10 of this course and the 46th  
lectures of this module will  be devoted to specialty oils  and Fat Products. In this lecture, 
we will in the next half an hour we will talk about tree -nut oils .  So, we will cover what 
are the major tree-nut oils , what is the composition properties , and health value of tree-
nut oils , the processing , and extraction of oils from tree -nut, stability and quality 
concerns , allergenicity, allergens found in tree -nut oils,  and packaging and storage 
condition s.  
 
 So, you see the major tree-nut oils  include Almond oil, Brazi l nut oil,  Cashew nut oil, 
Hazel nut, Macadamia, Pecan, Pin e nut, Pistachio nuts , and Walnut  oils.  So, these are the 
major tree nu ts and they con tain good quality oils. T hey are excellent sources of energy 
protein and natural bio -octaves, they are appreciated  in food applications because of their 
flavors  and they are generally more expensive than  other gourmet oils .  So, these are the 
major sources , they are used for making specialty oils, high-quality  oils, which have 
various applications in food, pharma , and others  because of their composition .  
 
 
So, the oil content of the major tree nuts is shown in the table. M ajor nuts here you see 
almonds  which  contain around 41 to 60 percent oil, b razil nut contains 61 to 69 percent, 
cashew  nut contains around  40 to 49 percent  oil, hazel nut 49 to 67 percent, m acadamia 
nut contains around 59 to as  high as 78 percent  oil.  Similarly, p ecan nut contains 58 to 
74 percent, Pine nut around 60 to 70 perce nt, Pistachio  nuts about 45 to 60 percent and 
Walnut contains 60 to 65 percent  of oil .  So, you can see all these nuts contain  
considerably good amounts , even more than 50 percent . Half of their  contents are good 
quality oils. 
 
Then lipid class distributi on that is the relative percentage of different fat compounds in 
the selective nuts is shown in the table. Y ou can see  that almonds have  about 98 percent 
Triacylglycerols , contain  around 0.53 percent Sphingolipids  and other content like sterols 
0.22 %, and the remaining content is much less. Similarly, Braz il nut  has 96 percent 
triacylglycerol , hazelnut 98 percent.  So, you can see from the data all these nuts contain 
around 96, 97 , or up to 98  percent of the triacylglycerols and they are normally low in 
these other contents . 
 
The composition of  major free fatty acids which are found in these nuts includes as you 
see 18: 1 is the oleic acid, it contained  in almost all nuts. I n the almond , it is around 69 
percent, Braz il nut 29, cashew 57, hazelnut 7 9, macada mia 65 and 58 in pistachio  and in 
walnut 21 percent.  Similarly 18: 2, that is omega 6 and it is present at about  42 percent in 
Braz il nuts, 57 percent  in walnuts,  44 percent in pine nuts , and in others also it is in good 
quantity.  Then, the iodine value if  you see that almond oil has an iodine value of 97 
whereas, walnut oil has 148.  The pine nut oil also has an iodine value.  So, this 
comparatively depends upon the saturation fatty acid unsaturated fatty acid that is the 
calculated iodine value is there. They also contain that is 16 there is 16:0 palmitic acid 
like 6 percent and 13 percent, a considerable amount of this palmitic acid is also present.  
 
Then let us talk about the processing of tree nuts  for oil extraction . This involves 4 major  
operations t hat is the tree nuts after they are obtained from the plants, need to be  cleaned 
properly, their outer covering is removed by selling operations and  then that is the 
deselled nuts are subjected to mechanical expression or solvent extraction  for the 
extract ion of or recovery of the oil.  
 
 So, depending upon the nut that is the cleaning operation normally involve s cleaning  
equipment that combines gravity and air separation by screens and fans based on the size 
and density . The nuts are first shifted by a sc reen to remove any unwanted material then 
through  a second  screen with a smaller mesh size . The last clearing step is the air blowing  
which separates the lighter particles.  Finally , these nuts are dried using circulated air or 
sometimes  they can be roaste d at  195 degrees  Celsius for 10 to 20 minutes . And this 
drying or roasting that is the condition it is used to facilitate the further peeling or 
removal of the outer covering after the cleaning  
 
Then there is the selling which is  the removal of the outer  cover . It is t raditionally done 
by hand cracking, but the universal centrifugal s heller is simple in design and it is used  
for continuous processing flow.  Unshelled nuts are fed through a hopper where that is 
you can see that they are projected  by high-speed  rotary paddles against the solid 
chamber of the machine and then speed can be adjusted  depending upon the nut . Then  
apply the right amount of force to crack open the shell without damaging the  kernel.  So, 
that is basically where  it is done by using t his machine the shell is broken that is kernel  is 
broken without damaging the internal material and then these nuts shells are separated by  
the aspirator or in a vacuum that is by vacuum flying or by any suitable methods these  
shells are blown and the unda maged kernels are recovered . These kernels are a source  of 
the oil , they are further sent for the process.   
 
Now these cleaned and deshe lled kernels are subjected  to mechanical expression or 
solvent extraction.  In the mechanical expression normally we h ave details we have 
discussed in the earlier classes  principles of all these operations.  So, here I will just tell 
specific things  which are for these specific nuts.  So, that is by applying gentle pressure at 
temperatures  not above 30 to 40 degrees Celsiu s that is, there is a low yield of oil around 
60 to 80 percent  and it is an expensive process.  These  oils have a nutty flavor and fresh 
taste and they are used for salad making  etcetera.  Then expeller or screw presser,  these 
horizontally operated hydraul ic presses  with the capability of continuous production . 
Metal barrel housing screws with larger pitch diameters are used for feeding and 
conveying.  Oil is expressed and the cake is discharged at the outlet. Temperature around 
60 – 100 °C.  Provides a highe r yield (80 – 90%), but lower oil quality.  The water  cooling 
system attached maintains below 50 °C.  
 
The solvent extraction method also can be used for the extraction  of tree nut  oils. More 
cost-efficient and the extraction is nearly  100 % complete.  Flaki ng machines  or 
expanders are employed to enhance the rate of extraction.  Nut oils are refined by steps 
including neutralization, bleaching, degumming, and deodorization.  Then s upercritical 
CO2 extraction can also be used. Here t riacylglycerols and bioactiv e are selectively 
extracted by varying the pressure and temperature. CO2 is operating at a pressure of 30 
MPa. SCF -extracted oils have similar acylglycerol and sterol profiles compared with 
hexane -extracted counterparts but are lower in yield and phosphati des. In the new solvent 
extraction method pressurized propane is used as a solvent for lipid extraction.  The 
pressure required to liquefy propane is around 42.5 bar . 
 
The c haracteristic properties of nut oils are as follows. The tree-nut oils are generall y low 
in saturated fat and high in mono - and polyunsaturated fats.  MUFAs outweigh PUFAs in 
most tree -nut oils with the predominated MUFA and PUFA being oleic acid (ω -9) and 
linoleic acid (ω -6). MUFA  PUFA ratio is very important as far as the healthy aspects 
health aspects of the  oil are concerned . The MUFA/PUFA ratio is  greatest in macadamia 
nut oil while the lowest is walnut oil.  Pine nut, pecan, and walnut oils are the only tree -
nut oils containing α -linolenic acid (ω -3). γ-tocopherol is the predominant form of 
tocopherol in most tree -nut oils except  for almonds and ha zelnuts, which are high in α -
tocopherol.  β- and δ -Tocopherols are found only in trace amounts in tree -nut oils.  Tree-
nut oils have a cardio -favorable lipid  profile and a rich quantity of phytosterols.  
 
So, now let us see specific characteristics  and extra ction of specific oils. For walnut oil as 
you can see here , normally cold press is used . Green walnuts are taken then passed 
through the walnut deh uller machines , from where the dehul led walnut is passed through  
walnut s heller machine, that is they shell  and the shells are  blown . The deshelled  walnut 
obtained is subjecte d to cold pressing by a simple cold press  machine. T he oil extracted is 
filtered and you get cold pressed filtered walnut oil.  And its property that is it has a 
specific gravity at 15 degre e Celsius about 0.918 , refractive  index at 25 degree Celsius is 
1.4, acid value is 0.7 milligram KOH  per gram, saponification  value is 19, iodine value 
is 67, it has a Pol lenske  value of 0.2 and saponifiable matter 0.8  g/100g  and  
saponification value i s - 18 degree Celsius. The fatty acid composition of walnut oil 
varies greatly viz. linoleic (49.7 –72%), oleic (12.7 –34%), and  linolenic acid (9 –25%), 
which a re derived from stearic acids (1.4–2.5%) and the saturated palmitic                          
(5.24–8.2%) . 
 
And then supercritical fluid extraction, ultrasonic -assisted  extraction , and microwave -
assisted extraction also have  been tried by researchers who have worked for the 
extraction  of walnut oil , because these emerging novel technologies where ther e much 
not much temperature  is involved are always considered to be a better process for the 
extraction of  this high-quality  super specialty  oils like nut oil, fruit oil, o live oil etcetera.  
So, this is  simple , the material is the walnut kernels, they are  made into  powder or into 
paste and then subjected  to the supercritical extraction chamber where supercritical 
carbon dioxide is part  and oil is extracted . Similarly in microwave -assisted  extraction , 
you see here , inside the microwave  oven walnut powder is  kept and given micro wave  
treatment and then it goes  to the solvent extraction.  
 
Then almond oil , you see harvesting the fruit, fruit washing , manual peeling of the fruit 
pulp/  mesocarp, sun drying, dehusking , and then winnowing/ sorting , drying of seeds i n 
the sun, and then moisture content determination for moisture adjusting, after that size 
reduction and we get the almond seed of a particular moisture content . These  seeds are 
conditioned to get a better recovery of the oil . Then it is either extracted b y solvent  
extraction or by expression , and the o il and the oil cake or residue are obtained . So, these 
are the treatments  given to the almond oil and then using a standard process  the oil is 
extracted.  Almond oil c omprises sizeable proportions of essentia l fatty acids. Almond oil 
is rich in beta -zoosterol, squalene , and α-tocopherol. The oil has anti-inflammatory, 
immunity -boosting , and anti -hepatotoxicity effects. I ts appearance is pa le yellow or clear 
oily liquid and  it is odorless . Its refractive index at 20 degrees  Celsius is 1.47 to 1.473.  
Its free fatty acids  as percent oleic acid are normally less than or equal to 1 , the peroxide  
value is less than 10 , the iodine value is in the range of 95 to 102, and its saponification 
value  is 188 to 196.  So, it  these are the properties and characteristics of the almond oil.  
 
 Now let us talk about cashew nut  oil as it is another very important nut oil.  So, basically , 
cashews  are boiled and dried at around 105 to 115 degrees Celsius for 15 to 25 minutes 
of coo king time. T hen it is roasted and kept under humid conditions that are  in a humidity  
environment of 60 to 75 percent for 5 to 8 hours.  Then it is undressed and finally, the 
cashew  is toaste d.  Toasting is done at around 80 to 100 degrees  Celsius for 5 to 8  hours 
and then finally , it is subjected to pressing that is where 4 to 10 mega Pascal pressure per 
minute is  used, and a final pressure of about 40 to 60 mega Pascal per 1 to 3 minute 
might be required  to get t he better recovery of the oil. Then  this oil is filtered and 
deoxygenated using vacuum filtration and here the pressure is less than 15 kilo Pascal.  
So, the cashew by this pressing gives an oil yield of about  43.7 percent and there is a 
cashew nut slag.  Cashew oil refers to an edible oil obtained fr om tropical cashew nuts.  
Rich in copper, magnesium, vitamin E, manganese, potassium, carbohydrates, healthy 
fats, and fibers. Cashew oil also exhibits antioxidant , anti-inflammatory , and anti -aging 
properties.  Oleic acid accounts for 63.0 %.  And linoleic a cid accounts for                                   
16.8 %.  
 
Hazelnut  oil is obtained through a multi -stage physical or chemical process.  The p hysical 
process  is beneficial due to high FFA. This helps attain the desired qualities like taste, 
texture , and c olor after the elim ination of unwanted substances. H azelnut oil refining 
includes degumming, contin uous bleaching, winterization, deacidification and 
deodorization finally  refined oil is obtained. You can see , that the  crude oil is heated , then 
acid mixed , then degummed , then neutralization,  and finally dried .  The standard fatty 
acid composition in crude oil is, you can see  C 18 :1 is around 81 percent, linoleic acid is 
C 18:2 is around 11 percent .  Linolenic acid is comparatively in less amount and palmiti c 
acid is around 5.9 percent or so given here, but the major acid is the oleic acid here in 
hazelnut oils.  
 
Then pine nut oil again there is des helled  pine nuts , are roasted for 5 to 10 minutes  at 100 
degrees  Celsius to 220 degrees  Celsius.  Then  the roasted pine nuts are subjected to 
colloid milling  at 50 degrees  Celsius to 90 degrees  Celsius for 5 to 20 minutes and t hen 
centrifugation is done at 15,800 -gram  force for 20 to 35 degrees Celsius, where it is 
separated  into oil and sludge components.  The oils obtained are filtered to get pine nut 
oil. The fatty acids contained in pine nuts are mainly unsaturated fatty acids such as oleic, 
linoleic, and linoleic acids, which act as a nourishing tonic . See that palmitic acid is 4.4 
percent, linoleic acid is aro und 43.9 or 44 percent pinolenic  acid is 14.2 percent and even 
oleic acid is around 29 percent.  
 
As the tree nuts oil  have varying  amount of unsaturated fatty acid, this will cause 
instability , but  as it contains various antioxidant it gives oxidative st ability also.  The 
oxidative stability and antioxidant value of selected tree nut  oils are given in this table 
induction time hours for hazelnut is 52 hours and then almond oil is 21.8 hours, pea nut 
oil is 14. 6 hours and walnut oil  is 4.7 hours,  it has com paratively less stability , less stable 
to oxidation and then the hazelnut oil it has a maximum stable because of this 
unsaturation value of all these oils.  But at the same time , you see that the total 
tocopherols ppm in hazelnuts  is more.  So, because the  antioxidant content is more total 
polyphenol also is around 80 µg GAE/g of oil . Then pistachio  nut oil has an induction 
time of 44.4 hours,  total tocopherol is 530  ppm,  total polyphenol  is 700 µg GAE/g of oil , 
and EC50 value is 378  g oil/g of DPPH . Simila rly, pine nut oil also has an EC50 value of  
1396  g oil/g of DPPH  and its total polyphenol content is 80 mu µg GAE/g of oil . The 
stability of the oil is because of the degree of unsaturation  and available antioxidant 
components. Although unsaturation leads  to instability, antioxidants are polyphenolic 
compounds and they provide stability against oxidation. Mechanically pressed tree nut 
oils are unrefined and have the greatest antioxidant level.  Thermal oxidative stability                                         
SFE oil < Pressed oil< SE oils . Tocopherols lost during the refining are restored by 
adding back synthetic  tocopherols.   
 
As far as the effect of heat on the stability of the tree nut oils  is concerned roasting 
increases  the oxidation stability by ina ctivating pro -oxidative enzymes and reducing 
water activity. Tree -nut oils are rich in PUFA and thus are quite susceptible to oxidation.  
Lower total tocopherol content in roasted tree -nut oils shows  greater retention of 
tocopherols during prolonged storage  compared to unroasted counterparts. Heat treatment 
during roasting can facilitate the Maillard reaction between free  amino residues and 
reactive carbonyls.  So, if you see that oxidative stability that is 72 hours incubation 
period , we find that  it decreas es in the order of p ecan oil , pistachio oil , brazil nut oil , 
almond oil , hazelnut oils , pine nut oil , and w alnut oils . 
 
 The health benefits of tree nut oils are due to the r eductions in serum total and low -
density lipoprotein (LDL) -cholesterol. They supp ress appetite, enhance  satiety, and limit  
the consumption of foods.  Reduce the glycemic impact of carbohydrate -rich foods.  
Associated negatively with stroke, dementia,  cardiovascular disease,  and gallstones.  
Reduce blood pressure and reduce the levels of v ery low-density  lipoprotein (VLDL) -
triglycerides and LDL -cholesterol.  Omega -3 ALA (alpha -linolenic acid) and omega -6 
LA(linolenic acid), are essential for healthy skin.  They are also shown to r educe 
inflammation.   
 
The edible and non -edible applications o f tree nut oils are, in  edible uses , it can be  used 
for salad oils, cooking oils, and baking oils, but in cooking oils , because these are very 
costly and so, it can be sometimes  used for low-temperature  cooking it may give  a better 
flavor to the product, b ut normally for salad oil it is good.  Then in cosmetics , it is used 
for soap manufacturing , in shampoos and  in hair conditioning , and even in skin lotions it 
can be used for their  skin-beneficial property.  In pharmaceuticals,  it is used as lubricants, 
emollients,  and antioxidants.  
 
Although they are very good quality oil some of the tree nuts  are reported to have  
allergenicity , that is the Ige-mediated (type I) hypersensitivity triggered by residual 
oligopeptides and proteins in tree nut oils.  The roasti ng process can cause protein 
denaturation and decrease allergens.  Tree nut allergens located in storage proteins are 
heat-stable  and unlikely to be affected by roasting. No  allergens form  during roasting as a 
result of conformational change in protein stru cture.  Refining also significantly lowers 
the level of residual protein in the oils.  
 
In this table , the data of major nuts and major allergens found in  them are provided. In 
almonds, there is 2 S albumin, seed allergic protein  1, accession, conglutin, et c. The 
common allergens reported in brazil nuts are 2 S albumin, 11 S globulin -like protein, in 
cashewnut  7 S globulin, 11 S globulin -like protein,  2 S albumin, in hazelnut it is PR -10 
Bet V  1 homologous, profilin , lipid-transfer protein,  11 S globulin -like protein.  In 
macadamia nuts allergy  is established but allergens are not well characterized so far . In 
pecan nut that is putative allergen 11, i n hazelnut is PR 10, profiling,  11 S globulin -like 
protein, and in walnut 2 S albumin, vicilin -like protein,  11 S globulin -like protein . etc. 
So, these are some of the reported allergens found in the nuts.   
 
Then in the packaging of the tree nut  oil like any oil that is , can use a liquid nitrogen 
dosing  system because liquid nitrogen replaces the head space ox ygen and extends the 
shelf  life, it addresses the rancidity.  It preserves the freshness and taste of the products , 
there is no deformation of the filled container.  There  is a possible reduction of weight 
that is 2 to 3 grams  for 1 liter PET packet and co nsistent pressure from  the container 
leading to easy filling .  Then aseptic packaging can be used here to take advantage of 
high temperatures  and increase  the shelf life of products at a normal temperature and 
even  in package sterilization is possible in a septic packaging.  Normally  form, fill, and 
seal machines are used that is packaging materials are sterilized and then oil is packed.  
Then opaque  PET, there is 2 litre and 5 litre  glossy pet  packs are used . It has an ISBM 
surface advantage. They give a distinct package appeal and there is an enhanced UV 
resistance . The mechanically pressed tree nut  oils are sometimes directly  bottled  after just 
light filtration or clarification.  
 
For storage of tree nut oils, temperatures ranging from 4 to 15 °C, kernel moisture content 
around 2.5%, RH about 40 – 60 %, oxygen concentration less than 2.5 %.  Dark 
conditions are ideal for most tree -nuts oi ls storage.  Walnut oil is usually stored in 
transparent containers and exposed to fluorescent light at ambient temperature. The shelf 
life for walnut oil without the addition of antioxidants under such conditions is rather 
short (i.e. about 2 months).    
 
 So, with this I will summarize this course that tree nut oils are appreciated in food 
applications because of their flavours, and are generally more expensive than others.  
Tree-nut oils are su ggested to have health -promoting effects.  Cold -pressing is conducted 
by applying gentle pressure producing a low yield of oil which is usually expensive but 
superior in quality.  Tree-nut oils obtained by SFE have lower thermal oxidative stability 
than pres sed- and solvent -extracted oils.  The allergenicity of tree nut oils can be greatly 
influenced by the way  they are produced.  
  
So, these are the references that were used to make this lecture with this.  Thank you very 
much for your patience here.  Thank you.  
