1 
 Food Oils and Fats:  Chemistry  & Technology  
Professor  H N Mishra  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Module  9: Cooking  & Frying  Oils 
Lecture  41: Characteristics  and Specifications  
 
Hello  everyone.  Namaskar.  Now,  we are entering  in the 9th module  of the course.  The 
five lecture s of this module  will be devoted  to Cooking  and Frying  Oils. In today's  
lecture,  that is lecture  41, we will talk about  the characteristics  and specifications  of 
cooking  and frying  oils.  
 
The concept  which  I will discuss  today  is what  are the basic  characteristics,  properties , 
and specifications  of cooking  and frying  oils. What  are the criteria  for the selection  of oil 
for cooking  or frying  purposes?  Physical  and chemical  changes  that take place  in oil 
during  heating  and particularly  during  cooking  or frying  processes.  And then finally,  we 
will also discuss  something  on the thermal  stability  of oils.  
2 
  
Cooking  oil refers  to any type of edible  oil or fat that is used in cooking  purposes , 
including  sautéing,  baking,  roasting,  stir-frying,  and deep -frying.  It is derived  from  
various  plant  or animal  sources  and is primarily  used to enhance  the flavor,  texture , and 
cooking  process  for different  dishes.   
In fact, the food materials  used are processed  using  different  methods  like cooking , 
etcetera , and having  different  oils and fats, they give different  taste,  different  texture,  
different  flavors.  So, for the cooking  oil, what  specific  characteristics  should  be there  
which  is referred  to as cooking  oil? It is an edible  oil, and sources  of the essential  fatty 
acids which  is procured  from  plant  and animal  sources  because  you know  these  oils are 
basically  triglyceride.  We have  studied  earlier  the detailed  composition.  This is liquid  at 
room  temperature . This oil, it contains  saturated  fats which  are solid  at room  temperature  
and there  are some  plant  oils, plant  fats like coconut  oil, palm  oil, which  have  more  
amount  of saturated  fat, and that’s why on cooling  down  or even  at room  temperature  
they solidify.  High  consumption  of saturated  fat increases  blood  LDL  levels  leading  to 
cardiovascular  diseases  etc. 
 
So, as I told you, cooking  oils can be obtained  from  both the plant  sources  as well as 
animal  sources.  From the plant  sources , the commonly  used cooking  oils are olive  oil, 
palm  oil, soybean  oil, canola  oil i.e. rapeseed  oil, corn oil, palm  oil, palm  kernel  oil, then 
3 
 peanut  oil, coconut  oil, and other  vegetable  oil. Then , from  animal  sources  are the butter  
oil or lard. Butter or lard are used for cooking  that is obtained  from  animal  sources.  Then  
cooking  oil contains  saturated  fats that is those  cooking  oil from  the plant  sources  which  
have  more  amount  of saturated  fat are coconut  oil, palm  oil, and palm  kernel  oil.  
 
The frying  oil especially  refers  to the oil that are suitable  for deep -frying  or shallow -
frying , where  food is immersed  or partially  immersed  in hot oil. These  oils need  to have  a 
high smoke  point , which  is the temperature  at which  the oil starts  to smoke  and break  
down.  Oils with a high smoke  point  can withstand  the high temperature  involved  in 
frying  without  deteriorating  in quality  or without  producing  smoke.  So, a good  frying  oil 
must  be able to withstand  being  heated  to a range  of around  190 to 200 degree  Celsius  
without  starting  to give a smoke.  The examples  of such oil include  sunflower  oil, soybean  
oil, cottonseed  oil, rice brown  oil, etcetera.   
 
So, what  are the criteria , how do we go for selecting  oil for cooking  or frying  purposes  
and factors  to decide  the right  kind of oil for cooking.  Let us take one by one the number  
one factor  is the fat content.  As you know  that cooking  oils are made  up of saturated  fatty 
acids,  polyunsaturated  fatty acids , and monounsaturated  fatty acids.  Saturated  fats are 
highly  stable  that resist  oxidation  and aid in digestion.  However,  they are less healthy  
than the polyunsaturated  fats and monounsaturated  fats. So, both polyunsaturated  and 
4 
 monounsaturated  fats help in preventing  diseases  like high cholesterol  and heart attack.  
So, a balance  needs  to be created  between  these  fats. So, while  selecting  the oil, that is 
the best condition  that is the MUFA -PUFA  ratio and it have  some  antioxidants  and there  
is a MUFA -PUFA  even  saturated  fats, solid  fats all these  things  should  be in the proper  
proportion  that should  be one criterion  as a fat content.   
 
The other  criteria  is the smoke  point.  Smoke  point  is the temperature  at which  the oil 
starts  to burn and degrade  that is when  you heat the oil that is there will be a  time, oil will 
go on, its temperature  will rise, and a point  will come  where the surface  of the oil will 
catch  fire and that is a smoke  point.  You cannot  heat the oil beyond  that; rather  oil will 
catch  fire and it will burn any smoke.  So, that is the highest  point  up to which  the oil can 
be heated.  So, obviously,  the smoke  point  an oil if you want  to fry them  at a product  at 
200 degree  Celsius ; you have  to select  an oil whose smoke  point  is more  than 200 degree  
Celsius.  So, higher  the smoke  point  better  is the suitability  of oil for frying  foods.   
Then  ideal  omega  ratio, that is, omega -6 and omeg a-3 ratio should  be ideal  for good  
health  and as recommended  by regulatory  agencies . Cooking  oil is a good  source  of 
omega -3 fatty acids  for vegetarian  people.  So, also like the MUFA to PUFA  ratio, 
similarly , omega  3 to omega  6 ratio should  be in a proper  ratio. There  are regulatory  
agencies  for heart -healthy  oils etcetera . It should  be in the proper  range  that should  be 
maintained.   
Then  vitamin  A, D, and E content . Cooking  oil is enriched  with vitamins , which  are an 
essential  part of our diet. Vitamin  A helps  in dealing  with stress  and lifestyle  changes,  
vitamin  D is vital for immunity , and vitamin  E reduces  damage  to the body.  So, it is 
always  and these  are the natural  plant  oils, they are good  sources  of vitamins  A, D, and E. 
So, their content  also should  be ensured  that it is good.   
Then  fat quality , you see the type of fat, and type of oil. You take the type of fats or oils  
which  are high in monounsaturated  fatty acids.  The oils which  are high in 
monounsaturated  fatty acids  are olive  oil, canola  oil, avocado  oil, high oleic sun flower  
oil, and peanut  oil. Whereas,  the oils high in polyunsaturated  fatty acids  include  soybean  
5 
 oil, walnut  oil, sunflower  oil, safflower  oil, grapeseed  oil, cottonseed  oil, corn oil, 
flaxseed  oil, canola  oil, and so on.  
 
Oils which  are high in saturated  fats include  coconut  oil, palm  kernel  oil, and oils which  
are high in trans -fat, they are mainly  vegetable  shortening  that is which  are given  
excessive  heat treatment  during  its manufacture.   
 
The temperature , if you look, that is smoke  point  on the basis  of temperature , the oils can 
be those  which  are low smoke  point,  medium  smoke  point , and high smoke  point.  Low 
smoke  point , the oils can be used for salad  dressing,  drizzling , etcetera  and the examples  
of such oils are coconut  oil, virgin , and extra  virgin  olive  oils. Then , those  having  
medium  smoke  point , they can be used for sauces,  salad  dressing , etcetera  and the 
examples  of such oils are olive  oil, grapeseed  oil, refined  walnut  oil, etcetera.  Then , high 
smoke  point  oils, they can be used for saute,  roasting  process,  baking  process,  stir-fry, or 
deep  fry, etc. and the oils which  come s in this category  are canola  oil, peanut  oil, in 
general  plant  vegetable  oil, soybean  oil, corn oil, refined  avocado  oil, and so on.  
Flavor  is another  important  criteria . If the flavor  of the oil is not important  in the dish, 
then the oil which  is light in flavor  can be used such as vegetable , corn, or canola  oil. If 
the flavor  of the oil is necessary , then one should  opt for olive  or peanut  oil because  this 
6 
 olive  oil i.e. fresh  natural  value  oils are known  for its flavor . Peanut  oil known  for its 
flavor.   
 
An important  quality  parameter  of major  cooking  oil, you can see that, acid value,  
peroxide  value,  iodine  value,  viscosity , and saponification  value.  So, for soybean  oil, acid 
value  is normally  1.15,  peroxide  value  10, iodine  value  130 to 139 gram  per 100 gram,  
viscosity  that is mPa second  at 40 degree  Celsius  is 33, and saponification  value  should  
be 195.  
Similarly , for sunflower,  mustard,  palm , and olive  oil, there  is acid value  in the range  of 
1.21 to 6.6 that olive  oil has a very high acid value  as high as 6.6, palm  oil also contains  
considerably  high acid value  like 1.75. Then , peroxide  value  of course,  sunflower  oil 6.6, 
soybean  10, mustard  20, that in palm  oil 3.18, and olive  oil 10 milliequivalent  meq per 
kg. The iodine  value , you see that the soybean,  sunflower , and mustard , they have  
considerably  higher  iodine  value  like 139, 134 and 125 grams  per 100 grams , 
respectively.  The palm  oil contains  45 and olive  oil contains  94 gram  of iodine  value  per 
100 grams . 
So, that indicates  which  one is having  more  saturated  fatty acids, which  one is having  
more  unsaturated  fatty acids. Similarly , viscosity , that is olive  oil has a more  viscosity , 
mustard  oil also has comparatively  more  viscosity , palm  oil is less viscous . This and the 
saponification  value , you see that palm  oil has a 202, olive  oil 176, and other  sunflower  
oil, soybean oil 195, 193, and mustard  oil has a saponification  value  of 184. So, these  are 
the important  quality  parameters  of major  cooking  oils.  
So, now let’s discuss  what  are the various  changes , particularly  chemical  changes  
commonly  observed  during  oil cooking  and frying  processes , that is, when  oils are heated  
depending  upon  subject  to the conditions  of heating  whether  heating  under  vacuum,  
heating  under  oxygen , and heat is more  heat or less. These  all will or even  during  frying  
operations  when  the material  is put some  moisture  also, is there ; heating  in the presence  
of moisture , in the absence  of moisture . All these  will influence  the various  quality  
changes  or various  reactions  which  will take place  in the triglyceride  in the oil. 
7 
  
So, the major  reactions  are the oxidation , and decomposition  of the oil. Release  of 
moisture , high temperature , and exposure  to atmospheric  oxygen  during  frying  of fats 
favors  the oxidation  of the frying  medium  that is oil. As food enters  the oil, oxygen  is 
introduced  into the oil leading  to oxidative  changes.  After  an initial  induction  period , the 
peroxide  content  of the food begins  to increase  and finally,  it decreases.  Reactions  during  
autooxidation  include  degradation  reactions  resulting  in the formation  of various  volatile  
compounds.  Auto  oxidation  of unsaturated  fatty acids  leads  to the formation  of 
conjugated  hydroperoxide  and peroxides  which  decompose  to form  volatile  aldehydes,  
ketones,  acids,  alcohols , and hydrocarbon.  So, details  of all these  various  reactions  we 
had already  discussed  in earlier  lectures  where  we discussed  about  autooxidation  process.  
So, similar  reactions  here also are encouraged  if the temperature  is more  during  the 
heating  process.   
 
The next is thermal  oxidation , that is presence  of thermal  oxidation  process  also occurs  
when  the oil is heated  at a high temperature  in the presence  of oxygen.  This thermal  
oxidation  results  in formation  of the free fatty acid due to cleavage  and oxidation  of the 
double  bonds.  There  is a formation  of hydroperoxides  which  may undergo  fission  to form  
alcohol , aldehydes , and acids , which  contribute  to the darkening  of the oil or frying  
medium  as well as the flavor  changes  in the product  and in the flavor  medium  may take 
place.   
8 
 There  is a dehydration  to form  ketones . There is a formation  of free radicals  followed  by 
their combination  to form  dimers,  trimers,  epoxides,  alcohols , and hydrocarbons  and all 
of which  contribute  to an increase  in the viscosity  of the oil. During  deep  fat frying,  
thermal  and oxidative  decomposition  of oil produces  volatile  and non-volatile  
compounds.   
 
And the oxidation  reactions  here, you see is shown  in this process  and it is similar  to that 
the autooxidation  process.  So, it is also initiated  by thermal  heat that decomposition,  the 
initiation,  propagation , and termination  of the thermal  oxidation  of the oil. Then  
secondary  oxidation  products , when  the oil is heated  more  than at a frying  period,  fried  at 
more  than 100 degree  Celsius  temperature,  the aldehyde,  alcohols,  and ketones , etc. are 
the secondary  oxidation  products.  
So, these  initiation,  propagation , and finally  termination  reactions  with various  carbonyl  
compounds  are formed.  So, these  details  of these  reactions  we had studied  in earlier  
classes.  Similar  phenomena  takes  place  here also, which  is catalyzed  by heat that we call 
thermal  oxidation.   
 
Then  the various  decomposition  products  in the oxidation,  air oxidation,  thermal  
oxidation,  and moisture  related,  the various  decomposition  products  which  are formed.  
Number  one they are various  volatiles  and the non-volatile  compounds.  Volatiles  are 
9 
 those , which  are most  of them  are removed  by steam  generated  during  frying , and they 
contribute  to the flavor  of the deep -fried  products.  For example,  unsaturated  lactones  etc. 
Non-volatile  compounds  are formed  largely  due to thermal  oxidation  and polymerization  
of unsaturated  fatty acids  present  in frying  medium.  These  products  include  polymeric  
triglycerides,  cyclic  acids,  fatty acids , and other  oxidative  products.  The accumulation  of 
these  products  is responsible  for changes  such as an increase  in the free fatty acid content,  
an increase  in the carbonyl  value,  OH content , and saponification  value , and a decrease  in 
the unsaturation  with a resultant  decrease  in the iodine  value  etc. are the changes  in the 
oil. Such  changes  are also accompanied  by increase  in viscosity  and refractive  index  of 
the oil.  
 
Another  very important  and common  reaction  during  the frying  of the oil, particularly  
deep  frying  of the oil, is the polymerization  reaction.  The oxidation  and thermal  alteration  
products  undergo  polymerization , forming  gums  and other  various  residues.  Reactions  
between  fatty acids  of the same  or different  triglycerides  form  cyclic  and non-cyclic  
dimers,  other  polymeric  compounds  involving  carbon -carbon  linkages , and oxygen  
bonding.  Thermal  polymerization  of unsaturated  fatty acids  also yields  cyclic  monomers,  
dimers,  trimers , and higher  polymers.  
The rate of polymerization  increases  with an increase  in the unsaturation  of the 
triglyceride  and frying  time.  This results  on changes  in the molecular  weight,  viscosity,  
heat transfer  rate, forming,  darkening  of color , and gum accumulation.  That is the reason  
why the frying  remains  of the oil, it should  not be reused.  That is for frying  purposes  only 
should  desired  quantity  of oil should  be used.  If you re-heat oil, various  polymers  are 
formed  and then polymers  will give the dark color.  The food product  which  is heated  in 
the oil having  dark color  compound,  polymer  compound,  it has more  intake  of the oils, 
and even  the product  surface  becomes  brown.  It will have  a cracked  surface.  More  
importantly  that these  toxicity  or carcinogenicity  of these  polymers,  one cannot  say that is 
the dangers  of carcinogenicity  cannot  be completely  overruled . These  polymeric  
compounds  may be toxic  at a time.  
10 
 Polymerization  also causes  increased  absorption  of fat by food, making  it unpalatable  and 
greasy. More  heat absorption  will take place.  Various  changes  are there.  We should  not 
use re-heat oil. That is one major  problem  in the street  food etc. Street  vendors , when  
they take the oil, then go on heating  it. There  is a polymer  oil, not much  this is a 
challenging  area that still remains.  That is how to remove  these  polymers  from  these  oils 
and reuse  of this oil for better  products.  Of course,  there  are some  molecular  filters  or 
membrane  filtration , etc. But these  technologies  are little expensive.   
 
The polymerization  reactions  etc. As I told you that polymerization  reactions  in frying  
oil, there  is desired  saturated  oil converted  to the cyclic  dimers and non-cyclic  dimers  etc. 
and which  give the various  changes  that we discussed  in the earlier  slide.  And these  
monomers  may be even  toxic.   
 
Other change  that may take also is provided  because  when  you are putting  the food or it 
has some  moisture  content,  then moisture  from  the food,  the moisture  is liberated  and 
released  into the oil. And then, the heating  is continuously  released  from  the food during  
the frying  and it brings  about  the moisture  brings  about  the hydrolysis  of the triglyceride , 
causing  the increase  in the acidity.  That is free fatty acids  are more  formation  of free fatty 
acids , or formation  of free fatty acids  results  into the monoglyceride,  diglyceride  
formation  and finally,  if there  might  be some  glycerol  molecules  also. So, all these  
11 
 products  monoglyceride,  diglyceride,  glycerol,  and triglyceride , are free fatty acids  that 
might  be there  as a result  of hydrolysis  of the fat. 
Soaps  of some  fatty acids  are also formed  which  accelerate  the deterioration  of the frying  
medium.  Accumulation  of alkaline  material  decreases  the interfacial  tension  between  the 
product  and frying  medium  and decreases  the food quality.  Liberation  of the free fatty 
acids  causes  a decrease  in the smoke  point  of the oil. Even  1 percent  change  in the free 
fatty acid depresses  the smoke  point  by 100 degree  or 50 degree  in some  oils. Viscosity,  
colour,  iodine  value  of the hydrogenated  oil also changes  more  rapidly  at free fatty acid 
levels  are up 1 to 1.5 percent.  So, this is the reaction  how is that, in the earlier  class  
details  we have  discussed.   
 
So, different  classes  of compounds  which  are produced  from  oil during  heating . If you 
summarize  that is volatile  compounds,  that is oxidative  reactions  involving  the formation  
of decomposition  and hydroperoxide  lead to the production  of saturated  and unsaturated  
aldehyde s, ketones,  hydrocarbon s, lactone s, alcohol s, acids, esters,  etc. The amounts  of 
volatile  produce  vary widely  depending  on the type of oil, type of food, and extent  of heat 
treatment . Generally , it reaches  plateau values  because  balance  is achieved  between  the 
formation  of volatiles  and their loss due to evaporation  and decomposition.  Also , non-
polymeric  polar  compounds  of moderate  volatility , like hydroxy  and epoxy  acids , are 
produced  through  oxidative  pathway s.  
12 
  
Then  dimeric  and polymeric  acids  and glycer ides occur  from  the thermal  and oxidative  
free radicals  through  polymerization  of the radicals  which  result s in a substantial  increase  
in viscosity  of the frying  oils. The free fatty acids  arise  from  the hydrolysis  of triglycer ols 
in the presence  of heat and water.  These  reactions  are responsible  for various  physical  
and chemical  changes  in the frying  oil. They  result  in an increase  in the viscosity  and 
foaming  tendency,  changes  in the colour  (dark colour  may become  darker) or even  
changes  in the flavour  of the oil. There  is a decrease  in iodine  value  and surface  tension , 
and also there  is a change  in the refractive  index.  
 
Let’s see some  case study.  The effect  of heat on the oil that is various  breakdown  
products  classified  as volatile  decomposition  products  and non-volatile  decomposition  
products  are found.  We discussed  in the various  earlier  slides.  Non-volatile  
decomposition  products  are formed  by oxidation  and polymerization  of the oil and form  
sediments  on the sides  and at the bottom  of the fryer.  Polymerization  in the absence  of 
oxygen  produces  cyclic  compounds , and high molecular  weight  polymers , which  increase  
the viscosity  of the oil. This lowers  the surface  heat transfer  coefficient  during  frying  and 
increases  the amount  of oil entrained  by the food.  In the presence  of air and water,  frying  
oil thermally  and oxidatively  breaks down,  and increases  the number  of polar  molecules , 
which  directly  oxidize  to form  hydroperoxide , conjugated  dienoic acids, epoxide s, 
hydroxide s, aldehydes , and ketones.  
13 
  
Then another  very important  phenomenon  is the acrylamide  formation.  It is another  
carcinogenic  compound  that is found  in fried  food.  So, the formation  pathway s of 
acrylamide  naturally  originate  by a Maillard  reaction  in the starchy  food which  is rich in 
reduced  sugar  and with low moisture  content  when  heated  above  120 degree  Celsius.  It 
has been  added  to food toxicants  since  2002.  Oxidation  of fats-soluble  vitamins  in the oil 
results  in a loss of nutritional  value.  Retinols, carotenoids , and tocopherols  are each 
destroyed , and contribute  to the changes  in the flavor  and color  of the oil.  
 
Then,  we will talk about  briefly  thermally  stability  of the oil. Thermal  stability  is the 
most  important  oil property , particularly  when  vegetable  oil is used as a lubricant  at high-
temperature  conditions.  Thermal  stability  is determined  by the onset  temperature  and can 
be defined  as the temperature  by which  oil starts  to decompose.  Thermal  stability  mainly  
depends  on the chemical  structure  and fatty acid composition  of the oil. For example,  it 
has been  reported  that the thermal  stability  of olive  oil is better  than that of the lube oil.  
So, here oxidation  and thermal  stability  of oils measured  using  pressure,  differential  
scanning  calorimetry,  rancimat , thermos,  gravimetric  analysis , etc. are done.  This, some  
common  oil that is moringa  oil, jatropha oil, cottonseed  oil, canola  oil, and sunflower  oil 
are the common  oils. Oxidation  temperature , OSI, onset  temperature  in degree  Celsius , 
and T end degree  Celsius  are indicated  here.  As you can see here, the cottonseed  oil, its 
14 
 OT value  is 159 plus minus  0.04.  Moringa  oil has the highest  OT that is among  these  
which  are included  in this list that is it has 191.  
 
Oxidation  stability  index  is highest  again  in the moringa  oil and it is lowest  in the 
sunflower  oil, and this is obviously  because  of the more  polyunsaturated  fatty acids  
content  in the T onset  that is onset  temperature  and oxidation  that is the 347 is in the case 
of moringa  oil, 342 in the case of sunflower  oil and other  is the 343 in the cottonseed  oil. 
T end that is at the temperature  at which  this is 400 ranges  from  391 to 413 in these  oils. 
 
So, finally,  I would  like to summarize  this lecture  by saying  that cooking  or frying  oils or 
the oils which  are used for various  food operations,  food processing  operations  such as 
cooking  or frying,  deep -fat frying,  shallow -frying,  baking,  roasting , and so on. The food 
frying  oils must  be able to be sustained  to being  heated  to a range  of temperatures  may be 
375 to 390 degree  Fahrenheit  or 190 to 200 degree  Celsius  in general  without  starting  to 
give off smoke.  Factors like like fat content,  nutrient  content,  omega  ratio,  smoke  point,  
flavor , etcetera  must  be considered  during  selecting  a good  quality  cooking  oil or frying  
oil. Major  chemical  reactions  that occur  during  the heating  of the oil are oxidation,  
hydrolysis , and polymerization , and several  volatile  and non-volatile  compounds  form in 
oil during  heating.  And so, heating  and frying  operations  should  be properly  controlled  
and conditions  should  be used in such a way so that the formation  of these  compounds  
15 
 can be eliminated.  And more  important , the reheated  oil, fried  oil, fry remain  it should  
not be used again  and again  it is not a healthy  option.   
 
16 
  
So, these  are the references  which  are used in making  this preparing  this lecture.   
 
Thank  you very much  for your patience.  
 
