Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 10 : Specialty Oils and Fats Products  
Lecture 49 : Cocoa/Shea Butter and Structured Triacylglycer ols 
 
 
 Hello friends, Namaskar.  We are in the 49th lecture of this course.  In this lecture, in the 
next half an hour, we will speak about very important  specialty oil and fat products like 
cocoa and s hea butter. The topics that we will disc uss in this lecture include physio -
chemical properties, nutrition  and health benefits, characteristics and manufacturing 
processes, and food usage and other applications of cocoa butter and s hea butter.  And 
then finally, before end we will talk about some important aspects of structured  triacyle 
glycerol like low calorie fat and so on.  
 
  So, let us start with the cocoa butter. Cocoa bean is the fatty seed found inside a cocoa 
pod, fruit of the Theobroma cacao plant.  Cocoa butter (CB) is obtained by pressing of 
matu re cocoa beans.  It is a pale yellow liquid with a characteristic odour and the flavour 
of chocolate. It is an important and the only continuous fat phase found in chocolate, 
which help in the dispersion.  It is brittle at temperature below 25 ᵒC, soft in th e hand and 
melts in the mouth having at about 34 ᵒC. It is also used in the formulation of cosmetics 
and soap due to its moisturizing and antioxidant properties.  
 
The processing steps of the cocoa include , cocoa harvested from  the trees, then the pods  
are opened and then they are left in an open atmosphere for a few days for the 
fermentation.  Sometimes enzymes are used for assisting the fermentation process.  Th en 
these cocoa beans are dried  to a suitable moisture content of about 10 to 12 percent and 
after drying they are roasted. It is during this roasting process the characteristic color and 
flavor of chocolate  develops.  Then after roasting , these beans are cracked , which  is 
where the two cortilidens which are normally known as nibs  are found.  And the n these  
shells or hulls etcetera are blown and these nibs are are the source of the main chocolate 
or butter and other components.  So, these nibs are ground and because of the high fat 
content when this nib is ground fat gets melted and we get some sort o f paste material 
which is called as chocolate liquor.  And this chocolate liquor is further pressed to get the 
cocoa butter.  So, this is in brief the processing steps involved in the cocoa butter 
production.  
 
Various presses can be used to extract the co coa b utter from the chocolate liquor  or cocoa 
mass or bitter chocolate.  They are  hydraulic press, mechanical press, screw presses,  and 
supercritical fluid extraction or even sometimes solvent extraction can also be used.  
However, the hydraulic presses an d screw presses are not very successful method for th e 
extraction of cocoa butter. The  major demerits of these methods include that they req uire 
high temperature and that affects the nutritiona l quality of the cocoa butter that  is after 
the extraction of the butter the l eft material which is obtained is a very good source for 
cocoa beverage manufacturing , and cocoa powder . But its etcetera and other qualities are 
adversely affected  because the hydraulic presses or mechanical presses generate too 
much press ure as well as temperature .  The cocoa butter obviously, contains heat 
sensitive and heat labile natural compounds . They contain also toxic solvent left in the 
final products which have diverse adverse human effects , particularly when this solvent 
extracti on is used. So, I think the better technology in this case as well i s the supercritical 
fluid extraction technology.  
 
Liquid carbon dioxide is pumped into the heated extraction cell.  Extraction cell is loaded 
with approximately 20 kg (dry basis)    dehulled seed, of less than 2 mm diameter in size.  
Pressures ranging from 20.7 to 48.3 MPa and temperatures of 40 and 80 °C. At each 
temperature –pressure combination, extraction is run continuously for 40 min. The oil is 
collected at the end of every 10 mi n giving a total of four fractions.  The CO2 flow is 
varied in order to maintain the desired pressure and temperature of the extractor.  CO2 
passed through the extraction cell at atmospheric pressure and temperature at the end of 
each 10 min run using a wet gas meter.  The flow rate of the CO2 used ranged from 1.5 to 
3.5 dm3/min at 40 °C and 1.2 to 3.81 dm3/min at 80 °C.  
 
Then let us talk about composition of the cocoa butter.  It contains a high proportion of 
saturated fat mainly the palmitic acid you can say  saturated f ats are around 57 to 64 
percent, Palmitic acid is 24 to 30 percent, even the stearic acid the content is around 24 to 
37 percent.  It also contain about 0 to 1 percent lauric acid, 0 to 4 percent myristic acid 
and arachidic acid may be around 1 percent.  Cocoa butter contains a high proportion of 
saturated fat, mainly palmitic acid.  Contains trace amounts of caffeine and theobromine. 
Contains antioxidants such as β -tocopherol, α -tocopherol and γ -tocopherol. More than 70 
% of its total tag consist of Disaturated 1,3 -distea royl-2-oleoyl glycerol (SOS), 1(3)-
Stearoyl -2-oleoyl -3(1)-palmitoyl glycerol (SOP) , 1,3-Dipalmitoyl -2-oleoyl glycero l 
(POP) with oleic acid in Sn -2 position of  glycerol backbone  CB can crystallize into 
several polymorphic forms, having α, γ, β’ and β, crystals, with melting points of 17, 23, 
26, and 35 - 37 ᵒC, respectively. In the chocolate production, only β crystal is used 
because it has a high melting point. The cocoa butter contains trace amount of caffeine 
and theobromine.  It contains antioxidants such as beta tocopherol, alpha tocopherol and 
gamma  tocopherol.  
 
 Properties of cocoa butter are mainly dependent to  its triglyceride composition. Cocoa 
butter has a sharp melting point ranges from 27 to 35°C.   At room temperature, it is hard 
and brittle.  The nature of the crystalline lattice also affects the hardness of the cocoa 
butter. Its iodine value is 32 to 35 gra m iodine per 100 gram ,  Saponification value  192-
199 mg KOH/g , acid value  1.04-1.68 mg NaOH/g , peroxide value  1-1.10 meq O2/kg , and 
melting point is 29 to 40 degree Celsius.  
 
 
Now, this the cocoa butter by proper tempering in the process different polymor phs of the 
cocoa butter can be found and all these polymorphs play a very significant role in various 
bakery and confectionary products.  And the different polymorphs formed are like form I 
gamma , which is the most unstable  polymorph with a melting tempera ture of around 14 
degree Celsius.  Another form is the form II that is called alpha form it ha s a melting 
temperature around 20 degree Celsius.  Form III polymer that is beta prime form , it has a 
melting t emperature of around 22 degree Celsius. Form IV tha t is again beta prime form 
which has a melting t emperature of around 24 degree Celsius . Form VI beta , it has a 
melting temperature of around 32 degree Celsius.  Form V is considered the optimal 
polymorph by the confectionery industry.  Provides appropriate melting temperature to 
allow storage at room temperature.  Provides a smooth melting of chocolate                      
in the mouth. Provides chocolate products with the ability to break apart easily; good                           
demolding properties.  Polymorph V is not readily obtained by simple cooling,                                                 
but rather by using a tempering protocol.  
 
The functions and health benefits of cocoa butter include it is an important ingredient in 
chocolate accounting for 30 to 35 percent.  Cocoa aroma spreads smoothly in the mouth 
because of its rapid melting.  It preserves the well soluble aroma, it is a source of energy, 
it is a carrier of oil soluble vitamins. The cocoa butter is known to reduce cataracts, it 
contai ns very  high amounts of antioxidants, it is a good source of vitamins and minerals, 
it is good for heart health, digestion, brain alertness, it makes our bones strong, it 
alleviates stress, it is rich in magnesium, helps manage depression and it is high in  
vitamins and minerals.  
 
Cocoa  butter alternatives that is CBA's  are fats fulfilling the functions of cocoa butter 
completely,  normally there are various like in  the earlier classes we discussed about 
mango kernel oil, kokum  butter , etcetera . They  may b e of three types like cocoa butter 
equivalent  (CBE), Cocoa butter replacer (CBR), and Cocoa butter sub stitutes (CBS).  
Cocoa butter equivalent (CBE)  are not -lauric acid plant fats, which are similar in their 
physical and chemical properties to cocoa butter and mixable with it in every amount 
without altering the properties of cocoa butter.  Cocoa butter replacer (CBR)  are n on-
lauric fats with distribution of fatty acid similar to cocoa butter, but a completely 
different structure of triglycerides; only in sma ll ratios compatible to cocoa butter.  Cocoa 
butter substitutes (CBS)  are lauric plant fats chemically totally different to cocoa butter, 
with some physical similarities; suitable to substitute cocoa butter to 100%.  Cocoa butter 
improvers (CBIs) are s imilar  to CBEs, but with higher content in solid triglycerides; used 
for improving soft cocoa butters.  Cocoa butter extender (CBEx): Subgroup of CBEs not 
mixable in every ratio with cocoa butter.  
  
As far as the storage and packaging of the cocoa butter is conc erned , as it melts easily it 
should be stored away from light and heat in a cool dry place . It can also be kept in the 
refrigerator. Cocoa butter will last several years if stored properly.  Cocoa butter can be 
stored in several different containers, from a  zip lock plastic bag to a plastic container 
with a lid, to a glass jar or container.  
 
Now let us talk about shea  butter. Shea butter are yellowish –grey solid material or 
yellowish white   in  colour  with  a  strong  smell  extracted as fat from the ker nels of the 
shea-nut tree Vitellaria paradoxa  . Shea butter is used extensively in the food, 
pharmaceutical, and cosmetic industries.  It is often used as cocoa butter substitute by 
chocolate manufacturers and for margarine and baking purposes.  Shea butter is as good 
as table oil because of its high nutritive value and low cholesterol levels.  It can be 
consumed raw without any further physical or chemical treatments or refinement.  And 
you can see in the figure , the shea nuts and the  pulp. So, fruit pulp is r emoved and the 
shea nut is obtained and this nut is then processed for getting the butter.  
 
The pretreatment of the shea-nut fruit is done to obtain the  kernel . Traditional postharvest 
processing of fresh kernel and extraction of the shea involves key sta ges of boiling, 
drying, crushing, roasting, grinding, and kneading.  Extraction efficiencies of 80% with 
good quality shea nuts. Industrial shea butter extraction involves expelling the oil from 
steam -heated kernels follo wed by solvent extraction and fracti onation.  
 
This slide shows  the traditional processing of she a butter  that is first fruits are harvested 
from the tree or the  fallen fruit are picked from the ground . The  fresh fruit s are heaped for 
about 1 to 2 weeks and then they are boiled  with water in  a large metal pot for about 40 
minutes at a temperature  more than 90 degree Celsius. The whole nuts are  spread  in the 
sun on a hardened mud or concrete floor and nuts are hand -pounded  with simple tools to 
remove the husk s, because when it is  dried the deh ulling becomes easier . The  kernels 
obtained  after dehulling or the hull removal  are spread  in the sun for storage or for sale , 
the raw material is either exported or processed.  The kernel s are hand pounded which  is 1 
to 3 at a time using small simple  tools a nd then dry fried in a large iron pot over the open 
fires. Finally , they are milled into paste usually by commercial operators then vigorously 
hand  blended  for about 30 to 60 minutes until the fat for aerated  emulsion , is washed and  
removed . The fat obtained is cleaned  by boiling on an open fire with  decanting stages to 
clarify the oil.  In the last step , the liquid left is cooled and then stirred  into a smooth 
creamy  butter.  
 
 The i mproved shea butter extraction process and machinery  includes different extraction 
techniques such as hydraulic  press extraction, motorized grinder, mechanical press 
extraction, screw press extraction, mechanical rig platform  and testometr ic universal 
testing machine. Some of the Semi -mechanized and screw press extraction processes are 
shown in the figure, a centrifugal process in the purple arrow, screw press extraction , and 
centrifugation in  the orange arrow, and common extraction steps in blue ar row.  So, these 
are some of the processes  like centrifugal presses or screw pr ess ex traction is used. T he 
kernels obtained are crushed the paste is heated and then they are  put into mechanical 
extraction . The oil is obtained is filtered and crude butter is obtained . 
 
Improved process such as solvent extraction, enzymatic and microwave processes  of the 
shea butters are also applied . The kernels after washi ng and sun drying, oven dried  at 50 
degree Celsius for 24 hours, washing, sun drying for 24 hours , again oven drying, then 
crushing, soxhlet extraction an d oil filter and rota-evaporator  used for concentration and 
crude butter is obtained.  In the microwave assisted extraction the kernels are crushed 
into about 5 mm, they are oven dried at 50 degree Celsius for 24 hours, then electric  
milling for 2 minutes , cooled and subjected to microwave extraction.  In the enzymatic 
extraction, like in soxhlet and microwave the kernels are grounded, added with the water 
and made to paste , heated  to 100 degree Celsius for 5 minutes, added enzyme to 2 
percent , then the mixture is heated at 50 de gree Celsius for 2 hours, then boiled at 100 
degree Celsius for 2 minutes for deactivatin g the enzyme and then emulsion is collected, 
centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 minu tes and butter is collected and oven d ried. Optimized 
parameters for solvent extraction process , n-Hexane as solvent , particle size of shea 
kernel of 2.06 mm , extraction t emperature of 68 °C , lead to a higher yield (66.47 %) . The 
FFA obtained by solvent extraction were higher (23.89% versus 9.00%) than FFA 
obtained by the artisanal method.  
 
So, if we let us see the effect of various process parameter or packaging on the quality  
characteristics , particularly th e extraction yield if you say the microwave assisted it  gives 
maximum extraction of about 88 percent of s hea butter whereas, the traditional process  
gives least 28 percent extraction.  Mechanical methods yield around 37 percent 
extraction , super critical gives  about 40 percent extrac tion.  Enzymatic extraction gives 
43 percent, solvent extraction gives around 70 percent and screw press extraction gives 
82 percent yield. Lower FFA achieved by microwave -assisted extraction.  Boiling the 
emulsion with rumex acetosa flowers, polygonaceae family, and yield  whiter butter at the  
end of extraction.  The roasting conditions would facilitate non -enzyma tic oxidation 
resulting in the production of peroxides.  Properly packaged to maintain microbiological 
safety and physico -chemical properties. Increasing the thickness of the kernels increases 
the acidity of the b utter.  
 
The properties  of the s hea butter are melting point is in t he range of about 34 -35 degree 
Celsius.  The slip point observed are at around 33 .3 to 33. 5 degree Celsius.  The viscosity 
of the sea butter is high below 40 degree Cel sius, but it decreases when it becomes  quite 
fluid over 60 degree Celsius.  The viscosity values in the range of 2.4 to 2.8 cP at 34 to 
35 degree Celsius.  The other properties of the s hea butter are density at 25 degree Celsius  
is 0.91 kg per cubic meter, viscosity at 38 d egree Celsius is around 39.98 mm square per 
second.  This acid value is 3.62 milligram KOH  per gram, iodine  value is 59.5 iodine 
gram per 100 gram, saponification value is 190 milligram KOH  per gram, peroxide value 
may be 12. 15 meq oxygen per kg, and  water content  is 0.037 weight percent  and these  
properties will be influenced by the storage conditions , extraction methods , variety , and  
etcetera . 
 
 So, as far as the composition of sea butter is concerned saponifia ble fractions , the 
average fat content in shea kernels varies between 45 – 53 %.  Palmitic, stearic, oleic, 
linoleic, and arachidonic with percentage of 4, 41.5, 46.4, 6.6, and 1.3 %, respectively.  
The fatty acid composition is dominated by stearic and oleic acids 85 – 90 % of the total 
fatty acids. The major triglycerides are SOO (33 %), OOO (19 %), and SOS (20 %) . The 
levels of the triglycerides  Palmitic -Oleic -Stearic (POS) were relatively low (3.6 –7.6 %).  
The high stearic acid content gives the shea but ter its solid consistency, while higher 
perce ntage of oleic acid determines softness.  
 
 
For the  presence of unsaponifiable fraction , shea butter has high level (5 –15 %) of non -
saponifiable lipid (NSL).  Two-thirds of the vitamin E found in shea but ter occurs in the 
form of α -tocopherol followed by δ (15%), γ (14%), and β (7%) tocopherols.  Shea butter 
NSL also contain high levels (upto 6 %) of phytosterols.  The phenolic profile of shea 
butter is composed of catechin family compounds similar to green tea. The most 
prominent component in shea kernels is gallic acid (27%).  
 
The uses of shea butter are as an edible specialty fat (Chocolate) , production of improved 
chocolate confectionary, c hocolates with longer shelf life and improved heat stability. 
Production of coatings with less tendency for “bloom formation”.  Further shea butter 
incorporated chocolate can be used for moldings (e.g., Bars, tablets, dragées (panned 
articles), hollow figures, shavings); For enrobing (e.g., as “super -coatings” on centers) 
(wafers, biscuits, cookies, cakes);  For extrusion (e.g., chocolate vermicelli, sticks).  Edible 
shea use in non -chocolate applications  are m argarines, ice creams, shortenings,  fondant 
fillings, yogurts, stock cubes, and puff pastry . Non-palm alternative vegetable oil/fat, 
stearic -rich ingredient.  
 
The health benefits of s hea butter numerous like they prevent wrinkles, fine lines and 
scars, repair, heals, dry skin,  anti -oxidant, anti -inflammatory, deep moisturizing, 
stimulating for the superficial  microcirculation , skin strengthening, skin protecting, skin 
regenerating, minor cuts and burns  are  healed, muscle aches, pains are healed.  
 
So, now let us talk about li ttle bit structured triglycerols.  Structured TAG, or triglycerides 
(TG) are fat or oil that has been modified from its natural TAG composition. Thi s 
definition  would encompass fractionated, hydrogenated, and even blended oils. 
However, the  term is usually restricted to those fats in which the TAG have been 
engineered to incorporate specific fatty acids, which also may be esterified to specific 
positions of the  glycerol backbone.  Typically, such a composition is achieved via 
interesterification (which may be followed by fractionation and/or blending).  Medium 
chain TG (MCTs) are, perhaps, the fat most commonly associated with  the t erm 
structured triglycerides.  
 
The structured triglyceroles are used in various modifications to produce low calorie fats . 
To counter the rise in obesity, there has been a drive to reduce the amount of fat in the 
diet. Salatrim®, developed by Nabisco Foods Group, combines short - and long -chain 
fatty acids on the sam e TAG molecule.  It has been used in Hershey’s reduced fat baking 
chips and was intended to be used as a cocoa butter substitute, in peanut butter, sauces, 
and so forth.  Caprenin® similarly combines fatty acids with dissimilar chain lengths; 
medium - chain a cids (capric/caprylic, C8/C10), and long chain (mainly behenic, C22), 
with    the latter being particularly poorly absorbed in the gut, yielding a reduced                                
calorie content of about 5 kcal/g.  Olestra® (Olean®), a nondigested, h ence zero calorie, 
lipid with similar physical characteristics to fat, formed by esterifying fatty  acids onto a 
sucrose molecule.  
 
So, with this I will like to summarize this lecture by saying Cocoa butter is the only 
continuous fat phase in chocolate and is therefore responsible for the dispersion of the 
other constituents. Efforts have been made to find an alternative to cocoa butter and to 
replace parts of the cocoa butter  in chocolate.  Shea butter has now become a major 
(second -largest natural) source of symmetrical stearic -rich TAGs, highly valued in CBEs.  
The ability to design and create specifically structured TAG means that fats with 
improved  physical and nutritional properties can be created in each area.  As 
understanding of the impact o f particular fatty acids, and their specifics within the                                                             
TAG molecule is better understood, further tailoring of fat compositions will be                                            
accomplished.  
 
 
These are the references used in the preparation of this lecture.  With t his thank you very 
much for your patience hearing.  Thank you.  
