Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 0 9: Commercial Cooking & Frying Oils  
Lecture 44: Fruit and Nut Oils  
 
Hello everyone, Namaskar.  Now, in this 44th lecture, we will talk about fruit and nut oils.   
 
We will discuss major fruits and nut oils particularly olive oil, palm oil and coconut  oil 
and quality characteristics of these oils and their health benefits and also we will  talk 
about what are the various pretreatments and their manufacturing process operations . 
 
So, the pretreatments for fruit and nut oil processing normally includ e as in any plant 
material, they are required, they are taken the raw material that is the  olive fruit or  palm 
fruit palm kernel or coconut, then they are cleaned, they are harvested  from the plant, 
they are cleaned and then they require selling or peeling, crushing  and then sometime 
even steaming and frying because of their specific characteristics  and natur e like 
particularly palm and coconut.  They require specific operations, specific treatment to 
remove the hull to deshell it and  to obtain in their extractable forms and these are again 
there are standard post-harvest  operations and techniques.  I am not goi ng to have details 
in these operations, I will directly come to the oil related that  is extraction of oil-related  
matters in these cases. So, obviously that before being subjected  to the oil extraction 
process, these materials  are subjected to proper post-harvest  operations , and the material 
that is a clean, radiated,  sold, sealed, peeled, crushed , and steamed or fried as the case 
may be and it is obtained  in the extractable conditions.   
 
Then let us start now one by one we will take first the olive oil yo u know olive botanical  
name is Olea Europaea  meaning European olive.  It belongs to the Oleaceae  family 
which has origin in the Mediterranean basin from Portugal  to Levant, the Arabian 
Peninsula and South Asia as far as far east as China as well as  the Canary, Iceland and 
Reunion.  Olive oil is the oil pressed from the olive which is the basically fruit of olive 
tree. Even olive fruit is also eaten as such in this every item.  So, after harvest olives are 
crushed and then decanted and put through a centrifugation process  to separate the oil 
which is stored in stainless steel tanks.  Olive oil usually has a greenish -yellow  colour, a 
characteristic olive flavor  and udder.  The udder of virgin oil is mainly related to the 
presence of chlorophyll and pheophyt in which also provide oxidation protection in the 
dark.  Carotenoids which are present in the olive oil contribute to the colour and they 
protect  the oil from photooxidation.  
 
The International Olive Oil Council has promulgated the following definition for the  
olive oil that is the virgin olive oil virgin olive oil is obtained in the market in various  
forms.  So, it is the oil from the fruit of the olive tree which is obtained by mechanical or 
other  physical means under conditions particularly the thermal  condition, minimal 
thermal condition  that is that they do not lead any adverse effect on the quality of the oil 
particularly  the strong characteristic flavour of the oil and other components held by the 
virgin olive  oil can further be designated as a natu ral and oil natural olive oil and it is 
categorized  into three forms like extra virgin olive oil which has a strong flavouring 
rating, flavour  rating of 6.5 or better and a maximum free acidity of 1.  The fine virgin 
olive oil it has a flavour rating of 5.5  or better and it is a 1.5 free  acidity maximum.  Semi -
fine virgin olive oil that is the oil that has a flavour rating of 3.5 or more and  it has a 
maximum free acidity 3.3.  So, virgin olive oil with an organoleptic rating of less than 3. 5 
or you can say to  be specifically less than 3.3 gram per 100 gram  free fatty acid is 
considered to be not  to fit it is considered not fit or unfit for human consumption.  So, this 
oil is used to produce refined olive oil or for non -food usage.  Because the otherwise the 
virgin olive oil is used as a particularly for food purposes.   
 
So, refined olive oil is the oil obtained from virgin oil by refining methods which  do not 
lead to the alterations in the initial triglyceride structure . And the pure oil is the oil that 
can consist of a blend of refined olive oil and virgin  olive oil in various proportions that 
is also.  So, olive oil is sold in the market in different forms.  So, olive oil is used for 
cooking, it is used in cosmetics, phar maceuticals, in soap manufacturing  industry and 
also it is used as a fuel for traditional oil lamps.   
 
This table taken from the literature to give the physicochemical and other important  
characteristic fatty acid composition of olive oil.  The first chara cteristic fatty acid 
composition of olive oil is the  It has a specific gravity at 25 °C in the range of 0.909 to 
0.915.  Refractive index at 2 5°C is in the range of 1.4680 to 1.4705.  Iodine value is 80 in 
the range of 80 to 88. Similarly, saponification valu e lies in the range of 188 to 196.  It 
has around 0.4 to 1.1 percent unsaponifiable  matter and tighter value 17 to 26 °C. And 
then it is a solidification point is 2 to 6 °C, cloud point minus 5 .6°C. It has a chlorophyll a 
about 10 to 30 ppm.  It has oxidative stability index at 110 °C about 5.7 hours and it has a 
good  amount of tocopherol that is I mean alpha tocopherol 103, gamma tocopherol 8 that 
is the its range is 63 to 135.  As far as the fatty acid composition is concerned you say that 
it has a permeative f atty acid  around 9 percent. Then oleic acid about at the name 
oleboile, oleic acid 80 percent its range may be 55  to 83 percent, linoleic around 6 
percent.  It has also triglyceride composition if you see that is SUS dye saturated is around 
5.5 that is rang e is 0 to 6 percent.  Then SUU mono saturated  it is around 38, range may be 
20 to 30, 4 or 20 to 30, 40.  Then UUU triunsaturated  fatty acids are about 56 percent and 
its hydrogenated crystal habit  is beta. So, these are the physicochemical and characterized  
properties and fatty acid composition of olive oil.  
 
About a nutritional fat of ol ive oil  per 100 gram it gives 884 calories and if you take  total 
fat 100 gram of ol ive oil  its daily value percent daily value becomes 153, saturated  fat 
will be 70 percent of the per daily value it will give and it has no cholesterol and  other 
components are not there here.  Of course, iron 3 percent of the daily value is provided by 
this oleboile and health benefits  I told that is the ol ive oil  is helps in improving 
cardiova scular system, helps in reduction  in depression risk, helps maintain healthy 
cholesterol levels and helps in curing Alzheimer  disease . It helps in curing acute that is 
pancreatis helps to protect the ulcerative colitis, it  helps in reducing breast cancer r isk, 
helps in preventing stroke.  So, it is a very good and health very good quality oil has a lot 
of health benefits.  
 
As far as the production of ol ive oil  is concerned, I told you there are three major issues 
like farming that is from the plant tree th at is olive is harvested, then this is the 
defoliation,  washing, pressing and , centrifugation.  So, this is the extraction and then 
finally, the virgin olive oil that is after extraction  it is bottling and packaging.  So, this is 
so farming extraction and pa ckaging these are the major steps in the olive oil  extraction 
process, olive oil production and also that is there are various step like for  getting 
different types of olive oil by just changing the conditions and one after the  other process 
mainly it is t he pressing, but just pressing operator etc can be  changed like you see olive 
first aqua extraction you get the virgin olive oil, then after that  olive pomace is obtained.  
And then after aqua extraction whatever is the lime and olive oil you can get then olive  
pomace it is stored and then subjected to second extraction and the solvent extraction.  So, 
second concentration of olive oil and crude olive oil etcetera this is also just  by changing 
the extraction conditions different types of olive oils can be ob tained.  
 
So, this is a schematic of the even equipment and system for the extraction of the olive  
oil. So, it is you see that is a loading hopper olive is given then this is a it comes to  the 
defoliator from where it goes to the washing machine alright and from washing the 
washed  olives are sent to the hopper.  And from where it comes to the partial de stroller 
machine where there are the stones  of the olives are there removed and from where it is 
then sent to the that is the I Malaxer machine that is her e ok that it causes crushing 
etcetera.  And then this is also it comes through that hammer crusher that is de stroller and 
hammer  crushing and from this the pulp is obtained crush is removed and pulp is 
obtained then  it goes to the solid liquid horizontal c entrifuge decanter.  And then liquid 
liquid vertical centrifuges and three way valves etc are provided to  get the oil olive oil. 
So, this is a schematic process flow for the manufacture of olive oil.   
 
Then we come to the palm oil palm oil palm or macropha ge that is allys genuineness  it 
belongs to the Arac aceae  family it has its origin in West and Central Africa the Far  East 
and Central and South America.  Palm oil is an edible vegetable oil which is derived from 
the mesocarp that is the  reddish pulp of the fruit of oil palm because see that oil tree tha t. 
Oil is obtained from both the fleshy mesocarp of the fruit and also the central kernel.  The 
fleshy pulp or mesocarp of the fruit plate contains approximately 50 % palm oil  by weight 
and the kernel it contain s around 50 %, 46% to 57 % palm kernel oil. Palm oil has oil has 
overtaken  soybean oil as the most important well vegetable oil in  the world and even its 
use that is in the cooking operations etc is increasing.   
 
The crude oil palm oil is also called the re d palm oil because of its high content of  
carotenoids.  It is a resource of vitamin E that contains around 600 to 1000 ppm, its 
coenzyme  Q10 that is ubiquinone around 18 to 25 mg per kg and sterols are around 325 
to 365 milligram  per kg.  The edible food ind ustry utilizes about 90 percent of the palm 
oil while the remaining  10 percent finds application in the soap and oleochemical 
manufacturing.  It is the only vegetable oil with almost 50 -50 composition of saturated 
and unsaturated  fatty acids. Crude palm oil  is used for cooking, frying and as a source of 
vitamins.  Fractionation of crude palm oil yields mainly palm olein the liquid fraction and 
the palm  is here in the solid fraction.  Crude palm oil, then palm olein and palm stearin  are 
important constituents of several  food and industrial products such as sardines, ice 
creams, cosmetics, candles, lubricant,  toothpaste, biodiesel and so on.   
 
So, here this slide I have taken from the literature that physicochemical properties  and 
characteristics of the palm oil its apparent density that is a gram per ml is around 0.8922  
0.99, AOM stability that is the 54 hours melting point around 37.5 you can see that is it  is 
a good melting characteristic, oxidative stability index at 110 °C around  16.9 hours ok.  
And its solid fat content is here 10 °C it is 34.5 and at 40 °C it is 4. 7.  Its specific gravity is 
0.888 at 50 °C, viscosity is around 45, iodine value  is around 53 and it has sub verification 
value that is 196 which is indicative of the chain  length.  It has total polar compounds 
around 13.5 percent, total polymer 0.5 percent and its crystal  habit is it forms beta dash 
crystal on crystallization.   
 
Fatty acids composition  and glycer ides or micronutrient and other minor components in 
the palm oil  are provided in this table as you can see that it has oleic acid around 39 
percent,  linoleic 10 percent and it has palmitic acid around 44 percent that is a saturated 
fatty acid, stearic acid als o around 4.5 percent.  Triglyceride composition Tri-saturated 
9.8, desaturated  48.8 or 49, monounsaturated 36  percent and Tri-unsaturated  around 5 
percent.  Diglycerides they may contain around 4.9 percent depending upon the conditions 
of extraction. Micronu trient it has good amount of alpha carotene, beta carotene even 
total carotenoids  present in the palm oil may be around 500 to 700 that is a ppm ok.  
Similarly it also has contain good vitamin A like alpha tocopherol 129 to 215 ppm.  The 
total tocopherols ma y be 500 to 600 ppm even also it contains good tocotrienols  about 
total tocotrienols it contains around 1000 to 1200 ppm and maximum is gamma 
tocotrienol  which is 262 ppm, delta tocopherol is also 70 to 217 ppm.  As far as the 
micronutrient present in the p alm oil include it has phytosterols around  326 to 527 ppm, it 
has good amount of phospholipid ok, s qualene , ubiqu inone  and then aliphatic  alcohols, 
tripe in alp hatic  alcohol, methyl sterols and aliphatic hydrocarbons are also  present in 
significant amount in the palm oil . 
 
So, these are the different uses of the palm oil that is it is used in food manufacturing,  in 
making beauty products, it is making beverages, making cookies, candy and ice creams, 
it is also used for making cleaning products even personal care or cosmetic products . 
 
Health benefits of palm oil include , improving the vision, helps in reducing  the risk of 
cancer, helps in improve hair growth, rich landed with landed with the  antioxidant it is 
decreased.  So, all these it is a very go od health oil ok, it contains zero transfat, it helps 
during  pregnancy, it contains more amount of unsaturated fats, rich in it is rich in vitamin 
K, helps  in providing naturally soft skins, it helps in preventing cardiovascular usage 
etcetera  ok. So, this  is considered to be a healthy oil.   
 
As far as the palm oil production is concerned, then this fresh fruit bunches there it is  
sterilized and where the appropriate threshing technology, in fruit bunches are thrown  
and there is this kernel is used for the  oil extraction and the oil extraction is done  by 
either by crushing or screw pressing.  So, after crushing or screw pressing, the oil which is 
obtained it is sent for the clarification  and purification and you get a palm oil, POM E 
treatment and the crude p alm oil. This is crude palm oil subjected to refining and storage.  
The cake is then deep pericarping , nut cracking and winnowing and drying and it gives 
palm  kernel.  And the crude palm oil which is refined and it is sent for the crude palm oil 
either physic al refining or chemical refining using the standard like degumming, 
bleaching, deodorizing.  Then refined and bleached is a oil palm oil and the palm fatty 
acid fractionation refined  and bleached palm olein  or refined and bleached palm olein is 
obtained.  So, either by chemical refining process and other by physical refining process 
these are  the steps which are obtained . 
 
So, this is again schematic of the palm oil production it has shown showing with that  
little to make it little understand that using th e equipment etc that is your is the  fresh fruit 
bunches is obtained, then it is part sterilizer, fruit cage, where it  is bunches are removed, 
washed and you get that is and it is stripped striping treatment  and then you get by 
stripping that is the kernels  etc alright.  And then it is subjected to extraction machinery 
that is the resistor and then extraction  is repressing or fresh oil is obtained, then fresh 
liquor is sent to the clarification, oil purifier and then you get the oil clarified palm oil 
crude p alm oil . 
 
This is also again a similar that is where the different oil palm oil manufacturing process  
that is fruit cage, sterilizer from here it is stripper, from the stripper it is  good there is a 
fruit it is go to the screw press ok.  And then different  stages that is the yellow line it is 
going to the press liquor that  is oil line which is clarified oil that is oil purifier, clarified 
oil and the cake filter  line. So, different there is drying etcetera.  So, it keeps palm kernel 
that is the cake which is  obtained fibre for the use for boiler  fuel, then crude palm oil is 
obtained, then recovered palm oil.  So, different product are after the crude palm oil or 
palm kernel or boiler fuel all  these things are its fibres.   
 
Then you go for the coconut oil, coconut oil or coconut butter is an edible oil derived  
from the kernels meat and milk of the coconut palm fruit.  Coconut oil is a white solid fat 
below around 25 °C and a clear thin liquid  oil in warmer climates.  It is a n unrefined 
varieties have a distinct  coconut aroma, coconut oil is used as a food  oil and in industrial 
application for cosmetics and detergent production, the oil is rich  in medium chain fatty 
acids and due to its high level of saturated fats numerous health  authorities recommend 
limiting i ts consumption as a food . 
 
Coconut oil is one of the most well known and most utilized products derived from the  
mature coconut meat or kernel.  It is generally obtained by drying the coconut meat using 
different methods and then extracting  the oil from th e granulated dried kernel through the 
use of high pressure mechanical press  or a combination of mechanical press and solvent 
extraction.  Coconut oil is a commonly commercially important oil in the lauric acid 
group.  Lauric acid oil differs significantly fr om other fats and oils in that they pass 
abruptly  from a brittle solid into a liquid within a narrow temperature range.   
 
The nutritional fats of the coconut oil that is a health benefits and nutritional fat that  is 
you see that a coconut oil it is a good  source of fiber, coconut is a good source  of fiber, it 
is gluten free, it is cholesterol free and it has a low sodium content ok. It is high in 
saturated fat which should be limited to less than 7 percent of your daily  calories ok.  It is 
that is a it give s around 14 gram fat, 5 gram carb ok per 1 by 3 cup unsweetened  coconut 
flakes it gives 3.5 gram fiber, 140 calories and 105 gram of protein.  As far as its health 
benefits are concerned it is used for the treatment of Alzheimer  disease, it is treats urinary 
tract infections, it is immune system booster, it improves memory  and brain function and 
gallbladder disease and pancreatitis are also improved ok.  It is a results in weight loss, 
cancer prevention and treatment, boost digestion and prevents  candid a, it prevents heart 
diseases and high blood pressure . 
 
This is the composition and physical properties of coconut oil, virgin coconut oil is the  oil 
obtained from the fresh mature endosperm like kernel or meat of the coconut by 
mechanical  or natural means with or without the use of heat, no chemical refining, 
bleaching or deodorization  and is used and this the oil that maintains the natural aroma 
and the nutrients that is  the virgin coconut oil.  It is called virgin because the oil obtained 
is pure and  it is raw it is crystal clear.  It had good amount as you can see specific gravity 
and the refractive index the iodine  value is 10 which indicates that is a highly saturated 
fats are there melting dropping  point 36.5, oxidative stability index is 50, AOM s tability 
is 50 hours ok.  And then solid fat index that is a 10 degree Celsius it is 54, 21 °C it is 26, 
crystal high which is beta dash crystal and as far as the fatty acid composition is  
concerned lauric 47. 5 maximu m. And then SSS Tri-saturated  fatty acid s are 84 percent, 
disaturated 12, monounsaturated  it is 4.  
 
So, it gives the coconut oil production and refining that is the copra is crushed, cooked  
and prepressed second prepressed and then it is get oil cake, oil cake or crude oil  it is 
filtered degum,  deacidified, decolorization and finished.  So, degummed that is the oil 
crude oil where refining the degumming is done through the  action of citric acid, 
bleaching is done through the addition of activated charcoal, filtering  aid atomize or 
phase two remov e the acids and then finally, deodorized with the steam  and vacuum 
method details of all these already discussed earlier.   
 
So, as far as the for the extraction of coconut oil there are various methods that is 
traditionally  used in the crystallization met hod. Coconut oil is extracted from the copra 
traditionally copra can be obtained by separating the coconut  meat from the whole 
coconut shell followed by sun drying and smoke drying for around  6 to 8 days. The copra 
is then chopped to small sizes and cooked  by heating in small pieces of copra  in a cooker 
for about 30 minutes.  The oil is then squeezed out from copra by an expeller and then 
filtered by a filter  press . 
 
In the mechanical extraction the coconut shells are cracked and the coconut meat is 
separat ed. The fresh coconut meat is chopped and sliced into thin flakes and of the 
desired sizes.  These thin flakes of coconut meat are cooked in a cooker by heating them 
at an elevated  temperature of for about 90 minutes. The oil is expelled from the heat 
treated coconut meat and the normally at around a  temperature of 70 °C in an expeller.  
The oil is stored in an airtight container in a dark cool and dry place for long storage  and 
the de -oiled cake obtained from this process is suitable for human consumption.   
 
So, this is the process pressing for the virgin coconut oil you can see that coconut  
husking, selling ok and after selling, pearling, selection and washing.  So, by this you get 
coconut meat and then coconut meat is the grinded, pressed, filtering,  centrif ugation, get 
coconut milk and then virgin coconut oil is obtained by settling  filter pressing.  So, these 
are the equipment how it is going?  There is a coconut using a convener it comes to the 
cook cooker and from cooker it goes  to the oil press and it is p ressed and oil is obtained 
which is filtered right.  
 
So, I will summarize now this lecture by saying that yes pretreatment processes are 
crucial  in vegetable oil refining processing to ensure the oil extraction and refining 
process, its  quality stability  and efficiency.  Olive oil, palm oil and coconut oil offer 
potential health benefits consuming them in  moderation is important due to their high 
calorie content.  Commercial packages for the storing oil, olive oil, palm oil and coconut 
oils include jars or plastic containers and flexible packaging etcetera.  Details of 
packaging we already discussed in the earlier lectures for the oils as the  same is true here 
also ok in the case of these oils and also we will take up especially in  the next its separate 
lectu re of packaging materials and packaging of food oils.  So, these oils should be 
protected from direct exposure to sunlight like any other oils also  sunlight to avoid 
oxidation, nutrient degradation and flavor  aroma change . 
 
So, these are the references  used this finally.  Thank you very much for your patience 
here.  
