Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 0 9: Commercial Cooking & Frying Oils  
Lecture 45: Rice Bran Oil  
 
Hello everyone, Namaskar.  Now, we are in the 45th lecture of the course.  In this lecture 
today, we will talk about Rice bran oil.   
 
We will discuss what is rice bran oil, what are its important characteristics, then enzymes  
present in rice bran and accordingly the stabilization of rice  bran oil, manufacturing 
process of  rice bran oil and packaging and storage conditions.   
 
So, let us see what rice bran oil is.  Rice contains an starchy endosperm  in the end  which 
is covered by a layer that is called rice bran layer and then finally,  it is further protected 
by a that is hull or husk called Paddy husk and it  contains a germ rice germ.  So, basically 
that is between husk and starchy endosperm there is a bran layer.  So, this bran oil rice 
bran oil is basically the oil that is extracted fro m the outer  layer or bran of the rice grains.  
It is commonly used in cooking and food preparations particularly in Asian cousins it is a 
very popular oil. Rice bran oil has a light flavor and a high smoke point which makes it 
suitable for various  cooking m ethods including frying stir frying and saute ing. 
 
Let us see the characteristics of the rice bran oil.  It contains up to 25 percent depending 
on the of course, variety of the rice milling  process and stabilization system that is the 
bran contains approxi mately 25 percent oil.  Rice bran oil is produced and consumed in 
great quantities in Asian countries such as  India Japan China Korea Taiwan Thailand and 
Indonesia.  India and China Japan they produce around 472,90 and 65,000 tons of rice 
bran oil annually  respectively that is India produces 472,000 tons of rice bran oil annually 
you can say. The world health organizations the American heart association and other 
international  food and health organizations have recognized rice bran oil as a healthy oil 
becaus e of its well-balanced  fatty acid content which consists of around 47 percent 
MUFA , 33 percent  PUFA  and around 20 percent saturated fatty acids.  The main 
unsaturated fatty acids in rice bran oil are oleic linoleic and linolenic  acids and the 
primary satura ted fatty acids include palmitic, myristic and stearic acid.   
 
Crude rice bran oil contains around 2.5 to 3.2 percent of an un saponifiable fraction  that is 
rich in functional components such as tocopherol popularly known as vitamin E,  gamma -
original, t ocotrienols and phytosterols and in it is also rich in other micronutrients  such as 
squalene and phospholipids. However, the refining process which is subjected to crude 
rice bran oil can reduce the quantity  of some of these micronutrient and health promot ing 
components.  Γ-oryzanol , tocotrienols , tocopherols and other phytosterols are the main 
micronutrients  that are responsible for the antioxidant activity of rice bran oil.  Rice bran 
oil has antioxidant, anti -inflammatory, anti -hypertensive, anti -diabetic,  anti-obesity  and 
anti-carcinogenic properties.  Furthermore, it has a positive effect on cholesterol levels, 
insomnia and other diseases.  The potential yield of rice bran oil is between 18 to 22 
percent depending on the variety  of the priority and method o f extraction.  
 
The crude rice bran oil in general contains as I told you about 80 to 90 percent 
triglycerides and it contains a sterile ester 2 to 3 percent and unsaponifiable  matter 3  to 8 
percent.  The free fatty acid content depending upon the storage and whether rice bran has 
been  stabilized or not stabilized and other conditions, it may vary from 3 to 40 percent as 
high as  40 percent.  So, the phytonutrients and fatty acid composition of the rice bran oil 
include that is gamma -original,  it contains around 0.9 to 2.9 percent, tocopherol 0. 1 to 
0.14 percent.  In fact, stearic acid is 2.1 to 4.7 percent, saturated fatty acid 22 percent and 
monounsaturated  44 percent, oleic 42, linoleic is 28 percent.  That omega 3 
polyunsaturated fatty acid are 0. 5 perc ent and omega 6 polyunsaturated fatty  acids are 
around 33 percent in the rice bran oil.   
 
So, let us little bit elaborate the health benefits of rice bran oil like it is a popularly  baby 
very popularly known as golden health oil that is a heart oil, heart  health food  in it is 
known as a heart oil or health food in the western country.  It has a balance of fatty acid 
profile, it is closer to the recommended levels, it  contains around 1 to 2 percent of 
polynomial acid that is meets the requirement of omega  3 fatty acids and it lowers the 
retention in foods.  That is presence of a host of biologically and nutritionally activity 
active constituents  in the rice bran include rice bran oil include or yzanol , tocopherol, 
tocotrienol, ste aryl esters , Squalene , diglycer ides, etc.  
 
Enzymes are a very important aspect of the rice bran and particularly the rice bran oil that 
is in the rice bran there are several enzyme that is it contained that is a bran which is 
obtained from the milling of the raw paddy  and is classified as full fat rice bran and it is 
light coloured oily unstable meal of various particle size and the it contains that is the rice 
bran contains many  active enzymes and germ and other outer layer of the caryopsis have 
higher enzyme activities t han the bran. So, the enzyme normally which are found in the 
rice bran include amylose , ascorbic acid  oxidase, catalase, cytochrome oxidase, 
glycosidase, invertase, lecithinase, lipase, lipoxygenase,  pectinase, peroxidase, 
phosphatase, phytase, proteinase,  succinate, dehydrogenase etc.  So, lot of all these 
enzymes many of these are very useful enzymes and some of them of  course, from the 
rice bran oil stability point of view some are not that good ok.   
 
Similarly, the lipase, lipoxygenase and peroxidase th ese are although very important 
commercially  because they affect the keeping quality and self life of the rice bran.  The 
most important and crucial properties of full fat raw rice bran is its instability  that is that 
is the instability of its oil caused by  oil splitting lipase enzyme ok and  which is the lipase 
enzyme which is inherently present in it.  So, it breaks that is lipase it breaks the ester 
linkage, it hydrolyzes the triglyceride  and it increases the fatty acid content the enzyme 
lipase acts as a c atalyst. So, in the intact grain the lipase are localized in the Testa cross 
layer of the rice grain  while in the oil it is in the al eurone  and in the sub  aleurone  layers in 
the germ .  
 
So, this rice bran oil it contains a 1,3 -Specific lipase and it starts hydrolyzing  that is rice 
lipase start hydrolyzing the triglyceride immediately after the removal  of rice bran and 
from the grain.  And the free fatty acids as I told you it may rise up to even 40 percent 
within 15 days  10, 15 days of course, dependin g upon the storage condition and whether 
if it is not  stabilized the enzyme lipase has not been taken care of and when it hydrolyzes 
the triglyceride  are converted into monoglyceride or triglyceride and free fatty acids are 
released earlier  we discussed.   
 
So, as I told you as soon as the bran surfaces surface is ruptured what happen that is the  
bran surface when it is ruptured and these enzymes are separated from the brown rice  in 
the milling operations the lipase enzyme comes in contact with the oil wear ing layers  
resulting in a very rapid rate of hydrolysis of the fat into FFA.  And immediately after 
milling the FFA content of the bran may be around below 3 percent,  but after milling the 
rate of increase of free fatty acid in the bran may be as high  as 1 percent per hour under 
favorable conditions even that favorable condition is that is the  condition which favor the 
activity of the enzyme. Bitterness develops very soon after milling whereas, soapy 
unpleasant taste develops during  long term storage.  So, a major problem of using rice 
bran oil for food purpose is the time lag between the  bran production and oil extraction.  If 
the oil extraction has process has been delayed and the bran is kept as such before  the oil 
extraction then these changes may take plac e in the bran.   
 
So, basically as a matter of rule the oil should be extracted immediately as soon as  the 
bran is produced.  Otherwise oil will be hydrolyzed into free fatty acid and glycerol by the 
action of that  is enzymes and then rice bran oil will wit h an excess of 10 percent free fatty 
acids is  unfit for human consumption. In fact, bran with more than 5 percent free fatty 
acids will not be feasible for refining  by a chemical method due to the higher refining 
losses.  As rice bran with a free fatty as s uch rice bran with a 5 percent free fatty acid 
content  exceeding that is the 5 percent is the deemed to be the unfit for the human 
consumption  etc. 
 
So, now so, keeping all these things stabilization of the rice bran becomes very very 
important.  Stabilization means that is the rice bran before it is subjected to extraction of 
the oil it must be given some sort of treatment to inactivate this lipase or fat splitting  
enzymes.  So, the process is basically the stabilization process it produces a stabl e rice 
bran by  inactivating the deteriorative enzymes and this is called a stabilization. The bran 
can be stabilized by different methods like physical methods, chemical method and  
enzymatic methods.  Thermal treatment is the most common method which is use d to 
stabilize rice bran.  So, in this high temperature above 120 °C is bran is exposed to this and 
which  denatures the enzyme responsible for the oxidation of oil and rice bran without 
destroying the  nutritional value of the bran.  Most of the processes invo lve either dry or 
moist heat treatment . 
 
So, the physical method that is of applying the heat treatment like it may be simple steam  
retorting or pressure cooking or autoclaving of the rice bran or even oven drying more  
than 100 °C temperature can be used here in the oven air drying. But of course, that is 
here that is the it may the accordingly depending upon the time  the process and 
temperature heat penetration characteristics it may take some time in the  process for the 
complete inactivation of the enzymes.  So, the roasting normally at 190 °C temperature for 
10 to 12, 10 to 11 minute  is reported optimum for stabilization of rice bran and the 
treatment this treatment results  in about 14 to 15 percent oil yield which contains 5 to 6 
percent free fatty acid and  8 to 9 milli equivalent per kg of peroxides.  Extrusion is 
considered to be another good process for stabilization of the rice bran  that is extrusion 
cooking it produces a stabilized bran which shows no significant increase in  free fatty 
acid content for at least 30 to 60 days of storage under standard conditions.  In the 
optimum process that is 500 kg per hour of 12 to 13 percent moisture bran was  extruded 
at 130 °C and held for 3 minute at 97 to 99 °C before  cooling and it causes t he enzyme 
inactivation.   
 
Then ohmic heating is again another important method that is here that is between two 
electrodes  that material is kept and electric through that the electric current is passed 
through  the food and that generates heat. So, the tre ated sample is observed to be stable 
even after 75 days of storage in comparison  to raw rice bran samples.  The percent free 
fatty acid in treated that is (ohmically  heated ) rice bran was observed  to be about 4.7 
percent after 75 days of storage whereas, it  was around 42 percent in case  of raw rice 
bran.  So, you can see the difference . 
 
Then dielectric heating or microwave heating they can also be used for stabilization of  
the rice bran for example, dielectric heating that 0.5 k V per centimeter or 13.56 MHz  is 
used to treat the rice bran containing around 21 percent moisture content and it  resulted in 
an increase in the free fatty acids from 4.2 to 6.2 percent during a 6 week s cold storage 
ok. So, it means that there is a significant reduction in the life ag e activity.  Similarly the 
rice bran was stabilized by microwave heating at 2450 MHz  for 3  minutes and it was 
found to be stable that is bran was found to be stable up to 4 weeks  in storage. FFA 
content of microwave stabilized bran increased from 4 to 4.9 pe rcent in long rice bran as  
well as from 4.6 to 6.25 % in medium grain rice bran.  
 
Infrared heating that is the FFA content of the samples that is in week 0 was between  4.4 
and 4.86 percent.  However the infrared heated sample after 4 weeks of storage the th at is 
the it was  the FFA was measured about 5 %, deeming them unfit for the human 
consumption ok.  So, although from the results it appears that infrared is not an effective 
and suitable method  for rice bran stabilization.  The data shows that the technique has 
some potential for further investigation into its  suitability and the people are working on 
it and I hope that is the process standardization  can be done to treat the rice bran.  Dry 
heating that is use of dry heating method for stabilization studies fo und that FFA content  
retained between 10 percent and 8 week s long storage period.  The 60 % of these under the 
critical FFA content of 5 percent in a 4 week s long storage period.  
 
So, the chemical methods of bran stabilization include number one acid treat ment that the  
this process is based on the principle that lipase activity will be low at low pH.  So, if the 
process used hydrochloric acid at 40 liter per ton of bran for lowering the  pH of rice bran 
from 6.9 -6.0 to 4.0 and this becomes unfavorable medium becomes unfavorable  for the 
activity of lipase.  So, the acid is applied easily by either sprinkling or by spraying and 
this simple method which  takes less than 4 minute for a batch of 15 kg is useful for 
stabilization o f rice bran  in rice mills or where steam or electricity is not available easily.   
 
Then enzymatic method is another potential method this process involves the addition  of 
anti-lipase enzymes along with water and heat for stabilizing the rice bran. The enz ymatic 
treatment comprised of al calase treatment for complete inactivation of lipase  along with 
reduction in lipoxygenase activity and endoglucanase for improving the soluble  fiber 
content.  The nutraceutical molecules like  γ-oryzanol, α-tocopherol  and poly phenols were 
retained in the range  of 68 to 110 % and the total antioxidant activity was improved by 
enzyme stabilized  rice bran.   
 
So, after this stabilization obviously, the rice bran after the milling the bran is collected  
bran is immediately it is a n enzyme treated or stabilized lipase it is treated either  by 
enzyme or by heat or by acid etcetera chemical whatever method is there.  So, after the 
rice bran is stabilized enzymes are inactivated then it is subjected to the  extraction 
process and the extrac tion is done as usual like in any material rice bran  air suppressor 
broken rice, steam by cooking then it is normally there is solvent extraction  because the 
bran is a very hard particles and pressing etcetera may not work here.  So, it is subjected 
to the solvent extraction process and the miscella is obtained and miscella  oil is separated 
by the solvent distillation. Then by this process crude rice bran oil is obtained and this 
crude rice bran oil again  is subjected to refining treatment as discussed in th e earlier 
classes standard processes.  So, therefore, the process parameter may little bit vary 
depending upon the content like  various impurities present in the oil like in the 
degumming, neutralization, bleaching,  dewaxing, deodorization and finally, 
winterization.  So, these are the crude rice bran is passed through all these operations and 
finally,  the refined rice bran oil is obtaine d. 
 
Now, let me particularly for the specific some parameter for the rice bran that solvent  
extraction.  So, commercial gra de solvent which is used in the solvent extraction of rice 
bran oil  is a hexane. And as you see that there is a setup in the extracted desired solvent 
along with the plant  sample rice bran is kept and it is done in the vacuum distillation for 
the removing of the solvent after the from the miscella and then condensing chamber it is 
passed through  the condensing chamber for obtaining the liquefied rice bran oil.  So, the 
purified rice bran oil is extracted from the after the solvent extraction it is  after coll ected.  
So, this is just schematic representation . 
 
Then cold pressing of course, that is as I told you although it is very difficult, but  
sometime mechanical pressing there is a screw spelling etcetera there is the opposite does  
not involve either heat treatment or any organic solvent, but it is a substitute for 
conventional  practices and promising technique for oil extraction because it requires a 
labour force  and cost are lower.  But however, in the rice bran oil it may not very it may 
not be very useful, but if at  all it can be tried rice bran is placed in the mechanical 
pressing machine then mixture  containing rice bran oil fibers  and other impurities are 
obtained then filtration is  done using centrifuge mechanical filter and pu rified cold rice 
bran oil is obtained, but  the efficiency yield will be comparatively low here. Of course, if 
this rice bran is given some pretreatments like PEA or another thing ultrasonic  fabrication 
etc then this cold pressing may work.   
 
Then supercritical carbon dioxide extraction in earlier classes we have discussed in detail  
the supercritical extraction principle.  So, I will compar e with other organic solvent 
supercritical fluid extraction  which  is faster and  more efficient because of higher  
penetration power into the matrix and it is beneficial  transport property.  So, it refers to 
separation technology which uses which uses supercritical fluid as a carbon  dioxide and 
above the critical pressure and temperature.   
 
So, also another potential technology is the subcritical water extraction (SWE ). It offers a 
cost effective and environmentally safe alternative compared to other methods  as it takes 
advantage of the special properties of the supercritical water under high temperature  and 
pressure c onditions that is the conditions are 100 °C temperature  to 374°C and pressure 
more than 5 MPa.  And the principle of supercritical water extraction is based on the a  
principle of subcritical water extraction is based on the molecular structure and 
thermodynamic  properties of the water.   
 
Microwave treatment is a green technique over the conventional methods for extracting 
the fats.  And this process particularly has i n recently gained popularity due to its less 
extraction  time energy and solvent consumption as a promising alternative for the 
conventional solvent solution.  So, in this case that is the through there is a suitable 
microwave generation source  and in this c avity microwave the rice brands they are 
exposed to microwave and these microwaves  because of the there is a some it causes the 
breakage of the cell wall due to the molecular  movement inside material when the 
microwaves penetrates into it. Then  try to alig n to the oppositely charged poles and then 
it causes the fraction  and rupture and this causes low specific heat of liquids makes it  
them susceptible  to this radiation and thus it facilitates the solubility in the extractant 
because of  this there is the mov ement of the material becomes better.   
 
Similarly same principle works on the ultrasound assisted extraction method for.  So, as I 
told you after giving this ultrasound extraction treatment or microwave treatment  or even 
other such treatment that is here it increases the pore size and like ultrasound  treatment 
the ultrasonication it induces cavitation and increases the permeability of the plan t 
tissues. So, micro fractures and are created and disruptions of cell wall are there and 
which provide more  eviden ce for the mechanical effects of ultrasound thus facilitating the 
release of their content  that is the it has a n ultrasound has many advantages including 
high extraction yield, high reproducibility,  low solvent use, short extraction time and low 
running co st because of the creation of  pores etc.  And then the material extraction 
remove that is an easy flow and yield increase to ultrasound  assisted bran or even 
microwave treated bran etc  or even PF pulse electric field treated  brans they can be then 
subjected  to either solvent extraction or also mechanical extraction.  
 
Then there is another enzyme assisted aqueous extraction as well this is also a good 
promising  technology because enzymes this is the it has emerged a n eco-friendly  and 
emerging green  technolo gy which facilitates the release of oil in the aqueous extraction 
process while  avoiding the use of any organic solvents.  And the principle is seen here that 
there are certain cell wall degrade the enzymes  are used and these enzymes when it is 
given mixture of enzymes when this bran  is exposed to this then cell wall that is a which 
is cover the oil droplets etc  they are broken and it releases this cell that is oil and its 
extraction becomes  easier.  The main enzymes which are used here are cellulose, 
pectinase and proteases .  
 
Then finally, packaging and storage condition that is rice bran oil needs to be packaged  in 
suitable well closed tin or food grade plastic material packaging once used should  not be 
reused and the packaging material should not af fect the properties of the oil  and at the 
same time it should maintain the shelf life of the product.  All the oil brands are generally 
packaged in a poly pack of 1 litre nowadays these are  becoming very popular in the 
Indian market as well as in the intern ational market that  is poly pack of 1 litre consumer 
packs. Rice bran oil should be stored in a cool dry location .  
 
These are some of the pictures  of the some of the common popular brands of Indian 
brands of rice bran oil.  
 
So, finally, I will summarize  this lecture by saying that yes rice bran oil has several  health 
benefits it is a golden health oils.  However the lip ase enzyme present inside the bran they 
may cause problem in the bran  as well as in the oil they and they may reduce the shelf 
life ok.  And therefore, it needs to be stabilized inactivated that is inactivated life as 
activity need  to be controlled to extend the shelf life of the bran as well as keeping 
quality of  the oil.  So, different stabilization process like physical chemical enzymatic 
process is carried out  due to stabilize the rice bran before milling and both conventional 
and non -conventional  method are applied for rice bran oil extraction ok. In the non -
conventional method like PF, microwave and this enzyme treatment enzyme extraction  
etcetera that may be helpful in getting the better oil recovery better oil quality ok.  Rice 
bran oil should be packaged in tin or food grade plastic containers and they should  be 
stored in cool dry place.   
 
So, these are the references that were used to prepare this lecture with this.  Thank you 
very much for your patience here.  
