Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 10 : Specialty Oils and Fats Products  
Lecture 48 : Essential Oils  
 
 
 Hello everybody, Namaskar.  Now we are in the 48th lecture of this course.  Today in 
the next half an hour or so, in this class we will study essential oils.  We will discuss 
characteristics , properties, classification, health value , and extraction  meth ods for various 
essential oils.  Also , we will discuss the stability of essential oils, then we will take 
certain case studies and examples . We will talk about citrus essential oils, and spice 
essential oils , and finally, we will also briefly discuss co njugated linoleic acid which  is 
commonly known as CLA.  
 
Essential oils (EOs) are plant -based volatile oils with strong aromatic components made 
up of different che mical compounds.  It is a kind of concentrated hydrophobic liquid 
containing volatile aroma compounds from the plant. They are also known as aromatic 
oils, fragrant oils, steam volatile oils, or simply as the “Oil of …” the plant material.  like 
oil of clove, ginger, lemon,,  and so on.  As far as the physical proper ties of essential oils 
are concerned, they are soluble inorganic solvents , they have a specific gravity in the 
range of 0.8 to 1. 17, they are sensitive  to heat and light and they are optically active 
compounds.  The health benefits include  relaxing  body and mind, essential oils curing  
nervous disorders , it prevents hair loss , and fighting  depression.  
 
The major examples  of essential oil include peppermint, eucalyptus, wild mint, Van tulsi , 
lemon tulsi, clove oil, lemongrass oil, citronella  etcetera.  And  the major compounds 
which are present in the essential oils, their physical properties , and biological 
applications are provided in the table. Compounds like  ketones,  alcohols, camphors 
etcetera are available in the essential oil  of the plant so urce lavandola stocchas and they 
have biol ogical applications like antispasmodic , sedative, anti -inflammatory, anti-anxiety  
and so on.  Similarl y that monotrepenes  D-Limonene  are found in the  essential oil  of 
citrus  limon. T hey are well known for their antifungal and antioxidant properties.   
Similarly oxygenated sesquiterpenes, a-bisabolol  are found in the Matricaria recutita  and 
they are known for their anti -irritant , anti -inflammatory  and antimicrobial activity.  
Cinnama ldehyde is a common component of the essential oil in cinnamon , zeylanicum  
and it is known for its bactericidal activity, fungicidal or insecticidal acti vities.  So, these 
essential oils contain various organic compounds that have several  properties like 
curative and health promoting activities. They are also responsible for the flavor they 
introduce in var ious materials . 
  
Essential oils are classified in various ways . One way of classification  is that botanical 
classification , that is they are classi fied based on the plant species  they are derived from.  
Other way of classification may be chemical composition that is it involves the 
classification  based on chemical composition involves categorizing oil into groups such 
as monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, alcohol s, esters, phenol s, and ketones, etcetera.  Then 
they can also be cla ssified on the basis of the aromatic profile and here the Common 
categories include floral (e.g. Rose, Jasmine), citrus (e.g. Lemon, Orange), woody (e.g. 
Cedarwood, Sandalwood), herbal (e.g. Rosemary , Basil),  and spicy (e.g. Clove).  
Classificat ion on the basis of therapeutic properties include the properties such as  
relaxing, uplifting, energizing, antimicrobial, anti -inflammatory, analgesic or immune 
stimula ting.  Based on the note, classified into thre e main categories known as top notes, 
middle notes, and base notes. Top notes are light and volatile, evaporating quickly, while 
base notes are heavier and evaporate slowly. Middle notes provide a balance between top 
and base notes.  
 
Extraction of essential oils include several steps , but the  major process is actually the 
distillation.  Here you can see in this figure , that water is first heated in suitable assembly  
of apparatus  and the steam comes in contact with plant  material , which contains the 
essential oils. When steams goes up it carries with it the essential oil contained in the 
plant mate rial,  then the oil rises with the steam above comes into a condenser where  it 
comes in contact with the cold oil and the cold water.  There is cold water that is in fact, 
it is fed into the c ondenser you can see is coming from bott om and goes out of top.  In the 
condenser chamber,  this cold water cools the steam into an oil and water  mixture.  And 
then it is separated that is the oil when it is condensed the oil rises to the top of the water 
and it is extracted.  T he leftover hydrosol can also be used in beauty or home care 
products . So, this is in brief the principle of extraction of essential oil from plant material.  
 
Methods of extraction include hydro distillation, steam distillation, solvent extraction , 
carbon dioxide extraction or cold pressing.  
 
Hydro -distillation is a traditional method for extraction of essential oils.  It is one of the 
oldest and easiest methods being used in the small scale as well as in the large scale for 
the extraction of essential oils . In this method, as you can see in the figure the essential 
oils are evaporated by heating a mixture of water or other  solvent and plant materials 
followed by the liquefaction of the vapors in a condenser.  The s etup comprises als o a 
condenser and a decanter to collect the condensate and to separate essential oils from 
water, respectively . Principle of extraction is base d on the isotropic distillation that is 
water distillation, water and steam distillation or even it may be a direct steam  
distillation.   
 
In this method, the material is completely immersed in water, which is boiled by apply ing 
heat by direct fire, steam jacket, closed steam jacket, closed steam coil or open steam coil  
as shown here  in the figure.  The plant material i n the still must be agitated as  the water 
boils, otherwise agglomerations of dense material will settle on the bottom and become 
thermal ly degraded.  Advantage is that it permits processing of finely powdered material or 
plant parts that, by contact with live steam, would otherwise form lumps through which the 
steam cannot penetrate.  The main disadvantage is that complete extraction is not possible.  
 
In water and steam distillation, the steam can be generated either in a satellite boiler or 
within the still, which make plant material separated from the water.  Like water 
distillation, water and steam distillation is widely used in rural areas. Moreover, it does 
not require more capital expenditure than water distillation.  Advantages of water and 
steam distillation over water distillation include  the higher  oil yield, components of the 
volatile air are less susceptible to hydrolysis and polymerization  and oil quality produced 
by steam and water distillation is more reproducible.  
 
Then let us talk steam distillation. Steam distillation is a type of distillation (a separation 
or extraction process) for a temperature -sensitive plant such as natural aromatic 
compounds.  In this method, the plant materials, charged in the alembic, are subj ected to 
the steam without maceration in water. The injected steam passes through plants from t he 
base of the alembic to the top.  This steam functions as agents that break up the pores of 
the raw material and release the essential oil from it. The system yields a mixture of a 
vapour and desired essential oil. This vapour is then condensed further and the essential 
oil is collected.  It is one of anc ient and official approved methods for isolation  of                                
essential oils from plant materials.  
 
The principle of this technique is that the combined vapor pressure equals the ambient 
pressure at about 100 °C so that the volatile components with the boiling points ranging 
from 150 to 300 °C can be evaporated at a temperature close to that o f water . 
 
Then next is the solvent extraction method l ike in the case of earlier oils, here also 
solvent extraction can be used . This method employs food grade solvents (hexane &  
ethanol) to isolate essential oils from plant material. It is best suited for plant materials 
that yield low amounts of essential oil, that are largely resinous, or that are delicate 
aromatics unable to withstand the pressure and distress of steam distillation.  Once the 
treatment of plant material with solvent is completed, then a waxy aromatic compound 
called a " concrete” is  produced . When this concrete substance is mixed with alcohol,  the 
oil particles are released as  you can see in the figure,  in this solvent water and oil solution  
is there and this is mixed with alcohol and heated . This is also known as liquid –liquid 
extraction or partitioning.  It is used to p roduce higher amount of essential oils at a lower 
cost. 
 
The CO2 extraction process produce higher quality oils that have not been altered by the 
application of high heat, unlike the steam distillation process. Moreover, none of the 
constituents of the oil are damaged by heat.  The difference between traditional distillation 
and supercritical extraction is that instead of heated water or steam, CO2 is used as a 
solvent in the latter method.  The supercritical extraction process operates at temperatures 
between 95 to 100 ᵒF whereas steam distillation operates at temperatures between 140 to 
212 ᵒF. CO2 extracts are usually t hicker than their essential oil counterparts and often 
give off more of the aroma of the natural herb, spice, or plant than a distilled essential oil.  
CO2 extracts have been said to contain more plant constituents than amount extracted  
from the same plant using steam distillation.  
 
So, the carbon dioxide extraction process in th e earlier classes also we have discussed 
and this is about the extraction setup.  So, here in this case also Pressurized CO2 becomes 
liquid while remaining in a gaseous state, which  means it is supercritical. In this state, it 
is pumped into a chamber filled with plant matter.  Because of the liquid properties of the 
gas, the CO2 functions as a solvent on the natural plant matter, pulling the oils  and other 
substances such as pigment and resin from the plant matter.  The essential oil then 
dissolves into  the liquid CO2.  The CO2 is brought back to natural pressure and 
evaporates back into its gaseous state, while what is left is the result ing oil.  
 
Then another process is the cold press extraction.   In the cold press extraction that is the 
plant material soft tissue, which is containing the essential oils is placed in a device that 
mechanically pierces it to rupture the essential oil sacs, which are located on the 
underside of the rind.  The essential oil and pigments run down into the device’s 
collection area. The whole fruit i s pressed to squeeze out the juice and the oil. The oil and 
juice that are produced still contain solids from the fruits, such as the peel, and must be 
centrifuged to filter the solids from the liquids. The oil separates from the juice layer and 
is siphoned off into another receptacle.  That is this emulsion is centrifuge d where 
essential oils being lighter are separated  from the water and this process is normally very 
popular i n the extraction of the citrus essential oils.  
 
 Now, let us talk abou t stability of the essential oils.  Basically, the stability of essential oil 
depend on variou s external factors like light, temperature, oxygen availability and metal 
contaminants and water content.  As far as the light is concerned, the ultraviolet  light and 
visible light are considered to accelerate auto oxidation process by triggering the 
hydrogen abstraction that results in the  formation of alkyl radicals.  All the 
compositional changes continued highly faster when illumination was involved.  
Especially, monoterpenes have been shown to degrade rapidly under the influence of 
light.  Changes in several essential oils were promoted under the impact of light.  
However, oils from varying plant species respond differently.   
 
Then effect of temperature, ambient temperature crucially influences essential oil 
stability in several respects. Generally, chemical reactions accelerate with increasing heat 
due to the temperature -dependence of the reac tion rate.  Based on Arrhenius equation, and 
as per Vant’s Hoff law, tem perature rise of 10 °C doubles chemical reaction rates, a 
relation that conclude stability at different temperatures.  Both autoxidation as well as 
decomposition of hydroperoxides advances with increasing temperature, because heat is 
likely to  contribute to the initial formation of free radicals . Then availability of oxygen 
plays a decisive role in essential oil stability . Oil oxidation accelerates with concentration 
of dissolv ed oxygen, which in turn depends largely on oxygen partial pressure in the 
headspace and ambient temperature.  Without stimulating, oxygen diffusion int o the 
sample takes place slowly over time.  As per Henry’s law, oxygen solubility is high at low 
temperature and radically decreases with an augmentation in degrees Celsius.  
 
As per  metal contaminants, upon distillation in primitive stills or during storage in 
metallic containers, impurities of metals can be released into essential oils. Similar to 
light and heat, heavy metals, specially copper and ferrous ions, are considered to promot e 
autoxidation, in certain  if hydroperoxides are already present.  Another factor is the water 
content of oil. Moisture has been considered as a possible reaso n for EO spoilage.  High 
moisture content reduced the quality and storage life.  
 
Now, let us talk about some specific essential oils.  We will first talk about citrus 
essential oils. Citrus essential oil refers to the concentrated, volatile oils extracted from 
the peels or rinds  of various citrus fruits, such as oranges, lemons, grapefruits, limes, and 
bergamots. These oils are extracted through cold -pressing or steam distilla tion process.  
The citrus essential oils have several benefits like they are known for their aromatherapy.  
Citrus essential oils are commonly used in aromatherapy due to  their uplifting and 
refreshing  scent.  They can help promote relaxation, reduce st ress, and improve mood.  
Citrus oils possess antimicrobial properties that can help inhibit the growth of certai n 
bacteria and fungi. They are often used as natural disinfectants.  Certain citrus oils, such 
as lemon and bergamot, are believed to aid digestion  Citrus oils are known for their 
invigorating and energizing properties. They are known particularly during the COVID. 
They can help increase mental alertness, imp rove concentration, and boost overall 
cognitive function .  
 
  Then spice oils, as you know India is known as “Home of Spices”.  Spice oil is a 
concentrated liquid that contains volatile aromatic  compounds responsible for 
charact eristic aroma and f lavour of spices . It is extracted from various parts of spices, 
such as seeds, leaves, bark, or flowers, usi ng different methods depending on the spice 
and desired oil.  So, normally the process for extraction of essential oil is the preparation 
of these spice plant , like spices they are harvested, d ried, ground, and then after grinding 
the extraction may be depending upon the part o f the plant and the type of the  species.  It 
may be a cold press  extraction, solvent extraction, or steam dis tillation and by this  spice 
oil is obtained.  
 
So, let us take one or two case studies like here that is characteristics of clove oil 
extracted  from different parts of the clove that is the bud, stem, or leaf  is provided.  When 
bud is used then essential oils obtained is 18 percent whereas, in the stem  it is 6 percent 
and in the leaf of the clove it is 3 to 4 percent.  And accordingly the specific gravity of 
the oil obtai ned from these different parts fluctuates and there are differences in the  
refractive index value also with the parts of the plant.  Total eugenol content is about 80 
percent in the essential oil obtained from bud, around 85 percent in spice oil  obtained 
from the stem and 82 percent in  spice oil  which is obtained from leaf.  Similarly their 
solubility is ethanol  is 1:2 and total eugenol if you see that  bud spice oil  contains around 
62 percent eugenol , in stem essential oils 80 percent , and leaf essential oil 7 7 percent.  
Eugenol acetate is 18.72 in spice oil  obtained from bud, 2: 1 from stem and trace amount 
in leaf. B eta car yphyllene is about 15 percent in the bud essential oil , 13 percent in stem 
essential oil and about 17 percent in the leaf essential oil.  So, you can see here that is the 
characteristics of the essential oil , they vary depending upon  the part of the plant that is 
used to extract the essential oil.  
 
 Similarly if you tak e the a comparison of the clove oil obtained by different methods  
such as  hydro distillation for 4 to 6 hours, steam distillation for 8 to 10  hours at 60 
degree Celsius and soxhlet  extraction with absolute ethanol for  about 6 hour s and 
concentrated using rotary vacuum evaporator at 50 degree Celsius.  The comparison is 
made between  supercritica l fluid extraction at 50 degree Celsius and 10 mega Pascal 
steam distillation, hydro distillation and soxhlet extraction .  And you can see the yield 
considerably increases in the soxhlet and it gets a maximum yield  of about  42 percent 
whereas, supercritical fluid extractio n gives about 20 percent yield, but the steam 
distillation and hydro distillation a re just half of the supercritical at about  10 percent on 
an average basis yield.  Similarly there is a huge difference in the eugenol plu s eugenol 
acetate percentage. The soxhlet extraction has the lowe st that is 30%, while the SFE and 
steam distillati on has double the amount, i.e.  58.8 and 61.2 percent. The hydrodistillation 
has 50% of eugenol plu s eugenol acetate . And the color also varies like the color of the 
essential oil obtained by supercritical fluid extraction is pale yellow, steam distill ation is 
also pale brown yellow  and hydro distillation is the brown yellow . And soxhlet extraction 
is also brown yellow and the extraction period also varies . 
 
Extraction of lemon grass oil includes  procurement of the raw material that is from which 
the lemon gr ass oil is processed. Then cleaning of the required part in large washing tank , 
and fed into the  heating tank and then steam distillation.  So, oil separation and extraction  
takes place, followed by  vacuum evapouration  pure lemon g rass oil is obtained and it is 
cooled at low temperature . Minimum citral oil yield of 0.53% was obtained on sample 
particle size of 3 cm and bed volume of 80%, Maximum yield of 1.95% on sample 
particle size of 15 cm an d bed volume of 40%. Solubility of citral oil in alcohol was 70% 
in ratio of 1:1,  Citral oil concentration was 79%.  
 
Then it is a extraction of turmeric essential oil by microwave assisted  solvent extraction .  
The picture shows the  effect of the microwave power , extraction time on essential oil  
yield using hexane as a solvent  or petroleum ether as solvent.  Extraction time 
significantly (P< 0.05) decreased from 30 to 1 0 min with increase in power from 200 W 
to 400 W.  Essential oil yield was higher using hexane. Optimum co ndition for microwave 
assisted extraction was 300 W for 20 min.   
 
The table shows t he comparison of the hydro distilled oil to sub critical ly extracted oil 
from turmeric. The  component  alpha curcumi n in the hydro distilled turmeric  oil is nil 
while  in the sub criti cal oven dried turmeric is 0.046. T here are other compounds like  
beta sesquiphellandrene , zingiberebe , ar-turmerone, turmerone, and curlone present   
when the oil is obtained by hydro distillation or by sub critically extracted oil , even 
though there are certain variations . 
 
Then let us briefly talk about conjugated linoleic acid . Linoleic acid is the most common 
ω-6 fatty acid, found in large amounts in vegetable oils but also in various other foods in 
smaller amounts. The “conjugated” prefix has to do with the arrangement of the double 
bonds in the fatty acid molecule. There are 28 different forms of CLA.  The difference 
between these forms is that their double bonds are arranged in various ways.  The main 
dietary sources of CLA are the meat and milk o f ruminants (cow, goat, sheep.). The total 
amounts of CLA in these foods varies greatly depending on wha t animals                         
ate. For example, the CLA content is 300 – 500% higher in beef and dairy from                              
grass -fed cows than grain -fed cows.  Possibly effective for high blood pressure.  Taking 
CLA by mouth daily might help decrease body fat in adults and children.  
 
 The CLA found in milk and meat fat of ruminants originate from two sources. One 
source is CLA formed during ruminal biohydrogenation of linoleic acid. The second 
source is CLA synthesized by the animal ’s tissues from trans -11 C18:1, another 
intermediate in the biohydrogenation of unsaturated fatty acids.  The CLA found in 
milk and meat  fat of ruminant originate from two sources.  The uniqueness of CLA in 
food products derived from ruminants relates to the incomplete biohydrogenation of 
dietary unsaturated fatty acid s in the rumen.  Ironically, rumen biohydrogenation of 
dietary lipids is responsible for high levels of saturated fatty acids in fat of ruminants, a 
feature considered undesirable for some aspects of human health, as well as f or ruminant 
fat containing CLA, fatty acids with many putative beneficial effects on human health.  
Factors affecting CLA content of ruminant fats  are d ietary factors , CLA s upplements and 
lipid metabolism.  
 
So, finally, I will summarize this lecture. Essential oils (EOs) are plant -based volatile oils 
with strong aromatic components made up of different chemical compounds.  Hydro 
distillation, steam distillation, solvent extraction, CO2 extraction and cold pressing are  
different extraction methods for essential oils.  Essential oils are classified on the basis of 
botanical, chemical, aroma, therapeutic and note.  Temperature, light, oxygen availability, 
metal contaminants and water content are the different factors affect ing the stability of 
essential oils.  Linoleic acid is the most common ω -6 fatty acid, found in large amounts in 
vegetable oils but also in various other foods in smaller amounts.  
 
So, these are the references that we are used in preparing this lecture.  So, this thank you 
very much for yo ur patience hearing.  Thank you.  