Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 12: Packaging, Storage, & QA/QC  
Lecture 59: Quality Analysis & Control  
 
Hello everyone. Namaskar.  
 
Today in lecture 59, we will discuss about Quality Analysis and Quality Control for 
Food Oil fats. We will discuss various quality parameters for edible oil fats, oxidative 
quality and stability tests, then various carbonyl com pounds which are present in oil 
fats, then chemical quick test and also we will throw some light on adulteration in 
oil fats.  
 
 
You know the various edible oils are prone to quality deterioration through 
oxidation and microbial degradation resulting in n utritional losses and off -flavor 
development. And some major aspects of this we already discussed in the various 
classes wherever it was necessary. Quality deterioration may contribute in the 
formation of oxidation products that are reactive and toxic whic h ultimately pose 
health risks including cancer and inflammation. Adulteration of fats and oils is 
increasing day by day throughout the world. Therefore, quality of oil is very 
important to regulate. Quality assurance criteria may depend partly on the type  of 
oil under investigation as well as on other factors that may vary depending on the 
intended use and regulations that vary from country to country.  
 
So, the various physical and chemical quality parameters include that is the physical 
parameters fatty  acid composition and distribution, relative density at 20  °C and 40  
°C, viscosity at 20-40°C, color may be both visual or colorimetry test, then turbidity 
visual or instrumental, solidification point, tighter or solid -fat content and cooling 
curve that is for water insoluble fatty acids and then odor and taste. So, these are the 
physical paramete rs which indicate the quality of fats and oils. Chemical parameters 
include saponification value, iodine value, un saponifiable matter, acid value, a 
smoke point, flash point, fire points, peroxide value, thiobarbit uric acid value and 
para -Anisidine  value and finally, the TOTOX  value. So, these  are the chemical 
parameters which indicate the quality of fats and oils.  
 
So, here in this table I just tried to give you some of the important quality 
parameters of major cooking oil. For example, soybean oil it s hould contain acid 
value not more than 1.15 percent, peroxide value maximum permitted is 10 milli 
equivalent per kg of the oil, iodine value it contains around 139 g per 100 g and 
viscosity at 40  °C is 40 mpas and its saponification value is 195. Similarly this similar 
data for sunflower oil include 1.21  %FFA, 6.6 Meq /kg per oxide value, iodine value 
134, viscosity 29 MPas at 40 °C and saponification value 193. For mustard oil again 
the FFA should be maximum 1.5 percent, maximum peroxide value should be 20 
Meq /kg, then its iodine value is 125, viscosity at 40 °C is 48 and saponification value 
is 184. And palm oil it has a that is free fatty acid 1.75, peroxide value 3.18, iodine 
value 45 because it contains more saturated fats. So, its iodine value is less, visc osity 
at 40 °C of palm oil is 29 and saponification value is 202. Olive oil it contains more 
free fatty acids permitted maybe that is 6.6 percent up to acid value and then 
peroxide value again maximum is 10, iodine value 94, viscosity at 40 °C is 40 MPas  
and saponification value is 196. So, you can see that earlier also we discussed that 
different factors such as fatty acid composition of the oil, product quality, frying 
time, temperature, heating type, composition of the frying oil, composition of the 
fried f ood, fryer type, antioxidant and oxygen availability affect the deprivation of 
the oil.  
 
Now, as regard to the oil composition earlier also in the beginning of this course we 
discussed that fats and oil contain various classes of compounds. These compoun ds 
are primarily neutral lipids that include triglycerides and diglycerides or some 
amount of monoglycerides and also there are some free fatty acids. So, partial 
acylglycerols are produced by the hydrolysis of triacylglycerols. So, the amount of 
free fatt y acids should be less than 0.1 percent preferably less than 0.05 percent in 
freshly refined oils. In addition , polar lipids mainly phospholipids and to a lesser 
extent glycolipids are present in the oils.  
 
The compound that is minor compounds which are present in the fats and oil that is 
the polar lipids as well as the sphingolipids. The polar lipids are the mainly 
phospholipids and these originate primarily as components of cell membrane and 
serve biological functions in the oil.  Among phospholipids tha t present are 
phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidyl ethanolamine and phosphatidyl inositol. 
Sphingolipids are also important bioactive  components of all membranes. The 
content of polar lipid is reduced during oil refining. D egumming removes most polar 
lipids. However, refining, bleaching and deodorization would also bring about a 
reduction in the content of polar lipids.  
 
Regarding un -saponifiable manner, the fraction of substances in oils and fats which 
is not saponified by caustic and alkali, but is soluble  in ordinary fat solvent is called 
un-saponifiable matter. In general, un -saponifiable matter are present in edible oils 
at less than 2 percent which includes tocopherols, tocotrienols, other phenolics, 
phytosterols, hydrocarbons among others. The tocotrie nols are primarily in palm 
and rice bran oils. Meanwhile, tocopherols are more widely present in different oil. 
Sunflower oil contains mainly alpha tocopherols and very small amounts of other 
tocopherols. Whereas, soybean oil contains mainly gamma tocopher ols with 
decreasing amounts of alpha, beta and delta tocopherols.  
 
Another group of un -saponifiable matter is phytosterols that is fatty acid esters of 
phytosterols and sterol glycosides. The hydrocarbons present in oils are composed 
mainly of s qualene and carotenoids such as beta carotene among others. In addition, 
oxygenated derivatives of carotenoids may also be present.  
 
Now let us talk about characteristics of fats and oils. The important characteristics 
include melting point that is the melting p oint of fats and oils provides an estimate 
of the degree of saturation or unsaturation that parallels the saturation or 
unsaturation pattern dictated by their fatty acid constituents. Trans fats when 
present have a higher melting point than do their cis counterparts because of better 
packing of trans fatty acids when compared with their cis counterparts. Density of 
liquid oil is dependent on their fatty acid composition, minor components present 
and the temperature of the oil.  
 
A smoke point is another characteristic that is important if oils are used for frying. 
The temperature at which smoking is observed with actual frying or heating is 
measured with AOCS methods. Smoke point depends primarily on the content of 
free fatty acid s as they are more volatile than their corresponding triacylglycerol. 
The refractive index of the oil depends upon the molecular weight, fatty acid chain 
length, degree of unsaturation and degree of conjugation.  
 
Titer is the measure of solidification po int of the fatty acids. As regard to the color, 
most oils are yellow red or amber liquids. The color is from the presence of 
chlorophylls and carotenoids. The presence of chlorophylls not only render a green 
color to the product, but also they act as sensi tizers for fats and oil oxidation. Often 
lighter color has been associated with better quality of oils, essentially for solid oils 
as well as for shortening. Carotenoids are present in edible oils at different levels. 
These are powerful antioxidants agains t both autooxidation and photooxidation. 
The color of edible oil is measured by the so -called Vason method that is described 
in the AOCS methods.  
 
Then oxidative quality and stability tests are available. To determine the oxidative 
quality of the oils or  its stability of the oil, various tests are available. These tests are 
detailed in AOCS methods. Standard Laboratory Manuals and Protocols are there. 
So, once you refer to that. Here I will briefly tell you that what are these tests and 
how they are mainl y measured. Like peroxide value, it measures the mainly 
equivalent of oxygen that is hydroperoxide per gram of oil. This is based on the 
titration of the iodine released from potassium iodide by the peroxides in a biphasic 
system with a thiosulfate  solutio n. It is the most common measurement of lipid 
oxidation. The maximum peroxide value of 0.1 and preferably less than 0.05 is 
expected for freshly refined oil. The peroxide value of higher than 10 meq/kg per kg 
is considered unacceptable.  
 
Earlier classes a lso we discussed that the heat, metal, light, oxygen etc. These cause 
the oxidation of the fats and oils and it result into the formation of various peroxides 
and other component by the reactions which we have already discussed. So, these 
are determined th at is the peroxide or other compound they are determined either 
by hydrometric titration or by TPP /TPPO or FTIR -ATR detection. Hydrometric 
titration method is the most commonly followed it is the recommended method 
whereas, the TPP /TPPO or FTIR -ATR detecti on are new methods and they are of 
course, they are also used, but they are novel methods are later recent. So, these 
hydrometric methods are that is here sometime there are problem that 
overestimation ok, it is tedious method time consuming, there are lot  of solvents are 
required and strict control required in these method and these problems has been 
to great extent overcome by the new method that TPP /TPPO that is these methods 
are new methods are reliable, simple, they are fast and they are independent of  
environmental conditions. So, this would be now used.  
 
Then carbonyl compounds that is the peroxide that are oxidation test  also if there is 
a thiobarb ituric  acid or other compounds are present in it indicates that oxidation of 
the iron. Normally, the t wo thiobar bituric  acid test is used to detect oxidative 
deterioration of fat containing foods. So, in earlier class we discussed during lipid 
oxidation, malon aldehyde  a minor component of fatty acids with three or more 
double bonds is formed as a result of degradation of polyunsaturated fatty acid. So, 
TBA test is based on the formation of a colored complex between two molecules of 
TBA reagent and one molecule of m alon aldehyde or TBA reactive substance. The 
intensity of the pink chromosome is measured at 532  nm and the extent of oxidation 
is reported as the TBA value and is expressed as milligrams of ma lonaldehyde 
equivalents per kilogram sample or as micromoles of m alonaldehyde equivalent per 
gram of sample.  
 
Then p-anisidine value is another indicator of oxidation. The para anisidine value 
method measures the content of aldehydes, principally two alkenes  and two four 
alkadienals . These are which are generated during the decomposition of 
hydroperoxide. The para anisidine value is a reliable indicator of oxidative rancidity 
in fats and oils and fatty foods. In this method, para anisidine reacts with aldehydes 
in acetic acid to afford an alloys color that is measured at 350  nm. This test is more 
sensitive to unsaturated aldehydes than to saturated aldehydes because of the 
colored products from unsaturated aldehydes as they are more strongly at this 
wavelength.  
 
Then gas chromatographic methods are also used. Gas chromat ographic method 
that is it is generally used it may be used for measuring volatile oxidation product. A 
static headspace, dynamic headspace or direct injection method may be employed. A 
specific aldehyde may be measured as indicators of oxidative stability  of oils and 
fats. Thus propanol is an indicator for stability of omega 3 fatty acid whereas, 
hexanol is the best for following the oxidative stability of omega 6 fatty acids. So, 
there are standard GCMA protocols which can be used for detecting the oxidat ive 
stability.  
 
Then free fatty acids are acid value. The free fatty acids are normally calculated as a 
free oleic acid on a percentage basis. The free fatty acids in an oil is estimated by 
titrating it against potassium hydroxide in the presence of pheno lphthalein 
indicator. The acid value is defined as milligrams of potassium hydroxide required 
to neutralize the free fatty acid present in 1 gram of sample. They are also found 
during frying of fats and oils. The amount of moisture from foods fried and the  
frying temperature are very important.  
 
Then TOTOX value. The TOTOX value means total oxidation value that is it is often 
used in the industry in conjunction with the  PV value to calculate the so-called  
TOTOX value that is the total what is the total am ount of oxidation.  
𝑇𝑂𝑇𝑂𝑋=2𝑃𝑉+𝑝−𝐴𝑉 
The TOTOX  value is often considered to have the advantage of combining evidence 
about the past history of oil as reflected by the PV value. Then it is present stage as 
evidenced by peroxide value. So, both perox ide value and para -acidin value these 
both are taken into account while considering or calculating TOTOX  value. 
Therefore, the determination of TOTOX  value has been carried out extensively to 
estimate oxidative deterioration of food lipids. This value represents the oil or fat 
quality, oxidation status and presence of degradation products formed from 
previous oxidation of oil.  
 
Then the polymers and polar compounds which are present which might be present 
in the oil these contain the content of the polymers and polar component in oil 
increases during frying process . Particularly if the oil is cooked it is heated the 
polymerization takes place in the earlier classes we discussed in detail about all 
these things. So, size exclusion chromatography and HPLC may be used for the 
analysis of such component like polymers or polar components. The content of polar 
lipids should not exceed about 20 percent in th e oil in any case . Antioxidants are 
used widely in fired cyanide products to delay the oxidation process. Synthetic 
antioxidants such as hydroxyl butylated hydroxy anisole commonly known as BHA 
butylated hydroxyl toluene BHT or tertiary butyl hydroquinone  TBHQ and propyl 
gallate PG. These are permitted antioxidant that are frequently used in the products 
their presence and concentration may be determined with HPLC and GC methods. 
Meanwhile metal chelators such as citric acid may also be determined by the H PLC 
analysis.  
 
Then quick chemical test quick tests there are several test kits available for 
detection of various chemical parameters like free fatty acids or oxidation products 
using color reactions pH indicators redox indicators and so on. And one amo ng them 
is the 3 MTM shortening monitor. With these test strips FFA in the range of 0 to 2.5 
percent that is the lower range and 0 to 7 percent higher range can be detected. As 
mentioned above there is only very poor correlation between free fatty acid lev el 
and frying fat quality measured by the polymer triacylglycerols and total polar 
materials.  
 
Then Oxyfrit -test and Fritest. Oxyfrit -test can detect OXF using a redox indicator, fry 
test can detect carbonyl compounds measuring alkaline color and by comp aring 
with it a color scale. With these test frying oils can be classified into four general 
category from good to bad.  
 
Then SafeTM test these tests are not typical quick test, but fast and portable 
laboratory test liquid reagents and solvents and a portable spectrophotometer are 
required for this test. Results can be achieved much faster than with the official 
laboratory methods . PeroxySafeTM for lipid peroxides, AldeSafeTM for malondial -
dehyde, FASafeTM for FFA, and AlkalSafeTM for alkenals and so on that is it.  
 
Then oxidation stability index or you can say oil stability index . During lipid 
oxidation volatile organic acids mainly formic acid and acetic acid are produced as 
secondary volatile oxidation product at higher temperature and simultaneously 
with hydroperoxide. So, the oil stability index method measures the formation of  
volatile acids by monitoring the changes in the electrical conductivity when effluent 
from oxidizing oil is passed through water. However, this method requires a 
somewhat higher level of oxidation that is peroxide value should be more than 100 
to obtain m easurable results that than the other method in which hydroperoxides 
are the most important products formed and detected. Therefore, to determine the 
stability or oil stability in the laboratory especially for some oils that are stable 
under normal conditi ons, the oxidation process is accelerated by exposing oil 
samples to elevated temperatures in the presence of an excess amount of air or 
oxygen.  
 
The Ran cimat  test equipment in the Ran cimat  assay a flow of air is bubbled through 
a heated oil usually at 10 0°C temperature or even more than 100 °C. The 
temperature oil is heated to accelerate the oxidation process that is bollock pile 
compounds formed during the accelerated oxidation are collected in distilled water 
which causes the increase in the conductivity  of the water. And this change of 
conductivity in water is plotted automatically and the induction period of the oil or 
that is normally taken at the time taken to reach a fixed level of conductivity is 
recorded that is the induction period that is at that  particular temperature what is 
the minimum time that is required to reach the fixed level. The after conductivity 
means that is the conductivity of the water beyond which you can see that is now 
the oil becomes rancidar it is oxidized. So, the Ran cimat  assay enables continuous 
monitoring of the oxidation process. So, this is you can see here in the figure it is 
shown that is the sample it is heated here then air is continuously and this is the 
Ran cimat  apparatus . And then this f ormic acid is it comes in th e air water it is 
dissolved and then finally, it is in the it is in will provided in the equipment it is 
measured and this found you see the maximum conductivity here it is obtained 
beyond the result. So, that is taken as a induction period it is induction  period is 
indication of oil stability index . 
 
Then adulteration another very  common meanings there are two major 
adulterations in edible oils and fats namely admixing cold press oil with the refined 
ones and another type  is replacement of more expensive oils and fats with cheaper 
ones. For example, the common adulteration being done for that is various regions 
to have to get more margin of profit etc intentional addition of one thing into the 
other that is like mustard oil adulterated with argemone oil. Edible fats and 
hydrogenated oils are often mixed with the ghee to adulterate it. In several cases it 
has been observed that the castor oil, carangia oil, mineral oils and artificial colors 
are profoundly used to adulterate edible oils. Swabian oil is adulterated with linseed 
oil, virgin olive oil is adulterated with cotton seed oil and sunflower oil etc.  
 
So, the purpose of this is here is that is to  replace the good quality oil with the 
inferior quality oil and obviously, the purpose of adulteration is the to achieve that 
financial when the more economical profit, but this adulteration already also it 
creates health hazard. So, it must be prevented . For detection of adulteration there 
are various test available many older test involved it is determination of physical 
properties such as refractive index, melting point, viscosity etc or the color test we 
have later used for this purpose like boudomain r eaction for sesame oil and health 
and test for the cotton seed oil have been noted. Some acid based or alkali based 
color charging rapid detection kits are also available. So, various methods like 
vibrational spectroscopy like Raman NIR, FTIR spectroscopy or U V-Vis, NMR or MS 
mass spectroscopy, chromatographic technique like HPLC, GC, thermal analysis 
technique, differential scanning chromatography (DSC ) or other techniques like e -
nose etc are now become popular which can be used to determine this test. The n 
chemometric tools like PCA, LDA, PLS etc are used to analyze these results and get 
the data. So, you can see that the various test. So, the purpose is that is this test 
should be conducted to control the adulteration .  
 
So, finally, I will summarize thi s lecture by saying that lipid oxidation and associated 
changes are major causes of primary quality deterioration of lipids and lipid 
containing foods. Quality control is essential to ensure shelf life, safety and oil's 
appearance, flavor and color. The ke y to the final product is the quality of raw 
material used. Gas oxidative and stability test like an acid in value, thiobarbitalic 
acid value, gas chromatographic methods, free fatty acid, acid value can be used for 
quality control of oils. Chemical quick test can be used for detection of various 
chemical parameters like FFA, oxidation products using color reactions, pH 
indicators or redox indicators etc. Adulteration in oil can be detected by physical 
methods as well as analytical techniques such as FTIR, GC, NMR, HPLC, GC , MS, E -
nose, etc. So, the whatever is required that is industry must follow the standard 
procedures and protocol to analyze the quality parameters of oil and this analysis 
helps in maintaining the quality of the oil and to maintain it to safe level quality and 
safety of oil which is very important . And this various adulteration detection tests 
are available now just to ensure that as there is this maintenance of adulteration is 
minimized or completely prevented. Even there are various regu lation in force in 
the country  and various agencies are there which can detect which can help the 
industry in getting these tests done and therefore, getting helping them to maintain 
the quality and safety of their products.  
 
These were the references th at is used in this lecture.  This thank you very much for 
your patience here. Thank you.  
