Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 11: B y-products Utilization  & Valorization  of Oil Milling Industry Waste  
Lecture 53 : By-products Utilization – Part II  
 
Hello everyone, Namaskar.  Now, in this 53rd lecture, we will also take up one or 
two byproduct utilization.  In the earlier class, we saw , that is , how protein powders can 
be made.   
 
Then , let us discuss how these protein powders, that is , the oilseed floors can be 
converted  into value added product, that is , for texturization of protein textured vegetable 
protein.   
 
So, here , that is , for preparation of textured vegetable protein, de -oiled meal as a 
raw material . We will see  then TVP manufacturing process manufacturing technology.  
We will study that high and low moisture meat analog ues because now there is a lot of  
emphasis on being made on the texturization of vegetable protein , animal protein , and 
conversion , its in textured protein products to be used as a meat analog ue or meat 
extenders , etcetera.  Then , even they can be used as animal feed , and then this , from de -
oiled flours, they contain lot of bioactives. T hey can be used f or extraction of bioactive 
compounds.  Let us first talk about texturization of vegetable protein, that is , which is , 
popularly known as TVP.  These textured protein , vegetable protein or protein products  
they are defined as fabricated  palatable food ingre dients processed from an edible protein 
source.  And the ingredients , normally , it can be taken protein is olate, protein concentrate 
with or without suitable optional ingredients added for the nutritional  and technological 
purposes.  They may appear as fibr es, shreds, chunks or bits, granules, slices or in other 
forms.  Even they can resemble , that is , fresh animal meat or flesh.  When prepared for 
consumption by hydration, cooking, ret orting or other processes, they  retain their 
structural integrity and character istic chewy textur e and they resemble the normal meat.  
They are used as meat analog ue or meat extenders.  
 
So, texturization of de -oiled meal , that is , even though  you know that world 
population  is increasing every year , and the demand for food supply and protein  is 
equivalently increasing.  So, the cost of food production is increasing due to increas ed 
prices of raw materials, energy, competition for land use , as well as the cost associate d 
with addressing environmental  pollution, soil deterioration , etcetera.  So, sustainable 
method for producing alternative food sources  to feed the world by utilizing  reusable  and 
renewable sources such as agro wastes , oil seed cakes , etcetera they offer promise.  So, 
oilseed cakes can be used as a good source of protein for human utilization . We have 
studied  in the earlier class.  So, isolation of  protein from cake is not expensive and  hence 
it can be considered as a sustainable approach for protein production to meet the global 
food demand .   
 
So, technology of protein texturization include , that is , majo rity of the textured 
vegetable protein produc ts available in the markets.  They are produced using a 
technology called extrusion . That is , extrusion cooking has been  defined as the process in 
which the raw materials  are there is fibres, flou rs, etcetera. They are moisten ed, 
expansile , starchy and other protein aceous materials.  They are , there is the , plasticized in 
a tube by a combinat ion of moisture, pressure, heat  and mechanical shear.  You can see 
here, in the extruder , it contains, that is , a screw , the material is coming. That. T here are 
different screw barrel , that is , heaters are provid ed, thermocouples are there, it  is meaning 
die.  Then , the material , when c omes to the extruder , in it becomes almost thermoplastic 
melt,  and then a die can be in culcated, it is forced through a die , and various products of 
various  shapes , sizes , etcetera are obtained.  
 
So, that is the extrusion technology.  So, extrusion is widely used to achieve this 
restructuring of protein based raw material to process a variety of textured protein.  
During the extrusion process , mechanical and thermal energy are applied to protein 
material,  which makes the macromolecule lose their native organized structure and form 
a continuous  viscoelastic mass.  The extruder barrel screws and dies , they align the 
molecul es and then in the direction of  the flow.  This realignment exposes bonding sit es, 
which lead to cross linking and reformed expandable  structure that creates a chewy 
texture in the fabricated food.  That is , how, that is whole thing , the philosophy behind 
this extrusion and its conversion. So, commercially using specific dies and specific 
processing conditions , these materials are  converted into two types of me at analo gues, 
that is , high moisture meat analogue  or low moisture  meat analogue , popular HMMA or 
LMMA.   
 
So, what happen , what we discussed , that is , you see the phase transition 
mechanism for the formulation of protein fibrous structure during high moisture 
extrusion processing . And you can see , basically here , the material , when it may be that  is 
the protein mo lecule, lipid molecule or carbohydrate molecules , that is , the yell ow 
portion that is the deep red  portion is mainly the protein , yellow is  in the oil and other is 
the carbs.  So, they are mixed together and then when you put to the extruder barrel then 
it is mixed , water is added , appropriate quantity m ixed with water , then it is passed 
through  the air, shearing action is there, pressing is there, cooling is there , and in the 
various , when the cooling die , that is , high moi sture for high moisture meat analogue,  the 
long co oling die is there , and during actually this cooling process , in the cooling die , 
when the material  goes from here , that is , the temperature may be in initially , may be 
around 30 to 150 , then in heating about it is about 100 degree Celsius , and then finally, in  
the cooling section it comes from 150 to about 100 to about 60 degree Celsius 
temperature  and the various transformation  takes place . There is denaturation of the 
protein , you can see here the native protein;  how it is converted into denatured protein , 
and then in the denatured protein , then heat  and moisture and shear inside the extruder 
barrel , they act and they cause the realignment of these proteins , and then it is forced  
through the die , then there is a cross  linking and te xturization.  So, you get a non-oriented 
structure or layered and orient ed fibrous structure or layered  structure depending upon 
that: when the protein aligned speed is more than the phase separation speed you get 
basica lly a non -oriented  structure.  When the protein alignment speed i s equal to the phase 
separation speed , it gives a layered and oriented  fibrous structure . When protein 
alignment a protein aggregation , that is , aggregation speed is less than the phase 
separation speed , you get a layered structure. So, the conditions inside the e xtruder and in 
the cooling die can be maintained accordingly to get the desired structure , ok.   
 
So, the high moisture extrusion process , that is , plant proteins are  texturized 
through a high moisture extrusion process to make , to form fibrous rich st ructures with 
texture s imilar to real animal meat , which is the goal of the most plant  based meat 
substitute. During high moisture extrusion processing , which are considered as a 
complicated multi -input output system , feed component s undergo numerous and complex 
physical and chemical changes and  exit the  extruder as a transformed  product. So, 
redesigning  screw configurations , including length to diameter ratios , types and orders of 
the screw elements combined with a long cooling die attached to the extruder barrel , the 
high moisture during the extrusion can be ranged from up to as high as 40 to 80 percent , 
ok. And you get different product  like a step 1 , then step 2 mixing zone, melting zone , 
then d ie heat comes cooling zone and finally, you get the different products.  
 
So, here you see  the temperature profile for  high moisture extrusion process for 
the formation of plant protein fibres , ok. And this , I already  showed you in the earlier 
case, that is , in the zone 1 tempe rature is  less than 100 degree Celsius ; in the zone 2 , 
which is  mixing and melting , tempe rature may be around 130 to 180  degree Celsius ; in 
zone 3 , which is cooling and compression , temperature may be 100 to  130 degree 
Celsius ; and finally, cooling and structuring zone , that is , last zone 4 , here the 
temperature is brought  finally, to 70 degree Celsius.  So, this is the process flow for a high 
moisture meat analog ue from the pea protein biomass. The  feed rate is maintained at 6 kg 
per hour ; moisture co ntent is around 55 percent dry basis ; the screw speed is 210 rpm ; 
barrel temperature may be , in different section , may be 60, 90 then 15 5 early 110 , and in 
the cooling die , the temperature is 70 degree Celsius , ok.   
 
So, you can see the typical properties of the high moisture extruded texturized pea  
protein is obtained then pean ut protein, peanut protein base d dry tofu, peanut protein 
based  vegetarian sausage , and some o ther commercial meat products is shown here , that 
is, you see , that high moisture extruded texturized peanut protein , it is ha rdness, 
springiness, chewiness,  tensile strength, long wise strength, cross width streng th and 
fibrous degree etcetera is shown here, given here . It has a hardness of about 28 kilogram , 
springiness 0.8, chewiness  13.32 and these values , that is hardness, springiness and 
chewiness of high moisture  extruded texturized  protein , they compare very values as you 
can see with the sa me values of the chicken breast  meat , that is , hardness of the high 
moisture meat texturized peanut protein is  about  27.8 and here in the chicken breast meat 
it is 27.6 and other value also , ok.  And this even peanut protein based vegetarian sausage 
it is als o the value is given.  So, that is , means that is the , here by combining a proper 
extrusion conditions , cooling die  designs , and all those things , we can simulate the 
process in  such a way that it can produce  a meat type product , which resembles the fresh 
meat. In this figure , it is the microstructure analysis using SEM image . SEM image 
confirm that the fiber orientation in the cooling zone exhibit a multilayered structure , 
whic h then formed the fibrou s structure in the extrudate . You can see , that is , there are 
small holes in the mixi ng zone, then the large protein  gel is formed in the protein gel in 
the melting zone, then accum ulated protein gel multilayered  structure is formed in 
cooling zone , and finally  the extrudate  which is o btained , ok.   
 
Then , it is another case study , where the high moisture meat analog ue is formed 
from the soy  protein , ok. There is soy protein as well as wheat  glutens are used , ok. The 
feed rate is used about 2.8 kg per hour and moisture conte nt of the mixture is maintained  
at 60 percent we t basis.  Screw rpm is 400 and there is screw speed 400 rpm , and the 
barrel temperature in different sections are , that is , 20, 50, 80, 110, 150, 170 and again 
150 degree Celsius.  Raw material , as I told you , it is the s oy protein concentrate is the  89 
to 59 percent and the gluten may be 0 to 30 percent.  Other ingredient may be 5 percent 
vegetable oil, 3 percent pumpkin powder, 2 .7 percent  wheat starch and 0. 3 percent salt.  
So, this were experiment reported by Cheng et al 2019 , and what they found that meat  
analog ue containing about 59 percent soy protein concentrate and 30 percent wheat 
gluten showed the highest degree of texturization, fibrous structure, hardness an d 
chewiness using instrumental and sensory  analysis.  The layered or fibrou s microstructure 
of meat analogues  was o bserved using scanning electron  microscopy and light 
microscopy.   
 
The low moisture meat analog ue, they, it is found extrusion with t win extruder 
using a special configuration and d ie to make a layered fibrous struct ure that can mimic 
whole muscle  meat texture and composition.  Normally , the low moisture meat analog ue, 
that is , die, they ca n be used sometime at the meat extender high moisture meat analog ue, 
that be used as a jus t meat  replacer.  This LMMA is  cut with an extruder knife at the di e 
into the finished product size  and shape , and dried after extrusion for ease of handling , 
storage , and s helf stability.  
This product is hydrated with water to make various meat items . After hydration ,  
its composition is approximately 60 to 70 percent moisture, 2 to 5 percent oil , and 10  to 
15 percent protein.  Upon hydration , its structure is layered and fibrous , and sizes are 
very similar  to whole  muscle meat , or they are very similar to whole muscle meat.  A 
typical formulation of a low moisture meat analog ue contains soy  concentrate, soy  
isolate, wheat  gluten and mechanically expelled soya flour , and oil , ok.  That is , oil is the 
vegetable source , ok. 
 
So, you see here , that is , raw material , that is , full fat soy  flour, soy  protein 
isolate,  wheat  gluten and this corn starch is used , ok.  And then in the proportion , that is , 
soy protein isolate , may be 20 to 50 percent, full fat soy flour 0 to 30 percent, wheat 
gluten 40 percent , and corn starch was 10 percent.  This is the result reported by John et 
al in 2023 , ok.  And then , these material in proper proportion , they are fed into the 
extruder , ok.  And this is , even for both the hig h moisture and low moisture ana logue. 
In high moisture meat analog ue, that is , FFS is 0 percent, yo u can see the texture 
which you  are getting fibrous layer , and when FFS is 10 percent , layers you can see you 
can see  the difference between this.  Similarly, in the low moisture analog ue material also , 
when the full fat soy  flour content varies, it has significant effect on the textural and fibre 
layer configuration of the product , ok. So, feed moisture  was maintained as 40 percent 
wet basis, barrel temperature was 160 degree Celsius, screw speed was 250 rpm and slit 
die was 1 centimeter width , 0.45  centimeter height , and 8 centimeter length , ok.   
 
So, y ou can see here that is the soy  protein isolate is th e most common primary 
material to produce low moisture or high moisture meat ana logue. And the full fat soy  
flour is another promising ingredi ent for the  these two products.  However, the water 
holding capacity, springiness, cohesiveness of  LMMA decreased w ith increasing  the FFS 
content , that is , full fat soy  flour content , ok.  Whereas, the integrity index, chewiness, 
cutting strength,  degree of texturization, DPPH  free radical scavenging activity , and total 
phenolic cont ent of low moisture meat analog  increased when the FFS content , full fat 
soy flour content increased , ok.  So, when  full fat soy  flour content increased from 0 to 3 0 
percent, there was a positive  influence on the fibre formation or fibrous structure of low 
moisture meat analog ue, ok. And you can see here , there is degree of texturization , and 
when you are getting , that is  FFS content up to 30 percent , that is , the texturization 
conditions were better in the l ow moisture  meat analog ue, ok. Whereas, in the high 
moisture meat analog ue, there was not . It is conditions , that is you  see, it is lower down , 
that is , degree of texturization is not very , it is, rather decreasing then it  does not have 
much effect , ok.   
 
Then influ ence of different ingredient on  the product quality of  soy protein based  
meat alternatives . You can see , there is the various like the soy  protein based meat 
alternative,  if you , lipid content , ok.  The increased lipid content contributes to increased 
tendern ess of protein fibres, improved  extrudate  strength and  it is provides a more puffed  
structure.  Whereas, dietary fi bre enhances the chewability,  ok, decreases  extruder 
extrudate  diameter  and it provide more swollen and porous structure.  Starch content of , 
starch improves the colour and taste , or it enhances the product stability . There is soy  
based meat alternative products.  
Wheat gluten provide a well fibrous mic rostructure. I t ensures the product 
stability. I t improves the digestibility of the  extruded products protein,  impr ove 
texturization, it improves or impart more fibrous structure , ok. I t improves the hardnes s 
and chewiness of the product. V egetable gums , when they are used , they result in 
increased w ater absorption capacity. T hey improve fibrous structure, improve elasticity 
and strength , and the y provide  better viscoelastic  properties in the product , ok.  Now , 
after that , texturization . So, this is , using extrusion technology , the meat analogue can  be 
produced and they can be used as  in the place of real cooking. Now let me tell you that , 
even in India also , so many co mpanies and at the global level  that is , trend towards 
conversion or making of the vegetable  meat protein, meat analogue , etcetera is increasing 
and so many companies are now involved with this proces s. India , many start up are 
coming in this direction , ok. 
 
Then other important application is the animal feed.  Animal feed, vegetable oil 
based ca kes are the agro waste , which  generate during the processing  of oil seed. I t is 
useful for animal feed , for example, young calves fed hemp seed cake  had similar live 
weight g ain to calves fe d with a mixture of soybean meal and barley.  Animal feed 
consist of carbohydrates, fats, oils , and protein together with  smaller amounts  of minerals 
and vitamins which are essential for the proper fun ctioning of the body metabolic 
processes.  Th e quality of the protein in oil cake is considerably higher than tha t of the 
cereals.  So, oil cake may signifi cantly contribute to the animal  diet’s energy content 
mainly  when the oil content is high.  Most of the animals eat grain and husk , and these 
oilseed cakes can be provided as a supplement.  Oil seed cakes usually have high 
phosphorus content and low calcium content . And they contain only negligible amounts 
of vitamin A -active  materials as well as vitamin D , ok.   
 
So, these are the various , in this picture , various kinds of oilseed protein rich 
oilseed cakes that are used as  animal feed like cotton  oilseed cake, groundnut cake,  bean 
seed cake, palm kernel cake, sunflower cake, soya cake, rapeseed cake, sesame , and  
these are used as , these are rich in protein and minerals as well as rich in vitamins and  
fibers . And they are processed , and they are used in various feed formulations , etcet era. 
And they are used to feed cows , particularly , milk animal , cows, buffalo , etcetera.   
 
So, we wil l take up one or two case studies. H ere, in this , I hav e tried to give you 
composition  of the cow feed containing pressed oil seed cake from various sources , ok.  
And, then the , there are , that is , because this provide intake of dry matter , crude protein,  
etheric extract, neutral detergent fiber, NDF, acid  detergent fiber , ok, and non fiber 
carbohydrates of pasture and suppleme nted pressed oil seed cakes.  So, these , in the cake , 
they are , these are the various ingredient , and you , they are supplemented  with. So, what 
are the proportion they , you see that is , dry matter in the soy bean  cake, peanut cakes,  
sunflower , palm cake , etcetera , the dry matter may be around 14 percent , almost  in all the 
cake, 14 to 15 percent , ok. Crude protein co ntent  may vary from 1.1 to  1. 5 or 2 percent , 
etheric extract is 0.19 to 0.23 in all the cake , and neut ral detergent  fiber is around 8 
percent to 9 percent in palm kerne l cake , and acid detergent fiber  is 5.4 in almost , that is , 
in the same range and nonfiber  carbohydrate around 3 percent and 2.25 in the palm kernel 
cake, ok. So, the cows , these were feed , feed they were fed  to the cows , that is , the cows 
were 16 cross bred Holstein  and Z ebu with the average  body weight of around 544 plus 
minus 57 kg . This is the result repor ted by Oliverira  et al in 2016.  And the sup plements 
used as a peanut cake,  sunflower cake and palm kernel cake for replacement of soya bean 
meal etcetera.  
 
And this , when  this cows were fed , the whatever their effect on the milk 
productio n and the chemical constituent  of the milk from those cows were grazing on 
pasture and fee d supplemented with the pressed oilseed  cakes , ok. And you can see , the 
milk production in almost , there is where these were there , except in the palm kernel cake 
little lesser, but in other case 8 percentage. Fat content in the milk varied from  2 to 3 
percent, protein again in the 3 percent , the lactose there was less variation an d total solid 
around 11 percent,  and solid not fat around 9 percent or 8 percent. So, however, that is , in 
the case of palm kernel cake, that is the , even it has the similar value.  
 
And similarly fatty acid profile of the milk which were fed wi th the feed 
containing pressed oilseed  cake. Consider about that lauric acid h as a significant quantity, 
palmit ic acid around 35 to 38 percent in palm kernel it was 33 unit weig ht. Then oleic 
acid also has  been significant amount in all these cakes , ok. And the other , even myristic 
acid, in all the cases , around 14 to 15 percent , lauric acid to  percent. So, there were these 
variations , these type of different fatty acids , which were found in the milk , when they 
were fed  with the depending upon what was the pressed cake given.   
 
So, you can say that supplementation of the diet with peanut cake, sunflower 
cake, and palm kernel cake compared with soybean meal in the diet of  cows did not 
affect the ave rage daily production or consumption of the milk and  it remains almost 
different.  The palm  kernel cake promoted an increase in the lauric fatty acids and 
palmitoleic  acids , ok. And compared with the  peanut cake and sunflower cak e, the level 
of oleic fatty a cids were higher for  the sunflower cake and palm kernel cake supplements 
compared with th e peanut cake. The replacement of soybean meal with sunflower cake 
and palm kernel cake im proved the nutritional quality of the milk , as you could see in the , 
because earlier although production were almost similar,  but the quality , nutritional 
quality with the lower concent ration of saturated fatty acids  and higher concentration of 
unsaturated fatty acids with out compromising the produ ction  or nutritional composition 
of the milk. So, by feedin g the cows with the these cakes,  there is  content of the 
unsaturated fatty acid is significantly improved.   
 
Then , now, let us briefly talk about the extraction of various b ioactive compound 
because these  meals contain various phenolic com pound , flavonoids , etcetera , ok. So, 
after extraction of the , large  amount of phenolics are there , these phenolic compounds 
contri bute to the dark colour, bitter  taste, and astrin gency of the rapeseed meal or  mustard 
meal. They may also interact w ith amino acids, enzymes , and other food components , 
thus influencin g the nutritional significance of the meal. On the other  hand, these 
phenolic compounds  can be extracted using pure or aqueous solvents like methanol  or 
ethanol etcetera , and utilized as natural antioxidant. The meal s have a significant phe nol 
content which implies their  antioxidant power , ok.  
 
Here in this table , I have shown , that is , the different , the phenolic components 
found in the different meals like cold pressed, solvent extracted  and rapeseed  cake, husk 
cake, first pressed cak e, second pressed cake, mustard  which is from from Manipur  or in 
India or from Germany.  So, commercial meals prep ared from Germany as well as in  
India were analyzed for their content of phenolics compound usi ng 70 percent methanols 
in the experiment reported by Thiyam  et al, and the mustard and rapeseed cake , husk 
cake showed low phenol content as compared to other commercial rapeseed cakes , ok.   
 
So, this was some study , was again conducted by Thiyam et al, for the extraction 
of phenolic  compound from the rapeseed meal , ok. And the solvent sy stem used was 
alcohol and water , and you can see in the figure diagram , here. The total p henol content  
range d from 6 milligram per gram from MeO H or methanol ethanol in the 1 to 1 extract 
to 18 milligram per gram from 70 percent methanol extract , ok, oil free basis . And it is , it 
is expressed as sinap ic acid equivalent. The total cinnamic acid concentration range d 
from 17 milligram  per gram from MeO H EtO H 1 is to 1 extract to 29 milli gram per gram 
from 70 percent MeO H extract , which is oil free basis . So, 70 percent MeO H methano l 
extract was the found as  the better extract better solvent.  
 
Similarly, flavonoid  contents , ok. T he extraction  of flavonoid  compound from 
oilse ed meal, the flavonoid  content in the seed cake extracted  by different solvents were 
significantly different. And the order of solvents used in the extracting phenolic 
compounds were methanol, acetone  and water mixture would  more than acetone pure , 
acetone 80 percent , with higher than  the methanol 80 percent higher  than the acetone , 
methanol , ethanol , and hexane , ok.   
 
So, the extract effect of u ltrasonic treatment on the poly phenolic  that was reported 
by Teh and Birch  in 2014. The raw material used as  hemp, flax and canola cake meals.  
Solvent  were methanol, acetone and water , ok, in 7 7 6 volume by volume by volume.  
Instrument used  are ultrasonic bath , ok, fixed power level 200 W att was used . And the 
process , where solvent volume was 25, 50, 75 and 100 mL, extraction time , 20, 30, 35 
minutes ; temperature were 40,  50, 60, 70 degree Celsius , and design was orthogonal 
design test , and you can see the results are given here in the figure , ok. So, you can see 
that, in all these experiment , what was the summary , it was the found that the best solvent 
volume that yielded the highest  phenolic content was 50 mL  followed by 75 and 100 mL . 
 
So, 50 mL  was the best volume  in the , of course, depending upon the sample size 
of th e extract and other cake. In th e present study , which , they were reported by that Teh 
and Birch  2014, it was found that flavonoid content of the extracts increased 
proportiona tely to the solvent volume and resulted in the highest flavonoid rec overy from 
the extract in 100 mL  of solvent. Antioxidant  capacity , that is , DPPH and FRAP  values of 
the extract was highest in 50 mL  of solvent which  was in accordance with the phen olic 
content of the extract.  Ultrasonication time of 20 minutes yielded the highest total  
phenolic and flavonoid content  from the seed cake and the polyphenol content of the seed  
cake extract started reducing when the ultrasonic time was 30 minutes and beyond. This 
is because the ultrasonic wave decomposes the polyphenols of the extract in longer 
expo sure periods. Phenolic content increased with the temperature , when it was increased 
from  40 to 70 degree Celsius while percent inhibition of D PPH and F RAP  were 
correlated w ell with the phenolic content. Total flavonoids of all seed cakes increased 
significantly from 40 to 50 degree Celsius.  After 60 degree Celsius , total flavonoids in 
flax and ca nola seed cake extract decreased , while total flavonoids in hemp seed cake 
extract de creased at 70 degree Celsius.  From  an orthogonal design test, the best 
combination of parameters was 50 mL  of solvent volume,  20 minute extraction time , and 
70 degree Celsius ultrasonic temperature.   
 
Finally, summary of this lecture is that novel product is added to the human diet 
through  the creation of textured vegetable protein , which are ma de from protein 
concentrate and  isolate or protein flour, protein powder derived from oil seed cakes. 
Extrusion  technology  plays a crucial role in the productio n of both high moisture meat 
analogue  as well as low  moisture meat analogue . Oil seed cake is also widely used as 
anim al feed due to its high protein  content , being ground  into a meal and incorporated 
into di ets of livestock and poultr y to meet their nutritional needs. The  extracted 
polyphenols from oil seed cak es have potential applications in food, pharmaceutical , and 
nutraceutical industries d ue to their beneficial property , and they can be used to extract.  
 
These were the references in this lecture, ok.   
 
And finally, thank you ve ry much for your patience here.  Thank you.  
