1 
 Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 1 2: Packaging, Storage & QA/QC of Food Oils and Fats  
Lecture 5 6: Edible Oil Blending and Fortificat ion  
 
Hello everyone.  Now, we are in the last module of this course that is module 12.  In this 
module, the next five lectures, we will concentrate on packaging, storage and  QA/QC of 
food oils and fats.   
 
In today's lecture, we will talk about edible oil blending and fortification.  We will cover 
oil blending that is formulation and effect on quality of blended oil, industrial  application , 
and regulations on blended edible oil in the country.  We will also discuss the industry 
experiences of fortified edible  oil, fortification to  combat vitamin and mineral 
deficiencies , and batch and continuous mixing processes.  
2 
  
Blending of oil , according to the World Health Organization, healthy oil  should have 
specific characteristics that is , it should have the ratio of saturated,  monounsaturated and 
polyunsaturated fatty acids to the tune of 1 :1.5:1,  that is , it should have 1 saturated, 1.5 
monounsaturated , and 1 polyunsaturated in this proportion.  The second point is that the 
ratio of linoleic (omega -6) and linolenic (omega -3) fatty acid should be in the range of 5 -
10:1 that is anywhere between 5 to 10 is the  omega -6 and 1 will be the omega -3. The 
third point is important thing that it should contain natural antioxidants.  So, these are the 
characteristics which are prese nt in the oil that make it a good healthy  oil. There are no 
fats and oils that meet all the above characteristics.  Most vegetable oil are deficient in 
omega -3 which is an important essential fatty acid.  So, therefore, many times it is 
required to blend one  oil with the other.  Blending of liquid oils can produce a blend that 
meets the recommended guidelines for  human diet.   
 
Blending non -conventional or conventional vegetable oils to obtain a synergistic oil  
mixture is commonly practiced in the food industr y to enhance the oil ’s nutritional 
characteristics  and stability at an affordable price.  Blending is the simplest method of 
mixing diverse fats and oils with unique physical  and compound attributes.  Mixing 
vegetable fats or oils with various properties is one of the least complex techniques  to 
make new explicit items and wanted nutritional and oxidative properties.  The third 
3 
 category of the oil by definition is the edible cooking oil that satisfies the  fatty acid 
composition recommended by WHO to prevent va rious diseases like diabetes,  chronic 
heart diseases, obesity , etc. So, a balanced fatty acid composition can be achieved by 
adopting vegetable oil blending  practice which will eliminate the need for hydrogenation 
or even interesterification  of the oils.   
 
So, formulation for blending . In this figure , I have given you a fatty acid composition  of 
some of the common vegetable oil s like canola oil, flax seeds , and flower oil , etc. The 
composition of saturated fatty acid, monounsaturated fatty acids, omega -6, and omega -3. 
You can see here , canola oil contains higher amount of monounsaturated fatty acid, less  
proportion of saturated fatty acid.  It also has a good amount of omega -6 fatty acid.  The 
sunflower oil on the other hand , it has higher amount of omega -6 fatty acid, but less  
saturated and monounsaturated fatty acid.  This coconut oil , if you see here , contains a 
higher amount of saturated  fatty acid and very negligible or less amount of 
monounsaturated fatty acid as polyunsaturated  fatty acids.   
So, here as I told you for formulation of oil for blending , according  to WHO , the total fat 
intake should be about 30 to 35 percent of the total energy , saturated  fatty acid less than 
10 percent, monounsaturated fatty acid between 10 to 14 percent , and polyunsaturated  
fatty acid between 6 to 11 percent.  However, to maintain good health , omega -6 and 
omega -3 must vary between 1.1 to 1 is  to 1 to 4 is to 1.  So, a balance ratio of MUF A, 
PUFA as well as essential fatty acids like omega -6 and omega -3 is essential to maintain  a 
modulated lipid profile in the human body.  So, oil blending could also provide oils with 
balanced fatty acid profiles and a greater  stability with improved content of antioxidant s 
and bioactive compound.   
4 
  
So, here you can see, how to select the vegeta ble oil for blending . The various edible oils, 
their content of monounsaturated fatty acid, content of polyunsaturated fatty acids, ratio 
of M UFA, PUFA in a particular  oil, and what is the content ratio of omega -6 and omega -
3 in the oil and even the what i s its antioxidant component.  This data is available  and if it 
is not available , one can analyze it like this  and NIN 2017 data is there.   
Common oils like canola, sunflower , sesame oils. S unflower oil , it has a M UFA-PUFA 
ratio of  around 0.27 whereas, it ha s omega -6 to omega -3 ratio  of 68 percent.  It has a 
MUFA (C18:1) 19 percent , and P UFA (C18:2) 68 percent, ( C18:3) 1 percent  and 
antioxidant content is 298  ppm. Similarly , the coconut oil , you can see coconut oil , it has 
a MUFA-PUFA ratio of about 2.06,  it has omega -6 and omega -3 ratio of 24. MUFA 
content is 5.82 percent and P UFA content is 2.83, but you see , it has a  very high 
antioxidant (ppm)  like 578.9 ppm. Similarly , flaxseed , MUFA-PUFA ratio is less 0.31 , 
omega -6 to omega -3 ratio 0.25, but M UFA that (C18:1), it has a 21  and P UFA (C18:2) 
13.29 and (C18:3), it has more poly  as 53 and antioxidant  is 36 7 ppm .  
So, once you know this information that is the different oils, what  is their fatty acid 
profile, what is their omega content , what is the antioxidant  value , etc.,  and you know 
that what you want , in which range , PUFA-MUFA ratio , omega -6 to omega -3 ratio and 
the antioxidant.  
So, there are various mathematical tools like linear programming and such other 
programs  one can use and find out and see that , which one is the best combination that 
gives  the desired proportion of omega -6 to omega-3, and M UFA-PUFA ratio , and 
maximum amount of  antioxidant s. But there are also certain regulations by the 
government and that is , mixing of parti cular component, more than a particular qua ntity 
content is not permitted.  So, that also should be taken into consideration while 
formulating the blend.  
 
5 
  
So, here different oil blend  formulations and their health benefits are given like flaxseed  
and tomato seeds, if y ou get th ere is the highest antioxidant capacity and phytochemicals . 
If you  check the  olive oil  + sunflower oil + cress oil , it has a M UFA-PUFA ratio , you 
will get 1.5,  omega -6:omega -3, it will get 4. 8, and it improved the functional 
characteristic s, thermal and oxida tive stability of individual oil s, and it s health benefits 
are because you are getting a balanced M UFA-PUFA and essential  fatty acids , they have 
beneficial effect on cardiovascular health.  There is the rice bran oil and partially 
hydrogenated oil like you get her e MUFA-PUFA 2.42, and omega -6:omega -3 is 21.8.  It 
has increased the antioxidant major ly oryzanol  content . It has oryzanol as  the antioxidant.  
So, health benefits a re lowering of adverse  effects and pro -inflammatory effects of 
partially pure  hydrogenated oils etc . So, even olive oil plus sunflower oil plus cress oil or 
rice bran oil and sesame oil , if you see rice bran oil and sesame oil blend , you will get 
MUFA-PUFA 1.1 and you  can get omega -6:omega -3 as high as 88.9.  So, it gives a 
finding and is a source of antioxidant and unsaturated fatty acids, but it gives 
antihypertensive  and lipid lowering action.  Canola oil and palm oil accordingly M UFA-
PUFA 1.62 and omega -6:omega -3 you can get 2.92 and it gives  an enhanced oxidative 
stability.  
 
6 
 Similarly, sunflower oil and gar den cress oil , one can get MUFA-PUFA 0.56 and  omega -
6:omega -3 2.3 and it gives a balanced essential fatty acids in the proper proportion  and 
enhanced radical scavenging  activity and decreased total cholesterol content.  Similarly, 
rice bran oil and oliv e oil , if you mix , you can get 1.42 as a M UFA-PUFA ratio and 
omega -6:omega -3 as 2.14.  It gives high smoke point and frying temperature with good 
retention of antioxidants, lower  acid value , and least peroxide formation.  So, it has 
favorable effect on cholesterol regulation and LDL cholesterol oxidation.  Similarly, rice 
bran oil, flaxseed oil, palm oil , and olive oil  can be blend. Palm oil  and olive oil , it is 
made , one can get more MUFA-PUFA like 4.4 with the ratio and omega -6: omega -3 ratio 
can get 34.8.  So, it has a better oxidative stability of the blend with 20 percent olive oil 
comparable  to the palm oil.  It has comparable health benefits linked to cholesterol, LDL, 
HDL , and triglyceride s etc. So, in this way these are from  the literat ure that is various oil 
blend you can  find out keeping the characteristic property into it and one can mix in the 
proper proportion  to get the desired benefits.  
 
Then the effect on quality that you have to see  is very important thing that the quality of 
the blende d oil it should be maintained.  The effect of blending on physical properties . 
Blending different fats and oils with various  properties give s a new oil with improved 
functional characteristics and application in the finished  product.  For instance,  some oil s 
tend to crystallize and change their clarity when they are cooled.  Studies show that 
mixing these oils with higher and more unsaturated oils gives a more  stable and clear 
mixture that remains stable during storage.  Similarly , blending fats and oils leads to 
change s in triacyl glycerol profile , and therefore, changes in the physical properties of the 
oil such as cloud points, solid fat  content, smoke point, density, viscosity and so on.  
Studies has shown that the blended oil has a higher smoke point , which is desirable in  
cooking process.  Blending oils with high stability and a good nutritional property is a 
good choice to decrease  the rate of oxidation and viscosity.  Blending oils with different 
properties can produce an oil with good stability at fr ying temperature without 
hydrogenation and the formation of trans  fatty acids can be avoided  here.  
7 
  
Effect of blending on sensory characteristics is a very important property.  Oil blending 
has an important role in the sensory attributes of the final produ ct particularly  the product 
in which this oil is used for frying purposes, cooking purposes and so on.  So, recognition 
of oil properties and employing appropriate oils for blending can reduce undesirable  
reactions during frying and improve their nutritiona l and sensory quality.  Organoleptic  
acceptability tests on different oil blends have shown that mixing oil can  moderate the 
properties of each oil and give a more satisfactory product.  For example, sesame oil 
which has a high antioxidant content and is , therefore, a healthy product,  but has weak 
sensory characteristics . It is not suitable for deep frying.  Blending of this sesame oil with 
palm oil improves the crispiness, aroma, flavor , and overall acceptability of the fried 
foods. Pure oils have individual colour s. Some of them have strong and some have very 
weak colour that can have undesired effect  on their acceptance.  Studies show ed that 
blending oils with good stability resulted in slowing the darkening  process in deep -fry. 
 
Then , effect of blending on chem ical properties of the oil as well as the product.  Mixing 
different vegetable oils can change fatty acid composition and give higher levels  of 
natural antioxidants and bioactive lipids in the blends.  Therefore, it can improve the 
nutritional value and stab ility of oil.  Mixing vegetable oils is known as an economical 
practice for altering their physicochemical  properties and oxidative stability 
8 
 improvement.  Careful blending of oils can change and improve the overall fatty acid 
consumption ; therefore, there  is no need to saturate fatty acids by hydrogenation and 
consequently form  harmful trans fatty acids.  For example, mixture of canola oil and palm 
oil containing high amounts of tocols with proper fatty acid composition has good 
stability during the frying  of potatoes.  Resistance to thermal oxidation of oil mixture s is 
significantly influenced by the relative  percentage of the blended oil type.   
 
Effect of blending on nutritional properties of the oil . No oil  has all nutritional 
requirements  and ideal fatty acid profi le. Careful blending of fats is an efficient method 
to obtain a mixture of oil with a balanced  fatty acid composition and desired ratio of 
omega -6 and omega -3 with a healthy effect.  For example, mixing groundnut and linseed 
oils indicated a reduction in low viscosity,  lipoprotein cholesterol and serum triglyceride 
concentration in r ats. Blending oils can change the fatty acid composition, essential fatty 
acid status , and the amount of tocopherol and cholesterol levels.  It can also increase the  
antioxidant enzyme activity and reduce h epatic lipid peroxidation and  oxidation of LDL.  
Overall , an effective combination of oils can develop mixtures that have beneficial 
properties , which can help prevent associated diseases caused by oxidative stress , 
atherogenic potentials  of saturated fatty acids rich oils.  
 
9 
 Let’s talk about regulations on oil b lendi ng. The FSS that is Food Products Standards  and 
Food Additive Regulation 2011  through its sub regulation 2.2.1 of 24 highlights and 
speci fics the standards  of multi -source edible oils.  It has been stated that an admixture of 
any two edible oils where the proportion by weight  of any edible oil used in the 
admixture shall be less than 20 percent that is a particular  oil. If you are mixing oil A int o 
oil B, then proportion should not be less than 20 percent.  The individual oils in the blend 
should be in compliance with the standard s prescribed  in the regulations.  Sub regulations 
2.1.1 of the FSS  (Prohib ition and Restriction on Sale) Regulation s 2011 states  that any 
multi -source edible vegetable oil containing mustard oil should not be manufactured  on 
or after 2021.  After that day, blending of mustard oil is not permitted.  It is clarified that 
restrictions are not applicable to a blend of edible oil intended  to be used as an 
intermediate product that is ingredient premix in the manufacture of  other products by 
other food business.  Such blends shall be licensed under category 99, rule 99. 1.  
 
Industrial applications of blended oil . In order to produce nutritional and  trans  fatty acid 
free shortening , using rice bran oil, which is cheap and contains high  amount of bioactive 
phytochemical s, with p alm stearin  provides appropriate products  which can be used as a 
nutritional shortening s without hydr ogenation process.  Mixing olive oil, palm st earin,  and 
palm mid -fraction can give shortening and cocoa butter  substitute with lower calories.  
Cocoa butter equivalents are usually compounds which are produced by mixing a POP -
rich fat  such as palm kernel frac tion, palm mid fraction  oil and fat rich in S toSt, such as 
Shea, Kokum  or mango kernel.  Low or zero -trans margarine can be produced by 
blending different oils including pine  nut oil and palm st earin or palm oil, palm kernel 
oil, and sunflower oil.  Besides b lending palm mid fraction with sunflower hard st earin , 
high oleic -high stearic  is a suitable alternative for tropical fat mixtures.  
The commercially available blended oil in the market are Saffola gold refined  cooking  
rice bran and corn blended oils, Sundrop vitamin rich blended oil, Fortune xpert  total 
balance rice bran, flax seed , soya bean  blended oil  and so on.   
10 
  
 
Now, let’s talk about edible oil fortification.  World Health Organization defines 
fortification as “the process whereby nutrients are added  to fo od (in relatively small 
quantities ) to maintain or improve the quality of the diet  in a group, a community or a 
population ”. This fortification with micronutrients including iron, zinc, folic acid , and 
other vitamins  benefit individuals at early point in life that is from con ception to aging 
like folic  acid, vitamin B 12 is required for brain development, vitamin A, D, calcium, iron 
and zinc are required  for body and brain development, calcium, iron, vitamin C, folate are 
required for growth,  iodine, iron, calc ium, B complex, vitamin A, D, C they are needed 
by a healthy matter,  vitamin B 12, A, C, D, calcium, iron, zinc for decreased functionality 
or for aging during  old age.  So, these are the various vitamins and minerals 
micronutrients required . Food Safe ty and Standard Authority of India has recommended a 
homogeneous standard for  oil fortification along with other staples to supply the 
necessary micronutrients because  the micronutrient deficiency is one major problem in 
our country.  So, to tackle this pro blem , certain micronutrients are recommended  to be 
mixed in the oil, th at is fortified oil , then fortified oil  should be set in the market . 
11 
  
These multiple micronutrients , this deficiency is rampant. So, more than 57 percent of 
child ren suffer from vitamin A deficiency , which may be symptomatic.  Vitamin D is also 
considered to play an important role in decreasing the risk of many chronic  diseases, 
public health problems warrant, public health interventions etc .  
 
So, as per the Household Consumer Expenditure Survey in India, NSSO report 2011 , 
consumption  of oil is reasonably high , about 20 to 30 gram per person per day and is 
consumed by all  population groups.  Since vitamin A and D are fat -soluble vitamins , 
fortification of edib le oil with  vitamin A and D is a good strategy to address 
micronutrient malnutrition and fortified oil  is known to provide 25 to 30 percent of the 
recommended dietary allowances for vitamin  A and vitamin D.  
12 
  
As per the Indian standard FSS AI, the oil may be fortified with the follow ing 
micronutrient s like vitamin A in the level 25 international unit per gram of the oil  and the 
source of the vitamin A used may be retinyl acetate, retinyl p almitate and  retinyl 
propionate.  Vitamin D 2 should be fortified to th e level of 4.5 international unit per gram 
of oil and the form is ergocalciferol  and cholecalciferol.   
 
As far as the technology of oil fortification is concerned , that is , in the fortification  
process a known quantity of vitamin , level is already rec ommended by FSSAI, you know 
the oil quantities accordingly there  is known quantity of vitamin is taken and it is added 
to the oil directly in the filling line in the packaging line of the oil manufacturing chain 
that just  before packing these are blended /mixed with the oil.  The vitamins can be added 
in one or one of the two ways through a continuous process  or through a batch process.   
In the continuous process , the pre-blend  is stored in a premixed tanks of 5 0 to 10 0 kg 
capacity  and these tanks are equipped with agitators to keep a uniform distribution of 
premix  in the oil.  A dosing pump that is synchronized with the flow rate of oil determines 
the amount of  pre-blend  added.  Further blending of the pre-blend  with the oil takes place 
at an appropriate point at  the filling point to ensure the optimum distribution of the pre-
blend  through the oil before final  packaging.  In the batch process , the addition can be 
13 
 done through mixing the pre -blend in an agitator  tank or recirculating the oil using a 
motor .  
 
So, here the process of oil fortification is very simple and is easily achievable.  The 
fortificants can be uniformly distributed in the oil without the need of elaborate 
equipment  etc. The premix  can be ad ded directly to the holding / churning tank that is 
here.  The holding tank (B) the premixed can be as shown in the figure or it can be diluted 
outside  in a container and then it can be added directly into the churner or the main tank.  
Dosing technology for a dding antioxidant and other micro -ingredient s to oil is a routine  
process . Now in India , in fact, there are many companies they are adding these 
micronutrient s and selling it to the market the micronutrient and fortified oil .  
 
Here , mixing the p re-blend with edible oil batch process . It is a mixture  of the oil  and the 
pre-blend.  The mixing with the agitator and circulation and you get the fortified oil that is 
in the  batch process , a precise quantity of the pre -blend  (premixed diluted with oil ) is 
added directly by a pipeline or manually to a r un tank equipped with agitators or having  a 
circulation system , and it is mixed thoroughly for at least about 30 to 40 minutes  before 
filling and then fortified oil is sent to the filling line.   
14 
  
Mixing the pre-blend  with edible oil  in the continuous process . In the continuous process , 
the pre -blend is filled in premixed tanks.  These tanks are equipped with agitators to keep 
uniform distribution of vitamins in  the fluid premix . A dosing pump that is  synchronized 
with the flow rate of the refined oil determines  the amount of the pre-blend  added . 
Further blending of the pre-blend  with the refined oil takes place at an appropriate  point 
before storage to ensure the optimum dis tribution of the pre-blend  oil through  the refined 
oil. So, here oil is going in the input regulator and the pre-blend  that is from the blower  
and it is mixing and the process is continuous . 
 
The commercially available fortified oil includes  Dhara, V Brand, Surya, An upam, 
Patanjali,  Gold Winner, ADM, Cargill etc. T hese are all the companies in India which 
fortif y the oil before sending it to the market.   
15 
  
So, polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA ) and this antioxidant vegetable oil powder we d id 
in our lab and that was in earlier lecture I have elaborated on this , that is , we had a 
blended oil as per the American health directive requirement that blended oil with  PUFA 
MUFA proportion and this was converted into emulsion and we made it into  a stable  
powder and this powder is a rich source of micro nutrien ts that is in the solid form.  It has 
potential , we have used this in bakery products, m uffin s as well as in ice cream  and 
frozen desserts is used and it gives a very good quality polyunsaturated  fats with stability .  
 
With this , I will summarize this lecture that is blending vegetable oil or fats with various  
properties is one of the least complex techniques to make new explicit item s with wanted 
nutritional  and oxidative properties.  Blending fats and oils lead s to changes in 
triacylglycerol profile , and therefore,  to change in the physical properties of the oil such 
as cloud point, solid fat content,  smoke point, density, viscosity, sensory characteristics 
of the nutritional value of the oil etc . The fortification  of vegetable oil s and fats with 
vitamin A and D is a good strategy to  address micronutrient malnutrition and fortified oil 
is used to provide 25 to 30 percent of  the recommended dietary allowances.  The vitamin 
mix can be added in the  oil in one of the two ways that is continuous process  or through a 
batch process just before the packing of the oil packaging of the oil.   
16 
  
So, with this I end my lecture with this  refere nces.  
 
Thank you very much for your patience hearing.  Thank you.  
