1 
 Food  Oils and Fats:  Chemistry  & Technology  
Professor  H N Mishra  
Agricultural  and Food  Engineering  Department  
Indian  Institute  of Technology  Kharagpur  
Module  11: By-products Utilisation & Valorisation of Oil Milling Industry Waste  
Lecture  54: Lecithin Produ ction  
 
Hello everybody. Namaskar. Now, in today's lecture that is lecture 54, we will discuss 
lecithin production.  
 
There , we will talk about structure and composition of lecithin, production process, 
quality analysis, modifications , and applications of  lecithin.  
2 
  
You know lecithin is a generic term that is used for the description of a multi -component  
blend of phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylserine , and 
phosphatidylinositol combined with other substances such as triglyceride s, fatty acids , 
and carbohydrates. It is a structural and functional component  of a diverse range of cell 
membranes for plants as well as for various terrestrial and marine animals. It is 
commonly used as an emulsifier in food, pharmaceutical , and cosmetic  industries due to 
its ability to mix with both water and oil-based  substances. Examples of lecithin which 
are available in the market include soy lecithin, sunflower lecithin , and so on.  
 
So, lecithin is basically a co -product of vegetable oil industry and is extracted from crude 
oil through sequential unit operations which include degumming, drying , and cooling. In 
the earlier classes , during refining process, we discussed what is degumming.  
So, from the degumming process , that is , the gums are extracte d. So, degumming 
represents the key unit operation for ensuring efficient extraction of lecithin from crude 
oil and achieving high purity in the lecithin that is high acetone insoluble value together 
with high physicochemical stability of the oil. Water an d acid degumming are the two 
most established conventional approaches used to degum vegetable oils , and over the last 
decade , enzymatic degumming and membrane filtration have also been applied. So, this 
3 
 crude lecithin gum which is obtained , it is dried and  cooled and then lecithin is obtained 
from that gums.  
 
So, the composition of lecithin that is lecithin mainly contains phospholipid that is around 
50 percent and each botanical source is characterized by a specific phospholipid profile 
which is influenc ed by botanical source variety, geographical region , and therefore 
weather and storage conditions , in addition to exact manufacturing procedure that is what 
is the use of the water or acid that is water versus acid degumming processes.  
So, phospholipids an d fatty acids in soya, sunflower , and rapeseed lecithin are given . For 
example, soybean lecithin contains about phosphatidylcholine in the range of 20 to 22 
percent whereas, sunflower lecithin contains phosphatidylcholine in 20 to 26 percent. 
Rapeseed leci thin contains ranging from 23 to 31 percent phosphatidylcholine. Similarly, 
phosphatidyl ethanolamine also in the soya bean lecithin are maximum like about 16 to 
22 percent, sunflower contains 4 to 10 percent and rapeseed contains 9 to 15 percent. 
Similarl y, phosphatidylinositol is almost in the range of 13 to 18 percent in all three 
lecithins  from three sources. Similarly, if you look at this fatty acid composition, you find 
that the C 18 :2 that is linoleic acid in soya bean lecithin is 57 percent, sunflow er seed 
lecithin it is 54 percent , and in rapeseed lecithin seed , lecithin is 31 percent.  The C 18 :1 
that is the oleic acid . It contains about 10 percent in soybean lecithin, sunflower lecithin 
about 21 percent , and rapeseed lecithin 49 percent. So, these various lecithin from various 
sources vary in their phospholipid content as well as in their fatty acid composition.  
4 
  
So, for the manufacture of lecithin , crude soybean oil is just a heated or soybean oil or 
any such oil which is used for lecithin produc tion. It is heated in a preheater that is you 
can see , there is a setup to 80 degree Celsius , and then it is mixed with 2 percent water in 
proportion control unit , and it is intensively agitated using an agitator that is shown here 
at point 3 and mixture t ransfers to a dwelling container (4) and held for about 2 to 5 
minutes in the dwelling container. The next step is the centrifugation , that is 
centrifugation separates the degum med oil and the lecithin sludge . The lecithin sludge is 
then dried in a film ev aporator at around 100 degree Celsius and 6 kiloPascal that is 60 m 
bar for 1 to 2 minutes and discharged  using a pump in the cooler unit at around 50 to 60 
degree Celsius.  The volatiles are condensed using condenser and vacuum pump.  
 
Drying of the lecit hin is done and as far as possible maximum moisture is removed that is 
it is dried to around 1 percent moisture content achieving long shelf life and fluidity. For 
the drying of lecithin gums , batch, semi -batch,  or continuous drying film evaporators are 
used. Film evaporators have the advantage of high-performance  capacity per unit drying 
surface of about 70 to 90 kg gums per square meter per hour and a short drying time of 
about 1 to 2 minutes which is adequate for achieving a good color quality. Often a l ong 
batch drying time results in severe darkening due to the Maillard reaction and the 
adherent sugars and Amadori reactions between sugar s and phosphatidyl  ethanolamine.  
5 
 Natural lecithin has a brown color. So, drying below 1 percent moisture reduces the 
viscosity values and gives a stable microbial and safe shelf life quality. Then cooling is 
another very important step in the lecithin production.  
 
The lecithin is cooled below 50 degree Celsius , and it is necessary to prevent post-
process  darkening. Ther efore, it is advised to use a heat exchanger just after the dryer.  
Otherwise , the results of the careful drying will be counteracted by the post-darkening  
during a slow cooling regime that is from 90 to 100 degree Celsius to ambient 
temperature. For bulk s torage, a temperature of around 40 degree Celsius under dry 
conditions is recommended. It is advised to use adequate tanks with stirring facilities for 
keeping the stored lecithin homogeneous. At around 20 to 30 degree Celsius, lecithin can 
easily be store d for over a year without significant changes in product quality and 
functional properties.  
 
The crude soybean lecithin obtained serves as a starting material for the production at 
large scale of soybean lecithin fractions with high phosphatidylcholine c ontent. They are 
obtained in high yields by extraction method s using the non -toxic solvent acetone and 
ethanol followed by a chromatographic purification procedure and appropriate solvent 
removal method. You can see here , that is, crude lecithin about 10 t o 15 percent how its 
6 
 colour look like and then the phospholipid content is around 70 percent PC , that after 
purification you can see that the visual image picture is shown here in the figure. The 
same again lecithin after further purification that is where  phosphatidylcholine is more 
than or equal to 9 0 percent , it becomes golden brown or delicate very attractive colour , it 
lecithin gives. So, the visual aspect of soybean lecithin , they vary with the 
phosphatidylcholine content in it.  
 
As far as the quali ty analysis of lecithin is concerned let us talk about there are few 
parameters which are used to indicate the quality of lecithin.  
One is the acetone insoluble , popularly known as AI. An approximate indication for the 
amount of phospholipids , glycolipids , and carbohydrates  because of the oil and fatty acid 
dissolve acetone. So, acetone insoluble indicate about approximate amount of the 
phospholipids. Toluene insoluble,  they measure the purity of the lecithin product. The TI 
matter usually consists  of resid ual fibre, but sometimes particulate containing  
contaminants may be introduced during processing like f ilter aids  etc. and in any case, it 
should not exceed 0.3 , i.e. TI should not exceed 0.3.  
Acid value expresses the acidity of lecithin in milligram KOH per gram of sample and 
the average represents the acidity contributed by phospholipids (in soy lecithin often  it is 
about 18 to 20 mg KOH per gram ). The moisture content of the lecithin product is 
usually less than 1 percent . Higher moisture levels usually  indicate a greater potential for 
spoilage or chemical degradation . Peroxide value of lecithin production from the fresh 
and optimally stored seeds is usually less than 2 m eq per kg of the product.  
Then consistency lecithin available in fluid paste like a nd plastic forms liquid lecithin 
generally follow Newtonian flow characteristics and generally higher AI and or moisture 
content yields  higher viscosity , whereas, an increased A V often decreases the viscosity.   
Clarity that is lipid soluble material can ca use haziness in the fluid lecithin . With modern 
miscella  and oil filtration techniques , clear transparent -looking lecithin with very low or 
7 
 even no TI contents can be produced. Haziness can result in sediments over the time. So, 
moisture of over 1 percent can also contribute to a lack of clarity  
 
About microbiological quality , lecithin is generally low in microbiological counts , and it 
should be maintained low because they are required for food and pharmaceutical that is 
the one which has a lower microbiol ogical content. The lecithin production should be 
carried out in closed equipment  complying with the state of the art GMP and H ACC P 
standards . A low addition of 0.1 percent hydrogen peroxide 35 percent solution to the 
gums may further reduce the microbiolo gical quality or count in the lecithin.  
 
Then another is the color , it is a very important parameter as you have seen that how by 
changing the phosphatidylcholine content how the color of the lecithin is changed. So, 
the color of lecithin is fundamentally  an aesthetic quality standard lecithin has been color 
graded as unbleached , single -bleached,  and double -bleached.  By convention , the amber 
color tones of lecithin are measured on the Gardner color scale. The color range of more 
clear lecithin is generally  in the range of Gardner 9 to 17 in the undiluted product s. As 
you can see here , that is what is the color  in 9 to 17 in the gardener range. So, Gardner 
color scale was designed to measure color with standards or liquid standards in oil, 
8 
 varnishes, fatty a cids, and resins. This scale establishes a gradation of yellowing from 1 
to 18 , with 1 being the yellow light and 18 being dark brown in color  
 
Then let us talk about there are certain technologies sometimes  it is required to modify 
the lecithin to suit s ome specific process operations. Standard refined lecithin takes the 
largest share of the lecithin group of food-grade  emulsifiers . So, refining is mostly used 
for the exact adjustment of the quality parameter of clear filter ed lecithin with guaranteed 
values of AI, AV, color , and phospholipid composition. Modified lecithins with 
dedicated emulsifying properties are specialties at higher prices, with relatively small 
market shares.  
So, the methods which are used for the modification of lecithin are enzymat ic and 
chemical adaptation of the phospholipid molecules, then physical fractionation for 
separating oil from the phospholipids and the other method may be fractionation of 
phospholipids. So, let us talk about enzymatic modification.  
 
You know that enzyme s are used to modify the structure of phospholipids in a wide 
variety of ways. Enzymatically hydrolyzed lecithin have technological and commercial 
benefits since they are excellent oil -in-water emulsifiers . So, the enzymes which are used 
are phospholip ase A1, A 2, C, and D. Mostly used is the phospholipid A 2 which produces 
9 
 lysophospholipids and free fatty acids. Phospholip ase D produces phosphatidic acid . You 
can see here that is this is the phospholipid particle , the phospholip ase A1, it will be  
assign ed at SN1 p osition . Phospholip ase A2, it will b e assign ed SN2 position . Third i.e., 
phospholip ase C, this esterlinkage between the fatty acid and phosphoric acid and 
phospholip ase D that is it removes the choline from X. So, these are the various action 
sites o f the various types of phospholip ases. So, mostly it is the phospholip ase A2 and 
phospholip ase D. These are the one which is used to modify this.  
 
So, different food applications or recipes will require the use of lecithin with defined 
degree of hydrolys is and concentration. The modifications are essential for achieving and 
adjusting optimal ratios between hydrophilic and lipophilic p roperties and for ensuring 
good food processing ability. Since phosphatidyl ethanolamine has very weak 
emulsifying power , the lyso -PE formation with strong emulsifying properties is a focused 
target of hydrolyzed production or hydrolysis production. Combinations of 
phospholip ases and lipases  represent a tool for enzymatic interesterification of 
phospholipids with specific fatt y acid composition , entering a commercial area for health -
related  lecithin as well.  
And you can see here , that is the phospholip ase A2 it acts a t 50 to 70 degree Celsius , then 
phospholipids water and then this R1 it and HO R2 that is second group it it is broken as 
the lecithin is broken that ester linkage at SN2 position. And it gives lysophospholipids 
plus a fatty acid is released. The degree of hydrolysis may be around 20 to 60 percent 
depending on the requirement increase in hydroph ilicity.  
Hydroxylati on, hydroxylation of the unsaturated fatty acid of the phospholipid s is made 
in the presence of peroxide and organic acid s, resulting in the highest possible lecithin 
hydrophilicity. Hydroxylated lecithin is superior for emulsification of cake and cookies,  
but can only be used in North America for food applications , since in Europe no food -
grade status has been regulated.  Hydroxylated lecithin is approved for food applications 
under Title 21 of the Code of US Federal Regulations.  
10 
  
So, soybean l ecithin ( unsaturated fatty acid ) plus H 2O2 hydrogen peroxide  under 
ultrasound irradiation and lactic acid, it gives hydroxylated soybean lecithin that is you 
can see how OH has come  here.  
 
Then acetylation , there is an amino group in the phosphatidyl ethanolamine r eacts with 
the acetic anhydride , resulting in acetyl PE that is an acetyl PE giving lecithin enhanced 
oil-in-water emulsifying properties . In addition , the product has better resistance to 
browning on heating.  It is a superior release agent in food process ing. Acetylated lecithin 
has GRAS  status in the USA, but it is not listed in the European food-grade  additive list. 
You can see the overall acetylation reaction for the synthesis of n-acetyl ated phosphatidyl 
ethanolamine that is phosphatidyl ethanolamine p lus acetic anhydride and gives that 
general acetyl phosphatidyl ethanolamine plus acetic acetyl alcohol is liberated.  
 
11 
  
Fractionation for oil removal or de -oiling. Phospholipid s possess  polar hydrophilic 
groups by which they can be separated from the apo lar triacylglycerol s. So, currently 
used methods are acetone de -oiling, supercritical carbon dioxide extraction , near critical 
propane extraction , or membrane technology.  
 
So, acetone de -oiling, a triacylglycerol dissolved in acetone in contrast to other  more 
polar components of the standard soy lecithin . This characteristic property is used as a 
quality control and specification tool in the regulatory definition and marketing of 
lecithins . De-oiling with acetone can be executed as an efficient continuous  process , in 
which the crude lecithin is mixed and agitated with acetone. The phospholipids and 
adherent carbohydrates precipitate as sediment , which can or are centrifuged and /or 
filtered and removed. A careful drying process is required to eliminate the residual 
acetone , preventing the formation of undesired off -flavor s, particularly m esityl oxide. So, 
the uses of this include  emulsifying agents, choline supplements , or pharma ingredients.  
12 
  
Supercritical carbon dioxide , in principle you know that carbon d ioxide extraction is an 
excellent process for de -oiling lecithin without using any organic solvent. Lecithin is 
sprayed  into a process chamber under CO 2 high pressure s of around 400 to 700 bar is 
maintained. The triacylglycerol s dissolve within seconds in the liquid carbon dioxide 
while the phospholipids become available as powder , which falls into the collection 
vessel. The advantage of the process is the absence of oxygen and solvent residues in the 
product. The low oil -dissolving capacity of carbon dioxi de, the subsequent high solvent -
to-feed ratio, and the low yield need further process development before a plant -scale  de-
oiling operation may become economically viable or economically interesting.  
 
Near critical propane extraction , that is , you know pro pane is a food-grade  gas with high 
dissolving capacities as compressed gas . At pressures below 50 bar , more liquid lecithin 
is dissolved in propane than in supercritical carbon dioxide. Conditions of around 40 to 
42 bar and below 96 degree Celsius temperat ure are reported to give good results in 
counter -current  extraction of the polar phospholipids from the apolar lipids. Further 
process up-scaling is a condition for economical evaluation in comparison to existing 
solvent de -oiling processes.  
13 
  
Then membra ne technology , again we have discussed earlier.  It is used to remove 
phospholipids from the crude oil miscella  feed. The phospholipids are bound in the large 
micelles , which do not pass the membrane ; they  are retentate , while the triacylglycerol 
passes  with hexane through the membrane.  So, they become permeate . Hexane -resistant 
membranes such as  ceramic ones are available on the market , and the technology has 
been improved so far that phospholipid separation from the oil miscella is possible on a 
plant scal e. Now , this technology is in use for the production of oil-free lecithin powder. 
However, the process is cumbersome for de -oiling of modified lecithins.  
 
Then , fractionation of phospholipids. The phospholipids themselves have different 
loading and solubi lity in solvents , so that aqueous alcoholic solvent can be used , alone or 
in combination with chromatography , for separation. Currently used methods are alcohol 
fractionation and chromatographic isolation.  
In alcohol fractionation , the phospholipid mixtur e in crude so y lecithin is fractionated 
into the alcohol -soluble  and alcohol -insoluble  fractions . Various types of alcohol and 
concentrations are used to obtain specific extraction yields and selectivity of the PC and 
PE ratio.  
14 
 Ethanol soluble fractions co ntain a high PC to PE ratio , and the insoluble fraction gives a 
low PC to PE ratio. These are specific food emulsions such as frying agents in margarine, 
instantizing agents , and health supplements.  
 
The chromatographic isolation that is more pure phosph atidylcholine fractions can be 
produced by using column chromatography with adsorbents. On commercial plant scale, 
oil-free lecithin or ethanol -soluble  PC fraction is treated in a chromatographic column 
with aluminium  oxide adsorbent , on which the non -PC p hospholipids are absorbed. 
Phospholipids have different adsorption characteristics and , therefore, different retention 
times on a silica gel column.  These properties are used by varying the aqueous ethanol 
concentration in adsorption and desorption. The si lica gel is reused and co -products of the 
PC isolations are used for further modification . With this process , fractions with a 
phosphatidylcholine content of greater than 80 p ercent are isolated. This process has the 
drawback that the expensive aluminum ox ide cannot be regenerated ; that  is, desorption of 
the non -PC phospholipid s is no t possible.  
 
So, applications of lecithin are included  in the food product . It is used in instant food as 
wetting and dispersing agent , as an emulsifier in baked goods . It is used for modification 
of baking properties, it is used as an emulsifier antioxidant in chocolate that is used for 
15 
 viscosity reduction and antioxidant . In margarine , its function include s emulsif ier, 
antispattering agent and antioxidants ; and in dietetics , it is used as a nutritional 
supplement.  
About feedstuffs,  in the calf milk replacers industry , as an  emulsifier and wetting and 
dispersing agent is used . In insecticides  industry , this is used as an emulsifier , dispersing 
agent , and active substance . In magnetic tapes , also as well as in leather textile industry 
this is used as either dispersing agent, softening agent, oil penetrator, emulsifier , lubricant  
and so on.  
 
In cosmetics , that is used for hair care, skin care . In hair care , it is used as a foam  
stabilizer or emollient ; in skin care , it is used as an emulsifier , emollient , refatting, and 
wetting agent. In pharmaceuticals,  it is used in parental nutrition as an agent emulsifier ; 
in suppositories, the softening agent, and carrier agent ; in cre mes and lotions , it is used as 
an emulsifier , penetration improver , and so on.  
 
Nanoemulsion is the pre-emulsion  of conjugated linoleic acid , lecithin , and glycerol in 
water that is subjected to high-pressure  homogenization. The sample f lowed  through the 
microchannel  onto an impingement  area. You can see here that there are various that is 
soy lecithin, CLA, glycerol , and water. So, they are mixed into this emulsion ; emulsion is 
16 
 sent to this reaction chamber ; these 4 cycles . These are the sub-micrometer  range at 
35000 psi.  They verify that fine particles are formed here. Then the prepared coarse 
emulsions are continuously passed into the reaction chamber to obtain the desired particle 
size; that is four cy cles. The conventional oil-in-water emulsions , with CLA surrounded 
by the thin interfacial layer consisting of lecithin and glycerol , are formed here. From the 
reaction , it goes to the heat exchanger and then monolayer emulsions  are formed . CLA 
nano -emulsions , small droplets size like 70 to 120 nanometers,  they are in triglyceride 
form and 230 to 260 nanometers  are in free fatty acid form. So, they improve thermal 
stability and bioavailability of CLA.  
 
Nanoparticles; t he development and evaluation of soy  lecithin -chitosan hybrid 
nanoparticles to improve the or al bioavailability of r aloxif ene hydrochloride.  The 
nanoparticles were formed by the interaction of negatively charged soy  lecithin  with 
positively charged chitosan . The ratio of soy  lecithin  to chitosan is critical for the charge , 
and hence the size of nanopar ticles. The optimal soy  lecithin  to chitosan ratio was 20 :1 to 
obtain nanoparticles with particle size range of 2 08 and a zeta potential of 36 plus minus 
2 mV and an entrapment efficiency of 73 plus minus 3 percent.  
So, pharmaco kinetic studies in  female Wistar  rats showed significant improvement , 
maybe about 4.2 folds  in the oral bioavailability of the drug when loaded into the 
nanoparticles . Normally , raloxifene hydrochloride is used in the treatment of breast 
cancer . 
The process where soy lecithin -chitosan hybrid nanoparticle formation you can see here 
chitosan solution and then ethanol soy lec ithin and r aloxif ene are injected into this , it is 
homogenized and then you get the powder . That is the formula this nanoparticles are 
obtained .  
17 
  
Finally , I will summarize this lecture by saying that lecithin is  produced through the 
extraction of phospholipids from sources such as soybean, eggs, sunflower seeds  etcetera. 
It is a natural  emulsifier and rich source of phospholipids , primarily that  is 
phosphatidylcholine. Lecithin derivatives obtained through enzymatic or chemical 
modifications offer enhanced functionality for specific applications. These derivatives 
may possess properties such as increased antioxidant activity, improved stability o r 
targeted drug delivery capability.  Lecithin is employed in the production of nutritional 
supplements and infant formulas as a source of essential fatty acids and choline , which 
are important for brain development and overall health.  
 
So, these are your r eferences.  
18 
  
This thank you very much for you. Thank you.  
