Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 11: B y-products Utilization  & Valorization  of Oil Milling Industry Waste  
Lecture 51 : Major By -products, their Composition  and Uses  
 
Hello everybody, Namaskar!  Now, we are starting Module 11 of this course.  The 
next five lectures of this module will be devoted on by -products utilization and 
valorization of oil milling industry waste.   
 
In lecture 51 today, we will study about major by -products, their composition and 
uses.  So, we will talk about composition, characteristics, properties and u tilization of 
major by -products  of oil milling ind ustry that include oil seed cake that is popularly 
known as de -oiled meal,  then gums, edible oil waxes, free fatty acid distillate, soap stock 
and other biomass.   
 
So, by -product in a food industry refers to a secondary  or incidental product that 
is produced during the manufacturing or processing of the primary product.  It can be a 
solid or liqui d or any other form.  It can be sold as a separate food product or used as an 
ingredient in other food product  formulations or it can also be used in non -food 
applications.  By -products are often considered to be waste, but finding new and 
innovative ways to use them can reduce waste and increase efficiency in the food 
industry.  So, that is the three like oil seed cake, soap stock , etcetera.  Oil lecithin is o ne 
of the very valuable by -product of oil milling industry.  So, we will discuss in the classes 
to come about all these things.   
 
So, oil seed cake , first you see that , of course, in the earlier classes we have 
discussed t hat after the extraction of the oil that is we get a material  pressed material or in 
the form of powder , sometime depending upon the process which is utilized.  And the 
material remaining after the extraction of the oil is called mill or oil seed cake.  So, t he oil 
seed cake is the solid residue left over af ter the oil has been extracted from oil seed.  It is 
typically used as animal feed or as a fertilizer due to its high pr otein and nutrient  content.  
The popular oil seed cake , pressed cake which are used for  these purposes include 
ground nut cake, sunflower cake, soybean cake, mustard cake , and so on.  Mustard cake is 
popular very good ingredient in the feed,  it is fed to the cows or other  animals.   
 
So, the first thing is the factors affecting the quality of the  oil seed cake because 
sometime  the cake which is obtained after the oil extraction it may not be in good quality 
depending upon the conditions that had been used during extraction or processing.  So, 
this cake might be further required to be treated  or processed in order to bring  it into 
edible condition for that is edible for human o r even for its utilization as a  feed anim al 
feed or such other purposes.  So, let us talk about what are the various factors which affect 
the quality of oil se ed cake.  
And that though factors important factors are number of  number one is the type of 
oil seed itself because different oil seeds have different com position particularly they 
have  different content of oil protein fiber and other nutrients and which  affect the 
composition of the resulting oil seed cake. Similarly , as I told you extraction method used 
to extr act the oil from oil seed cake affect the composition of the pressed de -oiled cake.  
For example, the cold pressed cakes are higher in protein an d fibe r content than those 
extracted using chemical solvents.  Processing conditions also influence the quality of the 
cake; the conditions like temperature, pressure , and duration of processing ok.  It 
significantly influences the composition of oil cake a nd, it is, even the qu ality of the oil 
seed cake.  
 
The quality of the seed used to produce the oil seed cake c an also affect the 
composition.  Seeds with higher oil content will produce cake with lower protein content 
and vice versa.  Storage conditions such as temperature and moisture influence the 
compos ition of the  oil seed cake.  Improper storage can lead to the growth of molds and 
bacteria which can also alter the composition of the pressed cake.  Then additives , 
sometime additive s, are used for one or the other pu rposes like the preservatives, 
antioxidants , etcetera . They also influence the composition of the oil seed cake . 
 
Now let us have a little comparison , that is , what is the qu ality of the cold pressed 
cake as well as hot pressed cake.  Cold pressed cake is produced when the oil seed is 
press ed at low temperature typically  below 60 degrees  Celsius to extract the oil.  And this 
method preserves the natural flavor, aroma , and nut rients of the oil resulting in a higher 
quality cake that is rich in protein, fiber , and other nutrients.  Cold pressed cake is 
commonly used as animal feed and i t is also gaining popularity as  an ingredient for 
human food products due to their nutritional value.  Hot pressed oil seed cake is produced 
when the oil seed is p ressed at a higher temperature at a high temperature typically above 
80 degrees  Celsius or e ven 100 or 120 degree Celsius.  
And this method results in a higher yield of the oil o bviously, but it also destroys 
some of the natural flavor, aroma, components , and nutrient s of the oil seed resulting in a 
lower quality cake. And because of its quali ties little inferior quality tha n the cold pressed 
cake, the hot  pressed cake is used as animal feed and they are less nutritious than the cold 
pressed  oil seed cakes due to the loss of nutrie nts during the heating process.   
 
So, in this table I have tried to give you a summary of the composition of the de -
oiled  cake ok, that we take , that, the groundnut, yellow rapeeed, brown rapeseed, 
mustard, mustard yellow,  mustard brown, then sunflower dehul led, safflower whole, 
castor, sesame, nig er and linseed.  These are the cakes, cakes obtained from these 
materials after the extraction.  So, the co mposition , let us say , that is the oil content in  
these obviously, it will vary depending upon the extraction process that is oil conte nt on 
the cake whether it is a cold pressed, hot pressed or solvent extraction or by other  method 
that is the cake might contain varying amount of oil.  
So, protein content . Normally , the groundnut cakes has aro und 20 to 25 percent 
weight by weight whereas, soybean has around 3 5 to 40 percent protein.  Even rape seed 
and yellow or brown both have around 30, 33 or 31 ok, mustard 28.  So, you can see that 
invariably all these oilseed  cake, they are having protein content  from even 20 to 40 
percent ok.  Here is the fiber content . Soybean has a 6.2 percent weight by weight f iber, 
rapeseed brown has 10. 2 percent even mustard b lack has 12 percent or mustard yellow  
has 14 percent, even sunflower dehul led has around 18 percent fiber content ok, nig er 
seed also has 18 percent ; linseed has highest , that is , 42 percent fiber content.   
So, here you can see again the fiber content also depends upon the commodity 
that is has been.  So, average ash content . It ranges from 4 , that is , in the soybean 4 to 5 
percent in rapeseed 6 percent , mustard 6 percent, 11 percent in castor , 7 pe rcent 
approximately in linseed and so on.   
 
So, it al so these are the values of the or compositio n of the oil  cake.  If you see the 
coconut or copra kernel ok, it has protein about 10 percent ok, fiber  7.5 percent and 
average ash content around 1.5 percent.  Oil palm tree ; it has protein 20, 21 percent, fiber 
9 percent , and ash content around 6 percent.  Olive has a protein 5.8 approximately, fiber 
content around 28 and 2 percent  approximately ash content.  
Jatropha , it has protein 25 percent, fiber content 40 percent weight  by weight , and 
ash is about 6.5 or 7 percent.  So, these are the composition , that is , the oil depend ing 
upon the extraction process  and protein content, fiber content and ash co ntent in the 
different oil cake of various materials varies depending upon th e various methods , 
composition and so on.   
 
So, now here I have tried to give you approximate composition  of rice bran, copra 
and sesame deoil ed cake, their water extract and residual solids content , ok.  So, if you 
can see that RBP that is rice bran pellets,  RBPR rice bran pellets residue  and RBPE that 
is rice bran pellets extract , ok. 
RBS is stand from rice bran stabilized, RBSR rice bran s tabilized residue and 
RBSE that  is rice bran stabilized extr act.  Similarly , the CC stand from copra cake, copra 
cake residue , copra cake extract or sesame cake, sesame cake residue or sesame cake 
extracts.  In all these if you see that moisture content vary as lo w as 0.9 to 1 percent in 
RBS to  about as high as 28 percent in CCE that is copra cake extract , ok.  It that is the 
rice bran that is the rice bran stabilized extract ; it has around 13 percent  rice bran 
stabilized residue has around 22 percent moisture content.  
So, depending upon that is different materials they have different moisture 
content.  Similarly , their fat content as h content also varies the fat cont ent is the rice bran 
stabilized  extract is around 15.8 percent whereas, there is the , in the case of sesame  cake 
residue, it has around 11 percent ok.  In rice bran pellets , also 11 percent rice bran pellet 
resid ue around 12 percent extraction  rice bran that is a solid extract rice bran stabilized 
extract it has around 15.8  percent  fat content , about 4. 8 percent protein content are there 
in the rice bran stabilized extract copra cake has around 18 percent protein.   
So, similarly that is now they have the in all these yo u can refer this table and you 
can find the details of the composition in various cakes.   
 
Now let us d iscuss about uses of this de -oiled cake , ok, that is , they are used as 
animal feed  because they are good source of protein , fiber , and other nutr ients and it 
make them an ideal  ingredient in animal feed.  They are commonly used in the production 
of poultry dairy and livestock feed formul ations, ok. They are also used as fertilizer as a 
natural fertilizer  due to their high nitrogen and  phosphorus contents . They are often used 
to improve the  quality of the soil as well as  to prom ote the growth of the plant.  
They are also used as a biomass energy , ok. They are used as  a feedstock for the 
production  of biofuels and other forms of renewable energy.  They can be burned directly 
as fuel are processed into pellets o r briquettes for use in boilers  or other heating systems.   
 
Pressed oilseed cake ; they can also be , because they have g ood amount of protein , 
fiber , bioactives, etcetera.  So, they can be refined as they can be processed further to be 
used in a variety of food products  such as protein bars, vegetarian  burgers and meat 
substitutes. They are often used as a healthier and more sustainable alternative to an imal 
based protein sources.  
As far as  the indust rial application of these de -oiled cake s is concerned , they can 
be used  in a variety of industrial applications such as the produ ction of detergents, soaps 
and other cleaning products. They can also be used as a binder in the manufacture of 
particle boar d and other composite materials, ok.  
 
Now, after the cake , let us see another important byproduct of the oil milling 
industry , that is, gum, ok. And, these gums , you have seen in the refining process , when 
we were talking in the de -gumming process , a lot of about 3 to 4 percent of the gums are 
there  and they are these gums during  the refining process , they are removed from the oil 
and they are complex mixture of the  phospholipids, glycolipids and other impurities that 
are remov ed from the oil during refining  process using steam or such other methods this 
is de-gumming and other processes, we  have discussed earlier in detail.  Now, these gums 
which are obtained from the refining proces s during , that you can see that is this 
centrifuges and gums are removed ; this is a just to refresh your memories , refining  line is 
shown here and the step f rom where gums are obtained.  So, these gums are used as a 
emulsifier . They can be use d as a stabilizer and thickener  in various food products.  And I 
told you earlier also , I emphasized that , yes, lecithin is a very ver y valuable gum product 
byproduct which is  processed and we will devote one l ecture fully on the processing of 
the gum into its conversion into lec ithin and the uses of lecithin.  Lecithin is extensively 
used as an emulsifier in so many food products , ok.   
 
So, the composition of lecithin obtained from the different  oilseeds , you can see 
that and  the like . Lecithin , it is basically phospholipids.  So, various phospholipids like 
phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylinacetyl,  PE, phosphatidylethanolamine, 
phosphatidylserine, phosphatidic acid or phospholipids , in general , that is , 
phyto glycolip ids or other  phospholipids.  
So, these are the different types of phospholipids which are g enerally found in the 
lecithin or other gums.  So, if you can see the soybean contains the phosphatidyl choline 
about 29 to 39 percent,  cotton se ed has 34 to 36 percent, corn oi l cake also c ontain about 
30 percent of the phosphatidylcholine , ok.  Sunflower oil it contains around 13 to 27 
percent, rapeseed 16 to 24 percent.  Peanut pr otein cake,  peanut cake it has as high as 49 
to 50 percent phosphatidylcholine , ok. Rice bran oil also has significant amount about 20 
to 23 percent. So, you can see that these are the three major component like 
phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamin e, and phosphatidylinositol.  
They are found in almost all these cake in very significa nt amount , and that is 
why that accordingly in the lecithin they also are carried over although in the lecithin , 
mainly  phosphatidylcholine is the major component of the lecithin , ok.  So, the cake 
which is o btained from the soybean , you can see , it has almost all forms of this  
phospholipids.  Because the phospholipids whether it is choline, ethanolamine, inositol, 
serine, phosphatidic acid and phyto glycolipids or other lipids are around 12 p ercent by 
weight i n the soybean, ok.  Even phyto glycolipids are around 14 to 15 percent.  So, there 
are significant amount of these compon ents in all these lipids , ok. 
 
So, the uses of gums , if you talk about , these gums are used as  emulsifier;  they are 
as a natural emulsifier in food products formulation such as dressing, sausage, baked 
goods.  They help to stabilize emulsions by preventing th e separation of oil and water. In 
fact, lecithin is used in our most , more than 100s of th e food products and it is used . It is 
one of the important emulsifier in product lik e margarine up to in margarine up to 10  
percent of lecithin is there. Then it is used as a thickening agents in food products, in 
gravies, in sauces etcetera,  in soup an d desserts.  They also help to improve t exture, 
consistency , and mouth feel of these products when used.  
The gums are used as a dietary fiber , soluble dietary fiber whic h can help to 
improve digestive  health and reduce the risk of certain diseases.  Gums are also used in 
various pharmaceutical applications , ok, such as in the drug delivery systems, wound 
dressings , and dental adhesive , these gums find use.  Gums find use  in variety industrial 
application in non -food uses, etcetera , such as , they are  used in the production of paper, 
textiles as well as in cosmetics , ok.   
 
So, then , after gum let us talk about , little bit edible oil.  These waxes are a 
complex mixture of long  chain fatty a cids and esters that are solid at room temperature 
and are separated from edible oil during the refining process.  They are also known as oil 
foods or oil feed and in the winterization process , the normally  gums , they settle down in 
the water , and then b y either decontamination or by c entrif ugation  they are removed.  
And, these gums , they are further processed into uses of va rious , like various 
applications , which  we will discuss little later. So, examples of common waxes are soy 
wax, palm wax,  sunflower wax , and even rice bran  wax, etcetera it is obtained. So, this is 
the winterization process flow diagram is shown here in this figure and during this 
process , the gums are removed , that is , wax are removed . Here you can see from this  and 
this wi nterization process in earlier lectures , we discussed in detail , ok.   
 
So, uses of these edible oil waxes include in coatings , that is, to use the coat of 
coating  as a coating on the surface of fruits, vegetables, candies , etcetera to prevent 
moisture loss as well as to extend their s helf life by regulating the respiration processes in 
fruits, vegetables , etcetera.  They can also be used as  texture enhancers to improv e the 
texture of the food product  like chocolate, chewing gums, baked goods.  They are , these , 
used as emulsifiers , that is , help mix i ngredients that do not normally  mix like oil and 
water , like in the margarine that is a pe anut oil or other vegetable oil  is mixed with water 
and there th ey are used as a stabilizer or emulsifier.  Then , they can also be used as a 
lubricant to prevent sticking  and to stabilize the movement of food products in processing 
equipment , ok. Then , these gums , waxes are also used as a releasing agent that i s in food 
processing to prevent  food from sticking to mold, pans or other equipments , etcetera , 
these waxes are used ok.   
 
Then other important byproducts of this is the free fatty acid distillate.  The fatty 
acids, fatty acid distillates are a mixture of fatty acids, triglycerides , and other 
components that are removed from the oil during the d eodorization process and these 
distillates can be further , that is , specific fatty acids for manufacture of g lycerol, for 
manufacture o f other important triglycerides. T riglycerides , they can be used to prepare , 
ok. That fatty acid distillates can be further processed to produce , as I told you , fatty 
acids which have a vari ety of industrial applications.  Free fatty acids are hydrolysis 
product of triglyceride i n vegetable  oil in the various previous lectures.  We have seen 
detail composition , that is , what is , how the free fatty acids are formed.  So, all these free 
fatty acids particularly which are removed either  in the deodorization  process as a fatty 
acid distillate or even the soap stock , they can be further refined and pure pure fatty acids 
can be obtained.  
 
So, these free fatty acids distillates can be used in th e biodiesel production. I t can 
be used as a feed stock for biodiese l production through the tr ansesterification process 
which  involves reacting the free fatty acids with an alcohol and a catalyst.  Then in 
chemical production that is used as a raw materia l for the production of various  chemicals 
such as oleo chemicals whic h have a wide ra nge of industrial applications.  The free fatty 
acids distillates have found significan tly usefulness in the cosmetics  industry.  In personal 
care products such as moisturizers, cream and lotions , free fatty acids can also  act as 
emollients which help to soften and soothe the skin.  They can also act as surfactant 
which help to stabilize emu lsions and improve the texture and sp readability of the 
products.  
 
They are found used in pharmaceuticals , that is , in the pro duction of oral and 
tropical drug formulations , like free fatty  acids can be used as excipients , which are 
inactive ingredient  in a drug formulation that help to deliver the active ingredient.  Free 
fatty acids can also have an antimicrobial and anti -inflammatory properties which make  
them useful in the treatment of certain skin conditions.  There is a dietary supplements, 
they may be a useful s ource of essential fatty acids , such as , omega 3 fatty acid, omega 6 
fatty acids which are important for human health.  FF A can be incorporated into dietary 
supplements such as cap sules and soft gels etcetera to  provide these essential nutrients.  
In soap production they are used , that is , and even they can be used for making other 
cleaning  agents.  
 
Another important is the soapstock is a byproduct of alkali refining process of the 
edible oil , and it is a dark brown viscous material th at contains residual oil, soap and 
water. Soap stock can be further processed to recover the residual oil and to pr oduce fatty 
acids  which have a vari ety of industrial applications.  You see that is in the neutralization 
process , that is , when caustic is added into the oil, the caustic sodium it forms the sodium 
salts of various respect to fatty acid , that is , soap stock.   
 
So, this , then there is  another product acid oi l. The neu tralization process results 
in the formation of a soap stock and also an acid oil . Acid oil  is formed by the reactions 
between the free fatty aci ds in the oil and the alkaline soluti ons used for neutralization.  
So, it contains a high percentage of free fatty acids and its composition depends 
on the type of the oil being refined and the specific refining process. So, acid oil  is a 
typically dark brown in color and it has a pungent odor and is hi ghly acidic,  ok.  S o, that 
you can see here , soaps tock and feed  tank and then it is  acid reacted with acid  and water , 
it gives acid oil  or even fiber glass bed then acid oi l can be formed , separated, ok.   
 
So, it is , in the stable free fatty acid and glyceride conten t in byproducts from 
different feedstock s, you can see , that is , it contains in the cotton seed oil  cake as high as 
85 percent in the fatty acid distillate in byproduct.  So, it varies from 30 percent to as high 
as 30 percent in soybean, 48 per cent in rape seed to as high as 93 percent in palm oil that 
is the free fatty acid weight percen t in the  byproduct , ok. Similarly, glycerides they may 
be in the rapeseed a round 32 percent weight percent , and also in the palm , the oil palm is 
about 20 to 30 percent , this is the fatty acid distillate.  Similarly, is soap stock around 
from 10 percent in soybean to a s high as 85 percent in cotton seed pressed cake.  There is 
sunflower cake , contains 70 percent then this glycerides content is around 13  to 14 
percent in soy bean cake and sunflower cake has around 25 percent , ok.  Then acid oil , 
there is around , it can say corn cake has arou nd 46 percent acid oil and then  it varies up to 
as high as 88 percent in pa lm oil and 86 percent in cotton seed oil , 80 percent 
approximately in rapeseed acid cake.  Then this glycerides are about in soybean it is 
conta in 33 percent and this rapeseed  feedstock it contains around 10. 8 or 11 percent 
glycerides , ok.   
 
So, this soap stock and acid oil can also be used in biodiesel production , fatty acid 
production . They can be used as animal feed. T hey can be used  as fertilizer because 
sources of plant nutrients ; as a source of energy and nitrogen in fertilizer formulations.  
And they can also , like other byproduct , they c an be used in  other material for production 
of industrial chemicals , surfactant , lubricants , resins , etcetera , ok.   
 
Finally, the biomass , the term , biomass , refers to organic mat ter such as plant 
material and animal waste that can be used as a renewable  energy source , that is , in the 
edible oil milling  industry . Biomass is mainly generated fro m the extraction process of 
oilseeds such as  soybeans, sunflower seed, rapeseed and palm kernel.  The biomass 
typically consist of seed coats , hulls , and kernel s, that are not used for the  oil pro duction 
like they are after dehul ling process , another material outer covering , etcetera.  So, these 
materials are usually rich in fiber , protein , and other application and they can be used 
again for the animal feed, fuel,  fertiliz er, soil improvers , etcetera.  
 
So, these biomass hulls, kernels , etcetera which are generate d they can be further 
processed  into, refined into different forms , and they can be used in this process , ok. So, 
here just a just for that biomass from the palm oil in dustry that is the fresh fruit you gave 
then palm oil milling , it gives around 20 to 22 pe rcent of the crude palm oil and  the 
remaining , you get about 5.5 to 6 percent kernel , ok. That is after the milling you g et 
solid palm biomass , that is  around 13 to 15 percent fibers , 6 to 6.5 percent kernel sh ells, 
and 23 to 25  percent empty fruit bunches.  So, all these , that is , they constitute a huge 
quantity of biomass and they can be converted into various value added products , ok.   
 
And the proximate composition of these biomass , you can see palm fiber , shell 
and EFB includes,  there is a moisture content they may , it may have partial moisture 
content in fiber around 36 percent , shell 16 percent, ash content it varies from 2 to 5 
percent. Similarly, carbon  percentage , they may have from 30 to about 44 percent, 
hydrogen is from 3 to 7 percent ; even here there is oxygen also is a significant amount . 
They have a sulf ur content and heating  value of these fiber is around 19.69 M J per kg . 
Shell has also a 20.52 M J per kg and EFB, they have the 17.78 M J per kg , ok.  
 
So, finally, I summariz e these lecture by saying that, yes, this is oil milling 
industry , produces a different byproducts and these byproducts,  they can be further 
processed to and used in valuable various products . They can be used  for developing 
novel products or converted into suitable p roducts for use for commercial purposes like. 
And say , cake is the major product , which is rich in protein a nd used to develop n ovel 
food products like meat ana logue, animal feed, fertilizers etcetera. The byproducts 
produced in the crude e dible oil refining such as free  fatty acid  distillate , acid  oil, etcetera 
can be used t o manufacture a pharmaceutical and cosmetic product. Biomass is another . 
Significant quantity of  biomass is produced in the oil  milling industry and they can be 
used as either fuel or fertilizer or some other purposes .   
 
These were the references used in the preparation of this lecture .  
 
With this, thank you very much for your patience here. Thank you.  
