Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 12: Packaging, Storage, & QA/QC  
Lecture 58: Handling and Storage  
 
Hello everyone, Namaskar.  Now, in this 58th lecture of this course, in the next half an hour, 
we will talk  about handling and storage of fats and oils.   
 
Here we will talk what are the various consideration that one should lo into for handling of  
oils and fats as well as storage o f oils and fats and then guidelines for storage of liquid  fats 
as well as guidelines for storage of solid fats.   
 
So, you know that handling and storage of edible fats and oils are crucial aspect of  
maintaining their quality, flavour and nutritional value . Fats and oils play a vital role in food 
preparation, enhancing taste and texture while providing  essential nutrients.  However, 
improper handling and storage can lead to rancidity, loss of flavour and potential  health 
risks. Therefore, it is important to understand the factors that affect the quality of edible 
fats and oils and appropriate methods for their handling and storage.  So, in the earlier 
classes also I discussed it, that there are major factors affecting the quality of oil during 
handling and sto rage are light, temperature, oxygen  and moisture.   
 
So, these four important factors must be taken into consideration while handling and 
storing the fat . The handling of oils and fats are quite tricky. It is generally very easy to 
handle a few bottles of any vegetable oil.  However, the things get a little more complicated 
when it is to transport more amount, huge qua ntity  in truck or in rail wagons et c. So, for 
industrial purposes the oils are shipped, but are categorized in relation to extent of 
processin g. Both of the oils and fats are shipped in the crude state, but the shipment of 
refined product are often described as refined bleached and deodorized RBD oil has 
increased considerably in the recent years.  Generally refined oils are more sensitive to poo r 
storage and handling conditions than  crude oil because if the handling conditions during 
transportation or even during storage,  if the conditions are not properly maintained then 
the further development of acidity etc,  oxidation products etc may take pla ce and the whole 
purpose  of your refining may get defeated. So, that is very important consideration.   
 
At ambient temperatures, oil may be liquid, semi -solid or fully solid.  So, the state of the oil is 
obviously, of importance to the  in view of the effec t that it will have on handling both at the 
time of loading as well as at the time of discharge.  Seed oils are mainly liquid at ambient 
temperature and they are often referred to as soft oils.  And, commodities such as palm oil, 
coconut oil etc which are su fficiently solid  at ambient temperature and normally because 
they are solid, they might require some heating  before being pumped to or from the seed 
tankers. Castor oil is an unusual seed oil that is far more viscous than all other vegetable  oils 
and despi te remaining a liquid throughout normal temperatures ranges, it requires some  
heating prior to pumping otherwise it is very highly viscous . Although it is possible to 
transport refined oils over long distance without significant  loss in quality  provided pr oper 
precautions are taken, oil users often prefer crude oil  and the oil can then be refined to their 
own specification . 
 
 
International agencies which are working on transport of edible oils and fats like FOS FA, 
FOS FA International it is the Federation o f Oils, Seeds and Fat Associations.  And this 
concerns itself with all aspects of international trade in oil seeds, oils  and fats providing 
guidance on seed transport of such commodity.  FOS FA plays a vital role in settling 
standards, promoting good trading practices and providing  arbitration and dispute 
resolution services for its members involved in the trade of oil  seeds, oils and fats. The 
primary objective of FOS FA is to establish and maintain fair trading practices, standard  
contracts and rules for the trade of oil seed, oils, oil seeds, oils and fats.  One of the notable 
services offered by FOS FA is its arbitration and dispute resolution  process.  In cases where 
disputes arise between trading practices, FOS FA provides a platform for mediation  and 
arbitrat ion to reach a fair and impartial resolution.  It was established in 1971 and is based 
in London, United Kingdom.   
 
So here in this table, I have given you the FOS FA recommended temperature for carriage  of 
oils and fats. So you can see that oil type like s unflower oil, soybean oil, safflower, 
groundnut, rapeseed  and maize corn oil.  So during transport, during wage, the temperature 
in this oil should be maintained in ambient  conditions.  Whereas, there is a palm oil, the 
transport temperature should be as acc ording to FOS FA, it should be minimum 30 °C to 
maximum 40 °C. In case of palm is tearing, minimum temperature during wage should be 
40°C and maximum should be 45 °C. Palm oil, minimum temperature during wage should be 
25°C and maximum 30 °C. Palm that is cocon ut, it should be 27 and 32, minimum 27, 
maximum 32.  For fish oil, it should be minimum 20 and maximum 25.  For palm fatty acid 
distillates, minimum temperature during wage should be 45 °C and maximum  should be 
50°C. But at the discharge point if you see for the sunflower oil as well as safflower oil,  it 
should be minimum at discharge should be minimum 15 °C and maximum 2 °C. For soybean 
oil at discharge, minimum 2 °C and maximum 25 °C. The same for groundnut oil also 20 -25°C 
and for rapeseed oil and maize corn oil, it  should be again minimum 15 °C and maximum 
20°C. You can see for the palm oil, the minimum at discharge minimum is 50 °C and 
maximum  55°C. For palm is tearing, minimum 60 °C, maximum 70 °C. For palm oil, minimum 
30°C and maximum temperature at discharge  should be 35 °C. For coconut, it should be 40 
minimum and 50, 45 maximum. For fish oil, minimum is 25 and maximum is 30 °C  and for 
palm fatty acid  distillate, minimum is 55 °C and maximum is 72 °C  at the discharge point.  So, 
these are some of the major oils .  
 
Now, let us talk about reasons for the damage of fatty oil carbon.  Number 1 is the poor 
temperature control. The natural antioxidant in a crude fatty oil will not fully protect the oil 
from improper  carriage  and handling.  In particular, exposure of th e oil to high temperature 
can lead to oxidative change.  Some deterioration in quality can be expected during a voyage 
lasting 3 to 4 weeks in condition  where considerable temperature cycle can occur.  For this 
reason, loading of a carbo, the characteristics  of which are close to the specific upper limit  
will sometime lead to the oil being outside its specification at discharge.  The other factor is 
the water ingress. Ingress of water into a tank will cause cargo damage although the damage 
is normally more  readily reversible than that caused b y overheating. A combination of high 
temperature and excessive moisture content may lead to the formation  of free fatty acid 
which can have adverse effect on the cargo quality.   
 
Then contamination with chemicals or other  substances miscible with the oil.  Chemical 
contamination is almost always caused by poor cleaning and consequent incomplete  
removal of previous cargo residues.  However, it should be noted that the contamination can 
have occurred before the oil is loaded  if a road tanker has been inadequately cleaned. 
Contamination may also be caused by inadequate processing of the oilseeds, particularly at  
the extraction stage.  Contamination or co -mingling can also take place from the admixture 
of one oil into another.  This can occur when a ship carries two different oils.  For example, 
palm oil and palm kernel oil and insufficient care are taken to segregate  the two carbons, 
particularly during loading and discharge.  This type of contamination does not give rise to 
any s afety risk as far as the oil edibility  is concerned, but it may make use of for the specific 
purpose originally intended difficult.  
 
Then, adulteration is another reason because adulteration is the deliberate mixing of  two 
low-valued oils to simulate the  composition of a more expensive product has been largely  
eliminated by development of sophisticated techniques for the characterization of the  oil. 
Then admixture that is ships carrying parcels of different oils must be meticulous in 
preventing  cross cont amination due to the faulty walls or by failure to properly clean lines 
between  the discharging different parcels.  Although different oils are compatible, cross 
contamination can be seriously affected in  use of a particular product and thus it gives rise 
to a substantial claim and possible arbitration.   
 
The FOA also has recommended temperature during storage, during transport, loading  and 
discharge for the edible oils.  The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
recommends the practice for  storage and transport of edible fats and oils as detailed in 
CAC/ RCP 36 -198 7. It gives guidance  on the maximum temperature required for the various 
grades during transit and while loading  and discharging.  For example,  in the table , 
information is given for the storage and  bulk shipment for the coaster soil and coconut oil.  
There is minimum temperature for coaster oil at storage should be 20 °C maximum  25 
whereas, for coconut oil minimum can be 27 and maximum 32.  But for the same at loading 
and discharge for  coconut oil it should be 40 should be  minimum and 45 should be 
maximum at the discharge  And the other oil grapeseed, groundnut etc already it is also 
almost similar to those  recommended by the phosphor . Then like here you can see the palm 
kernel oil that is the minimum temperature at storage  of bulk segments is 27 °C  and 
maximum 32 °C , but at the discharge  it will be minimum 40 and maximum 45  Similarly for 
sesame oil it is ambient condition during storage and the at loading at discharge  it should be 
10 should be minimum and 20 should be maximum.  This is both for sesame and sunflower 
oil for this T allow ( for voyage of 10 days  or less ) it should be the for storage it will be 
ambient, but at the loading and discharge  it should be minimum 55 and maximum it c an go 
up to 65.  And the same for loading and discharge of T allow ( for voyage more than  10 days ) 
it can be and the for storage if it is more than 10 days for Tylo it should be minimum  35 and 
maximum 45 that temperature may range during this.  Only oil is the  storage for minimum 
as it should be ambient, but for that loading and  discharge it should be temperature range  of 
10°C to 20 °C minimum 10 °C and maximum 20  °C.  
 
Then let us talk about challenges of shipping bulk oil and fats.  Shipping bulk oils and fats 
present several challenges due to their unique characteristics  and requirements . As 
essential commodities in the food and industrial sector, oils and fats are widely traded 
globally.  However, their transportation present various challenges like the conditi on of the 
oil and fat before transport how was it and therefore, to maintain it during the  
transportation.  Some oils and fats are not refined until they go get to their final destination 
and the  reason for this is that refined oils are more susceptible to loss during the transit 
quality  loss during transit. As and as a result the shippers prefer to have the oils in crude 
form so that they can  refine them to meet their specification.  Otherwise if the refined oil 
being stored then further development of resin s may cause  additional secondary refining 
and which will unnecessary increase the cost.  However, the rate of transport of refined oil 
has been on the rise in the recent years  because thanks to the new technology which can 
prevent that is the resins or oxid ation  of the fats and oil during transit.   
 
Then edible oils and fats contracts  contain details of the oil being transported.  Some details 
include the specific oil being shipped and agreed quantities and specification  being shipped 
analytical properties of the cargo at loading and unloading standards for  shipping tanks and 
many more. These contracts are there to ensure that there is an efficient, effective and risk -
free transport  of the bulk oils from the supplier to the receiver, but because there are a lot 
of oil  that could be possibly shipped and each has varying properties that make a generic 
contract  impossible.  There has to be a contract for each oil and that is why FOS FA have a 
long list of contract  template that can be used for any edible oil and f at being transported.  
 
Then shipping and storage conditions and the challenge it should be the shipping and 
storage  conditions for edible oils and fats could also always to the challenge to the transport  
of these oils.  Proper tank coatings, spotless clean ing and equipping the tanks  to system or 
sustain the quality of the oils are important factor to never compromise.  Edible fats and oils 
cargo maintenance is another important it is als o a challenging  task due to the vastly 
varying properties of the various  oils and fats. A standardized edible oil and fat cargo 
maintenance system cannot work.  For instance, oil like coconut and palm are quick to turn 
into fat at ambient temperature.  The oil though maintaining its liquid state ambient 
temperature requires heat ing for efficient  uploading.  So, these oils require heating, but at 
the same time the heating has to be done slowly  and steadily.  Rapid heating could lead to 
the increase of the free fatty acid or acid value of the oil  ultimately leading to the 
deteriorati on of the oil. So, these things should be taken care of.   
 
Now, let us talk about storage of oils and fats.  Proper storage of edible oil and fat is essential 
to preserve their quality, flavor and nutritional  value.  Inadequate storage conditions can 
lead t o the development of off -flavor, rancidity and  degradation of essential nutrients.  To 
ensure the longevity of edible oils and fat, it is crucial to follow appropriate storage  
practices. The next section here that is the storage tank.  The most suitable shap e is the 
vertical circular claw section tank with a self -supporting fifth  roof preferably convex in 
shape.  Where possible, tall narrow tanks are preferred to maintain exposed surface area.  
Tank bottoms should be conical shape or slope to be self for self -draining for ease of 
draining.  
 
For each installation, the storage capacity is related to the expected storage period,  the rate 
of the turnover and the number of different products to be handled. For refineries or end -
users, the capacities of the storage tank should be small and it  is desirable to have a number 
of tanks ranging from 200 to 1000 tons.  For export and import of tank farms, different 
capacities for various products can be used  like for crude liquid oils, there is a tank for up to 
1000 to 5000 tons capacity can be  used.  For crude, non -liquid oils and refined oils, it is from 
500 to 2000 ton capacity.  High melting fats such as palm  stearin , tallow, hydrogenated oils, 
the tank capacity is normally  500 to 1000 tons.  Fatty acid distillate or acid oi ls is 500 tons or 
larger, where turnover is large. So, for export, all these bearing capacity depending upon the 
product of bearing farms  can be used.   
 
In addition, ship tanks of mild steel should be coated with suitable inert coating, which  is 
suitable for contact with the food.  It is preferable to construct a number of smaller tanks 
with capacity ranging from 200  to 1000 tons.  Copper, brass or bronze should be absolutely 
avoided for use in any part of the storage  and means of transport that has contact with the 
oil such as piping, pipe connections,  valves, heating coils, temperature gauze for oil, 
strainers, pumps etc or in even  sampling apparatus also, there should be any contamination 
with copper, bronze etc should be avoided.  Mild steel is acceptable for oil products, but the 
tank wall, floor, roof should preferably  be coated. A number of different coating practices 
are available and specific assurance so as to  suitability for contact with the food stuff should 
be obtained from the manufacturer.  Mild s teel is not suitable for acid, oil or fatty acids.  
Fiber, brass or 316 stainless steel can be used for many grades of products.  Aluminium is 
also satisfactory.   
 
Then heater installation in tank, sometime in the tank there are heating systems or devices  
are provided particularly for removal of the solid fats etc for heating of the oil  before it 
unloading . So, these are two heating of the installations also becomes necessary to maintain 
the proper  temperature of oil and to ensure its quality and usability.  Edible oils may solidify 
or become more viscous at lower temperature making it difficult to  handle or pump.  So, 
heating systems are designed to provide controlled and uniform heat distribution 
throughout  the storage tank.  Maintaining the oil to maintain in  a liquid state at the 
facilitating easy extraction  and transfer when needed.  All tanks for solid or semi -solid 
products is installed with heating facility in order  to obtain homogeneous products when 
they are transferred or unloaded. So, heating coil shou ld be of mild steel or mild steel tanks 
and the of stainless steel  for coated and stainless steel tankage.   
 
Then bare hot water pipes, this bare hot water pipes based heating is one method which is  
used to heat edible oil in storage tank.  This system inv olves circulating hot water through 
pipes and that are in direct contact  with oil transferring heat to the oil and maintaining it at 
the desired temperature.  Heating the hot water that is where controller at 80 °C circulated 
through the  oil is the best proc edure because it is least likely to cause local overheating.  
Then bare steam pipe, there is a bare steam pipe based heating is another method 
commonly  used to heat edible oil in storage tank. This system involves circulating heat or 
circulating steam throu gh pipes that are in direct contact  with the oil.  So, transferring the 
heat to the oil and maintaining it at the desired temperature.   
 
Heating by steam with pressure up to 1.5 kg per centimeter square gauge may be 
temperature  of 127 °C. The heating coils are normally mild steel 5 centimeter square or 
pipes and should be  rest and supporting legs of about 7.5 centimeter that is 3 inch above the 
base of the tank.  Here no provision existed for making the oil in tank.  A maximum heating 
rate of 5 °C per every 24 hours should be maintained to  avoid local overheating at the coil 
surface.  Then heating installation in the road and rail tankers.  Here you can see in the figure 
that heating installation in the road and rail tankers  for edible oils and fat play a crucial role 
in maintaining the quality and usability of  these products during transportation. So, edible 
oils and fat can solidify or become more viscous at lower temperature making it  challenging 
to load unload and transport them efficiently.   
 
So, from this po int of view a suitable heating system must be installed.  So, heating 
installations in tanker help ensure that the oil remains in a liquid state facilitating  a smooth 
handling and preventing any adverse effect on quality.  The primary objective of the heating 
installation in road and rail tanker is to prevent the  product from solidifying or 
experiencing temperature related changes that could affect its quality.  By maintaining the 
oil or fat within the appropriate temperature range, the heating system en sures  that the 
cargo maintains or cargo remains pumpable and free flowing allowing for efficient  loading 
unloading and transfer operations. For solids or semi solid fats tanker with it should be 
fitted with stainless steel or  mild steel steamed coils which  can be coupled to a source of hot 
water or low -pressure steam  where steam pressure up to 1.5 kg per square centimeter can 
be used.  In temperate and cold climates even tanker should be insulated.   
 
Then typical and ideal bulk storage and handling faciliti es for fuel oil you can see here.  Bulk 
storage and handling facilities are required by extraction plants and refineries, industrial  
uses of fats and oils as well as tank farm operations. So, ideal bulk storage system has been 
shown in this figure that is y ou can see the rail  and truck, there is pike and scale.   
 
The key features in the ideal bulk storage system include that is storage tanks and piping  for 
each type of crude oil to be stored and handled.  Second that is there should be an inventory 
control s ystem that allows an accurate measure  of crude oil coming into the refinery and to 
the refining operations.  Finally, third important stage is the spill prevention that is 
containment that is there  should be a control system for spill prevention containment . So, 
item 1 and 2 that is storage tanks with piping as well as inventory control these  are the very 
important in preventing co -mixing and mixing of old product with new where the  new 
product is being used.  So, the typical piping arrangement for crude oil storage tank is shown 
here in the picture  that is oil in there is a siphon breaker and it oil goes out like the key 
feature include  an inverted U -shaped piping arrangement with a siphon breaker at the top  
And this lessens the possibility of oil in a full t ank accidentally flowing to a tank  containing 
less oil and it also permits filling a tank from the bottom thereby minimizing  exposure of the 
oil to air.   
 
So, general scheme for the storage and handling of finished oil that is oil coming from the  
deodoriz er is passed through a heat exchanger and a polishing filter to remove any solid  
material etc. Then after the polishing filtration the oil is pumped through a cooler and it 
goes to  the storage tank and from the storage tank that is before packaging the oil  is filtered  
again to remove any solid etc and then it is passed through another again polishing  filter. 
And finally, it is sent to the packaging where paper is generally used for in the filtration  
polishing filter the paper is used and after that it is sent for the packaging depending  upon 
the type of the product either drums, cartoons, tank wagons, cans, bottles or margarine  and 
shortening products structure and their packaging etc is followed.   
 
Now, let us talk about the general guidelines for storage of some of the liquid fats like  the 
proper storage of edible liquid oil or fat is essential to maintain their quality  extend s helf life 
and assure food safety.  Edible liquid fats such as vegetable oils are commonly used in 
various  food applications  and are susceptible to degradation if not stored current properly.  
So, to preserve their freshness nutritional value and flavor a specific guidelines should  be 
followed when storing these fat.  So, general guideline is that is air, heat, light, and age aff ect 
the quality of the s helf life of the product, edible oil and which deteriorate the oxidation or 
through oxidation  surfaces. So, oxidation process is generally are greatly enhanced when 
edible oils are stored in container  that are not airtight and in ar eas where the oil is exposed 
to heat and light.  So, an unpleasant smell of these indicates that the oil is no longer desirable 
for consumption.  
 
 So, even a wine smell or taste may reveal that the oil was not properly stored.  A metallic 
flavor indicates t hat the oil was stored in a container made with reactive metals.  If edible oil 
becomes rancid very quickly, it indicates that the oil was improperly stored  and has 
oxidized. Most refined oils like oils obtained from cold pressing mechanical methods etc it 
will keep for 3 to 6 months if properly stored in a cool dark location.  The refrigerator is the 
best place to store refined unrefined oils and although most will  solidify in cooler 
temperature, they will return to a liquid state if removed from the  refrige rator 1 or 2 hours 
prior to their use.  Refined oils that is oil obtained from heat and solvent extraction tend to 
keep twice  as long as unrefined oil that is at least 6 to 12 months if stored properly.  An oil 
high in polyunsaturated fat has a much shorter shelf life than the oil high in 
monounsaturated  or saturated fats and they should be stored in a refrigerator to extend the 
shelf life. 
 
So, let us see the guidelines that is provided for a specific guidelines related to specific  oil 
like avocado oil. Thi s it should be stored in a refrigerator for about 9 to 12 months.  Canola 
oil may be stored in a cool dark cabinet away in its original container for 4 to 6  months or in 
the refrigerator for 9 months.  Chile oil if kept at room temperature it will last for 6  months, 
but the flavor and heat  will gradually dissipate the longer it is kept.  The intensity will 
deteriorate less rapidly if it is stored in a refrigerator.  Corn oil contains a high level of 
polyunsaturated fat, it should be stored in a refrigerator  for up to 6 months.  
 
Grape seed oil can be stored without refrigeration for 3 months if the storage temperature 
does  not climb above 21 °C. However, since it contains a high level of polyunsaturated fat, it 
is best to store grape  seed oil in a refrigerato r for up to 6 months.  Storing the grape seed oil 
in an area of excessive heat will cause it to deteriorate rapidly.  Hazelnut oil is stored in a 
cool dark cupboard, it will remain fresh for as long as 3 months,  but if it is best to store it in 
a refrigerato r to prevent it from becoming rain seed.  If refrigeration causes the oil to 
solidify, it can be restored for a liquid state by leaving  it at room temperature for an hour or 
two. Macadamia nut oil the high level of antioxidant shows rancidity and allows mac adamia 
nut oil  to be kept for up to 2 years without refrigeration and longer it if it is refrigerated.  
 
Mustard oil should be stored in refrigerator where it will keep for about 5 to 6 months.  It 
will keep for a considerably shorter period if it is stored  in a cabinet.  So, it should not be 
stored in a warm location.  Palm oil because of its high level of saturated fat, it resists 
rancidity and can be stored  in its original container in a cool dark cabinet for many months. 
Palm kernel oil it is also high lev el of unsaturated high level of saturated fats are there.  In 
some cases, it is higher than the palm oil.  So, it also resists rancidity and therefore, it has a 
very long shelf life stored in a  cool dark cabinet for 1 year or in the refrigerator even for 
mor e. Peanut oil there is refined peanut oil will keep for long period usually 2 years and in  
many cases almost indefinitely if it is stored unopened in its original container in a cool  
dark location.   
 
Shafflower  flour oil has an extremely high level of pol yunsaturated fat which does not keep  
as well as the fat components and therefore, it should be stored in a refrigerator where  it 
will keep for more than 6 months. Truffle oil because of its strength only a few drops of 
truffle oil are required to add  early  truffle flavour to a variety of foods such as meat, fish, 
pasta, salads, sauces  etc. So, truffle oil may also lose some of its intense flavour and aroma if 
it is restored  for long period of times.  Walnut oil if properly stored, walnut oil will become 
ranc id quickly if it is improperly  stored especially if it is an unrefined version.  So, if stored in 
a cool dark cupboard it will remain fresh for as long as 3 months, but  like most unrefined 
oils and oils high in polyunsaturated fat it is best to store it  in the refrigerator to prevent it 
from becoming rancid.  If refrigeration causes the oil to solidify it can be restored to a liquid 
state by leaving  it at room temperature for an hour or two prior to use. Refined walnut oil 
will keep for somewhat longer period , but the refrigerator is still  the best place to store it 
for optimum shelf life.   
 
Now, let us briefly talk about guidelines for storage fat storage of solid fats and  most solid 
fat as you are know that is they are from animal sources.  However, they are  exceptions 
typical of tropical plant oil such as coconut oil or solid or  semi solid at room temperature 
and vegetable shortening and margarine made from the plant  oils or solid due to 
hydrogenation process.  So, most solid fats also contain a higher  degree  of saturated fat than 
the liquid fat  and therefore, they are very stable and then tend to keep for extended period 
especially  when refrigerated.  Brown butter can be stored in air tight storage container and 
refrigerated for several weeks  or it can be froz en for long term storage. When reheating 
frozen, but brown butter use caution when melting and heating it on a stove  top stove top as 
so as not to burn the butter with a setting that is too high . The frozen butter can also be 
heated on a low microwave sett ing. Ghee which is usually solid in cans does not have to be 
refrigerated because it contains  no milk solids and that can spoil.  
 
Clarified butter although clarified butter keeps longer than the whole butter due to  the 
removal of the milk solids, homemade  clarified butter should be refrigerated in case milk  
solids are still remaining in the finished product because refrigeration will allow clarified  
butter to remain usable for an extended period.  Coconut oil is solid or semi solid at room 
temperature due t o its extremely highly saturated  fat content and therefore, it resist to 
rancidity. It should be kept in a container in a cool dark cabinet for many months.  It can also 
be stored in the refrigerator for an extended period.  There is a like butter lard will absorb 
flavors and aromas.  So, it is could be tightly wrapped when used.  The label should be 
checked for the proper storage method because some types of lard  depending on the 
processing technique may be stored at room temperature while other  required 
refri geration .  
 
Margarine should be stored in the refrigerator where it will keep for 2 months or more. For 
long -term storage, it may be kept at a freezer for a half year or longer.  Like butter and other 
solid fats, margarine will absorb the flavors and odors  of some  food.  So, it should be tightly 
wrapped or covered when storing.  Sweet butter sweet butter is there is a perishable it 
should be stored in refrigerator.  Although it is tempting to store in a container in a cabinet 
at room temperature so that it  is easy to spread. It will become rancid quickly due to the 
presence of milk solids that can spoil.  So, when you stored in refrigerator, it should be 
tightly wrapped because it will absorb  odors and flavors quite easily.  Unsalted butter may 
be kept in a refri gerator for 2 to 3 weeks and salted butter may be  kept some more longer 
like 4 to 5 weeks because the salt acts as a preservative.  Butter freezes extremely well and 
may be kept in a freezer for at least half a year.  
 
So, a handling and storage of edible  fats and oils are crucial aspects for maintaining their 
quality, flavor and nutritional value.  Phospho lipids  plays a vital role in settling standards, 
performing good trade practices and providing  arbitration and dispute resolution services 
for its members  involved in the trade of oil  seeds, oils and fats. Shipping bulk oils and fats 
presents several challenges due to their unique characteristics  and requirements.  Proper 
storage of edible oils and fats is essential to prevent their quality, flavor  and nutri tional 
value.  Inadequate storage conditions can lead to the development of off -flavor, rancidity 
and degradation of essential nutrients.  So, this should be properly handled and stored well 
to maintain quality.   
 
These were the references.  Thank you very m uch for your patience here.  Thank you.  