Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agri cultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur   
Module 10: Specialty  Oils and Fats Products  
Lecture 50 : Oil Powder and Liposomes  
 
Hello everybody.  Namaskar. We are now in  the last lecture of module 10.  In this 
lecture 50th, we will talk about , in the next half an hour or so , about oil powder and 
liposomes.  
 
We will discuss : what is an oil powder, how oil powder can be made, what a re the 
various techniques including encapsulated techniques, then character ization and 
application of oil powder.  And then we also will talk about liposomes, its classificatio n 
and method of prepar ation.  
And then finally, we have in our lab work done and we  have a patented 
technology on heart healthy blended oil powder and liposomes.  So, we will discuss a 
brief of that as well.   
 
So, the oil powder from the name itself indicates , that is , you kno w tha t vegetable 
oil is susceptible to oxidative degradation.  Omega 3 fatty acids are prone to oxidative 
deterioration which cause impaired flavor.  It may result into loss of nutritional value as 
well as decreased shelf life of the oil.  Therefore, it is beneficial to convert these highly 
unstab le omega 3 rich oils into more stable powder form.  And this inhibits the auto 
oxidation process and helps in maintaining the quality as well  as shelf life of the edible 
oils. And this can be done by a technique cal led microencapsulation of oil.  We 
microencapsulate like the oil which is taken a consi der as a core material and this  is some 
wall material is used and from emulsifiers are there, then  emulsion is prepared and then 
this emulsion is finally  dried using sui table technology and i t gives a some sort of coating 
is applied appeared on the top.  
 
I will come little later again in this, but first advan tages and disadvantages of the  
oil powder processing , that is , it is a , it gives a shelf life enhan cement, it , that is the 
product package flexibility, it reduces the handling in energy or cost requi red for 
handling transportation  etcetera ok.  Powders  add variety to diet, the powders have more 
nutraceutical values ok.  They can be even targeted release a targeted  delivery of  the 
various bioactive etcetera  can be used with this microencapsulation technology.  
However, there is the some of the disadvantages might incl ude requirement of the 
specific  wall material and this wall material may interfere with the general  characteristic 
flavor etcetera  of the compound.  They are highly expensive processing required even not 
much people are aware about this techn ology or consumers etcetera.  And then storage of 
oil powder , that is , because the powders are highly hygroscop ic in nature.  So, they 
require  air tight specific storage material and storage conditions etcetera.   
 
Now let us talk about microencapsulation technology.  You can see here it is a 
micro capsulation that is where the active ingredient core ma terial and it is include some 
site of the wall material or cell material that is this ok.  And using a proper characteristics 
of these materials tha t is taken that is just a core ingredient is encapsulated is surrou nded 
by thick wall material.  
So, it is microencapsulati on technology is used to devel op products containing 
marine, vegetable or essential oils in mic roencapsulation technology.  It maintain s 
biological and functional characteristics.  Physical encapsulation of sensitive oils in a 
small capsule  in the form of oil powders  prevent s oxidation triggered by moisture, metal 
ions, oxygen, heat , etcetera.  So, as I told you microencapsulation is method in which tiny 
particles or droplets are surrounded  by a coating or they are embedded in a homogeneous 
or heterogeneous matrix to form a small capsules.  And these the wall material is selected 
in such a way th at even they can be engineered to degrade and therefore, targeted release 
of these bio-octaves ca n be achieved.  
So, oil material here you see then chemical, physical or m echanical factors are 
required which will break this coating and then this it will take t ime and then the oil 
materials are released.  And in fact, this microencapsulation technology is also use d for 
various applications like  targeted nutrition delivery and so many things ok.   
 
Then these oil powder production technologies ; commonly used m ethods include 
emulsification, spray drying, coaxial electro spray system, freeze drying, extrusion, 
fluidized bed coating , and supe rcritical fluid technology ok.  
 
The spray drying, then the spray drying is relatively s imple, it is continuous and 
low cost commercial process.  The microencapsulation using spray drying involves first  
as I showed  you in the earlier  slide that is the preparation of suitable emulsion that is the 
and wall material and core material are there, they are some homogenized , mixed 
properly and emulsion is formed.  
And then th is emulsion is a sprayed using  fine spray nozz les etcetera into fine 
droplets , ok. There is a and it comes that is these emulsion comes in the fine  droplets in 
the drying chamber  where it comes in contact with hot air , ok. Then from this drying 
chamber , the water is evaporated and we get , that is , using cy clone , air is removed and 
micro capsule that is oil powder is recovered.  So, optimum drying conditions to obtain 
the minimized fat  free surface powder there and low inlet and outlet temperatures can 
reduce the viscos ity and the diffusivity of fat . Large emulsion droplets and nozzle size 
provide a large powder  with low surface area and low fat free surface , ok. 
 
So, the process flow chart for the spray drying of vegetable  powder particularly 
olive oil emulsion is take n 10 percent and 1 percent beta-lactoglobu lin buffer solution is 
obtained  by mixing with a polyt ron.  And then the refining of the coarse emulsion by a 
high pres sure homogenizer were done and the protein sh ells and the oil water droplets 
interface s were cross linked for 15  minute at 80 degree s Celsius.  And then finally, spray 
drying of the 10 percent cross linked material and it is spray drying  conditions were 125 
degree Celsius inlet temperature in the drying chamber and 84 degree Celsius  in the 
outlet temperature.   
 
And you can  see that this is the oil powder which is as  observed by bright field 
light microscopy and the other one is the oil powder observed by UV light microscopy 
and this is  the picture of spray dried oil powder you can see ok.  Emulsion parameters 
which influenc e the drying process conditions : number one : inlet and outlet  temperatures 
in the spray drying chamber.  
The ranges are 150 to 200 degree Celsius and evaporation occurs simultaneously.  
Lower inlet temperature gives low evaporation rate resulting in a obvio usly low yield.  
High air inlet temperature causes prem ature release and degradation or  loss of 
encap sulated  cores. T otal solids content that T SC of the emulsion is , it is T SC, also 
influences  the core material volatile compounds and efficacy of the microencapsulation.  
The optimum solid content is around 20 to 40 percent of the spray dried oil.  The wall 
material type of the material that is used like application of gum Arabic for  the 
encapsul ation of oil is where has been popular ok particularl y for the fish oil etcetera.  
Then combination of encapsulation  by spray drying is blend -based  protein, gums 
and carbohydrates.  Protein portion behaves as an emulsifier and carbohydrates acts as a 
matrix  material.  A combination of protein with different carbohydrate as well as wall 
mater ials, a blend of maltodextrin, sodium caseinates , etcetera are achieved a high 
encapsulation efficiency in some oils.   
 
Then anothe r method is the coaxial electro spray system.  In this , there are this 
system consists of two syringe pumps, one is the  syringe pump;  one for the core liquid 
and syringe pump two for the wall liquid.  
And the wall liquid prepared in a syringe pump ; and core l iquid is injected u sing 
a, this syringe pump.  Then nozzle  need le, that is nozzle needle , had an outlet and inner 
diame ter of 0.51 to 0.02 mm , respectively ; and each syringe attached to a programmable 
syringe pump.  And then with the help of this ; these are the vo ltage of around 0 to 30 
kiloVolt  and a limiting current of 2 mA  generated by a high voltage generator which is 
applied to a coaxial nozzle  and here these materials are put and then sprayed and then the 
capsule micr o capsules are obtained , ok. 
 
Then , freeze drying . The oil , before the drying , the oil is d issolved in water and it 
frozen  at minus 90 degree to minus 40 degree Celsius, surrounding pr essure is reduced 
and even heat  is added to sublimate water directly from the solid phase to the gas phase.  
So, p owder characteristics of freeze -dried oil powder include t hat the freeze dried 
ingredient  may have higher porosity exposing the oil to surrounding environment.  The 
porous structure of freeze dried bioactive products it offer s a high oil release. Freeze -
dried mat erials seem to have the maximum retention of volatile compounds.  Their 
essential oils processed through  freeze drying  are darker wit h a larger flaky appearance.  
Freeze dried samples exhibit an irregular geometry with a compact sheet like 
structure.  Freez e dried samples are more res istant to oxidation and they have  lower 
microencapsulation  efficiency.   
 
Then extrusion is the , it is a , extrusion technique has been use d to encapsulate 
olive, clove, thyme and cinnamon oils , etcetera.  It has been used to almost exclusively 
for microencapsula tion of oils in a carbohydrate matrix.  Generally, extrusion 
microencapsulation involves three proce sses those are melt injection, centrifugal 
extraction , that is coextrusion and melt ext rusion , these are the three processes,  ok. 
So, advantages of the extrusion process in microencapsul ation include stability of 
the oil against oxidation, low surface oil, prolonged shelf lif e and reduced evaporation 
rate. However, the disadvantages include , that is , the process is sometime expensive.  
There are large particles : may be 150 to 2000 micron are formed ; particles need to be 
separated  and dried and viscous carrier material cannot be used in this case.   
 
So, the melt extrusion process . As you can  see here in the figure 1 , that is the , in 
the melt extrusion process , the core material is dispersed in m olten carbohydrate , then 
pressed  through a dye into a bath of i sopropanol and liquid nitrogen.  The wall material 
solidifies with liquid forming an encapsulating matrix to in terrupt  the cored material.  
The granules are then recovered b y filtration or centrifugation.  The residual 
solvent is removed by air drying or vacuum drying.  Melt extrusion proce ss; it is almost 
similar to that of the melt injection ; only thing here , adding the core material to 
plasticized carrier matrix at a later stage ; you can see here , that is, the plasticized carrier 
matrix and melt core materi al is added at a later stage in  the middle of the extrude  almost , 
ok.  The in the later stage in the extrusion process , the process , it protects the sensitive 
bioactive,  etcetera from harsh extrusion conditions , ok.  In the co -extrusion process , you 
can see here it is a con centric feed tube through which  wall material and core material are 
pumped separately to the many nozzle mo unted on the  outer surface.  Core material flows 
through the center tube , ok.  Wall material flows through the outer tube and encapsulati on 
of olive oil has been using alginate microspheres is done using this co extrusion 
techniques , ok.   
 
Then fluidized bed  coating . It is accomplished by suspend ing solid particles of the 
core material by an air stream under controlled temperature and hum idity and then 
spraying  the coating material. With time , the wall material will gradually build as a th in 
layer on the surface of the suspended particles. Encapsulated  fish oil by spraying it into 
the fluidized bed chamber followed by film  coating granules  are done.  
Vegetable oil emulsion  prepared by  using maltodextrin and gum Ara bic 
agglomerated  using fluidized bed drying is done.  A spray granulati on process can also be 
performed  before flui dized bed coating and drying of  the products at a temperature of 
around 70 degrees  Celsius is done to prevent degradation of the heat sensitive core.  So, 
the fluidized bed coating process increases wettability and ease of reconstitution 
properties.  Fluidized bed process resu lts in controlled release of bio active compounds 
due to better cohesion of the coating material. It is increased powder size with reduced 
coalescence is obtained here.  It shows reduced flowability and mechanical resistance.   
 
Now, this the various methods of fluid board coating which i ncluded were top 
spray, bottom spray , and tangential spray system.  In the top spray system , as you can see 
in this figure 1 , that is the coating solution  is sprayed counter  currently such that , as the 
solid o r porous particles move to the coating region, they  become micro encapsulated.  
So, a small micro capsule ranging between 2 to 100 micr ometer can be formed using this  
top system.  In the bottom spray system, just a reverse of the top system, i t is widely used 
for coating particles as small as 100 micron.  
Proximity particles move from b ottom to top through the cribrifor m bottom plate 
and they pass the nozzle zone and these are mic ro encapsulated by the coating.  In the 
tangential spray system as you can see in the third fig ure, there are three mechanical  
forces which cause particle movement, mixing and granulation.  And these forces 
resembling a spiraling helix provide good mixing and the formation of particles.   
 
Now the characteristics of the powder . Obviously, the density  and moisture 
content influence  the flowability of the characters.  So, these  become important 
parameter.  Then C arr index and Hansen ratio are indirect method to as sess the bulk 
powder properties  particularly free flow, etc etera.  The hydrophobic additiv es added 
during emulsion preparat ion increase the powder flowability  at reduced relative humidity.  
Encapsulation efficiency depends on number of wall materials added during emulsion 
preparation.  Encapsulation efficiency depends on the stability of the emulsion and its 
preparation.  The various methods to use to characterize the oil powder include  the 
encapsulation efficiency, oxidation stability, even rehydration time, release time, 
moisture content, colour, density  and its morphology.  
And there are set procedures protocols for measuring  and fin ding out these 
characteristics and so that the powder can be characterized using and then importantly 
that is these should  be characterized to have a more efficient release or target release 
system whenever  it is required.   
 
So, morphological a spect of the oil powder . Scanning ele ctron microscopy, 
transmission electron microscopy, electron spectroscopy, etcetera can  visualize surface 
morphology, disperse and agglomerated particles and surface functionalization.  Even 
analysis helps in identifyin g the uniform coating of wall material around the oil droplet  
and the smoothness of the outer surface during drying at high temperature s. Thermal 
analysis like DSC, TGA and DMA can be used.  DSC uses heat flow changes versus 
temperature or time . In TGA,  it takes a mass change versus temperature or time . And 
DMA measures the storage modulus  like stiff ness and loss modules  (damping) , the oil, 
versu s temp erature, time and frequency.  
Oxidizing stabilit y like peroxide value, 2 thiobar bituric acid re active sub stances, 
etcetera are mea sured using standard protocols.  Headspace gas analysis is done to 
determine the production of propanol and hexanol , etcetera which are the indicator of the 
vegetable oil oxidation.  So, these are the set protocol by which the oi l powder can be 
characterized.  
 
As far as the application of oil powder is concerned , that is , microencapsulating 
fish oil with a barley protein into milk and yogurt to improve the stability has been used.  
Methods can be employe d for microencapsulation of vitamins in the oil, fortified soya 
milk with calcium, use of fish oil for encapsulation to fortified bread or even these 
encapsulation  technology has been used to mask the fishy flavor of the fish o il and then 
these encapsulat ed fish oil containing high content of the omega fatty acids , they are put 
into the milk and then omega fatty acid rich milk is using encapsulation technology 
which is available in the market , even some dairies are doing using this technology.  Then 
increasing the microcapsule in dough of the bread red uce the formation of acrylamide  
and hydroxymethylfurf ural in the breads.   
Milk fortified with fla x oil powder provide  oxidative stab ility to the system.  Even 
250 mL  fortified mil k helps to meet approxi mately 34  percent of the RDA requirement of 
alpha  linolenic acids for adults using this fortified and encapsulated alpha linolenic acid, 
encapsulated  linseed oil, fish oil etcetera.  So, that becomes a very energy to mask flavor 
or even the core material that is wall material is used in such a way that the bio engineered 
wall material o r nano materials are used, that is, which can be even seen they can get this 
released as  a target site particular site because of the in our digestion system the 
conditions is it another things are different.  So, the material ca n be selected in such a 
way.  
So, that they these micro encapsules at the one time that they prov ide stability to 
this material and at the same time they get released they get degrad ed or disin tegrated at a 
proper  location in our system and then we can get targeted rele ase of the bioactives are 
micro nutrient in the desired location.   
 
Then comes  the liposomes. T hese are the liposomes , you know that  they are 
hydrophilic compounds  and phospholipids molecule.  So, using this is standard control 
techniques m icro capsular these hydrophobic compounds  are formed and the layer is 
hydrophobic both hydrophilic head and  aqueous media and hydrophobic tail these are 
contained inside that is c ontain liposomes.  So, the liposome structure and formation how 
it is formed that they  contain all these hydrophobic hydrophilic and the aqueous media.  
So, liposomes are a small membrane vessels made of lipids with b oth hydrophobic and 
hydrophilic  phases used in sustainable release and stability of bioacti ve compounds 
mainly in the case  of functional foods , etcetera.  
Phospholipid molecule are the major building blocks of liposomes. Advantages of 
liposomes is the ability to accommodate  and maintain the stab ility of encapsulated bio 
compounds.  Various bioactive compounds were encapsulated using liposome s in the 
form of nanoliposomes or micro liposomes or functional foods .  So, major phospholipids 
which are used in the synthesis  of or preparation of liposomes,  include soy leci thin, eg g 
lecithin, marine lecith in and milk phospholipids ok.   
 
So, liposomes can be classified in various ways that is two main categories of 
liposomes  include multilamellar  vesicles, popularly known as MLVs or unilamell lar 
vesicles that is ULVs.  
The multilamellar  vesicles are the presence of multiple lipid  bilayer as you could 
see here in this figure , ok.  Whereas, the unilamelllar  vesicles that is they may be joint, 
grant, ULV that is single lipid bilayer of 1 micron dia, there may be a small ULV that is 
with the vessel size range of  20 to 200 nanometer that is SUV.  The n there may be multi 
vesicular  vesicle  of several vesicle s with less than 1 micron  in size that is MUV.  So, it 
may be joint unilayer vessel GUV, SUV or MUV all tho se things ok.   
 
Then , method for the liposome preparation . There are four commo n and important 
stages involved  here are : first is the drying of lipid dissolved in  organic solven ts, then 
exposure of the lipid to aqueous media, purification of the generated liposomes and then 
finally, anal ysis of the final products.  
As this can be used as a thin layer, thin film rehydra tion method, detergent 
removal method, injection method or extrusion method or heating method can be.  But 
novel method include supe rcritical fluid  method like supercritical anti solvent (SAS) or 
supercritical reverse phase evaporation method , ok.  Then , microfluidization or 
ultrasonication , these are the other ways wh ich can be methods which can be used for 
preparing the liposomes.   
 
Now  liposomes can be applied like  peptides, dairy products, bi o preservatives, 
nutraceutical or as  functional food . They are used as bioactive  phytochemicals and plant 
extracts part icularly  in the dairy beverages, flours , etcetera or functional food and 
nutraceuticals.  Then the essential oils , that is , are liposomes in the form of liposomes are 
used in the  bio preservatives in nutraceuticals, then in marine oil like EPA, DHA , 
etcetera . They  are used in food fortification in dairy , in beverages , in nutraceutical , and 
functional foods and vitamin.  So, like A, C, D and E and minerals like calcium and 
ferrous they  are used in food fortification  using liposomes , dairy beverages as usual in 
functional foods ok.   
 
Now, let us talk about heart healthy oil powder and liposomes , ok.  You know that 
for a healthy diet , heart healthy that the fat is very important, but at the same time , the 
first is fat is sometime bad fat if you use , that is , it will give lot of problems , obesity an d 
many other problems will be there , ok.  So, heart healthy fats include as per the American 
heart association (AHA ), the heart  healthy cooking oil must satisfy certain characteristic s 
like there s hould be a balance in the MUFA and PUFA, mono unsaturated fa tty acids and 
polyunsaturated fatty acid should be in the range of 1 to 1.5 and omega 6 to omega 3 ratio 
should be 1 to 4 and there should be significant a mount  of antiox idant present in the 
system.  
So, this oil which containing MUFA, PUFA in this ra tio omega 6, omega 3 you 
know 1  to 4 and containing good amount of antioxidants in it natural antio xidants vitamin 
D, tocopherol,  can be considered as a good heart healthy oil ok and this hea rt healthy oil 
can be converted  into oil powder.  So, first thing for  making heart healthy oil powder the 
thing is that you can select the oil having these properties or formulate , that is , take the 
different blendin g of two or more  oils to give to come into these properties to meet thes e 
requirements of heart healthy  oil and also they should have better stability and nutritio nal 
composition or antioxidants  are more that will give better stability , ok.  Then even this 
heart healthy oil , vitamin deficiency in India you know , that is , there are it is well known.  
So, it is a vehicle is needed to incorporate or encapsul ate both fat and water soluble 
vitamins all right into this the oil powder etcetera , ok.  So, using this liposome 
preparation technology or this powder e tcetera you can take oil blend and lecithin, then 
heat it a nd fat soluble vitamins ar e added into properly agitated,  then water soluble 
vitamins are added and then agita ted and lipid bilayer is formed  and this finally, 
liposomes and which contains almost all hy drophobic vitamins, hydrophilic  vitamins, 
phospholipid s, etcetera they are a ll enclosed in the one unit.  
So, that is how beauty of this liposome preparations ok and, but the short shelf life 
of lipos omes , that is , stability can be enhanced by encapsulation and drying , that is , the 
protein layer and the  lipid soluble layer of vitamins , they can be freeze d ried to give 
stable liposomes. So, that is in brief , you can say , that is , the proper selection of the oil, 
proper blending  and then incorporating into it vitamin A and D and other various 
bioactive  micronutrients can be used and then this can be stabilized and freeze dried and 
you get a material liposome,  stable liposome , ok.   
 
Now, what we in our work , what we have done that obviously, we  selected that is 
the vegetable  oil based on their fatty acid compositions and then blende d these oils and 
we formulized the optimized  formulation was optimized ok and the blend 
characterization the ratio etcetera . And, we in our study , we found that rice bran oil, 
flaxseed oil a nd peanut oil in the proportion  of 72.5 perc ent, 20 percent and that is 7. 5 
like rice bra n oil 72.5 percent, peanut oil  20 percent and flaxseed oil 7.5 percent if it is 
blended in this it me ets the requirement  of AHA for the heart healthy oil , ok.  And we 
could get the shelf life of this oil blend was fo und in our study as 239 days at  30 degree 
Celsius temperature , ok.  So, these oils we have taken as I explained earlier also that is fat 
soluble vitamins  and vitamin A and D were mixed into it by using that is  heat and 
mechanical agitation and then water soluble, I mean , that is , the blends were  emulsified 
by the various wall  material and coating material, poly liposome formation were used 
then vitamin water soluble  B9 and B12 were added into it then mechanical agitation 
form.  Then , see it gives here that is water in oil and water . This emulsion is formed and 
using this is given ultrasonication techniques ok . And this give s finally, the freeze dried.  
So, micro capsu les are formed.  So, single emulsion were unstable in our study we 
found th at at 25 and 55 degree Celsius temperature while double emulsions were stable 
for about 22  days at 55 degree Celsius and 36 days at 25 degree Celsius ok.  Then these 
micro encapsule  liposomes , stable liposomes whe re we used in the various they can be 
obviously, used in various different products like frozen desserts , etcetera . Also,  we used 
this in the pre paration of fortified biscuits.  So, biscuits that is the dough was incorporated 
with appro priate quantity of these freeze  dried liposomes and biscuit made from the using 
stand ard methods standard and it was  baked using and we were found , that is , that thes e 
baking temperature liposomes  were stable up to that baking temperature , ok. And the 
biscuits were used with encapsulated oil provid ed a crisper texture with fewer  surface 
cracks and irregular sticky morphology and showed higher antioxidant potential , ok.  And 
this can also be used we also us ed in the frozen dessert , ok. 
And then this  is used , that is , biscuits . We studied  that in vitro digestion in the  
gastric conditions . The liposomes into the low fat biscu its and sodium chloride (2 gram  
per liter ), pepsin and pH and time these were in vitro gastric condition were simulated , 
ok.  And in vitro in vitro intest inal conditions were simulated and we found , that is , they 
were stable and released properly in the gut as well as in the intestine . Their releas e 
kinetics  were studied and we found it satisfactory , ok. And we found that 1.1 to 1.5 times 
lower release of vitamins is I  have is over found here , ok.  
 
So, with this , I come to the conclusion of this lecture , that is , oil powder is 
developed  by encapsulating oil with wall materials using various drying tec hniques, 
physical encapsulation  of sensitive oils in  small capsules in the form of oil powd er 
prevents oxidation triggered  by moisture, metal ions, oxygen , and heat.  Emulsion spray 
drying a nd freeze drying techniques are the mo st commonly used to develop oil  powder . 
Phospholipid molecules are the major buil ding blocks for the liposomes. Liposomes are 
small membrane vesic les made of lipids with bo th hydrophobic and hydrophilic phases 
which a re used in sustainable  release and stability of bioactive  compounds mainly in the 
functional food development.   
 
These were the references that used for this lecture.   
 
Thank you ver y much for your patience here. Thank you.  
