Food Oils and Fats: Ch emistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 11: By -product Utilization & Valorizatio n of Oil Milling Industry 
Waste  
Lecture 52 : By-products Utilization – Part I  
 
Hello everyone!  Namaskar!  Now, in this lecture 52, we  will discuss utilization of 
byproducts.  In the earlier class, we studied what are the various by products and what is 
their usefulness.   
 
Now, in this  lecture, we will talk about some of the conver sion of these 
byproducts into different materials which can be used for food purposes as well as non -
food purposes.  And we will take three important products, one is the protein powder.   
 
So, how this de -oiled meal can be converted into a good  food grade protein 
powder that  is by different extraction method, alkali extraction, ultrasound assisted 
extraction or enzyme assisted extraction.  And then these can be used for making 
generating edible films a nd glyc erin is the one product which you see that is a fat ty acid 
distillate , glycerin.  
So, the manufacture of preparation of these three major  products  from the 
byproducts of oil milling industry will discuss.  So, let us see de -oiled cake which you 
obtain which is also known as meal.  So, they are having many health benefits associated 
with the diet high in plant protein, ok.  For example, lowering the body weight, body 
cholesterol als o they lower the blood pressure  or regulate the blood pressure.  
So, the meal containing that is food which contains hi gh protein content it has 
very good advantages.  So, plant protein diets also prove very useful in case of obesity by 
helping in controlling  body weight.  This is the main reason why these are p referred over 
animal proteins. So, oil seed cake or oil seed meal, de -oiled meal obtained after the 
extraction of oil from the oil seed. They are rich in protein content we discussed in the  
earlier class.  So, the highest content of protein may be as high as 45 to 50 percent in the 
ground nut followed by soybean, cotton seed, rapeseed, sesame, sunflower, palm oi l, olive 
oil cake , etcetera.  
They are all having very good quantity of the protein  not only good quantity, but 
also they ha ve very good quality proteins. So, this protein hydrolysate  it like hydrolyzed 
product of protein, protein isolate which has more than 90 percent protein and protein 
concentrate which has protein content rangi ng from 30 percent to 90 percent , they can be 
prepared by these protein rich oil cake.    
So, that protein can be isolated or it can be purified and concentrated.  So, protein 
powder basically is a concentrated form of protein obtained through the process ing of de-
oiled cake.  The most widely used or spread methodology to obtain frac tions enriched in 
protein from oilseeds pressed cake and meals have an alkaline solubilizati on of the 
protein, a removal of  the insoluble material by centrifugation and an isoelectr ic 
precipitation of the protein,  followed by its s eparation by centrifugation.  
So, this is the way by which these protein s can be obtained they can be. And then 
these commer cial products prepared from oil seed cakes pressed oil cake are that  is a 
protein po wder , that is , which contain protein to 30 to  90 percent and then obviously,  
protein isolate which has  protein more than 90 percent. So, isolates from different oil seed 
cakes that is protein  isolates can exhibit differing  functional properties , such as 
emulsification, cream instability, wa ter and oil holding capacities and thus they offer 
wide range of applications in food industry , ok.   
 
So, let us see protein powder preparation . The flow chart is shown here , ok.  And 
what is the alkali acid extraction process is more commonly used where soybeans 
obviously, where peeled, crushed and sifted thro ugh 100 -mesh screen and the flou rs are 
degreased three times with n -hexane , that is , 1 is to 6 weight by volume in a  37 degree s 
Celsius water , ok. 
So, you get the oil and from this process that is defa tted soybean meal is obtained. 
So, that is , by standard method.  So, this defatted soybean meals , what is done , this is 
mixed with the deionized water at a ratio of 1 is to 10 weight by volume with the pH 
adjusted to 8 , pH is adjusted 8 , and for this even 2 mole per liter of NaOH is used.  So, 
the mixture is stirred continuously for 2 hours at 50 degree Celsius in a water bath, ok. 
And this , afterward the solution is centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 deg ree 
Celsius  to get the soy protein isolates , ok.   
 
So, after centrifuging , the pH of the  supernatant is adjusted to 4. 5 using 2 mole 
per liter  of NaOH  at a ratio and centrifuged at 6500 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 degree 
Celsius , ok. Then , this, the precipitate , which obtained after this centrifu gation is washed 
with deionized  water for about 48 hours at 4 degree Celsius and neutralized to pH 7 using 
2 mole  per liter  of NaOH followed by dialysis and freeze drying.  So, after freeze drying 
you get the final product tha t is a soy protein isolate and it is in the form of powder . All 
steps are performed obviously, at room temperature ok.   
 
Then , the other method is the ultrasound assist ed protein extraction from 
sunflower  meal , you get around 50 gram of sunflower meal , it is dispersed in  1000 liter of 
deionized water , then pH is adjusted to 8 by adding 1 mole per liter o f sodium hydroxide 
under R T for  1 hour retention time for 1 hour , ok.  And then i t is given a ultrasonification  
treatment , that is , a power density is 80 to  220 W att per liter , pretreatment time is 5, 15 
and 25 m inutes in different experiments  are given and temperature were varied from 25 
to 35 to 45 degree Celsius , ok. 
And the centrifugation . It was followed by centrifugati on and 4500 rpm per 20 
minutes , then pH is adjusted to 4.5 with 10 mole per liter HCl , then it is  further 
centrifuged at 4500 rpm fo r 20 minutes.  Then finally, the washing of precipitate with 
deionized water . The pH is 4.5 , and resuspension  of precipitate in deionized water 
followed by pH adjus tment to 7 by adding 0.1 mole per  liter NaOH . Then, this precipitate 
is obtained , the freeze dried , and then you get the protein isolate powde r. At minus 
eighteen  degree Celsius , it may be stored up , ok.  So, this was the process , that is , usually 
described by Dabbour  et al in 2018 , they conducted experiment,  and the responses they 
related protein yield as well as energy consump tion. 
 
And their results showed , that is , the maximum yield value , that is, 55 percent 
approximately was obta ined by the combination of 220 W att per liter , 45 degree  Celsius 
and 15 minutes retention time. The protein yield at optimal extraction point of ultrasonic 
treatment were higher  when compared to the traditional extraction , that is , without 
ultrasonic treatment , ok. And this case can be attributed to thermal and  mechanical 
influences induced by sonication , which can cause cell disruption and opening of the 
pores in the sunflower meal.  And this subsequently resulted in increase in the rate o f 
mass transfer and improvement  in the contact frequency in the release of protein , ok.  
And the consumed  energy d uring the process was about 0. 05 to 0.2 kilowatt hour , ok.   
 
Then enzyme assisted extraction of a rapeseed meal , you can see , that is , enzymes 
were used. P ectinoly tic, xylanoly tic as well as celluloly tic enzymes are given here . They 
were used and these two diagram , diagram , bar diagram.  So, that is the effect of enzyme 
treatment on extract ion of protein and carbohydrate  from intact B. rapa and dehul led B. 
napus pressed cake in compari son to the reference treatment.  That is , reference means 
where there was no enzyme treatment ; and these experiments were  at 30 degree Cels ius 
and 50 degree Celsius. And you can see , in all the methods , the amount of extraction , that 
is, yield , extraction yield  increased with the both temperature as well as when th e 
enzymes were used ; and you can  see in both the cases , that is , the ex traction yield 
increased.  
 
Then , the membrane technology was used , that is , extracti on of cruciferin and 
napin rich  protein from mustard cake using acid extraction , ok.  Then , in this , the 
rapeseed pressed cake is taken , homogenized , washed with water , and of course , acid pH 
2 is maintained . Then, it is dewatered thr ough decanter and then obtained  in different 
fraction , that is , first fraction is the frac tion 1 is the hull and fraction  3 is the water 
insoluble fib res and protein.  It is washed with water , purified water insoluble fraction 
and sp ray dried finally, which gives you napin rich protein.  Whereas the second fraction 
which is obtained ; it contains water soluble component like glucosinolates, thiols, soluble 
fibers, carbohydrate and soluble proteins , ok. This is subjected to membrane filtration , 
that is , UF and MF m embranes of particular particle  sizes , specific pore sizes are used ; 
and this is used to sepa rate the water soluble proteins,  then, which is finally, spray dried 
and gives the cruciferin rich protein . So, this method , cruciferin rich protein and napin 
rich protei n is obtained from the mustard cake, ok.   
 
This is a diagram for the preparation of protein isolat e from de -oiled sunflower 
cake.  So, process flow chart is given here . The de -oiled sunflower cake is used ; it is 
milled and passed through 0.5 mm sieve. Then the  processed sunflower cake which is 
obtained after mill ing ok, then it is subjected to  two process : one is the same process, but 
one is the laboratory scale a nd other is the pilot scale.  
In the laboratory scale , this pressed cake , there is the de-oiled pressed cake or 
powder  cake, it is dissolved into cake and salt solution 1 is to 10.  Whereas, in the pilot 
scale , the cake and salt solution is maintained 1 is to 15 , ok.  In the laboratory scale , both 
in this case , their extracti on time is around 1 hour,  they are centrifuged at 150 rpm and 20  
plus minus 3 degree Celsius , pH is adjusted till 6 using  1 Molar HCl or NOH in both the 
cases , ok.  Whereas, the in the pilot scale , the rpm is about 50 and extraction tim e is 1 
hour, another extraction rate is ; temperature is same.  So, by both the process , you get 
high phenolic protein extract ; and this high phenolic protein  extract in the laboratory 
scale , it is further centrifuged that at 150 rpm for 4 hou rs at 20 degree Celsius , ok. 
And in pilot s cale it is a set with a 3 bed V  per hour ; it is flow rate;  then, it is, 
there is precondition ed adsorbate  resin , you get phenolic acid.  And the remaining other , 
they pass through low protein , low phenolic protein after the extraction of the phenolic 
whatever you get , low phenoli c protein extract from both the  setups , that is , laboratory as 
well as pilot scale.  They are precipitated , subjected to precipitation using HCl , the 
precipitate is obtained , and this is  then washed with water , that is , 4 to 5: 1 at 15 degree  
Celsius followed by NaOH treatment for neutralization.  And then , it is subjected to 
homogenization and spray dr ying using Niro atomizer the 2 litre per hour whereas, in the 
pilot scale is used drying using G EA atomizer using 2 5 litre per hour , and then it  gives  
sunflower protein isolates.  
After then , low phenolic protein extended the pilot scale after prec ipitation , then 
the supernatant , which is obtained , it is ultrafiltered using 10 kilo Dalton membrane and 
0.2 Mega Pascal pressure ; and then diafiltration  neutralize and spray dried,  it gives 
concentrate sunflower protein isolates. So, sunflower protein isolate and sunflower 
protein concent rated sunflower protein isolate,  these are the obtained by using this 
process.   
 
Here , again the , it is a commercial process flow chart for the preparation of , way 
of protein  isolate is shown here , that is , how, that is , schematic presentation is shown , ok.  
That is the preconditioning agent , defatted and then concentrate , this line blue line , green  
red lines are shown . This mixtur e and dehul led and defatted.  
Soyabea ns are processed into 3 kinds of high protein commercial products , like 
soya flour,  soya protein concentrates , and soya protein isolates ; these are standard process 
they used, ok.   
 
Then the. As far as the uses of these de -oiled cakes are , they can be used like , in 
earlier , that is , in the sports nutrition because these protein pow der they have very good 
quality  protein , that is , quantity as well as quality as they can be used in the for mulation 
of various food , that is , the high protein food , which is required by the sport persons , 
etcetera.  Then can be used for meal replacement , even for formulation of the food for 
weight management.  Then , this can be used for making , even for texturization , for 
making protein meat , or other diets for vegan people . They can be used as an ingredient 
in bakery products, confectionery  products , in cooking formulation, mixes , etcetera as 
well as even , that is , the elderly nutrition,  that is , food for elderly people, for diabetic 
people, for other persons , that is the , for making , formulating protein rich food , you can 
have high protein , low carb diet , can be used prepared by , used by , prepared by using 
these ingredients.   
 
Then let us talk about edible films , that is , seed oil cake , byprod uct of vegetable 
oil industries  are kno wn to contain high amount of fiber,  polysaccharides and  protein that 
can be extracted and they may be , that may be represent a renewable source to produce 
innovative b io based materials.  
There is seed oil cake extract proteins without or after puri fication can be a 
potential raw  material for bioplastic product since they are abundant,  biodegradable and 
inexpensive.  These plastic films make with the protein derived from  oil seed could be 
successfully  employ ed to manufacture one time or short term use items , mostly in food 
packaging sector,  replacing at least a portion of the non -biodegradable materials currently 
used.  However, the low mec hanical and water vapour barrier  properties of the protein 
films are general drawbacks with respect to synthetic films.   
 
So, here , it is the process of possible production of a biodeg radable film by using 
the seed oil cake . And there are various methods which used to impro ve protein film 
performance and  these have been investigated , such as the appropriate film formulat ion 
and preparation conditions,  plasticizat ion, irradiation, protein cross linking induced by 
heat, c hemical or acy lation,  enzyme , protein incorporation of nano composite , blending 
with different biopolymers , etcetera.  So, from oil seed cake , that is , protein , after protein 
extraction , then protein concentrate,  which is obtained . It can be used various protein 
concentrates, solvent, plasticizers , etcetera , plasticizers , and then , this solution , and this 
solution can be  film forming solution is made , and this solution can , that is , the peeled 
film can be formed , it is casted into a specific  film, and then , it is peeled.  
 
So, using a standard method like you see here , that soy protein film , that is , the 
protein  content of soybean cake or meal range from around 38 to 44 percent , which 
mainly consist  of globulin 2S, 7S, 11S and 15S.  So, film formation is a result of 
polymerization of unfolded prot eins by disulfide and h ydrogen , sulfide bonds and 
hydrophobic interactions.  So, soy protein films are usually formed by the polymeriz ation 
of 11S and 7S protein by disulfide linkages.  So, polymerization is favored by heating a 
solution above 60 degree Celsius , ok, that is, around heated 85 degree Celsius for 30 
minutes , and to unfold th e protein ; and a pH between 6.2 and  10.2 to promote the 
sulfhydryl  disulfide interchange reaction.  You can see here , that is , protein isolate , 10 
gram plus dei onized water, 90 gram per 100 gram , it is stirred for 30 minutes.  Then , 
glycerol is added at 35 weight by weight percentage , stirred for 30 minute,  heated at 85 
degree Celsius for 30 minute , again stirred for 15 minute , and then the film  is casted , that 
is, cast film on plastic sheet by using D raw-down  instrument , etcetera,  and then dried in 
humidity chamber of at around 50 degree Celsius , humidity may be 45 percent,  low 
humid air.  So, this , the film is obtained , ok.  So, normally , plasticizers , which are used , 
may be polyols like glycerol and sorbitol , etcetera,  mono , di and oligosaccharides , and 
lipids , sometime monoglycerides,  phosphol ipids , etcetera can be used.  
 
So, methods normally which are used to enhance the structure and functionality of 
films include plasticization, cross linking, development of composite film by blending 
with other polymers , and application of nanotechnology by the inclusion of different 
conditions.  So, plasticization that is the sum of interactions among protein chain s lead to 
a rigid structure  and b rittleness requiring the incorporation of a plasticizer , which are 
small molecules  with low volatility.  Then they are directed towards reducing protein -
protein interactions and indu cing flexibility, extensibility,  and dis pensability of the film . 
And various plasticizers which are water, glycerol, sorbitol , etcetera.   
 
So, here you can see schematic representation of the effect of plasticization , that 
is, the structure of protein , that is , how it is,  that is , a double b ond it keeps a rigid 
structure , that is , protein chains , how they can interact , is shown and the n interaction 
among the protein  chain with plasticizer , it gives a flexible and extensible structure.  
Then only protein -protein chain interact , it gives a rigi d structure, but plasticizer is  made , 
it introduces plasticity , which makes it flexibility , flexib le structure is obtained.  
Usually p lasticizers with small molecular  weight are more efficient , and 
plasticizers  with low molecular polarity are less effective d ue to their low  competition 
with the hydrogen bonding sites compared with the highly polar plasticizers.   
 
Then , cross linking , that is , another development in the creation  of stronger and 
less permeable  film is the cross linking of protein by forming stronger i ntermolecular 
covalent bonds in  the protein network closer to the molecular packing , and by reducing 
the polymer mobility. The cross linking of protein may be induced by heating, acid 
treatment, al kali treatment  or by addition of aldehyde, gly oxal, phenolic compounds, 
calcium chloride or enzymes such  as, transglutaminase, irradiation and ultrasonic or 
microwave assisted treatments.   
 
Here you see , that various chemical cross linking , how it is done , various 
chemical like acid,  alkali, aldehyde , etcetera.  This is polymer 1 and polymer 2 and the 
cross linking is ob tained , may be covalent bonding.  
Then , there is a cross linker acting as a catalyst here.  In this case , there is a cross 
linker , it does not form a ny bonding etcetera, but rather  it has a catalyst and then after 
cross linker is separated , it can be from the reaction.  It does not take part in reaction, but 
it increases that catalyzes  the reaction.  So, again , covalent bond is formed between 
various groups.   
 
Similarly , here, physical cross linking like heating and irradiation or enzymatic 
cross linking , enzyme transglutaminase , it is shown her e, that is , ok. 
How pictorial it is shown in this , how the cross linking covalent bonds , etcetera 
are formed then , ok. Then let us talk about another : the composite films.  The composite 
films are blends , that is , the another , due to their hydrophilic nature.  Protein based films 
are not an effective water vapour  barrier , ok.  However, through blending, extruding, 
laminating or coating w ith other polymers that possess  desirable barrier properties , such 
as polysaccharide, lipids and other polymers , it is possible to take advantage of the 
distinct functional charac teristics of each component.  
 
So, there may  be composite film like protein -protein composite film , where 
protein blends in the  development of biodegradable film permit the improve ment of some 
of their physical and or mechanical properties as compared with the isolated applications.  
For example, gelatin e in soy  protein improves strength and flexibility because gelatin , 
due to its linear structure , has the capacity to form a soft , flexible and elastic gel that  
conform a less organized matrix  and the complex mixture of soy  protein of a mainly 
globular structure , ok.   
 
Then , protein -polysaccharide composite film, then protein -polysaccharide blends 
allow the development of a network wit h higher functional properties.  Polysaccharides 
used are starch, chitosan , agar, pecti n, alginate, methyl cellulose, carboxy  methyl 
cellulose, gums , etcetera.  The enhanced mechanical properties of protein -polysaccharide 
blends are attributed to the multiple and strong interm olecular interactions by , that is , the 
and then i nteractions may be by hydrogen bonding, dipole -dipole link formation or 
charge effects , etcetera will be there ; and these are between hydroxyl g roup and the 
polymer chains.  In addition , cross linking with thermal treatments allows the g eneration 
of bonds between the chains of protein and polysaccharides which improve the 
mecha nical properties of the polymer  network.   
 
Then , there may be protein -lipid composite films . The moisture barr ier properties 
of protein -based  film can be improved through the inclusion of lipids in their formulation , 
which favor  protein -protein interactions in the film matrix and there fore, improve their 
mechanical properties as the lipids , which are normally used , may be fats, waxes, oils , 
fatty a cids, etcetera.  Then , nanocomposite films . They are biopolymers matrix rein forced 
with nanoparticles loads  or fill ers having a dimension smaller than 100 nanometer , which 
improve their mechanical, thermal , and barrier property.  For example, the incorporatio n 
of nanomulsions, nanoliposomes , and or nanoparticles in the protein -based films 
significantly improves its barrier and other mechanical properties ,  etcetera.   
 
Then the another important product is the glycerin e, as we discussed.  The 
glycerin e, sometime also called as  is the glycerin,  is the name of the commercial product 
consisting of glycerol and a small amount of water.  So, glycerol is actually , it is 
triacylglycerol which is more a ccurately named 1, 2,3-propane triol.  It is the main 
component of triaglycerides , found in animal fat, vegetable oil , or crude  oil. And it is 
derived from the soap or even from biodiesel  production.  So, this glycerol production 
technology , you can see , it is the main component of all fats  and oils and the main 
byproduct with added value obtaine d from oil and fat by means of saponification and 
transesterification carried out during oil and chemical process or in biodiesel  production.  
 
Glycerol is produced in two ways. One is the natural glycerin e, that is , as a 
byproduct of soap produc tion or fatty acid methyl ester , such as biodiesel ; and then 
synthetic glycerol , ok. So, that is methanol, vegetable oils , ok. It can be treated in reactor, 
settler in the neutralization washing , and after that , it can  be obtained , that is , by catalyst 
or mineral acid . Glycerol purification  you can give fatty acids and glycerin is obtained , 
ok.   
 
This is a simplified heterogeneous proc ess for glycerin production.  Here you have 
R 1 and R 2 reaction , and in this , it is tre ated with the methanol and gets  biodiesel as well 
as more than 98 percent of glycerin is , it is basically vegetable oil,  as you can see , and 
methanol under specific conditions , they are allowed , reacted with , treated  with different 
reactors , ok.   
 
Then , this glycerin  can be used , it is a natural product, non -toxic and generally 
recognized  as safe for human consu mption.  It is an excellent humect ant, emulsifier , and 
plasticizer.  It is compatible with a wide variety of materials and it m ixes well in those 
materials.  It pos sesses antioxidant properties. It can be used as adhesives , that is , for 
plasticizi ng and penetrating properties. It can be used in agriculture , that is , used as  
sprays, dips, washes , etcetera.  It is used in the cleaners and polishers , that is , used as a 
wide range of home and automotive  markets. It is used for corr osion prevention, gums, 
resins,  surface coating material and used in cosmetics, dental creams, food and beverages, 
pharmaceuticals .  So lot of the glycerin has very important commercial applications , and 
it is one major  byproduc t of, which can be processed.  
 
So you can see that in the lecture , that is , about 25 -30 minutes now , we have a 
good idea that development of high value products from oil seed ca ke contributes to the 
efficient  utilization of resources and minimizes the waste in th e oil seed processing 
industry.  Protein  extraction from oil seed cake can result in  protein po wders, isolates , or 
concentrates  that are used as dietary su pplement, food ingredients or sport nutrition.  
Edible films  offer economic advantage in reducin g food waste, enhancing product  quality 
and providing i nnovative packaging solutions. Glycerin , an important byproduct of 
biodiesel production from edible oil exhibits a wide  range of applications encompassing 
food, agriculture, cosmetic, pharmaceutical, medical , and more , making it a v ersatile and 
valuable compound.  So, this is way , at least I have  shown you just, but there are lot of 
applic ations you will  find in the literature , and that really adds value to th e industry and it 
makes the oil  milling indust ry economically viable industry . Because .  
 
These are the references which are used . This.  
 
Thank you very much for your patience  here.  Thank you.  
