1 
 Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 11: By -products Utilisation & Valorisation of Oil Milling Industry Waste  
Lecture 55: Biodiesel Production from Waste Cooking Oil  
 
Hello everybody.  Namaskar.  Now, we are in lecture 55.   
 
In this lecture, in the next half an hour or so, we will talk about another very important  
aspect of the by -product utilization and valoriza tion of oil milling industry waste.  We will 
talk about biodiesel production from waste cooking oil.  The topics which we cover today 
is biodiesel, what are the steps in biodiesel production  and biodiesel production process es 
like base catalyzed transesterif ication, acid catalyzed  transesterification , and enzyme 
catalyzed transesterification processes.  
 
2 
  
So, let us talk about waste cooking oil.  It is a type of used vegetable oil that has been 
discarded as a waste  product.  Many times, it has because when the oil is heated, then it 
goes to polymerization and  other various reactions and it develops very dark colour and it 
is not useful.  Rather many times there are some undesirable or toxic compounds etc . may 
form in the  polymerized products , may be toxic.  It is a waste cooking oil as I told you 
generated by the byproduct of food processing, commercial  cooking,  or household 
cooking activities and can be found in large quantities in urban  areas, restaurants , and 
fast-food chains.  So, it is a complex mixture of trig lyceride that is the waste cooking oil 
or hot polymerized  cooking oil ; heated oil contains triglyceride, free fatty acids, mono - 
and di -glycerides,  other impurities that result from cooking and food processing 
activities.  It can also contain water, food pa rticles , and other contaminants , which can 
make it difficult  to reuse or even recycle.  Due to its high energy content and potential for 
reuse, waste cooking oil is a valuable  resource for biodiesel production.   
 
Biodiesel is a renewable alternative fuel t hat is made from vegetable oils, animal fats  or 
recycled cooking oil.  It is produced through a chemical process called transesterification , 
which involves  combining oil or fat with an alcohol usually methanol or ethanol as a 
catalyst.  This process breaks d own the oil or fat into fatty acid esters , which can then be 
separated  and purified to form biodiesel.   
3 
 Now why biodiesel?  This biodiesel increases security of energy supply for the 
transportation sector by having  a renewable source at hand.  It gives an environmentally  
friendly fuel available for the diesel combustion engine.  It is used to reduce health and 
security risks as well as to provide the customer with a  reliable fuel at a reasonable cost -
benefit ratio.  
 
So, this is the concept of biodiesel prod uction.  I told you that is the waste cooking oil 
which has various triglyceride s, palm olein  and other  compounds , and this triglyceride 
may be example palm olein  etc., then it is treated with methanol  which is reusable for 6 
cycle s methanol and then you ca n see lipase these  enzymes.  So, this , lipase  immobilized 
on the polyhydroxybutyrate and then it is into the  reaction mixture it is broken into fatty 
acid methyl ester ase enzymes is there.  So, it gives biodiesel as well as glycerol is 
recovered from the bio diesel.  So, this is the concept that is the triglyceride it is treated 
with methanol , methanol act as  a catalyst and then it gives the fatty acid methyl ester that 
is, it breaks the methyl fatty  ester is formed and it gives the biodiesel as well as glycero l.  
 
Sources of biodiesel include that is oils, animal fats , or other sources . In the oils , it may 
be edible oil like soybean, coconut, canola, sorghum, etc ., they are considered the first-
generation  oil sources.  Whereas, the second -generation  oils include non-edible  oils like 
4 
 almond, jatropha, jo joba, palm, rubber, castor or even beef, poultry, fish oil, lard etc ., 
they are the second -generation  sources.  The third -generation  sources of biodiesel include 
the bacteria, fungus, algae, microalgae , or cooking oil waste etc .  
 
Then the transesterification process . The transesterification basically is the  process which 
gives the biodiesel.  So, it is common vegetable oils or animal fats or esters of saturated 
and unsaturated  monocarbo xylic acid with t rihydric alcohol glyceride that we discussed 
earlier also several  times.  So, these esters are called triglyceride s, which can react with 
alcohol in the presence of a catalyst , which is the process known as a transesterification .  
The reaction between triglyceride and alcohol  in the presence of a catalyst.  So, 
triglycerides are converted into fatty acid methyl esters  (FAME ) or fatty acid ethyl  ester 
depending upon whatever the alcohol is.  So, you can see the reaction triglyceride plus 
methanol it gives fatty acid methyl ester  and plus glycerol is liberated.   
 
Steps  in biodiesel production . It was reported by Dunford in 2023 recently, that is , the oil  
and fat it is fed into the reactor and then alcohol as a catalyst they are fed  into the reactor 
and here  the reaction takes place , fatty acid methyl ester is formed then  they are passed 
through the separator where glycerine  and alcohol are separated.  The glycerine  portion 
may come contain some water plus alcohol as well.  So, this is sent for alcohol recovery  
5 
 and the alcohol goes further recycle further reaction  and some glycerine  plus water , it 
goes to the glycerine  recovery and water which is evaporate d goes through wash column 
and again recycle d. From the separator , where glycerine  plus alcohol and the biodiesel 
goes into where it is sent to the wash column , dryer and biodiesel is obtained.  So, this 
gives a simplified step for production process of the biodiesel.   
 
So, the pretreatment here , the cooking oil feedstock is first pretreated to remove any  
impurities such as water, free fatty acids, solid particles , etc. This is usually done through 
a combination of filtering, settling , and/or acid -catalyze d esterification process.  
In filtration , the raw cooking oil is typically filtered to remove any large pa rticles , such as 
food debris or packaging materials , that may be present in the oil . Then it is passed  
through deacidification , in the  deacidification,  if the free fatty acid content in the cooking 
oil is  high.  This step is done by adding an alkaline subst ance, such as sodium hydroxide 
or sodium  carbonate , etc. to the oil to neutralize the free fatty acid and then water 
washing.  The raw cooking oil may be washe d with the water to remove the water -soluble 
impurities  such as sugar , salts that may be present in the oil.   
 
Then in the reactor which you have seen, that is , where alcohol and these  reactants they 
are used.  So, the reactor is used to mix the oil or fat with the alcohol and the catalyst to 
6 
 facilitate  the chemical reaction  between the oil or fat and the alcohol , which is catalyzed 
by the  base catalyst.  The oil or fat , alcohol , and catalyst are added to the reactor in the 
appropriate amounts  and are then mixed together using a mechanically st irrer. You can 
see here . This rea ctor is then heated to the desired reaction temperature and the reaction is 
allowed  to proceed for the desired period of time.  During the reaction , the triglyceride s in 
the oil and fat are broken down by the base catalyst  into the fatty acid methyl ester a nd 
glycerol.  The fatty acid methyl esters are desired product and make the biodiesel , while  
the glycerol  is a byproduct that must be separated from the biodiesel.   
 
Then after the reactor , it is passed through the separators to separate the biodiesel  from 
the glycerine . There are several types of separator s that can be used for this  purpose 
including settling tanks, centrifuges , or the decanters.  
 
Then after that , it goes to the drying . Washing and drying helps to remove any residual 
catalyst s, soaps , or other impurities that may be present into the biodiesel.  It involves 
mixing the biodiesel with a small amount of water and agitating the mixture  in the 
reactor.  The water helps to remove any water -soluble  impurities such as residual catalyst s 
or soap s that may be present in the biodiesel.  The mixture is then allowed to settle which 
allows the water and impurities to separate  from the biodiesel.  The washing process may 
7 
 be repeated multiple times to ensure that all the impurities have  been removed.  After the 
final washing , the biodiesel is a typically dried to remove any remaining water  before it is 
ready for use.   
 
Then alcohol recovery . After the reaction is complete , the biodiesel and glycerine  are 
separated , leaving behind a mixture of alcohol plus wa ter. The mixture contains 
unreacted alcohol and water , as well as any impurities that may have  been present in the 
cooking oil.  So, to recover the alcohol , the mixture is typically heated and distilled under 
vacuum  conditions which allows the alcohol to ev aporate and recovered as a vapour.  The 
vapour is then condensed and collected in a separate container , where it can be reused  in 
the biodiesel production process.  The remaining water and impurities are typically 
removed as a waste.   
 
Then glycerine  recove ry, that is after alcohol recovery the waste may contain glycerine,  
which  is recovered by removing impurities and water.  The glycerine  can be further 
purified through distillation , which separates it into a crude  glycerine  fraction and refined 
glycerine  fraction.  The glycerine  is typically washed with water to remove any residual 
catalyst s or impurities  and then heated to evaporate any remaining water.  The refined 
8 
 glycerine  fraction is of higher purity and can be used in various applications  such as in 
the pharmaceutical as well as in the cosmetic industry.  
 
The factors affecting yield of biodiesel , that is , one is the type of oil.  Oil used as a 
feedstock can affect the yield of biodiesel.  Oils with a higher percentage of unsaturated 
fatty acids may require  more catalyst and  larger reaction time which can affect the yield.  
The type and concentration of the base catalyst used can affect the yield of biodiesel.  
Higher concentration of catalyst can increase the rate of reaction, but too much catalyst  
can also l ead to side reactions and it may lower the yield.   
Alcohol to oil ratio is another important factor.  The molar ratio of alcohol to oil used in 
the transesterification process can affect  the yield.  Increasing the alcohol to oil ratio can 
increase the yield,  but too much alcohol can also lead  to side reactions and lower yields.  
Reaction temperature can affect the yield of biodiesel.  Increasing the temperature can 
increase the rate of reaction, but too high a temperature  can also lead to side reactions and 
which may lower the yield.  
 
Reaction time can increase the yield, but too long a reaction time can also lead  to side 
reactions and lower yields.  The presence of water in the reaction mixture can affect the 
9 
 yield of biodiesel.  Water can interfere with the reaction and decrease the yield.  So, it is 
important to ensure that the oil and alcohol are dry before the reaction is  carried out.   
The stirring rate can affect the yield of biodiesel.  Higher stirring rates can increase the 
rate of reaction and improve mi xing, but too high  a stirring can also lead to the emulsion 
and lower yields.  Then impurities in the oil such as free fatty acids , can affect the yield of 
biodiesel.  Pre-treatment of the oil to remove impurities can help to improve the yield.   
 
Then biodi esel production processes are base (alkali )-catalyzed transesterification, acid -
catalyzed transesterification , or enzymatic  transesterification.  Both acid and alkali 
catalyzed transesterification can be homogeneous or  heterogeneous.  
 
Base-catalyzed transesterification is the most commonly used method for producing  
biodiesel from cooking oil f eedstocks.  The process involves the reaction of a vegetable 
oil or animal fat with an alcohol typically  methyl alcohol in the presence of a base 
catalyst such as  sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide  to improve fatty acid methyl 
esters,  which is the main component of the biodiesel.  It is also called as alkali catalyzed 
reaction.   
So, requirement of the oil , there it should be free fatty acid less than 0.1 percen t weight 
by weight, moisture content it should  be less than 0.1 percent weight by weight  and 
10 
 phosphorus content less than 10 ppm.  The other catalysts  which are used are sodium 
hydroxide, potassium hydroxide , or sodium methoxide.  The alcohols can be used are 
methanol, ethanol, butanol , or amyl alcohol.   
 
Vegetable oils and fats may contain a small amount of water and free fatty acid s. For an  
alkali catalyzed transesterification , the alkali catalyst that is used will react with FFA to 
form the soap . The sapo nification  reaction of the catalyst and the FFA form the soap and 
water.  
The reaction is undesirable because the soap lowers the yield of biodiesel and inhibits  the 
separation of the esters from the glycerol.  In addition, it binds with the catalyst meaning  
that more catalyst will be needed and hence  the process will involve higher cost.  Water 
formed during the saponification reaction , retard s the transesterification reaction through  
the hydrolysis reaction.  It can hydrolyze the triglycerides to diglycerides  and forms more 
free fatty acids.   
 
Acid -catalyzed reaction is used in sul phuric acid or trifluoro acetic acids.  In this process, 
the acid catal ysts protonates the carbonyl group of the fat or oil , which  leads to the 
formation of an activated intermediate t hat can undergo a nucleophilic attack by  the 
alcohol.  This results in the formation of ester , which is the main component of biodiesel 
11 
 along  with the glycerol as a byproduct.  That is the fatty acid ester is formed.  Fatty acid 
plus alcohol gives fatty acid ester plus water.  Normally the catalyst for this reaction is 
concentrated sul phuric acid . Due to slow  reaction rate and the high methanol to oil molar 
ratio that is required, it has not gained  as much attention as the alkali catalyzed 
transesterification.  
 
Trifluoro acetic acid-catalyzed transesterification , here a 4 ml screw -capped stainless -steel 
tube is charged with the different moles of soybean oil  and methanol , and a desired 
amount of trifluoro acetic  acid.  Temperature is generally 100 to 200 degree Celsius.  
Reaction time may be 1 to 4 hours . Centrifugation is given to 1 2000 g for 5 minutes and 
excess methanol and residual  trifluoro acetic acids removed by heating at 65 degree 
Celsius in thermostatic baths.   
The figure  shows here that is transesterific ation after that this is the cooled , it goes to the  
centrifugation and phase separation and you get the biodiesel phase as well as the other  
evaporators you get biodiesel product.   
The effect of reaction temperature and time on the yield of methyl ester is  60:1 M ratio of 
methanol to oil and 2. 5 M catalyst concentration bound on oil.  The reaction time is given 
here in the table.  You can see that , at 100 degree Celsius , reaction time  is 4 hours it gives 
around 92 percent methyl  ester ; at 120 degree Celsius , 3 hours reaction time , it gives 99 
percent methyl ester.  So, if the temperature is increasing obviously, reaction time will 
reduce and you get more  methyl ester content.  
Homogeneous and heterogeneous catalyzed reactions , that is homogeneous catalysis , it 
refers to a catalytic process in which the catalyst is present in the same phase as the  
reactant s, usually in the form of a liquid solution like sodium hydroxide, potassium  
hydroxide, sul phuric acid etc . It has high and rapid conversion rate , the catalyst recovery 
is not possible , in this case , catalyst  reuse not possible therefore, and it is a cost effective 
then heterogeneous formation.   
 
12 
  
Heterogeneous catalysis , it refers to a catalytic process in which the catalyst  is present in 
a different phase than  that of the reactant s and usually  it is in the solid phase like calcium 
oxide, potassium carbonate etc.  It has a medium conversion rate , catalyst can be 
recovered here.  However, catalyst accordingly therefore, catalyst can be reused and it is 
an economica lly feasible  with high conversion efficiency.  
 
Enzyme -cataly zed transesterification process . It refers to the use of enzymes as  
biocatalyst s to catalyze the reaction between a fat or oil and an alcohol to produce 
biodiesel.  The process involves adding an enzyme such as lipase or protease , to the 
reaction mixture , which then facilitates the transesterification reaction between the fat or 
the oil and the  alcohol.  The enzyme acts as a catalyst by lowering the activation energy of 
the reaction , allowing  it to occur more quickly and efficiently than it would have been 
otherwise.   
So, you can see here , oil containing free fatty acids and methanol biocatalyst is given.  So, 
it is biodiesel form and byproducts like glycerol and the partial glycerides etcetera and 
enzymes that is it is there.  
13 
  
There are three step processes given by  Veda et al . in 2020.  They gave schematic 
representation of the experimental methodology to have this process  and they studied the 
effect of enzyme concentration like 14, 16 and 18 percent  concentration,  effects of 
reaction time in step 1 , pH was 7 and temperature 38 degree Celsius.   
In the second step , the optimum conditions of this were used and effect of pH i.e. 6, 7, 8 
was seen . Enzyme concentration and reaction time was optimum and tem perature 38 
degree.  And in the third step , that is the effect of temperature 35, 38 and 40 degree 
Celsius and  they got enzyme concentration optimum , reaction time and pH  optimum . So, 
in this process in three step s, they optimize d the enzyme concentration , reaction time , and 
pH etcetera to give the better biodiesel yield.  
 
So, in the step 1 , you can see here , it is biodiesel yield percent all  right.  Biodiesel yield vs 
experiment s E1, E2, E3, E5,  etc. E1 means that is 14 percent concentration for 8 hours, 
E2 is the 14 percent for 12 hours , and E3 is 1 4 percent for 1 6 hours and accordingly.  So, 
you can see here th at, higher yield at lower enzyme concentration and retention time of  8 
hour like E1 . E1 here , it gives around 92 percent biodiesel yield and E1 is a t 14 percent 
enzyme concentration and 8 hour reaction time.  And as the enzyme concentration 
increased that is E4, E 7 etc. i.e. 16, 18 percent ; 16 percent is E4, E5 and E6 . You see may 
14 
 be little at E6 there is a little more in comparison to E4 and E5, but definitely  the yield is 
less than the E1.  So, the higher enzyme concentration limit glycerol separation due to the 
non-interaction between methanol and oil. Higher retention time causes a reduction in 
yield due to the presence of more unreacted  methanol ov er time interfering the separation 
of glycerol from the methyl ester and increasing  its solubility.   
 
Similarly , that is you see , the higher yield was obtained at pH 7. When the effect of pH 6, 
pH 7, and it was  at pH 7, the highest yield was obtained in c omparison to  pH 6 and pH 8 . 
So, maximum lipase  activity was found at pH 7.  
 
Then in third step , there is the effect of temperature 35, 38 and 40  degree Celsius and you 
can see here the reaction rate increases with temperature due to the  reduction of viscosity 
of the oil that increases its solubility in methanol.  The highest biodiesel production was 
reached with an enzyme concentration of 14 percent , reaction time of 8 hours, pH 7, and 
temperature 38 degree Celsius that gives around 90 percent  biodiese l yield.   
15 
  
This are the some of the examples of different types of alkali -catalyst,  homogeneous and 
heterogeneous , acid-catalyst and enzymes.  So, you have seen that is , advantages of the 
homogeneous alkali -catalyst include high catalytic activity, low cos t, favorable kinetics , 
and modest operation conditions.  Disadvantages  are low free fatty acid requirement , 
anhydrous conditions, saponification, emulsi on formation, more wastewater from 
purification etcetera.   
Then heterogeneous alkali, it has calcium oxid es, aluminum oxide s etcetera that is an 
alumina /silica supported K 2CO3. These are the types of the reactant which are used as a 
catalyst.  Then advantages here , it is non -corrosive, environmentally benign , recyclable, 
fewer  disposal problems , and easy separation.  Whereas, the disadvantage include s low 
free fatty acid requirement , anhydrous conditions,  more wastewater from purification, 
high molar ratio of alcohol to oil requirement , and so on.  It is also required high reaction 
temperature and pressure.   
Then if you see acid catalyst , that in homogeneous acid catalyst , concentrated sulfuric  
acid is generally used.  Here , advantages include catalyzed esterification and 
transesterification simultaneously and  it avoid  soap formation, but it has a problem , that 
is equipment corrosion, more waste from  neutralization, difficult to recycle and so on.  
Heterogeneous acid catalyzation that carbon based solid catalyst activists, carbohydrate  
derived catalyst etc.  Advantages include catalyzed esterification and transesterification 
simultaneously, recyclable  as these are eco-friendly . However, disadvantages are low 
acid si te concentration, low microscopy, diffusion  limitations , or high cost are some of 
the disadvantages.   
Enzymes that is normally Candida  antarctica  fraction B lipase , and Rhizom ucor mieher  
lipase is  used.  Advantages are t hey avoid soap formation, non-polluting , easier 
purification, whereas expensive and denaturation  are the disadvantages of this.  
16 
  
Finally, I will summarize this lecture by saying that the waste cooking oil is a  low-cost 
feedstock for biodiesel production as it is  often readily available and relatively  
inexpensive compared to other feedstocks.  Biodiesel produced from waste cooking oil 
has a lower carbon footprint compared to petroleum -based  biodiesel as it is derived from 
a renewable resource and produces fewer greenhouse gas  emissions during the 
production and consumption.  Biodiesel produced from waste cooking oil can help reduce 
dependence on fossil fuels  and promote energy independence.  The byproducts of 
biodiesel production such as glycerine  can be used in other industries,  further increasing 
the economic and environmental benefits of biodiesel production from the  waste cooking 
oil, that is they are given that is the if the  byproducts like glycerine  etc. can also be used.  
This further improve the economics and the cost of the biodiesel etc . will be lower  and 
finally, it will add to the value to the oil miller.  
 
These are the references you did during this class with this.   
17 
  
Thank you very much for your presentation.  Thank you.  
