1 
 Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry & Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 1 2: Packaging, Storage & QA/QC of Food Oils and Fats  
Lecture 5 7: Packaging Materials & Methods   
 
Hello everybody, namaskar.  In the 57th lecture of this course today, we will discuss about 
Packaging Materials  and Methods.   
 
We will talk about packaging, different types of packaging material as well as different  
types of packages, oxygen removal techniq ues that is sparging and inert gas blanketing,  
bottle packaging, pouch packaging and also, we will talk about butter and margarine 
packaging.   
2 
  
So, let us see what is packaging?  The main function of a package is to contain the product 
and protect it again st a range  of hazards which might adversely affect its quality during 
handling, distribution , and storage . This function of a package is true for any food 
material.  In this lecture, we will talk about requirements of the package with specific 
product relat ed to fats and oil.  The package also plays an important role in marketing and 
selling the product.  The packaging system must be designed to produce an economical 
product that satisfies  regulatory guidelines, consumer demands , and production 
requirements.  Bad packaging and storage practices can influence the sensory quality and 
lead to the development  of off -flavor and rancidity in the fats and oil products.  Oils and 
fats are spoiled due to the environmental factors that affect their stability.  The 
environme ntal factors which mostly influence the stability of fats and oil s include 
oxygen,  moisture, heat , and light.  Oxygen is the most critical factor.  The presence of 
oxygen leads to oxidation and formation of hydroperoxides and peroxides  and then 
aldehydes and  ketones which ultimately gives an off -flavor in the product.  These 
reactions increase the rate of an intensity in presence of light and heat.   
 
Modern packaging technology provides many opportunities to maintain product 
protection  while reducing the cost . The packaging system for edible fats and oils should 
be non -toxic and it should be  compatible to the product.  It should provide protection 
3 
 against environmental factors.  It should be machinable.  It should be leak proof and 
transport worthy and finally, m ore importantly it should be  easy to store, use , and handle.   
So, for selection of a packaging material, the properties that need to be considered  are 
physic ochemical characteristics of the material as well as the product, geometry  of the 
package, filling methodology , and in this case , oil and package interactions.   
 
How the packaging material will interact with the oil components?  So, the packaging and 
its impact has a packaging has its impact on different aspects like in  the distribution, it 
leads to bet ter logistic, wider reach, low wastage for the product,  it gives safety and 
hygiene, it protects its freshness, it breeds seasonability.  Then package also helps 
improving the branding of the product, it improves shelf life, it  has impact on size of 
differe nt size of packages etc. and of course,  the safety of the product is very important 
which is protected by the packaging.  Then in marketing, the packaging , if it is a good 
attractive package, it gives greater  visibility to the product, even there are variou s size 
and shapes of convenient packages,  it gives premium feeling , and also a good packaging 
provides a good assurance  to the quality.   
 
So, packaging it may be that materials and type that different materials which are used  for 
packaging may be metal, g lass, plastic, in the plastic it may be PET, HDPE , or PVC  and 
4 
 depending upon the material used for making the package, it may be a rigid package, 
rigid  container, semi -rigid container , or a flexible package.   
 
So, let’s talk about some materials , importan t materials like number 1 is the metal . Metal 
containers especially containers made from tin plate have been used for a long time  in the 
oil and fat milling industry and even they are still high in demand.  They provide 
protection against light, oxygen, wat er vapour , and microorganisms.  The tin containers 
are provided with lacquer coating inside which prevent them from corrosion  and the 
capacity of the tin container may be from half kg to 5 kg or even to 15 kg and  among this 
half kg, 1 kg and 15 kg are more common.  All these metallic containers are considered 
inert against oil, even though trace levels  of metal ions such as iron and copper are 
known to have adverse effects on the oxidative  stability in the natural olive oil or such 
other oil.   
 
Glass contain ers, glass bottles provide good protection, but it is fragile and needs  care.  
They are generally used for high quality and priced edible oil such as olive oil, virgin  
olive oil , and so on.  Transparent  glass has high disadvantage on the other side because i t 
leads to the photo oxidation.  
5 
  
Plastic depending upon the usage , plastic are of various types such as HDPE  that is 
popularly  known as high density polyethylene or PET bottle which are polyethylene 
tetra-thiolate  or PVC bottle like polyvinyl chloride and  many other types of flexible 
pouches which  are used where the plastic is used with other materials.  PET bottles that is 
the plastic containers have been used increasingly in the recent  year due to their low 
price, easy handling as well as weight.  There ar e PET bottles in several size types et c. as 
volume are available which are  used by oil milling industry.  Here , shelf-life is not high, 
but they are economical.  PET bottles are used for less quantity generally may be 0.5 kg or 
1 kg.  PET bottles provide good  design, better transparency , and  can be colored also.  They 
have good mechanical, thermal and chemical resistance, low production cost,  they 
provide good barrier properties against CO 2 and there is a suitability for the storage  as 
well as low weight.  So, t he weight of the PET bottle is generally very less and which 
provides convenience.  Application of the incorporation of antioxidant s and sterilizers in 
PET bottle is increasing  rapidly nowadays because of its convenience.  
 
HDPE containers , high density pol yethylene container s, you can see that this type of 
container  has been used since several years by now for dalda or vanaspati . HDPE is 
largely used as a packaging material because of its tensile strength and hardness  and good 
chemical resistance.  Blow -mold ed HDPE containers in the form of bottles, jars , and jerry 
6 
 cans are used for  packaging of edible oil as well as dalda or vanaspati . IS 10840 of 1994 
gives specification for blow -molded HDPE container for the packaging  of vanaspati . 
HDPE is inferior to PET and PVC in its oxygen barrier properties.  However, higher wall 
thickness allows it to use for larger quantity.   
 
PVC bottles, this is a popular packaging material for edible oils in many countries, due to 
its transparency , adaptability to all types of c losures , total compatibility with the existing  
packaging lines , and potential for personalized design features.  Its usage is reduced in the 
recent years due to the migration of residual vinyl chloride  monomer whose prescribed 
limit is very low in the food.  PVC increases light exposure of the oil , enhancing the 
oxidation of oil.  Ultraviolet absorbers can be added to plastic materials in order to reduce 
their light transmission.  IS 12883 of 1989 gives specification s for PVC bottles for edible 
oil packaging.   
 
Pouches, multi -layer pouches for oil has increased due to consumer preference for unit 
package s. They are economical as well.  Mostly , 500 gram or 1 kg pack is packaged in 
this type of the flexible pouches.  LDPE is commonly used for packaging of the oils an d 
fats. Flexible pouches may be manufactured from laminates or multi -layered films of 
different  compositions and pouches may be in the form of pillow or stand -up pouches.  
7 
 The selection of a laminate or multi -layer film is governed primarily by the compatib ility 
of the contact layer, heat sealability, heat seal strength , and shelf life required , together  
with machinability and physical strength parameters of the material.   
 
Here in this slide, I have just given you some of the Indian standard BIS  specificat ions of 
packaging material for different types of products like for example, IS :10325 -1989 , it 
provides a specification or description of a square  tins of 15 kilo gram per liter for ghee, 
vanaspati , edible oil , and bakery shortening s. IS:10339  of 1988 provi des a specification  
for packaging of ghee, vanaspati,  and edible  oil tins.  IS:10840  of 1994 provides a 
specification or description of b low-molded H DPE containers  for packaging of vanaspati . 
IS:12887  of 1989 provides a specification for PET bottles for pac kaging of edible oil.  
IS:12883 of 1994 provides PVC bottles for packaging of edible oils.  IS:14129 of 1994, it 
provides a specification for flexible packaging material for the packaging  of vanaspati  in 
10 kg and 15 kg packs.  IS:11352 of 1994, it provides a  specification for flexible 
packaging material for the packaging  of vanaspati  in 100 gram, 200 gram, 500 gram, 1 
kg, 2 kg and 5 kg packs.  IS:12724 of 1989, it provides a specification for flexible 
packaging material for packaging  of refined edible oils.  So, one can go into detail as it is 
available on the BIS websites and other related documents.   
 
8 
 Let’s talk about oxygen removal during packaging because oxygen is one major 
hindrance in edible  oils during packaging, which can lead to rancidity and off -flavor or 
auto-oxidation.  Sparging and inert gas blanketing are the techniques through which 
oxygen dissolved  in the oil can be removed.  There is particularly sparging of nitrogen 
that is here oxygen can be removed and nitrogen  can be bubbled . Sparging and spa rging 
with nitrogen to remove dissolved oxygen that is  one commonly used technique.  You can 
see in the figure here , that is , there is sparging, then nitrogen is sparged  here, oil is 
flowing into this and there is a non -return  valve . So, the nitrogen cannot  go back.  So, it is 
poured into the oil and then a sparged product where inert gas bubbles can be seen  there 
in the oil and oil containing inert gas nitrogen is there so that oxygen is removed  from the 
oil.  
 
So, here that is in the table, I have given yo u some data taken from the literature that  is 
effect of nitrogen purging on peroxide value as well as free fatty acid development  in the 
palm oil during transport and storage.  So, you can see , peroxide value that is in the 
voyage  up to 48 days where the ni trogen was  sparged, the peroxide value was found to be 
0.05 Meq per kg of the oil whereas, in  the sample where there was no sparging of 
nitrogen, the peroxide value was much higher  that is 1.66 Meq per kg of oil.  Similarly, 
voyage  after 63 days , the peroxi de value was 0.18 in the nitrogen sparged sample  
whereas,  2.62 in the no n-sparged sample.   
Similarly , free fatty acid , if you can see voyage after  63 days , if the nitrogen sparged 
sample  it was very less that is 0.01 whereas, in the sample where the nitrog en was not 
sparged , free fatty acid was 0.09 percent.  During storage , you can see that is peroxide 
value in the nitrogen sparged sample was 0.35  whereas, in the no n-sparged sample was 
1.6. The free fatty acid remained at 0.01 in the sparged sample and it r ose to 0.04 percent  
in the samples which were not sparged with the nitrogen.  In the trucks , you can see 
stainless one day or rail made of mild steel after 14  days.  So, in the truck , the peroxide 
value in the sample sparged with nitrogen, the peroxide  value  was 0.24 Meq per kg 
whereas, in the truck’s  samples are not sparged , this peroxide value rose to 1.22.  
9 
 Similarly , for FFA , it was 0.01 in nitrogen sparged and 0.17 percent in the  non-sparged 
sample.  So, this data clearly show that is , the nitrogen spargin g has benefited , has helped 
or prevented the peroxidation of the fatty acid , peroxide , hydroperoxide formations as 
well as free fatty acid formation.   
 
Nitrogen blanketing of edible oil , that is , after processing , the oil is placed in tank  where 
head spac e is there and chances of oxidation is high because in the head space there may  
be oxygen gas.  In tank blanketing , a low -pressure flow of nitrogen gas (typically less than 
a few  psig) with purities of between 97 percent to 99.9 percent is introduced above the 
liquid level of the edible oil to fill the vapour space at the top of the tank with  a dry , inert 
gas. So, in the empty space there is this inert gas is filled.  So, oxygen is removed.  In the 
application closely related to that of tank blanketing a proce ss called modified  
atmosphere packaging that is in which the MAP pumps ultra-pure nitrogen and 
sometimes  carbon dioxide as a filler gas into sealed package of the produce and snack  
food items.  Nitrogen can also be used to purge air from pipes and hoses pri or to bottling 
and to ensure  oxygen is not introduced during transport.   
 
So, you can see here this short film there is a clear pack and here you can see that  bottle 
packaging process is shown.  There is a step by step solution , a complete packaging 
10 
 solution  for edible oil industry  you see that is bottle blow -molding , how it is going after 
that there  is a bottle feeding , bottles are molded then it is fed then filling and capping is 
done  and all these operations are automatic , after that it is  labeled . And then , it is shrink 
bundling , this package there is a shrink bundle and case packing that is these bottles are 
cased in the cartoons and then finally, these  cased are pellet pelletized that is stor age. So, 
and they are sent to the conveyor and turnkey lines . So, this you could see how this 
packaging is helping.   
 
So, this blow molding particularly le t’s have there are six stages of blow molding  alright 
there is in number one case , there is  heated plastic is extruded into  hollow tube that is the 
parison that  you see that is heated plastic is coming , it is extruded into the hollow tube 
alright.  Then comes the second stage , where mo uld closes , you see here the mold closes 
and parison is  gripped  in place.  Then in third stage , the compressed air is blown into 
parison and it inflates the parison as you can see here.  Then in the fourth stage , there is a 
parison fills mo uld, there is a complete mold . In the fifth stage , product is tr immed and 
removed from mo uld and finally, the finished  product is ready for next production stage 
for filling and all those things.  So, that is how the bottle is made in the blow molding 
process .  
 
11 
 Another very important aspect is the recycling of the  packaging bottle which is  normally 
used by the industry . Used bottles are collected . It is the stage one as you can see here 
that, used bottles  are collected and grouped based on their properties etc ., different  types 
of bottle what are the materials etcetera.   
 
So, they are grouped and then in the next stage there is these second stage , there is  these 
plastic bottles are shredded into flakes , glue paper , sand etc ., there are contaminants  
which  are removed from the bottles in the second stage.   
 
 
Then comes the third stage , where the dirty flakes are cleaned with water as well as 
detergent.  So, you get the clean material from which the bottles were initially made.  Then 
comes the fourth stage , where the clean flakes are melted at high temperature to form  
resin pellets.  This is the important stage where processing is done based on the final 
product required  such as t -shirt, shoes , or plastic bottles etcetera.  So, from this plastic 
material , anything  can be made , in this case , we are discussing about bottles from the 
reuse plastic.  
12 
  
 
Then comes the final fifth stage , where the heat that high heat and pressure melt down  the 
resin pellets, then inject them into the mo uld to create the pr eform .  
 
These are the preform  and then comes the sixth stage , in the sixth stage , where the 
preform  is heated up again until the plastic is soft enough to blow. Then pressurized air 
pushes the plastic out to the edge of this mo uld which forms the plastic  into the shape of a 
13 
 bottle.  The blow mo uld cools and opens up to release a brand new recycled plastic bottle.  
This is how the plastics are recycled.   
 
You can see here that is the pouch packaging process in the form fill and seal machine.  It 
is seen in the  picture , that is the l abelled  packaging material is coming , this packaging 
material whatever it is formed here . Bottom is sealed then the material is filled up and 
then it is cut on top of that. So, you get the packaging .  
 
This is an other automatic liquid filling machine . This is again form you see that is how 
this packaging material is coming , it is being sealed , it is the similar thing .  
14 
  
This is another , that is the packaging of the solid fat like butter, margarine etc ., how they 
are packaged you can see here in this figure.  There is first is the p reform  modes and the 
material of known quantity is filled into  this and then the top layer is closed you can see 
that is this is first preform and  then now it is you see that is h ow the top layer is being 
closed.  Finally, it is removed and pressed .  
 
Now, we will see that is after this that is the sealing of bottles . Sealing of bottle is  again 
very important that is in the bottles one after the material is fi lled, it should  be properly 
sealed . The different types of closures for plastic and glass containers  include metals or 
plastics caps and lids for oil packaging.   
Bottle sealing can be grouped into three categories ; number one is the pressure seal, the 
normal seal or vacuum seal.  In pressure seal , it is used for screw cap, crown cap, cork , or 
polythene stoppers in glass  bottles.  In normal seal , that is aluminium screw caps with 
thread press -on plastic c aps or pri se-off plastic c aps are use d in the normal seal.  In the 
vacuum seal , it is a screw on screw -off caps, press -on prise-off caps.  
So, in this case , type of closure the seal is formed by pressing a cushioning material 
against  the rim of the container . The pressure must be evenly distributed to give a 
uniform seal around the rim typically  the cushioning material is made from plastic .  
15 
  
Sealing of the pouches . There are different set up like you can you s ee there it is inbuilt  
heating arrangement  in the FFS machine , which first seals the bottom  and sides . It form s 
the package ; the material is sealed . So, there are manual sealing machines also there , 
plastic seals are there , heat sealed  for oils like that is in the pouches it is kept then th e 
pouch is sealed.  Then the electrical bar or band sealers are used which are heated 
electrically that is  electric bar sealer here there is a heating arrangement .  
Then FFS equipment , you can see there may be vertical equipment which are known  as 
trans wrap or flow pack or horizontal FFS also known as pillow pack or flow wrap.  And 
the machines use a roll of film , which they form into a tube , seal one end , fill the  food 
and then seal the other end in a continuous operation .  
 
Then seal performance test because that is very important  if this after filling the material  
if seal is not proper there is a leakage etcetera then it may allow even not only the product  
may come out, but also inside even in a minute leak if it is there it may allow the ingress  
of oxygen and which will  oxidize the oil or auto oxidation of the oil or it will  spoil the 
product.  So, this seal performance test is a must and it is invariably done without fail . It 
should be seen that all the sealing is properly intact .  
16 
 So, steps to perform the test is , place the sample inside a vacuum chamber  that is the 
packed sample placed inside a vacuum chamber, then close the lid  and the set the 
pressure to around 90 kilo Pascal or so.  And then turn on the  vacuum pump keep 
observing the test sample and there will be successive  air bubbles coming out of the 
package from the leak point if there is a leakage is there  then air bubble will come out 
some of the product will also  come out . So, record the pressure where t he leak occurs and 
the position where the leak occurs and  that should be ensured that is may be whatever 
remedial measure in the packaging in the FFS  machine is required this should be done.  
So, that temperature should be regulated , air pressure etcetera sh ould be  regulated . So, it 
must be ensured that the seal is leak proof.   
 
Final ly, I will summarize this lecture by saying that the main functions of  the packaging 
are very important and the material particularly in the oil supplied  in order  to provide 
them stab ility against the oxygen, against the environmental pressure . It must be properly 
packaged.  So, the main function of a package is to contain the product and protect it 
against  a range of hazards which might adversely affect its quality during handli ng, 
distribution  and storage.  Bad packaging and storage practices can influence the sensory 
quality and lead to off -flavor  development as well as a rancidity development.  So, 
depending upon the properties of oil as well as its cost , different packaging mate rials are 
used such as glass bottles for olive oil, PET bottles for soybean oil, metal and HDPE  
containers for 15 kg, flexible pouches for 0.5 kg or 1 kg , and wrapping or cup packaging  
for the margarine or butter etcetera.  So, in oil packaging , oxygen remova l is must that is 
very important  here in case of oil  packaging.  So, it is must which is done either by 
sparging the nitrogen inert gas or inert gas  blanketing is used to remove the oxygen from 
the packet  and to ensure  more shelf  life.  
17 
  
So, these were the references which are used for making this presentation.   
 
Thank you very much for your patience here.  Thank you.  
