Food Oils and Fats: Chemistry and Technology  
Professor H N Mishra  
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Module 12: Packaging, Storage, & QA/QC  
Lecture 60: Regulatory Requirements & Course Summary  
 
Hello everyone.  Namaskar.  Now, we are in the last lecture of this course that is the lecture 
60. 
 
In the next half an hour or so, we will discuss about regulatory requirements of some 
important  fats and oils.  And also we will take up the summary of the course.  We will 
summarize that whole thing what was discussed in this course. Then concept covered are 
like international and regional regulations like Codex Alimentarius and FSSAI.  FSSAI 
regulations for quality and safety of fats and oils, food safety and quality  standards  for 
important or major fats and oils, regulations for packaging and also I told you the course  
summary and finally, the acknowledgments.   
 
You know that knowledge of government regulations relevant to the chemical analysis of 
food  is extremely important to persons working in the food industry.  The laws and 
regulations reinforce the effort of the food industry to provide wholesome  food, to inform 
consumers about the nutritional composition of food and to eliminate economic  frauds. In 
some cases, they dictate what ingredients a food must contain, what must be tested and  the 
procedures used to analyze food for safety factors and quality attributes.  Information about 
food standards and safety practices established by international organizations  is es sential 
for successful food business operation.   
 
So, the various international standards and practices with regard to the regulations and  
control in the food particularly with reference to fats and oils.  Here with the need to 
compete in the worldwide mar ket, employees of food companies must be  aware that 
allowed food ingredients, names of food ingredients required and allowed label  information 
and standards for food and food ingredients differ from countries to countries.  For example, 
colorings and preser vatives allowed in food differ widely between countries and  nutritional 
labeling is not universally required. To develop food for and market food in a global 
economy, one must seek such information from  international organizations and from 
organizations in  specific regions and countries.   
 
So, one major governmental body that is the Codex Alimentarius that is the international  
body Codex Alimentarius Commission, Latin for code concerned with nourishment, the 
word  Codex Alimentarius, the code concerned with  nourishment.  So, this Codex 
Alimentarius Commission was established in 1962 by two United Nations  organizations that 
is the Food and Agriculture Organization commonly known as FAO and the  World Health 
Organization's WHO.  And objective was to develop inter national standards and safety 
practices for food and  agricultural products.  The standards published in the Codex 
Alimentarius are intended to protect consumers health,  ensure fair business practices in 
food trade and facilitate international trade of foods . 
 
The Codex Alimentarius is published in 13 volumes.  All these 13 volumes are listed here 
that is among this one volume is on general requirements  which includes labeling, food 
additives, contaminants, irradiated foods, import -export inspection  and food hygiene etc. 
There are nine standards and codes of practice combined on commodity basis.  For example, 
volume 8 is especially compiled on fats and oils and related products.  There are two 
volumes on residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs in foods and o ne volume  is on 
methods of analysis and sampling. So, it contains there 13 volumes.   
 
So, the Codex has efforts to validate and harmonize methods of food safety and analysis  
among countries and regions.  It maintains the smooth flow of international commer ce and 
ensures appropriate decisions  on food exports and imports.  The setting of the international 
standards on food quality by Codex has been a high priority  in the world trade to minimize 
non-tariff trade practices or trade barriers.  International trade of food and raw agricultural 
products has increased due to reduced economic  trade restrictions and tariff imp osed. So, 
that is the Codex Alimentarius is one standard.  
 
Then there are also other standards or regulations like the other international, region al and  
country specific organization publish standards relevant to food composition and analysis.  
That is in India, it is the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India popularly known  as 
FSSAI.  It publishes standards of various products, food products i ncluding fats and oil and 
related  products.  The Saudi Arabian Standards Organization like popularly known as SASO, 
it publishes standard  documents for example, labeling, testing method etc and this is 
important in the  Middle East or except Isarel . The Euro pean Commission (EC) sets a 
standard for food and food additives for countries  like European Economic Communities.  In 
USA, Food Ingredient Export Community which operates as part of the US Pharmacopeia 
sets  a standard for the identification and purity of f ood additives and chemicals which is 
published  as Food Chemical Codex (FCC ). 
 
That is for example, a company may specify in the purchase of a specific food ingredient  that 
is to be FCC grade.  Countries other than the USA and adopt FCC standards like in Au stralia, 
Canada etc they also use FCC standard.  At an international level, the Joint FAO and WHO 
Expert Committee on Food Additive popularly  known as JECFA , it sets standards for purity 
of food additives. The Codex Elementary Commission is encouraged to ut ilize the standard 
established by JAGFA.  The standards established by FCC and J ECFA  are used by many 
countries as they develop  their own standards.   
 
Let us talk about little bit food safety and standards authority of India.  This FSSAI is a 
regulatory bod y responsible for supervising the safety standards for food  business across 
the nation.  To run food and food related business in India, FSSAI certificate or FSSAI license 
is mandatory. In today's world, as people prefer certified food consumption, FSSAI li cense 
can provide  the food business with legal benefits and expansion scope.  Not to forget it 
builds goodwill and trust ensures food being wholesome create consumer  awareness.   
 
So, now in this table I have given that is FSSAI regulations that are in force particularly  with 
related to food, oils and fats.  So, this food, oils and fats the category is two, 0 -2 category that 
is fats and oils  and fat emulsions.  In this there is a subcategory 0, 2.1 that is fat, oils and 
essentially free from water.  So, in this 2.1 the product name may be soybean oil 2.1.2 and its 
FSSAI number is 2.2.  So, in this subcategory the product name is partially hydrogenated 
vintherize soybean  oil that is 0, 2.1.2 and its FSSAI number is 2.2.3 then bracket 1.  Partially 
hydrogenated soybean oil that is 2.1.2 and its FSSAI number is 2.2.3 within  bracket 2.  
Refined soybean oil its FSSAI number is 2.2 and 1, 16.6.   
 
Then this ground nut oil like Bhuung Phalika Tel it is FSSAI number is 2.2.1, 3 within  
bracket 3.  Refined ground nut oil i s 2.2.1 within bracket 16, 3.  Raphseed oil that is Toria Tel 
or mustard oil Sarsoka Tel its 2. 2.16 and Raphseed oil  or mustard oil with low erucic  acid is 
2.2.1 bracket 7.  Then refined mustard or Raphseed oil its 2. 2.1, 16.9.   
 
Then sunflower seed oil i t is 2.2.1, 22.  Refined sunflower oil 2. 1, 16, 7.  So, these are the 
FSSAI number and this is this number one can go to the FSSAI website  or you search on the 
Google or even printed volumes, gadgets etc are available.  Here the different specifications 
for these all the oils specific specific quality criteria  and all those things are very beautifully 
narrated and which must be followed by the  industry.   
 
So, FSSAI regulations for oil that is refined vegetable oil means any vegetable oil which  is 
obtained by  expression or solvent extraction of vegetable oil bearing material, deacidified  
with alkali and or physical refining and or by micellar refining using permitted food  grade 
solvents followed by bleaching with absorbent earth and or carbon and deodorized  with 
steam no other chemical agent shall be used.  So, this is the clear cut definition or regulation 
that is provided in the FSSAI for oil.  The name of the vegetable oil from which the refined oil 
has been manufactured shall  clearly be specified on the label  of the container. This is the 
requirement of FSSAI for oils and fats.  In addition to the mentioned standards to which 
refined vegetable oil shall confirm  to the standards prescribed in the regulations that we 
saw earlier for the specified vegetable  oil sh all also apply except for acid value which shall 
be not more than 0.5 percent.  Moisture shall not exceed 0.1 percent by weight in any case in 
the oil that is the strict  regulation of FSSAI.  
 
Also the test for argument oil shall be negative.  Further if th e oil is obtained by the method 
of solvent extraction and the oil imported  into India whether obtained by solvent extraction 
or otherwise it shall be supplied for human  consumption only after refining and shall 
confirm to the standard let down under regula tion  2.2.1.16  And the oil so refined shall not 
contain hexane more than 5 ppm.   
 
So, these are some of the major regulations and the list is long one.  I recommend that is one 
can go and have detailed study of these recommendations.  So, just for example, y ou see the 
FSSAI regulation for mustard oil that is published here that  is the rapeseed oil, torii oil or 
mustard sarson ka tel  means that is the oil expressed  from clean and sound mustard seeds 
belonging to the com pestris, juncea or napus  varieties of Brassica.  It shall be clear free from 
rancidity suspended or foreign matter separated water added coloring  or flavoring 
substances or mineral oil.  The oil should be clear for this.  The next is the  specification.  It is 
butyro refractometer reading at 40 °C shou ld be 58 to 60 or refractive index  at 40 °C should 
be in the range of 1.4646 to 1.4662.  Its saponification value should range in between 168 to 
177. Its iodine value may be in the range of 96 to 112 that is polybromide shall be negative  
and saponifiable mat ter not more than 1.2 percent by weight.  Acid value should not be more 
than 6.  This is a barrier test turbidity temperature that is a stick acid method at 23 °C to 
27.5 °C. Test for argemone oil should be negative, test for hydrocyanic acid should be 
negative.  So, this is the FSSAI recommend recommended specification for mustard oil.   
 
Similarly, FSSAI regulation for sa ffflower seed oil that is berry ka tel means the oil expressed  
from the seeds of Carthamus tinctorius . It shall be clear free from ran cidity suspended or 
other foreign matters separated water,  added coloring or flavoring substances or mineral 
oil. Its specification include that is butyrometer or butyro refractometer reading at 40 °C 
should range between 62.4 to 64.7.  Its refractive index at 40 °C should range lie between 
1.46742 to 1.4689.  Its saponification value may be in between 186 to 196, iodine value 
should range between  135 to 148.  Its saponification matter should not be more than 1 
percent, acid value not more than 6  percent and bel ler test arbitrary temperature that is not 
more than 16 °C. So, this is the regulation for say flower oil.   
 
Similarly, the regulation for soybean oil FSSAI regulation.  Soybean oil means the oil 
expressed from clear and sound soybeans that is sojomates fr om which the major portion of 
the gums naturally present have been removed by hydration and  mechanical or physical 
separation.  Its at clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated 
water,  added coloring and or flavoring substances  or mineral oils.  The specification its 
butyro refractometer reading at 40 °C should lie between  58. 5 to 68.  Its refractive index at 
40 °C should be in between 1.4649 to 1.4710.  Its saponification value should be in between 
189 to 195, iodine value 120 to  141.  It should have un saponifiable manner not more than 
1.5 percent, acid value not more  than 2.5 and phosphorus not more than 0.02.  So, these are 
the some of the recommendations.  Similarly, from all most of the oil such a specification 
recommendations a re available  in FSSAI notifications and FSSAI they have given the 
number.  So, one who is interested they can they must consider it, they must go through it 
and maintain  it the industry must the business operators for the oil they must see that their 
produc t meets the recommended standard by FSSAI because FSSAI it is a mandatory 
standard.  
 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards they also have their standards or regulations for various  
products for oils and fats als o etc. That is you know that oil is a commodity co nsumed by 
every person it may be both that is another.  So, different standard like PFA, AGMARK, BIS 
are formulated which give a specifications  on the quality parameters of oil at the time of 
sale.  The shelf life of the oil in different plastic packaging ma terials and specifications on  
safety and performance of packaging material.  However, these BIS standards are not 
mandatory these are voluntary, but the BIS is level  mark it improve the credibility of the 
company and the quality it speaks about the shelf  life required for oil like a BIS regulation in 
plate or PVC bottle is 60 and 180 days  under normal and accelerated storage conditions. So, 
the also the vinyl chloride  (VC) monomer content of PVC should be less than 1 ppm and  VC 
migration into oil should be l ess than 10 ppb.  
 
So, BIS specifications for plastic packaging materials for packaging edible oils and fats  like IS 
number and year is that 12724 of 1989 it is a specification for flexible packaging  material 
for packaging of refined edible oil.  12883 of 1 989 is the polyvinyl chloride bottle for edible 
oils 12887 of 1989 provides specific  specification for polyethylene te rephthalate  bottles for 
packaging of edible oil.  11352 of 19 85 specification is for flexible packs for packaging 
Vanaspati.  10840 of 1994 it provides blow mold SDPE containers for packaging of 
Vanaspati. So, similarly like FSSAI, mandatory similarly there are for different oils and fats 
and their related product as they relate their packaging and labeling there are BIS standard  
MRV standards  and this can be, but they are mandatory, but it is recommended that as the  
company should follow this and see that these product their product meet the requirement  
of the regulations.  
 
So, to summarize on the regulations we will say that yes regulatory requirements are fat,  
oils and fat based products ensures good quality and safe products in the global and  
regional markets.  The international standards help in maintaining the quality and safety 
standards for food  and agricultural produce.  Food business o perators must abide by these 
regulations for successful operation and safeguarding  the rights of the consumers.  In fact, 
interstitial and agricultural or agencies or information about such requirements  must be 
obtained through the different organizations a nd their publications very smooth 
functioning  of the food business. Like for example, if you are in the international trade.  So, 
FCC regulations or codex we will tell you as commissions, that those regulations  one must 
follow different even the various cou ntries also they have their own regulations.  So, one 
must see the regulations in force in that particular country where you are intending  to 
export your product.  So, all these things should be followed to have a fair trade business.   
 
These are the refere nces that are used in this lecture for the regulation part.   
 
Now, let us talk about the I will that summarize this being the last lecture of the course. Let 
us have a overview that is what we studied major points in the last 12 week that is in  the 60 
classes.  You know this course cover the fat and oil industry market potential, production 
statistics  and utilization patterns while throwing light on the issues and challenges faced by 
this industry.  It also explained its nutritional importance, physico chemi cal properties and 
important  chemical reactions that the oil sulphates undergo under various conditions.  
Mechanical spelling, solvent extraction, refining processes, oil modification methods, 
valorization  techniques, packaging, quality analysis, quality co ntrol and regulatory 
requirements of fats  and oils of plant and animal origins were also discussed in this course.   
 
You know we discussed in the earlier class that Indian fats and oil market growth is  
expanding at a CAGR of 6.82 percent over the forecast  period of about 2021 to 2027.  So, its 
dependence on imports, low oil said productivity, inadequate infrastructure etc are the key 
challenges faced by the industry.  Oil and fats are important energy sources and that is they 
give 40 percent of the daily  energy requirement of human is specified by dietary 
triacylglycerols.  Important plant sources of vegetable oils are seed, nuts, cereals, fruits and 
sources  of animal fats include milk fat, rendered fat and marine oils etc. Fats are the esters 
of glycerol and fatty acids and can be classified either mono -, di-, triacylglycerol.  The major 
component of fats and oils with glycerolipids or non -glycerolipids are the  minor 
components.  
 
Then the fatty acids are carbo xylic  acids with hydrocarbon chains ranging from 4 to  36 
carbons.  Lipids, phys io, chemical and nutritional properties depend on the type of the fatty  
acid that they contain.  The bulk properties of the oil are density, viscosity, melting point, 
specific heat cap acity,  thermal conductivity etc. Key chemical properties of lipids are 
hydrolysis, oxidation, saponification, polymerization,  esterification, inter -esterification, 
halogenation, methylation etc. Then fats undergo a crystallization process through super 
cooling, nucleation and crystal  growth and exhibits polymers which is the ability of a 
material to exist in number of  crystalline structures with different molecular packing. 
Rancidity is the natural process of decomposition of lipids leading to undesirable f lavor.  Its 
type of oxidation, its types are oxidative , hydrolytic, ketonic etc and they result  into the 
flavor changes.  Antioxidants are the substances that are added to inhibit the oxidation, 
autooxidation and  TSC and OSI are used to measure the antioxida nt capacity and relative 
resistance of fats and  oil samples to oxidation.   
 
We also discussed the primary processing of oil seeds like cleaning, dehulling, crushing,  
cooking, flaking.  Thermal properties or thermal pretreatments reported to yield increased  
oil yield, oxidative  oil stability, bio active  compounds recovery and the formation of new 
functional compounds. Microwave ultrasound, pulse -electro filled -aid enzyme pretreatment 
of oil seeds are the novel  pretreatment method that we discussed in the vari ous lectures.  
We also discussed the mechanical expression of oil which involves the application of 
pressure  that is using either hydraulic or a screw press to force the oil out of the oil bearing  
materials.  The continuous mechanical expression process is c urrently the most commonly 
encountered  process in the processing of oligosaccharides that oil seeds.  The solvent 
extraction is an alternative approach to involve dissolving the oil containing  material in a 
solvent separating the oil from the rest of the plant material and evaporating  the solvent.  
Distillation, evaporation, membrane filtration and absorption are the recovery methods 
from  miscella and the desolventizing, toasting, drying and cooling process is used for 
removing  the solvent from the de -oiled  seeds and all these aspects we discussed in the 
different  classes.  
 
We also discussed that crude oil obtained from the oil seed contains various gums, waxes,  
fatty acids, etc and these are removed during the refining process in the different  process 
like filtration, degumming, de -filtration, bleaching, deodorization, etc. And the membrane 
technology and ultrasound refining are considered to be the promising  methods owing to 
their quality and stability.  The products treated by these methods are of higher quality and 
they are also stable.  Then we discussed the various modification techniques that is what to 
improving the functionality  and other desirable properties of the fates and oils like 
hydrogenation, inter -esterification,  winterization, etc. We have d iscussed the fractionation 
is the process of fates and oil which fractions into  different products with different melting 
properties. Plasticization is making lipids that is a baking lipids have plastic properties, 
inter -esterification,  high oleic oil blen ding and fractionation are the methods to carry out 
transfer modifications.  Hydrogenation is a chemical process that adds hydrogen to double 
bond that leads to saturation,  cis-trans isomerization and shifts of double bond locations, 
etc. So, all these thin gs details we discussed in various classes.  
 
We also discussed that is a various animal fat from their sources from where they are  
obtained like lard, tallow and fish oils they were obtained by rendering.  Then tubular bowl 
and disc bowls are two types of centrifuge which are used to separate the  cream from milk 
and then this cream is used to make butter or ghee. Cooking oil we discussed their cooking 
oil for their characteristics, properties, how  they can be maintained in various operations 
like factors li ke which decide the right oil  for cooking or fatty acid composition, smoke 
point, omega ratio, etc. Then commonly used cooking oils which we discussed were seed 
oils like groundnut oil, mustard  oil, sesame oils, fruit and nut oils like palm oil, coconut oi l, 
olive oil, rice ground  oil, even some of the specialty oils that are tree nut oil like almond oil, 
cashew oil,  tropical exotic oil like mango kernel butter, kokum butter, essential oil like 
citrus oil,  this chili oil etc and oil powder and liposomes the se are the novel products 
developed  by freeze drying,  coacervation , fluidized bed drying, spray drying.  So, their 
processing technologies for all these commonly used cooking oil and exotic  oils etc they 
were explained in detail in the various lectures.   
 
Also we discussed that oil seed cake that is a major byproduct which is a rich source  of 
protein and is used to develop novel food products, animal feed, fertilizers etc. Then the 
byproducts used in oil refinery are lecithin, free -fatty acid, distillate ac id, oil  etc and they 
can be used to manufacture pharmaceutical and cosmetic products. So, these are obtained 
from the oil milling by products.  Biomass is another byproduct mostly used as a fuel and 
fertilizer.  Waste cooking oil could be used for biodiesel production through 
transesterification.  Then we also discussed that is very important aspect and the oil 
blending that is oil blending  or oil fortification that is oil blending is practiced to achieve an 
ideal omega ratio  cooking profile as well as stabili ty of the oil.  Fortification of oils with 
vitamin A and D is a good strategy to address micronutrient  malnutrition.  Essential oil 
packaging method like sparging, inert gas, blanketing and use of novel packaging  materials 
and edible films, bio based polymer s, packaging materials, handling and storage  of oil seeds 
all these aspects were discussed in detail. We also discussed the quality test, quality analysis 
test like anisidine value,  thiobarbituric acid, gas chromatography method, free  fatty acid 
value, adu lteration of pre fatty acid content,  oxidation products that is their measurement 
these were detailed.  Then international and national regulations for the manufacture, 
packaging and distributions  of oil were presented in the different lectures.   
 
So, spec ial focus in this course was given to novel techniques such as ultrasonication,  
microwave treatment, pulse electric field treatment, high pressure processing, enzymatic  
treatment etc and their use in oil seed pretreatment, extraction, refining, modificatio n, 
frying technology and byproduct utilization.  So, we discussed both why that is the 
traditional methods and whatever the drawbacks in the  traditional method, how they can 
be eliminated like to eliminate the issues and challenges  faced by the traditional methods 
these were highlighted and how by the application of  these novel techniques how these 
challenges can be overcome.  Then opportunities that are available in oil powder, liposome, 
a specialty  oil manufacturing,  oil blending and oil fortifications were  discussed in detail and 
it was shown and this provides  the future of this oil milling industry. The growing 
population, increasing consumer awareness, demand from the food processing  industries 
and technological advancement.  So, the start up and entrepreneurship potentials of the oils 
and fat industry in India,  
 
There  is a great demand, great scope of starting up there is a entrepreneurship or the 
enterprise  and start up agency etc to have a finally, convert into a various commercial 
ventures.  So, the different opportunities for entrepreneurship are areas where the start up 
in food, oil  and fat sector could be opened they include that is online marketplace, 
innovative packaging  solutions and marketing for oils and speciality oil products, organic 
and cold press oil,  their packaging, their branding, then edible oil refining that is there is a 
need that  is even a small scale home scale refining equipment etc can be developed and 
using  the novel technologies, oil seed processing technology, mobile oil  extraction unit, 
waste  management and byproduct utilization, edible oil fortification and speciality oil.  So, 
these are some of the sectors areas which can where innovative ideas can be used to  have a 
start up or entrepreneurship venture.   
 
So, with this  course is over I thank you all that is I before going for normal customary  
thanks I must give our acknowledgement.  
 
So, acknowledgements are first the contributions of teaching assistants and PhD research 
scholars  of the food chemistry and technology la boratory are thankfully acknowledged.  The 
teaching assistants for this course are Mr. Subham Mand liya who is  a PMRF  fellow in 
process food process engineering at IIT Kharagpur. It he did his M.  Tech in food process 
engineering from IIT Kharagpur and B. Tec h in agricultural  engineering from J.N.K. V.V. 
Jabalpur.  The other teaching assistant is Mr. Siddharth Vishwakarma  he is a research 
scholar in food  process engineering at IIT Kharagpur.  He did his M.Tech in food process 
engineering from IIT Kharagpur and B.  Tech from agricultural  engineering from J.N.K. V.V. 
Jabalpur.  The other scholars and postdoctoral fellow who significantly contributed in this 
course  and the special thanks are due to them they include Dr. Chandrakanta Dalbha ghat, 
Mrs. Ja yshree Majumdar, Mrs. Anjali Thakur, Mr. S ourav Mishra, Dr. J oyati Das, Ms. A. Nit hya 
and Mr. Anas She ik.  
 
Finally, I shall be failing in my duty if I do not acknowledge the excellent work done  by the 
NPTEL video and lecture recording team of IIT Kharagpur. The team incl uded Mr. Uttam  
Sharma, Mr. S ourav  Sahu, Mr. Sushobhan B hanja, Mr. Ajay  Malik and Mr. Kajal Kumar Guha .  
 
Finally, I sincerely acknowledge all help and assistance provided by NPTEL and Swayam  
team of IIT Kharagpur as well as IIT Chennai.  The Ministry of Ed ucation, Indian Institute of 
Technology, Kharagpur and its authorities,  Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
of IIT Kharagpur and its functionalities for  giving me this opportunity to present this course 
before this audience and this online  course for the generation of knowledge into this 
important area of food science and technology.  
 
So, finally, I wish the participants of the course all the best for their future endeavors.  
Finally, I thank you all very much.  Thank you.  Enjoy.  
