Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr. Bhabagrahi Sahoo  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 35 
Structural De sign of Drop Spillways – 2 
 
So, welcome students , so, this is our 5th class on  the Design of Drop Spillway , we have 
already designed the drop spillway and we have in the last class we have already 
discussed about how to estimate t he horizontal pressures . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:38)  
. 
Here we wi ll be discussing the structural design o f drop  spillway part - 2. (Refer Slide Time: 00:46)  
. 
This lecture highlights  the evolution of strength and stability of different parts of drop 
spillway against uplift pressure , contact pressure , piping failure , and overturning . 
What is the uplift  pressu re? The uplift pressure happens because if the foundation metal 
gets saturated . So, pour water pressure develops and this hydrostatic pressure arcs 
upward . So, if this hydrostatic pressure arcs upward  then it creates one negative pressure 
in the stability . 
Second is contact pressure , the contact pressure is nothing , but it is the  vertical pressure 
which is acting at the contact surface between the structure as well as the saturated 
foundation . So, you can see the contact pressure  is given by the notation V, which is 
acting at the base of this foundation  and depending on the location of this V that is 
vertical contact  pressure the overturning of the structure will happen . If it acts at exactly 
or the centroid of this base section then there is more stability otherwise there will  be 
overturning  
Then the piping failure mostly occurs at the base of the foundation which is contacting 
between the structure and the saturated foundation material , you can see  here the piping 
failure takes place along the contact surfa ce between the structure and the saturated 
foundation material . So, all the details we wi ll be discussing in this class . (Refer Slide Time: 03:04 ) 
 
The upward hydrostatic pressure on the base is due to the pressure transmitted through 
the seeping water in  the saturated foundation material that reduces the self  weight of the 
structure . And this is mostly caused because of the differential head you can see this 
figure at the option site there is depth of water  and at the downstream side rates tail water  
and the difference between these two water surface elevations is the differential head . 
And this differential head gives additional energy head and that is exerted on the 
saturated foundation material . So, because of that the pore water pressure the soil pore  
water pressure develops . 
For earth  foundations this uplift pressures are assumed to be existing over the entire base 
area of the spillway . Uplift pressure can be roughly estimated by using the line of Creep 
theory . The line of Creep theory talks about how  the water moves are the contact surface 
between the structure  and the foundation metal , you can see the line of creep  goes like 
this as I am marking here on this figure . 
So, along this line generally the  water seeps and the piping phylogeny occurs . So, by 
using this line of Creep theory along this contact surface we estimate the uplift pressure . 
These uplift pressures  are generally computed based on what are the  water surface 
elevations at different contact surfaces  along this line the creep line . 
But stab ility the sum of the weight of the structure and all the vertically downward forces 
acting on it must be greater than the uplift  pressure . If the uplift pressure is more naturally the structure will float. So, generally  the uplift pressure is a negative pr essure , 
which has to be deducted from the vertical pressure during all these force calculations . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:35 ) 
 
Now, coming to contact pressure , the contact pressure  occurs due to the vertical and 
horizontal loadings or the contact surface of the structure and foundation material . You 
can see this figure ; this is a very important figure to understand  this figure shows the 
plan of base area . You can see this figure , this is the head wall and this is my  upon 
section and the whole figure on the to p shows the plan of the base area . And here I am 
choosing the axis the o axis just at the bottom corner of this  upstream part of this . 
So, this is my upstream edge and my axis is o o you can  it is assumed that the whole 
structure is almost rectangular it h as a width of d  and length of b so; the centroid passes 
through d by 2 and b by 2. So, this is my centroid which is just exactly at the center of 
this rectangle  and my vertical forces are acting  at this location which is at a distance e 
from the centroid . So, this is my e distance  and z is the distance between this upstream 
edge  and the point of the line parallel line join ing the point where V is acting . 
So, at this section V is acting that is the contact force that the summation of all these 
vertical force s minus  the uplift pressure force . So, is called as eccentricity here , if these 
are acting exactly at the centroid of this base they naturally the structurally more stable , 
but it is acting at a distance of e from the centroid which is called eccentricity  naturally 
there will be  momentum will be occurring . So, that it call as  like your bending moment you have study might are studied  so, that is lust like a bending moment s and generally 
that will cause overturning of the structure . So, this e can be either this positive side  to 
the centroid axis or it will be towards negative side that w e in this side of this centroid . 
So, before going to calculate the contact pressures you have to understand this figure  and 
these contact pressures should be computed for 3 loading conditions . Before any backfill 
has been around the spillway , after all the backfill has been placed with no flow over 
spillway  and the spillway operating at design discharge capacity . So, these are the 3 
engineering condition general ly we consider for calculating the contact phases . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:04 ) 
 
For calculating  the contact pressure for a rectangular  base we can use the equation 
 
Here e is the eccentricity , d is the width of this base  and V is the sum of all the vertical 
loads acting on the structure , which are equal to weights of all the concretes , earth  above 
footings , water above any part of the structure and these are acting downward minus  the 
uplift pressure . 
So, here the uplift pressure is working acting upward  so, it will be minus. Then you can 
calculate what is the  resultant vertical load on  this? And if it is acting at this central 
location then it be more stable if it is acting at a distance e from the centroid that is 
eccentricity naturally there will be turning our momentum will be there . Here A is equal to the base area that equal to computed as b into d, if e is equal to  0 in this equation 
naturally P 1 it will be equal to V by A that equal to force data area that is equal to your 
pressure . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:46 ) 
 
 
 
Now, we have to compute the moment of vertical loads M V, for this as to select the oO-
O axis are seen this figure , from this O-O axis along the upstream edge of the  base area 
the elevation of the bottom of the apron  let this O. Let V i be the magnitude of the ith 
part of the vertical load or weight , because there are different vertical loads , these 
vertical loads can be because of the head wall it can be because of the apron it can be 
because of the backfill materials . So, these are different vertical load components , so, 
these are called as V i and they are acting at a location perpendicular distance between 
the line of action of the load V i and the axis o  that is equal to L i. 
Then the moment , M V of all such parts of the total vertical force about the O - O axis 
can be given by this equation you know that momentum equal to our moment equal to 
force into the length . So, M V equal to sigma V i L i that equal to V 1 L 1 plus V 2 L 2 
plus V n L n, where V i are the different part loads , different part  vertical loads and total resultant vertical load would be equal to summation of all these vertical forces acting on 
the base of the structure . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:29 ) 
 
 
 
Then there could be the horizontal loads , the horizontal loads could be because of there  
is static water table or the upstream  side and let these vertical loads be defined as 
different parts . Let h i equal to magnitude of the ith part of the horizontal load , y i is the 
vertical distance from the line of action of the load h  i through  it is centroid to the O axis, 
then the moment M h of all such parts  of the total horizontal force is can be estimated 
similar as we have done for the vertical loads . So, your M h will be equal to sigma h i y 
ith and H will be equal to summation of h i that is the total horizontal loads . (Refer Slide Time: 13:21 ) 
 
 
 
Then the total moment due to vertical loads and horizontal loads can be estimated by this 
equation  
 
which is M v plus M h that equal to total moment divided by V will be give you the 
value of z, because V is the resultant load , resultant vertical load . So, the total moment 
will be countered by V times z so, z is the distance from this O-O axis to the point s to the 
line passing through this  point where this V is acting . 
So, you can estimate what is th e distance z, by computing this z  you can check for the 
stability again against tens ion. So, for stability against tension are the base of head wall 
we can es timate what is the eccentricity , from this figure you can see that d by 2 equal to 
e plus z. So, e will be equal to d by 2 minus z and for stability against strength  so, near to 
design such that e should be less than d by 6 it will solve this equation then you will get z 
equal to d by 3 I will sorry z is greater than d by 3. 
So; that means, for stabili ty against tension z  should be greater than d by 3, the structure 
is safe against overturning a positive contact  pressure exists over the entire  base area . So, depending on this position of eccentricity you can estimate whether the structure will 
overturn or not . So, to our the overturning you have to design such a that z is greater than 
d by 2. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:25 ) 
 
Now, next is stability against the piping failure , you can see from this figure that piping 
defined as the removal of material from the foundation through seepage water as it 
emerges from the soil below the dam , on this mostly occur when the water table is high , 
if the upstream water table is high it creates additional water facer . 
And because of this generally the what we as foundation is  gets saturated  and when it 
gets saturated  the upstream pressure the water pressure  which is causing the flow of  our 
which is causing generally the saturation of this foundation . So, it will create additional 
pressure  so, that this water will move along wi th the soil particles and it will make a pipe 
like structure and if the there is more loss of the soil materials along this pipe line then 
the structure will fail . 
The velocity of seepage depends on the length of flow path; failures due to piping may 
resul t from subsurface erosion  or hea ve. So, because of these the subsurface erosion 
causes ; that means, the soil particles along this line  they emerges out at the downstream 
section a nd sometimes this creates quick sand condition you might have studied already  
that what is quicksand condition . The seepage could  have occur  through earth  foundation such as flow through the 
foundation material  itself, it can directly flow through these foundation material as 
shown in this figure or along the line of least resistanc e which is the line of contact 
between the spill and foundation . That means, these seepage  may occur also along this 
contact surface as  I am showing in this diagram ; that means, it will pass through this line 
and this is called as the line of creep as we h ave studied in the previous slide s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:43 ) 
 
Now, for the stability against piping failure the design against piping failure is based on 
the line of Creep theory  and it is postulated by W G Bligh and further  revised by E W 
Lane so, less theory i s the most advanced one  so, that is  why we  will use  the lens theory  
for all our designs . 
The line of Creep is the line of contact between the dam and cut off or toe walls with the 
foundation , that produces less resistance to percolation than any ot her path through  the 
foundation material . 
If you wi ll see this figure the values  that is L v1, L v2, L v3 and L v4 these are all steep 
contacts  the vertical contacts  under distance L H1, L H2 and L H3 in this figure all are 
horizontal distances . And all th ese are called as horizontal plot distances  if the slope is 
less than 45 degree . So, we generally calculate the weighted creep length the effective seepage length , so, the 
effective or weighted  creep length is estimated as one third  of all these horizontal  
distances plus the sum of the vertical distances . So, it is the sum of all the steep contacts 
and one  third of all the contacts  flatter than 45 degree between the headwater on tail  
water along the contact  surface of the drop spillway and foundation . And capital H is the 
static water table or the upstream side which is mostly causing the seepage below the 
foundation . So, that is  why H is the driving head or driving energy  head . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:35 ) 
 
So, the length theory for a safe weighted  creep rati o is given by C W. So, C W equal to 
weighted creep distance that we have already estimated our summation of 
 
 So, that equal to one third of L H1 plus L H2 plus L H3 as shown in this figure divided 
by capital H, capital H is the driving or static water he ad which is causing these seepage 
or the piping failure . 
So, for stability against piping generally the calculated  C W value should be greater than 
the tabular value and the C W of table value is estimated already computed depending on 
the different soil t ype of the foundation material . Otherwise , the depths of cut off or toe 
walls have to be increased if it is less than the table value s, then you have  to increase the depth that is L V 1 or L V 2 or L V 3 and L V 4. So, that the stability against piping 
failure is achieved . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:57 ) 
 
So, these are the different weighted creep ratios of different foundation materials  you can 
see the , for very fine sand and silt which is having more porosity it has a greater C W 
value . So, greater C W value m eans it is less stable for fine  sand is 7, medium sand 6, 
course sand  5, fine sand 4, medium gravel 3.5, course gravel  inclu ding cobbles  the 
decouples that is 3, boulders with some cobbles and gravel 2.5, soft clay 3, medium clay  
2 then hard clay 1.8 and t he least it is very hard clay or hard can that is 1.6 that in  that 
means, it a more stable . 
  (Refer Slide Time: 21:30)  
. 
Clean gravel as 5, clean sand or sand and gravel mixture  6.5, well graded mixture s of 
sand silt and  less than 15 percent clay that is  your 5.5, it is more than 15 percent clay 
then it is 4 on 4, and form clay it is 2.3. So, these are the tabular values of C W so, our 
values  should be greater than this tabular value . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:07 ) 
 
Then, as we have already studied in our pre vious lecture  so, depending on the backfill 
condition and drainage condition you can design or you can estimate the elevation of the 
saturation life line Y 2 you can see from this figure case C suppose for example, for case  C this Y 2 value you can estima te and that is depending on d ifferent water table 
conditions . 
If your water table condition is suppose high and  the relative permeability between the 
foundation to backfill material is equal suppose and drainage condition is a , then known 
for no flow condi tion I can get Y to equal to S plus 0.5 F. And this S plus 0.5 F is 
nothing , but the value of Y 2 and this Y 2 value we can estimate  because , it is mostly 
responsible for  estimating how much is my water table depth . 
So, the saturation line shows the water table depth in the backfill material . So, that is  
why during the load computation  so, this is Y 2 value is very  much important . So, this 
table will be always referred  for all these design  calculations of the drop spillway . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:48 ) 
 
So, everything will be clear with if you follow a problem you will solve your problem 
you can see in this problem a drop spillway  has to be constructed for a design discharge , 
Q equal to 5.83, cubic  length of we ir is 4 meter , total drop is 2.44 meter . If the de pth of 
the toe wall t  2 as shown in this figure equal to 0.91 meter , find the required depth of cut 
of all t  1 to ensure safety against piping for the following conditions . 
So, if there are three conditions given 1 is pond  above structure with no upstream bomb 
against red wall , 2nd is  pond  ever structure with upstream berm  type  a drainage and pond above structure with upstream berm  type  b drainage and the condition s of 
foundation metal are given . 
So, it is well grade a mixture of sand , silt, clay, having clay content 20 percent  which is 
greater than 15 percent  relative permeability of the foundation and fill metal equal is 
equal on water table is high . So, for the foundation metal that is will grade a mixture of 
sand silt and clay which having clay content  greater than 20 percent , you can estimate 
what is your C W value from this table  given table . But for designing this you have to 
estimate , what is the value of H are shown  in this figure . To estimate the value of H 
naturally you have to estimate what is t he value of S?S is nothing , but it is the  depth of 
end silt. 
So, as we have studied in the previous classes S can be estimated by using Q and L 
relationship like  by computing the hut  the critical depth d c and d c you know that not 
equal to Q square divide d by L square g whole to the power 1 by 3. So, once this is 
estimated  so, S will be equal to  d c divided by  2. So, those calculations are can be down 
in the next slides . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:53 ) 
 
 
  
So, for estimating S you have to estimate , what is y our d c value ? So, here by putting the 
value of Q and L on z equal  9.81 you can get d c equal to 0.6 meter and S equal to d c by 
2 that equal to 0.3 meter . 
So, here H can be calculated as shown in this figure that equal to F plus S plus this 
distance or th is height that equal to t x and t x is given as 0.25 meter . So, H will be equal 
to F plus S plus t x and that equal to 2.44 plus 0.3 plus 0.25 equal to 2.9 and meter , 
because F is already given that equal to 2.44 meter . So, once H is estimated  and we have 
given t  2 equal to 0.91 meter already . So, to estimate what is my t  1 value by using the 
lines Creep theory , I can estimate what is mind t 1 value  so, that the  piping failure would 
not be happening . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:06 ) 
 
Now, for this you have to est imate what is the table value of C W and for the given 
condition well  graded mixture of sand , silt and clay and having clay content 20 percent . 
So, you can calculate that C W equal to 4. (Refer Slide Time: 27:24)  
. 
 
 
So, for all the estimates you can ta ke C W equal to 4, now using lanes  creep theory you 
know that C W H is equal to sigma L H the length of all these horizontal distances 
divided  by 3 plus the summation of all the vertical distances or vertical depths . 
So, in this case the length of vertical  distances will be equal to 2t 1 plus 2t 2, if you will 
see this figure  this is t 1 and this side also will be equal to t  1, this is t  2 on this side will 
be also equal to t  2. So, 2t 1 plus 2t 2 and this B is the horizontal distance , so, it will be 
divide d by 3. So, by solving this  you will get 2t 1 equal to C W H minus B or B or a 3 
minus t 2 and H I have kept here without putting this value  so, that we can do later on . 
So, B equal to 4.14 divided by 3 minus 2 into 0.91 because , t 2 is given as 0.91, So, we 
will get 4 H minus 3.2 now t 1 will equal to 2 H minus 1.6. 
So, whatever the condition is  are given  so, depending on that the H value will change . 
So, for this condition first con dition that is with no upstream berm  here H is equal to 2.99 
meter and dir ectly you can get t 1 equal to 2 H minus 1.6. So, H is 2.99 so , we will get it 
is 4.4 meter , so, this is for the first condition .  (Refer Slide Time: 29:21)  
. 
 
Now, coming to the second condition  that is with upstream berm and  type a  drainage : 
For type  a drainage for the given condition you can find out what is the value of Y 2, as 
shown in this figure . So, you can estimate  what is the value of Y 2 so, this is my Y 2. So, 
here I am getting Y 2 equal to S plus 0.5 F that you can estimate from here for no f low 
condition . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 29:54)  
.  
 
So, once this value is known Y 2 equal to S plus 0.5 F that you can use for your 
subsequent  calculations . So, as shown in this figure here H equal to Y 2 equal to S plus 
0.5 F, we have already seen that one that Y 2 equal to S plus 0.55 F. So, we can estimate 
what is the Y 2 value , so, here Y 2 equal to 1.52 meter and this Y 2 is corresponding to 
that is the depth between the saturation line  and the line from this bottom of this say top 
of this apron so, this is my Y 2 value . 
So, that is you can estimate as 1.52 meter  and from this case you can get this H equal to 
Y 2 plus t x, because these  t x has to be added here  then you will get this 1.52 that equal 
to Y 2 plus 0.25 that equal to 1.75 meter . So, t 1 will be getting that is 2 H minus 1.6 and 
H equal to 1.75 meter . So, we wi ll get  1.9 meter . So, my t 1 value is 1.9 meter . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 31:16)  
. 
 
Similarly, you can do for the 3rd case , so, for the 3rd case it is type  b drainage , for type b 
drainage similarl y can selects what is my Y 2 value . In this case you can see the Y 2 
value is equal to S plus 0.15 F that you can see from this table . So, this is the distance from this bottom surface to the saturation line . So, once Y 2 is known  so, by using this 
you can  estimate what is my H value . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 31:53)  
. 
So, for this first  I have to estimate what is my Y 2 that equal to S plus 0.15 F  that I can 
compute here . So, S equal to 0.3 and F equal to 2.44. So, I can get Y 2 equal to 0.67 
meter , on from the  sketch you can get H equal to Y 2 plus t x and Y 2 equal to 0.67 plus t 
x equal to 0.25., so, we are getting 0.92 meter . 
So, once H is known this H is known , you can estimate what is t 1 that equal 2 H minus 
1.6. So, by putting the values of h and that is  1.6 here, so, we wi ll get t  1 equal to 0.24 
meter . You know that the minimum depth  of this cutoff wall should be 1.2 meter , but this 
value is 0.24 meter which is much below than that of 1.2 meter . So, for this case you can 
recommend the minimum value that  equal to 1.2 meter  so, your minimum t  1 value equal 
to 1.2 meter . 
So, if you are providing a cut off wall of depth 1.2 meter , then it is  c code from the 
piping failure . So, this example shows that , what are the  effect of different earth wall  and 
the drain age condition ? It can be drainage condition a, it can be drainage condition b and 
it can be no flow and because of that how the  cutoff wall depth is changing or it can be 
optimized  so, that there would not  be any piping failure . So, from this lecture we su mmarized that  what are the contact pressures , what  is piping 
failure , what are the main causes of piping failure , and to withstand against the piping 
failure , how will design our  depth of cutoff wall  and what is the optimized depth of cut 
off wall and we d iscussed about the overturning  depending on the uplift pressure and the 
vertical pressure loads at  what is my z ? That  is the or the eccentricity according to that 
whether it will be overturning or not  ok. 
So, this completes our lectures here  and then in th e next class  we will b e discussing 
about how the cont acts pressures will be estimated by using the line of creep theory . So, 
we wi ll end our lecture here . 
Thank you very much . 