 
 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr. Poulomi Ganguli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 48 
Chute Spillway Design – I 
 
Hello. In the lecture 47, we studied the D esign of Chute Spillway  Principle. N ow, we are 
going to solve some design problem , so that you understand how to design the  chute 
spillway . So, this lecture is again divided into two parts that is part 1 and then part 2. 
And now , we are going to start the part 1 design problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:41)  
 
So, Chute Spillway Design P art 1.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:45)  
 
Now, the coming to the problem in the first  what are  the dimension given , the spillway 
crest level is 200 meter, and the level  of bottom flank at which low ogee weir is to be 
constructed  is 192 meter , design discharge is  5,000 cumecs , downstream tail water 
corresponding to this discharge  is 103 meter . The spillway length consists of 5 span of  
10 meter  clear wi dth. And the thickness of each spillway is to assume 3 meter  and 
assume if there is any data needed . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:29)  
 
  
 So, first we go for the discharge , and we  go for the trial and error method here first . And 
see how our assumption is correct or not . And if it does  not follow the correct 
assumption , then we have to  redesign our problem . So, first we calculate the design of 
the approach channel , so the first component of the  chute spillway . So, we first calculate 
the Q  using this equation , so H e is the  height total height that combination of design  
height as well as the velocity of approach . 
And assuming the coefficient of discharge as 2.18, and taking L e as the  clear wi dth 
which is again an  approximate . So, L e as given in the data , we have a  10 meter  span is 
the spillway span of 5 spans are located h ere. So, 10 meter of each wi dth and the 5  spans , 
so this come out to be  10 multiplied by 5,  so 50 meter that way going to plug here . And 
C is the coefficient of discharge . And in that way after plugging this one to equation 1,  
we have H as 12.58  meter . So, this is the H e is upstream level is designed here . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:57)  
 
Now, the upstream  water level this one is a combination of the crest  level plus H. So, the 
crest level is given in the problem as  200 meter  the spillway crest level , which is located 
here. So, 200 meter  plus our calculated height , now it comes out to be 212.8 . Now, bed 
level of river in a flank , it is given as  192 meter  in the problem . The level of bottom flank 
at which low ogee weir  is to be constructed is  192 meter . So, we plug it  here, so total 
water depth what will be it is ? This is the  subtraction of the upstream water level minus 
the bed level in the river  flank , so which comes out to be  20.8 meter .  
 Now, we assume that the channel is  1 is to 1  of the side slope . Now, the w idth of the 
channel B  is total length of the spillway that is  50 meter . And since , we assume d it as a 
trapezoidal , so 50 plus 4 into 3, so  1 is to 1 slope , so it is the total width  of the channel is  
if we assume it is as a plane , so it is trapezoidal chann el. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:37)  
 
So, we have this , so this is the  50 meter and 1  is to 1 slope, so  we calculate this as  50 
plus 4 into 3 62 meter . Now, coming to the area of the channel , it is a B  plus y into the 
depth or the y thickness here , so it comes o ut to be  1720 square meter  is the area . So, this 
is the total dimension of the channel .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:09)  
 
 
Now, coming to the velocity of approach , which is  cube the discharge divided by the 
area total area of the channel . So, since the discharg e is given in the problem is  5,000 
cumecs and a calculated area is  1720 square meter , we divide  this and we get the velocity 
of app roach , which comes out to be  2.9 meter per second . Now, the velocity head is V 
square upon  2 g, which is again a  calculation from the kinetic head , so this is now comes 
out to be  0.43 meter . 
So, once we ha ve this , we calculated the calculate the  wetted perimeter of the channel . 
So, this is  the velocity head here  0.43 meter  and now , coming to the calc ulation  of wetted 
perimeter . Since, we assume that channel as the trapezoidal , so it is the formula is B plus  
2 root 2  d, where is d is the water depth . So, B is the thickness of the channel that we 
calculate d in previous step in 2 root 2  and 2  d that we calculated early  earlier . So, the 
depth of water is coming out to be here in calculation of the wetted  perimeter . So, the 
wetted  perimeter of the channel comes out to be 120.8 meter .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 06:51)  
 
 
Now,  we plug this into equation of hydraulic radius , so since it is trape zoidal channels . 
So, R = A/ P, so  this comes out to be  14.2 meter . So, this is the hydraulic radius . And 
now, we calculate the frictional head . So, assuming  the length of the channel as 160  
meter , the head loss due to friction up to the sp illway crest is giv en by the M anning’s  
formula . So, the head loss is calculated using  the M anning’s  formula that we also 
calculate  studied in the spillway design . 
So, here we use the equation . So, here the s  comes from the M anning ’s formula . So, this 
one after plugging this , we comes  this it the equation reduced to this form . And here we 
calculate the h f the head loss due to friction , where  we assume the Manning ’s formula  
roughness coefficient as  0.019 , which is an approximation or the value for a natural bed 
channel .  
 (Refer  Slide Time: 08:25 ) 
 
Now, the level of upstream  water level . So, upstream water level plus the velocity head  
minus head loss up to the spillway crest . So, here the upstream water level was 
calculated as  212.8, and velocity head we calculate as  0.43, and h ead loss due to friction 
was 0.016 that we calculate here , and that comes out to be  213.2  meter .  
Hence, the head over the crest including the velocity of approach is  213.2  minus  200 
meter , which is given in the  problem that is spillway crest level , if you  remember . So, 
this comes out to be  H e as 13.21  meter . And now, the H d is a combination of  H a and H 
e sorry , so H e is a summation of  H a plus H  d. So, from that we can calculate the value 
of H d as H e minus H  a, so that comes out to be  12.78 meter .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 10:03)  
 
Now, we have to correct a coefficient of discharge . So, how we calculate  coefficient of 
discharge ? So, there will be  correction in number of way, so correction due to the height 
of the weir. So, this kind of  graph is  always given with along with the designed problem . 
So, h upon  H d is now we calculated h as 8  meter is given in the problem , and H d we 
calculated as 12.78 , so it comes out to be 0.63.  And H e upon  H d is again we calcu late 
as one 1.03 . So, now, we have the ratio betwe en H e by H d, whic h is 1.03  here. So, if we  
click our pen here and we take the value here upon the C by C  d, we find that C by C  d is 
comes out to be 0.98 . So, here is the value . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:20)  
  
 Now, we correct  for h upon  H d, this is given . And this is the corresponding slope at 1 is 
to 1 we assume that trapezoidal channel with 1 is to 1  slope , and the corresponding 
correction factor comes out to be 1.008 . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:43)  
 
Now, the total correction factor is now combination of C is 2.2 multiplied by 0.98,  and 
then 1.008, so  the value of corr ection factor come s out to be 2.17 . Now, coming to the 
effective length of the  spillway  crest . So, L we use this equation here . Now, we go for 
the calculation of L e. So, assume  we assume that  K p as 0.01, and K a as 0.1. So, now 
we calculate the L e  
 
as this is the  50 meter , and we plug this in the equation , and L e comes out to be 46.3 
meter . Now, the correct head will  H e is given by following equation . So, we plug 
everything back in the  equat ion of discharge that is Q  equal to . So, we plug  everything 
here, so C is 2.17, L of the channel is 46,  and the discharge is  5,000 and then we solve 
for H e.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 13:11)  
 
So, the H e is comes out to be 13.6 meter . Hence, corrected design height is a subtraction  
of H e and H a, where  H a is the velocity of ap proach , now it co mes out to be 13.2  meter . 
Hence, the design shall be don e for a design head equal to 13.2  meter . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:31)  
 
Now, design of the crest  profile . So, design o f the crest  profile is the ratio between  H a 
by H  e. So, we have the  H a as the velocity  of approach , and H e is again a combination  
H a plus H d, which comes out to be  0.0315 . And now we calculate h by H e, which 
comes out be 0.58. S ince, H a by H e lies between 0 to 0.08,  it is the value is 0.0135   
 which is between this . So, and h by  H e is 0.58,  we can  directly equation use this 
equation . So, these equations are given in the next slide . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:13)  
 
So, as we say  from the previous slide  that a downstream profile of the low ogee weir  is 
given based on the h by h by  H e value  and if how much is the ratio of h by H e ranges , 
and depending upon  H a by H e, we change the equation of the ogee downstream profile , 
so we use this kind of equation. So, we plug everything into this equation , and we get a 
value of y reduced to like this . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:49)  
  
 
 
 
And a position of now we coming to the position of the downstream apron of the 
spillway  so, the apron or the toe of the spillway should b e at such an elevation that it 
does not affect the coefficient of  discharge . So, this is the coefficient of discharge . 
Hence, the maximum apron  elevation is that T E L, the TEL  water level , and which is 
subtracted by de sign height and the depth , so which i s comes out to be 190.41  meter . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:19)  
 
Hence, provide the toe of the spillway at a level of 190.4  meter . Now, we can calculate 
the discharge intensity  downstream of the spillway piers , which is again a ratio of  
discharge divided by are a. So, area we calculate early , so this is  around 80.7 meter 
square per second . So, this is the specific d ischarge , so the unit is in meter  square per 
second . Now, if d is the width, then the velocity head will be  80 the discharge  divided by 
the depth in m eter per second . 
Now, we calculate the specific energy . Now, we going for the stilling basin design , so we 
need the specific energy , which is the depth plus the kinetic head . So, d divide d V square  
by 2 g, where we calculate from here V, and the  2 g g is the acceleration due to gravity . 
But, the specific energy of the spillway is  213 meter minus 194.4 , so it comes out to be  
23.214 . So, we plug everything in the equation of the  specific energy , we have given the  
 specific en ergy as 23.21  and specific energy u sing the equation here , so we can calculate 
d here . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:49)  
 
So, it is a quadratic equation , and by we can calculate by trial and error method , the 
quadratic equation or we can use a numerical  method or computer programming to solve 
this kind of equation , and we comes the d value as 4.2  meter . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:09)  
 
Now, the downstream  profile is design ed between the relative level  200 meter  and the 
relative apron level 190.4  meter . Hence, the maximum ordinate y is given  is the  
 subtr action between  200 and this 190.4,  which comes out to be  9.6 meter . Now, since we 
are calculating the profile , we plug everything into this equation , which we calculated 
earlier , so x comes out to be 15.08. N ow, the remaining co -ordinates of the downstream  
profile will vary between x and 15.08,  which can be worked out in table 2. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:53)  
 
So, this is the coordinates of the downstream profile . Here as you can see this is the x 
level , this is the x the horizontal and the vertical axis , it is like a projectile . So, once you 
plug this values here , you get the x value corresponding y value  the related to x value , 
you will  get this one this curve . So, this is the downstream profile of the  coordinates .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 18:19)  
 
Now, the coordin ates of the upstream profile it is vary according to this . So, this is  listed 
here. So, this way , we can design the complete  design a spillway . 
So, thank you . 