 
 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr. Poulomi Ganguli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 47 
Chute Spillway  
 
Hello, good morning . So, we in the pr evious lecture we studied about Ogee Spillway . 
Now, we are going to work on the Chute Spillway . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:26)  
 
And a chute  spillway has the some design is in the lengthy  design . So, we are going to 
split a lecture into two part that is chute  spillwa y part 1 and the part 2; and at t he end we 
are going to cover the energy dissipation of the spillway .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:41)  
 
So, the chute spillway is an open channel lik e structure , which is constru cted on a steep 
slope of a gully face with a suitable inlet . So, here is the inlet po int and outlet . So, chute 
spillway is mostly suited for earthen and the rock fill dam . And it is also known as an 
alternate name  trough spillway . And chute spillway is a  simplest type of spillway which 
can be easily provided at a rural area at a low cost . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:11)  
 
So, chute spillwa y is also known as the waste weir. A nd it is constructed in continuation 
to the dam at one way , and it may be called as a flank weir . So, if there is  damn here , so  
 it can be constructed at a  end of the damn , so here it is called as the flank wei r. And it is 
also co nstructed in a natural saddle at  the bank of a river separated from the main dam  by 
a high ridge ; in this case it is known as saddle weir . So, this is the saddle weir  here. And 
chute spillw ay is essentia lly consist s of a steeply sloping open channel , placed a long the 
dam or abutment through a flank  or a saddle .  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:05)  
 
So, the chute spillway generally leads water from the reservoir  to downstream . The base 
for the channel is usually ma de of reinforc ed concrete slab around 25 to 50 centimetre  
thick . The chu te is sometimes  of constant weight  but is usually narrowed for economy 
for there  to trade off between economy and the best design cons truction and they have a 
widened  near the end to r educe the discharge velocity . Now, in for designing a chute 
spillway , we also need an expansion joint which is  usually provided in the chute at an 
interval of about 10 meter  in either direction .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 02:56)  
 
So, the expansion joints should be made of water tight  so as to avoid any  under -seepage 
page or any trouble some effect s. So, under -drains are also provided ; so, as to drain the 
water which may seep through the trough  bottom and a side walls . The under -drain  
maybe in the form of perforate d steel pipe or clay tiles or rock  filled trenches . And the 
shape of the chute  must be high enough , and should be at least be able to maintain a 
supercritical flow to avoid any unstable flow condition . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:33)  
  
 So, here sample chute spil lway is shown . So, this is the inlet of this spillway . And here a 
ogee curve  is placed here . And this is the steep slope channel , and this is again flow  to 
outlet . So, this is a way a chute spillway  looks . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:02)  
 
Now, the basic compone nt of the chute spillway as  you can see this structure here , the 
entrance channel or  the approach channel . Then there were control structure which is 
here and ogee curve  is placed , and there are many  control structure , but here shown as 
you ogee curve . And then chute channel or the di scharge career which is this part the  
steep slope channel . And the energy dissipation arrangement in the form of a stil ling 
basin , so this is this part the energy dissipation arrangement is here . So, there are four 
basic compon ent for the chute spillway .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 04:48)  
 
Now, coming to  each of this component one by one ; first we will start with approach 
channel . So the, what is approach channel here ? It leads the reservoir water up to the 
control structure . It may be straight or curved in a plane . And it is generally in 
trapezoidal shape , and the slope is kept as one is to one . And it is banks may be parallel , 
convergent , divergent or combination of these  and maybe vertical or sloping . It may 
ensure minimum head loss t hrough the channel  and to obtain uniformity of the flow over 
the control structure .  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:25)  
  
 
 
 
Now, how to design the approach channel ? The friction head lost in the channel up to 
silver cre st may be calculated by M anning’s equation w hich is it h f  is the friction in 
head , S f multiplied by L, where S  f is the energy gradient between two points , n is the 
Manning’s roughness coefficient and velocity v is the velocit y of the channel . So, this is 
by simple equation here , v equal to 1 upon  n R to the power 2 by 3 and S to the power 1 
by 2 which is plugged here as a the so here it is sh own. So, you plug he re it is v square n 
square and then the S  you calculated here . So, if you square it , so it will be  1 upon n 
square R  to the power 4 by 3. And you get a  value of a S, so where S  is plugged here . So, 
in this way , you ca n get a  h f value .  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:45)  
 
Now, the control structure , so there are different control s structure . Since the chute  
spillway is provided in a flank  or saddle , ogee weir is generally provided as a cont rol 
structure . The profile of this  spillway is made in accordance with the  shape  of the lower 
nappe of the free falling j et. So, theoretically , adaptation of such profile should cause no 
negative pressure on the cr est. And negative pressure causes what the fluctuation of 
head , and thereby instability of the flow  and increased load on the structure .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 07:21)  
 
So, here you can say the profile of the ogee weir to be used a s a control structure . So, 
here h is the height of the crest  from the bed level as we explain  this also in the design of 
ogee  spillway . H d is again the design  head, H a is the velocity of approach . So, H e is 
combination of H d and H  a and this is the downstream profile here . The downstream 
profile here and the upstream  and a upstream profile  should merge  with downstream  
profile at an one is to one slope . And here this there will be a discharg e carrie r and a 
gamma is the radius of reverse curve which joins the downstream  profile to di scharge 
carrier . So, this is  calculated using t his term gamma . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:22)  
  
 Now, design of the crest profile . So, now,  if H a, H e and h are known , then we have to 
decide the upstream profile and the downstream profile . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08 :35) 
 
So, the equation for downstream profile of the low ogee weir is given in this  following 
equation . These are all empirical equation which is  fix by US army of course,  through 
some studies . And h by H e a range of values are given here sorry . And for different 
values of H a by H  e, there are different value of h by H e and  corresponding equation 
for downstream profile are  given here . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:08)  
  
 Now, the coordinates of the upstream profile for the low ogee weir , so x by H e and if  H 
a by H e is zero and H a by H  e is 0.08, and H a by H  e is 0.12. H ow this profile varies , 
so this kind of table is given and for calculating the design problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:32)  
 
Now, chute channel or the discharge carrier design . The water spills o ver the control 
structure flows through the chute s channel . And the minimum slope  of the chute  is 
governed by the condition that the supercritical flow must be maintained . So, it is 
generally rectangular in shape wit h a bottom width is equal to L . 
(Refer S lide Time: 09:57)  
  
 Now, coming to design of  the vertical curve of the chute , so this is a concave curve . So, 
in this case a concave curve was  assumed . So, this is the concave sha pe. Whenever the 
slope of the chute  changes from steeper  to milder , a concave  vertical curve sh all be 
provided . So, here we given a concave vertical shape . And in no case in the radius , so 
this is a concave . So, this is a curved surface . So, this the radius in no case this radius 
should be less than 10 d, where d  is the depth of wa ter here . So, minimum this curvature 
is given as 10 d. And this  is a steeper slope , this is a junction point , and this is a milder 
slope . So, it will gradually go like this from steeper to mild er. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:55)  
 
Now, the convex curve .; so, this case  whenever the chute changes from steeper  to milder  
concave curve shall be provided . Now, in which case the convex curve , so whenever 
slope  of the  chute  changes just opposite milder to steeper  in that case a convex vertical 
curve should be provided . So, this is the convex shape here . So, here the slope going 
from milder  to steeper ; and this is a junction point . So, the equation for this is given as  
 
whereas  phi is the slope angle of the floor at upstream , and d plus h v  is the spec ific 
energy of flow  at junction point , K is assuming  generally as constant is 1.5. So, using 
this equation  we can calculate the slope  the y at a given x .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 12:11)  
 
So, stilling basin , stilling basin we keep it for energy dissipation which is the last 
compon ent of the spillway . So, this is a structure in which energy dissi pation action is 
confined . And in this  energy dissipation structure and approach a aprons are provided 
with auxiliary devices . So, what are  the auxiliary devices here chute blocks sills and 
baffle walls , these are usually work ed as an auxiliary devices . And it helps in dissipating 
the energy of flow by offering resistance to the flow . So, this is for the stilling basin . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:53)  
  
 
 
 
Now,  what happens to the stilling basin ? So, once the flow o f water at a high speed is 
falls and there is a  occurrence of hydraulic jump as you know from the principle of fluid 
mechanics . So, hydraulic jump principle  the it is the ratio between y 2 and y 1, where is a 
critical depth and which  is again a function of the F roude number . So, y 1 is pre jump 
depth and y 2 is the post jump depth , where y 1 and y 2 are the conjugate depth. And a 
Froude number is given by the ratio between v  divided by acceleration due to square root 
of acceleration due t o gravity and y 1 what is the pre jump depth . So, depending upon the 
Froude  number , the velocity of flow  can be critical , subcritical or the  supercritical . And 
based upon the velocity of flow  and we can design the stilling basin . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:56)  
 
So, different jum ps are classified according to F 1 or the F roude number  and accordingly  
stilling basins are provided . So, F 1 if it is 4.5, it is a supercritical flow and U.S.B.R 
stilling basin 2 is used in this case . So, this is  the kind of stilling ba sins are  provided and  
sorry . So, if F 1 is 4 greater than 4.5, the jump is well balanced and steady . So, in this 
case the stilling basin 2 is provided . And however, if the jump is between 2.5 to 4.5, it is 
oscillating and in this case the stilling basin 4 is provided .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 14:41)  
 
 
Now, the leng th of the basin varies between L  this is the equation how that we design the 
length of the basin which is a  difference between y 1 that is pre jump , and y 2 is the post 
jump and which is multiplied by  5 is the  length of the basin . And for basin 2  depending 
upon the F roude  number , we again fix the length of the  basin like this . So, if the F roude 
number is 4, so  we ge nerally kept as 3.6 of y 2. If the F roude number is 6, we kept is a 4 
times of y 2. If it is 8, 4.2 y 2; and if it is more than 10, then we generally kept as 4.3 of y 
2 where y 1 is the pre jump height  or a depth , and y 2 is the post jump depth of the 
stilling basin .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 15:33)  
 
 
 
So, thank you . 