Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 31 
Hydraulic and Structural Design  of Gully  Control Structures of drop Spillway  
 
So, welcome s tudents to our next  lecture it is on a Hydraulic and Structural Design of 
Gully Control Structures  of drop Spillway . So, we will design by using many  number of 
examples  in the subsequent slides . So, this lecture is  solving many examples  first our 
design is  for free flow condition .  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:59)  
 
So, the first case can be the values of Q, F are known on way to find the combination of 
capital  H and small  h for desired Q and minimum freeboard . If you will see this figure  
small  h is nothin g, but the summation of capital S that is the depth of water in the above 
the crest of the weir h v is here is a  kinetic  head loss and small f is the freeboard .  
So, in this case the design discharge Q is known , capital F is known from this figure you 
can see  and you have to make a combination between capital H and small  h. So, the 
value of capital H or the length of the weir generally considered depending on the  width 
approach channel or the existing site .  (Refer Slide Time: 01:50)  
 
So, for this in the step 1, you have to  use the formula as you have talked in the previous 
class , 
 
  
This is for SI unit and then you have to obtain a relationship between L and small h .  
We can do it by using some trial and error approach , in this case  you have to first assume  
small  h then you have to compute the value of L by using this equation . Then you have 
to check whether this is tallying with the practical value of capital L that  is the length of 
the weir. And depending upon the site condition you can select the suitable combin ation 
of small h and capital L.  (Refer Slide Time: 02:44)  
 
In the step 3, for free board you can use the weir equation that equal to that is given 
 
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:31)  
 So, this will be  more clear when will be solving some problems . Suppose this one 
example , Q is given as 10 cume c, capital F is 2.5 meter and this is a free flow condition . 
So, the tail water is not obstructing and we have to find a combinat ion of the length of a 
weir L and h  is the depth of weir for the desired Q and the mi nimum  freeboard that is 
small f .  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:58)  
 
For the solution you have to use this  formula   
 
and by putting the known value s Q and capital F and C is known that 1.84 for 
rectangular your F is 2.5. So, you can get one relation ship between  L and  h. So, your L 
equa l to 6.386 divided by h to the power 3 by 2. So, you have to make a combination 
between L and h. So, in this case your assume the value of h and get the value of capital 
L.  
  (Refer Slide Time: 04:35)  
 
So, this is shown in this figure in this table , you can see that different trail valu es are of h 
we have  started from h equal to  1 and up to  1.5. So, when  I am using h equal to  1.5, I am 
getting the computer value of L as 3.48 meter . And that is almost matching with the  
practical value of  L that is your edge consider as 3.5 meter and the corresponding 
discharge is about 10.06, which is nearly equal to  the target that is your given discharge 
of 10 cumec . So, in this case we can select the length of weir as 3.5 meter and the depth 
as 0.5 meter and we should not that the selection of L and h that depends on the site 
conditions .  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:31)  
  
 
 
In the step 3, you have to use the weir formula to estimate what is your freeboard , the 
small f . So, you have to estimate what is the  value of small f , so, that equal to  small h 
minus the kinetic energy weir plus the depth weir. 
So, before that for that you have to calculate what is the value of capital H plus V a 
square by 2 g by using the your formula . So, here we get  it is 1.04 becau se, Q is known it 
is 10.06 and C is 1. 84 and L is 3.5 meter . So, by putting this values we can get small f 
equal to  0.46 meter . So; that means, you have to provide  0.46 meter of freeboard , h equal 
to small h equal to  1.5 meter and L equal to  3.5 meter .  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:26)  
 
For the  design of free flow  condition , this is case 2 suppose the known values are small  h 
that is the depth of weir length of weir L capital F and C, C is equal to 1.84 that is known 
for rectangular and you have to find the desig n discharge that equal to  Q. The solution in 
this case is simple as we need to put the known values in the equation that is  Q equal to 
C L h to the power 3 by 2 by using weir formula .  (Refer Slide Time: 07:00)  
 
For design under  submerged flow condition , you can see this figure the tail water is 
above the crest level . That means  what about H2 height is there that is above the crest  
level . So, you are getting submerged to be able to cons ider the effect of submergence  one 
must first recognize  those situation s where the effective like ly to exist for this purpose .  
We must have a reasonably accurate estimate of the tail water elevations . So, this 
depends on the accurate computation of the water surface profiles for various discharges 
which are computed based on  the known  upstream stage -discharge relationship which 
are called as also called as normal rating curves . So, many times we have the normal 
rating curves  and by using those rating curves  so, generally convert the stage value into 
discharge or  vice versa .  (Refer Slide Time: 08:01)  
 
The design for su bmerged flow condition is likely to occur specifically the submergence 
is likely to occur because , at the upper end of a drainage ditch where the spillways design 
for a discharge capacit y greater than the averag e bank full capacity of the drainage ditch 
below . 
Where, the spillway crest elevation is below average ground or bank elevation  so as to 
provide a definite approach channel to the spillway for low flows . And the spillways is 
located on a relatively deep gully or channel just upstream from a highway cu lvert and 
earth fill where which require and permit a considerable head on the culvert to discharge 
the spillway design flood .  (Refer Slide Time: 08:51)  
 
The submer ged flow is also likely to occur at a locati on where the channel below the 
spillway  so flat in gra de, or so small in cross sectional  area, or so high resistance to flow 
that it is stage discharge curve indicates water surface elevations  above the spillway 
crest .  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:11)  
 
For the design of submerged  flow case , the submerged  discharge is related to free 
discharge by using the equation  
    or     
  . Where Q f is the discharge in the free flow condition and Q s is the discharge under 
submerge d flow condition . So, in this case you w ill get a specific ratio  so, that ratio the 
Q s divided by Q f equal to  R and similarly , small q s is a s ubmerge discharge for unit 
length of weir and small q f is the free discharge for unit length of weir. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:55)  
 
You can see this plo t, in this plot  in the x  axis you will get H2 minus H1  that is the ratio 
of submergence or submergence ratio and  the y  axis we are getting R. So, that is equal to 
Q s divided by Q f and for a specific channel you can get such type of rating curves .  
So, this is a plot between R versus s ubmergence ratio that  it is H2 by H1 curve and here 
you can see H1 is the upstream head of water  and H2 is the submergence which is above 
the crest level . So, this is the crest level. (Refer Slide Time: 10:48)  
 
In this case , the known values are the design discharge Q, the t ail water height H2 is 
known , small  f the free board is known and C is equal to  1.84 for the rectangular weir. 
We have to find the combination of L and H with the associated submergence . For the 
solution on e should remember that to  for flowing water generally H1 should be greater 
than H2, the upstream water level should be always greater than that of the downstream 
or tail  water level that is H2.  
So, H1 equal to in this case small  h minus f because , H1 is the depth of flowing water  
and small h is the depth of the weir depth  and small f is your freeboard . So, naturally you 
will get if small h is assume d you will get what is the value of H1 so, that equal to  h 
minus f , you can see this table . 
And by the weir formula you can get Q f and the freeboard condition free flow condition 
that equal to  1.84 into H1 to the power 3 by 2. And you can calculate what is the value of 
H2 divided by H1? 
So, once you have calculate d this value H2 divided by H1, you can estimate that is the 
value of R. So, R equal to H2 divided by H1, then by using the R versus H2 divided by 
H1 curve as well shown in the previous  slide  you can estimate the value of q s that equal 
to R into q f. And from here you can get what is the value of L. So, L equal to  capital Q divided by Q s this capital Q is given  and you have estimated the 
value of Q s from the graph , so, you can get what is the value of L.  
So, in this case H2 is known , if L is fixed  then plot small  h versus L and then  interpolate  
small  h for given L.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:11)  
 
So, this is your solving one example , suppose  the required discharge capacity is given as 
13.6 cumec , submergence for Q 13.6 is given 0.75 meter that equal to  H2 equal to 0.75 
meter . Selected freeboard  that your s mall f that equal to  0.23 meter and the know the 
discharge coefficient for rectangular is 1.84. 
So, the following that to  find the practical combination of small  h and capital L for a 
weir that will carry the required peak discharge of 13.6 cumec with the associated 
submergence then the chosen freeboard . So, that you have to find out .  (Refer Slide Time: 13:57)  
 
So, this is a solution approach , the solution is carried out by using trial and error method 
in a tabular format . With begin with assuming  a value  of small  h in column 1 we can see 
we are assumed value of  1.07 meter , in such a way that H1 is greater than H2. So, the 
value of H2 is given that is 0.75 so, we have selected small h 1.07 so that H1 equal to 
here 0.84. Then we have  estimated the value of q f that is your free flow condition . So, 
that equal to  1.64 by using  this formula .  
Now, you can get the value of H2 divided by H1, here H1 is 0.84 and H2 is given  point 7 
5. So, by using that you can estimate  what is the value of H2 divided by H1 and the  equal 
to R so, R equal to  also 0.89.  
Then, by using this R you can estimate what is the value of  q s by using the graph 
between R and the ratio between q s and q f. So, you will get q s equal to  R into q f and 
then you can get the length of weir equal to  capital Q that is your given discharge divided 
by the estimated  q s value ok. So, by that way we can solve for L.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:52)  
 
So, here you can see  this is a solution approach for H2 divided by H1 equal to  0.89, this  
is 0.89 and we got R equal to  0.1. So, here you will get H 2 divided by H1 0.89 here and 
correspondingly you are getting R equal to 0.1.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:20)  
 
So, R is obtained from R versus H2 divided by H1 curve and then values in column 7 
and 8 are obtained . You can se e the values in  7 and 8 are obtained  we have filled up the 
table whatever we have shown for and in this case we are getting L equal to  83.02  or 
approximately it is 83 ok. So, this is the solution for submergence .  (Refer Slide Time: 16:56)  
 
So, in this ca se we got the that if you have  assume small h equal to  1.67 you are getting 
L equal to  6 meter . So, are L is given as 6 meter  so, you will get h equal to  1.67 and L 
equal to 6 meter in this case .  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:15) . 
 
The 2nd case the known values are L, small h , small f , crest elevation , the crest elevation 
is generally given to estimate what is the upstream water depth above the crest level  from 
the stage discharge relationship . Then you have to find the discharge capacity Q. The solution of Q involves different steps , in step 1; you have to  estimate what is the value of 
Q f by using the weir formula .  
So, Q  f is the free flow condition discharge  so, that equal to  1.84 into L H1 to the 3 by 2 
and here H1 equal to  small h minus f , f is the free boar d. In a 2nd step you have to go for 
trial and error method as you have done before . The process begins by assuming Q value 
and then obtaining tail water  elevation H2 from the Q versus H2 curve . With known H2 
divided by H1 that equal to  R whatever we have o btained as in case 1, we can estimate Q 
s that is the su bmerge flow discharge .  
The process  ends when the assume d discharge and estimated Q s match. Will see this 
table , first you have to estimate or you have  to go for a trial value of Q you have to 
assume  some value of Q, get the value of H2 from  the given H2 and Q curve , get the 
value of R which is nothing , but H2 divided by H1.  
Where H1 equal to small h minus f and that is known  and you will get Q s equal to  R 
into Q f as you have done in step 1 by usin g the weir formula Q f equal to 1.84 into L H1 
to the power 3 by 2 and when Q is nearly equal to Q s the trial Q is the final value .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:08)  
 
So, this is one example you can see the weir dimensions are given L equal to 5.5 meter 
and the  depth is 1 meter , crest elevation is 194.8 , freeboard is 0.15, discharge coefficient 
1.84 and the given discharge H2 Q is given in FPS unit we have whatever plot is given that is in FPS unit. You have to  find the discharge Q of the weir operating under th e 
specified tail  water condition with a freeboard f  equal to  0.15 meter as specified .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:43)  
 
You can see  this plot whatever given the rating curve is given between tail water  
elevation and discharge this elevation is not the water depth H1. R ather  this is H1 plus 
the crest  level , the crest level elevation .  
You can see this the crest  elevation is given 639 feet and here all are in feet, the tail 
water elevation is in  feet and here the dis charge is  in c f s . So, here the tail  water 
elevation  equal to  H2 plus crest elevation . So, here the tail water elevation  this height  is 
equal to  the crest elevation plus the value of  H2.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:44)  
 
So, for this calculation  you have to go for a trail value of Q that if you have taken  here 6 
cumec , which equal to 212 cubic feet per second  and from this graph you can get for Q 
equal to  212 c f s here I can get the tail water elevation this value which is approximately  
195.32  meter . 
 Hence, H2 equal to tail water elevation  minus crest elev ation  so, that equal to  195.32 
minus 194.8 in meter  and which  equivalent to  639 feet. So, this is equal to  639 feet so, 
194.8  meter equal to  639 feet so, you will get approximately  0.52 meter . So, the tail  
water elevation is  0.52 meter .  (Refer Slide Time:  21:59)  
 
 
 
 
So, in the step 1, the given value is h and f  so, you will get  
 
that equal to  1 minus 0.15 so, that equal to  0.85 meter . And Q f by using weir formula 
you can get  
 
so, that equal to 793 meter cube per second .  
And in this case  you have to assume the assume  value is  6 you got H2 equal to  0.52, the 
value of R that equal to 0.62 sorry 61. So, H2 divided by H1 equal to  0.61 so, that equal 
to H2 divided by 0.85 and R you can get from the  curve R versus H2 divided by H1 
curve ok . So, you can get Q s equal to R Q f that equal to 7.93 R so, that equal to  7.45. 
But in this case you will see this is very high because , Q is not matching with Q s. (Refer Slide Time: 23:17)  
 
So, you have to again continue  the trial and error process . For this you can se e we have  
got H2 divided by H1 equal to  0.61, here H2 divided by H1 equal to  0.61 in this table 
and correspondingly  you got R equal to  0.94. So, you can get the R value of 0.94 from 
this plot  and that we are using in the calculation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23: 43) 
 
Now, for different trail values of Q in this table you can see that if  I am taking Q equal to  
6.8 cumec  then, I am getting Q s equal to  6.82 and that is nearly equal to  design 
discharge is Q . So, in this case  I can use Q s value as 6.8 cumec .  Thank you. 