 
 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute Of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture -36 
Structural De sign of Drop Spillway – 3 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:26)  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:28 ) 
 
Welcome students . So, this is our next lecture  on Design of Drop S pillway . So, in this 
lecture , we will be talking about the  evolution of  uplift pressure , and what is the  
 condition of overturning , and all the things will be solving by using a  example p roblem . 
So, all the se problems are connected with our past lectures . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:52)  
 
So, while solving these problems , you should remember or you  should go through all the 
previous lectures , what  I have  already told to you . Suppose , we wi ll be solving this  
problem , it is in continuation with th e previous lecture of week 7  and lecture number 5. 
So, here the given length of apron is 4.5 meter , the drop is  2.5 meter , thickness of apron 
is 0.3 meter , depth of toewall and depth of cut off wall there  of 1.2 metre , as you can see  
in this figure .  
The thickness of toewall and cutoff wall both are of  0.35 metre , you can see in this 
figure . Assume  that the downstream channel has been eroded  to elevation of bottom of 
apron  that means, this channel has eroded  up to the bottom of apron up to this line , so 
that mean this shows that the tail water is up to this depth , that is equal to 3.5 metre in 
this slide . 
So, our question is that estimate the uplift pressure on base of the structure , and draw the 
uplift press ure diagram for t ype-b drainage with flow condition . So, before  solving this 
type problem , first we have to  clearly visualise what is given in the problem . You can see 
this diagram , try to understand this diagram , it is full flow condition . So,  full flow 
condition implies  that there is  water above the crest . So, here the water level is given as  
 H is equal to  0.75 metre , and there is tail water , so that means, are the dumps  inside , you 
have tail water , so that it is full flow condition . 
So, we know that the uplift pressure is due to the soil pore  pressure  that means, there is  
standing water and  becaus e of this standing water are submerged with  the pore  pressure  
generally develops , and that is exerting pressure of what at the foundation material . So, 
for this, we have  to use the as we have already discussed before that for solving the uplift 
pressure , we have to use the Lane’s C reep theory , the Weighted C reep length has to be 
estimated , so that means, the uplift face  are developed in this diagram you  can see al ong 
the line a , b, c, d, e, f, g, h, and i. So, this is the contact surface between the structure and 
the furvius foundation material . 
So, because of the standing water on the sub stream side  as a large in the downstream 
side the pore water pressure  develo ps in this foundation material th at is why the pore 
pressure or the operate pressure is created are these contact surfaces of the structure and 
the foundation material . So, once this is clear , then we can go for calculation of the uplift 
pressure . 
(Refer S lide Time: 04:36)  
 
 
So, this is a type-b type of drainage  with full  flow condition . And for that you have to 
estimate the  Y 2 the value of  Y 2. You can see in this figure , the value of  Y 2 what is this  
 value of  Y 2, this Y 2 is nothing  but it is the dept h below the saturatio n water table . So, 
this Y 2 depth is the depth or the submerged weight  of this  backfill materi al, which is 
computed just above the  upfront and the saturation line. So, this you can estimate from  
the table , we have already solve this type of problem in  our previous classes . 
So, in this condition from this table , you can see for high water table and relative 
permeability of foundation  backfill  material  equal , and type b  drainage . For full flow  
condition , we can estimate  Y 2 equal to t plus s 0.15F. So, here t is given  0.75 that is the 
depth of tail water , S is 0.3, and F  is 2.5 meter , so we will get  1.425 meter , so that means, 
the height of this s ubmerged backfill material  from the top of this apron is 4 point  1.425 
meter . So, by knowing t his one , now we will go to our next step. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:14)  
 
So, in this step , we have to  identify the line of creep along the contact surface of the 
structure and foundation , which is along the line a , b, c, d, e, f, g, h, and i. So, for 
solving , you should understand the whole picture here . So, if can understand this whole 
picture here , it may differ to estimate the uplift pressure . So, as shown in this figure , we 
have already estimated the what is the value  Y 2 that is 1.425 meter , so that is the depth 
of water table in backfill below saturation . And this is nothing  but your sub merged 
weight , so that means pore water pressure is created in this  field material , which is up to 
a depth of  Y 2, which is above the apron  this is above the apron .  
 So, to get the value of h  i, because we have taken our line of creep as a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, 
and i, and here our contact pressure or the uplift pressure generally  develop s here . Here 
in our uplift pressure develops , which is vertically upward . So, along this line, we have 
to estimate what is our pressure . So, at this point  i, what is my water height , so that is 
given by the depth h  i. So, here h i you can say h i equal to  1.425 that is  Y 2 plus the 
apron thickness of  0.3 meter , so I  will get h  i equal to  1.725  minute . And you know that  
this is our  water height , so gamma w into h  i that is the specific wei ght of water into the 
water height that is h  i, you will get how much is your pore water pressure or the uplift 
pressure at point  i. 
Similarly , we have  to esti mate how much is the water press ure above the point h , g, f, e, 
d, c, b, and a . So, what will be the water height above point a , here it will be  equal to the 
tail water that is  0.75 plus s that is  0.3 plus my apron  thickness that equal to 0.3, so  I will 
get h a  equal to  1.35 meter . So, here the water pressure above point a will be h a  that 
equal to  1.35 metre into gamma w that equal to  1000 kg per meter cube that is the 
specific weight of water . 
And once these pressures are calculated at  i and a , and from  i to a along the line a , b, c, d, 
e, f, g, h, i, so this is  my contact surface , and there are horizontal line s or horizontal 
surfaces . The  horizontal surfaces are  i, h, g, f, then e , d, and c , b. So, this horizontal lines  
will be taken as one-third  of that length , so that will be the weighted  length for the  
horizontal lines you know this  Lane’s C reep theory , so that is taken as one -third of the 
horizontal length . And the vertical or strip lengths are a, b, c, d, e, f, and g , h, and they 
will be taken as full. So, by using this concept, we can now go for our next  calculation .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 10:17)  
 
 
The 2 nd step is  that we have to  estimate the hydrostatic pressure head at point a that I 
have  already told you , so that that equal to depth of the tail water above point a , so that  
 
so that equal  to 1.35 meter , so this is equal to  1.35 meter . And the  hydrostatic pressure at 
point a that is equal  to P a,  
 
we can calculate as  1000 1.35 that equal to 1350  kg per meter square . Now next step is 
that the depth of  water table above point  i that will be equal to  Y 2, this is  
 
so we will get  1.725 meter . And the hydrostatic pressure at  point  i will be equal to 
gamma w h  i, so that equal to  1000 into 1.725, so  you will get 1725  kg per metre square . 
So, we can see along this cont act surface a , b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i at point a , we ha ve the 
pressure of 1350  kg per metre square . And at point  i, we have  the pressure of 1725  kg 
per meter square . So, once  this p ressure  difference is there , so it is mostly the pressure is 
distribute d proportionately at the weighted  creep distance . So, we can estimate what is 
our weighted creep distance  along the line a , b, c, d, e, f, g, h, and i. So, by getting the  
 weighted creep  distance , I can estimate what is the pressure va riation or in cremental 
pressure per unit creep  distance . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:22)  
 
 
 
So, my first calculation will be to estimate  the weighte d creep distance that equal to L W, 
so that is equal to sigma L V plus one -third of L H, so  we can get  L V those are the strip 
lines or vertical distances . So, these  are ab plus c  d plus e  f plus g  h, and these values are 
1.2, because all these depths are cut  of wall to ewall both are of 1.2  meter , so 1.2 into 4 
you will get , so that (Refer Time: 12:49) 4.8 meter and one -third o f the all the horizontal 
lines . The original lines are b , c, d, e, f, g, and h , i, and these values are given as  0.35, 
3.1, 0.35, and  0.5 as shown in this figure . So, we will  get L W equal to 6.233  meter , so 
that is my weighted creep  distance . So, one impo rtant thing here is that the vertical 
distance are  taken as whole and the 1 by 3  weight has been taken for the horizontal 
distances . 
Then compute the change in pressure per meter of weighted creep distance . So, for that 
we have to get delta p , delta p  equa l to P a minus P  i divided by L W, so  we will be 
getting 60.1916  kg per metre square per metre  60.16 kg per  metre square per metre  
 length of weighted creep  distance . So, this is based on the assumption that the pressure  
between the points a and  i vary in direct proportion to the weighted creep  distance . So, if 
you want to estimate the pressure  level or  the pressure for a specific creep distance , then 
we have to multiply delta p with that weighted creep distance , then we will get the 
pressure at in between p oints that is b, c, d, e, f, g, and h . Now, we will go for our next 
calculation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:36)  
 
So, this shows  that how the pressure varies in between the points b to  h, and then to get 
the total uplift pressure . So, first try to understand th is table . The 1st column shows the 
points a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, and i. 2nd column shows the weighted creep distance between  
points , so these are the lengths ab equal to 1.2  meter ; bc that is the horizontal distance . 
So, in this case  bc equal to  0.35, so  it will be weighte d value will be divided by 3, so  we 
will get  0.177 meter ; cd is the vertical distance , so that is equal to 1.2 metre ; and de is 
horizontal distance , so that is taken as the weighted divided by 3, so  we wil l get 1.033  
meter . 
Now, our 3 rd column shows that it is incremental pressure between points . So, we have 
the pressure at location a or at point a 1350,  we have already estimated this one . So, my 
incremental is here delta p into column 2, so  that is  60.16 our delta p value that we  
estimate d in the previous slide into one point is our distance , so I will get  72.19 kg per 
metre square  that means, this 72.19 kg per meter square is the incremental value on the  
 value of  P a. So, for getting P b that is pressure at  point b, we will get P a value plus the 
value that is  the incremental value estimated  at column 3, so  we will get  1350 plus 72.19 
that e qual to 1422.19  kg per metre square . 
Similarly , at point c , we have the weighted creep distance that equal to  0.177 meter . So, 
the incremental  value wi ll be 7.02 kg per  metre square . And my pressure at point c  will 
be P b value plus  this incremental value of  7.02, so  we will be getting  1429.21 . Similarly , 
can calculate for point d  so, we have  point d  is fifteen  1501.40. A nd for point e , it is 
1563.57  kg per meter square . 
Then the average pressure between the points will be estimated as average of P b and P  
c, it is in between the average pressure between b and c , so that will equal to P  b plus P c 
divided by 2, so  we will be get 1425.70,  because the bc is  a horizontal distance . So, if the 
pressure , the point  pressure changes at b and c , but still then the average because it is the  
horizontal distance , the pressure will act  uniformly alo ng this horizontal line , so that is 
why we can take average pressure , so that equal to 1425.70. S imilarly , P de, so that equal 
to 1532.49 . 
Now, the base  area for bc per  unit width of the structure , so that equal to  0.35 A bc. So, 
you can see the length of b c equal to  0.35, so 1  meter is perpendicular to the plane of this 
pape r, so that is equal to  0.35 into 1, so  we will be get  0.35 metre square . So, pressure 
into the area , you will get the total force , so here you will be getting 499  kg that is your 
uplift load for b c along the line b c. Similarly , you can calculate for line de. So, here the 
base area is 3.1,  you can see here 3.1,  and uplift load  will be this P  de 32.49  into 3.1, so  
we will be get 4750.7. So, similarly we can go for calculati on of other points .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 19:24)  
 
The next slide shows  our calculation fo r the points f , g, h, and i. So, here you can see ef 
is a vertical line , so it is 1.2  meter . Similarly , you can estimate our incremental pressure 
that equal to  72.19 kg per meter square . And h f is estimated 1635.76  that equal to h  e 
plus column 3. And the  average pressure is estimated a s 1642.8  kg per meter square . A 
fg equal to  0.35, you can see here it is  0.35. And multiplication of this column 5  with 6, 
we will get 575  kg that is our uplift load . Similarly , for fg the weighted creep distance is 
0.177 , and here we will get incremental load as ; our incremental pressure as 7.02  kg per 
meter square . So, pressure at point g , you will be getting 1642.79 . 
Similarly,  for g h, we are getting uplift load as 860. And my aver age pressure as 1720,  
and finally, you can  say h  i that the pressure  at point  i is 1725  kg per metre square  that 
we ha ve alrea dy estimated before . So, total up lift load will be summation of all these f 
values , so that is coming as 6684.7  kg. So, by knowing the pressure at different  points , 
we can develop our pressure diagram , because that is our second question second bit of 
the question , so we can develop our pressure diagram .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 21:18)  
 
Sorry. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:32)  
 
So, this shows our  uplift pressure diagram . You can say all these values have been 
computed  P a, we have estimated  1350 , P b 1422 . So, here P a the length is  1350 , then P 
b is 1422, P c 1429, P d 1501,  P e 1564, P f 1636,  P g just 1643, P h 1715, and P  i 17.25  
kg per metre square , so that means, this length is or this value is 1725  kg per m etre 
square . So, by knowing these pressure values , we have developed ou r uplift pressure 
diagram .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:35)  
 
Now our next  problem will be to calculate whether the structure is safe against 
overturning or not . So, all these competitions have been t aken forward from the previous 
lectures . So, this is a problem , which we  have already solved in lecture 4 of week 7  in 
similar way you can solve it . And those pressure calculations or  force calculations can be  
followed th ose type of  pressure calculations , the same procedure we can follow also in 
this lectures , because we  cannot repeat those  things to save our time . 
So, now try to understand the problem the equivalent fluid  density for all the horizontal 
pressure process  on the given drop spillway equal to 805 kg per meter cube . You will  
remember in our  lecture 4 of week 7  that we have estimated what is our horizontal 
pressure load , then the whole pressure horizontal  pressure is converted into equivalent 
fluid pressures , which is having a weight density specified density of 805  kg per metre 
cube . So, you have to correlate this problem with  those  that class . 
Now, second is compute  the contact pressure in the drop spillway with the  spillway 
operating at design discharge capacit y, design discharge  capacity  means it is flowin g full 
the flow condition is full flow condition . Check if the structure is safe against  
overturning . You know that why the overturning occurs , the overturning occurs  because 
of our horizontal pressure process , and the uplift pressure process , which is acting 
upward  and that is counted by our vertical forces . And the vertical forces are because of 
the weight s of water on the structure as well as the backfill material .  
 So, by using this , we have  to estimate the bending moment , the moment along some 
reference axis that  I will talk about here . Then you have  to say whether the structure is 
safe against overturning or not . Here the given  value s of unit weight of dry back  filler 
gamma d that equal t o 1050  kg per metre  cube , unit weight of moist sand and gravel are 
2000  kg per metre cube , and that of  concrete is 2400  kg per meter cube , void ratio of 
backfill that equal to 0.35 . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:19)  
 
The first step is that identify the nature of forces . So, these a re all the force diagram , we 
have already done in our previous classes , how to estimate the different forces by using 
our phaser  triangles . So, here you can see in this figure , there are total 15 forces acting . 
Among this 15 forces  F 1 is the equivalent horizontal pressure force . So, F one is the 
equivalent horizontal pressure force , which has to be estimated as you have done bef ore 
in the previ ous lecture that is lecture 4 of week 7 . Then F 2 so, this F 1  force it is 
horizontal , so it is a  turning force , it is the moment is turning in nature . F 2 that is your 
weight o f concrete headwall , you can say F 2  is our weight of concrete headwall . You 
know the concrete density , and the area you can calculate for unit depth or unit width , so 
that you  can get  volume , so you can estimate what is the force . 
Then F  3 is weight of concrete apron . F 4  is the weight of concrete cu toffwall ; these are 
cutoffwall . F 5  is for toewall . F 6  is for concr ete endsill . F 7  is weight of saturated sand , 
because in this condition by you will consider the drainage type-b, you know that this is  
 my water table , so this soil will be saturated one . So, for this you have to estimate what is 
the value of  Y 2, hear it is  1.425 meter , so that is my F 7. W hat is F 8? F 8 is the weight 
of moist sa nd. You can see this is weight of  moist sand , because our water is here , so 
water table is here , so naturally this soil or back fill metal will be mo ist sand. 
F 9 is weight of water above crest . So, this is the weight of water above crest , because 
the water i s flowing full , which is having a height of  0.75 meter . Then F 10 is weight of 
tailwater  on apron . This is F 10,  because this is our tailwater , and this is our water 
pressure . Then F 11  is weight of tail water on endsill , because some weight is also above 
the end sill, so that is my F 11. And F 12, F 13, F 14, and F 15,  these are all operate face 
of the just we have completed in our  previous problem . And the pressure values are 
given already here all the se values are mentioned here , so we can estimate what is  the 
press ure process . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:30 ) 
 
 
 
Now, next step is that  we have to calculate what is the porosity , because the void ratio is 
given , so porosity equal to e divided by 1  plus e , void ratio equal to  0.35, so  we will get 
point 0.259.  And the saturated width specific weight of sand and gravel will be equal to 
gamma  s plus n gamma w , because up to level  Y 2 we can see  in this figure up to level  Y  
 2, our soil is  saturated . And in the saturated soil how much water is there , so the water is 
filled in the void spaces or the pore  spaces . And porosity is 0.259 that is equal to 25.9  
percent , so that means, 25.9 percent of the soil for ce are havin g filled with water . So, we 
will be multiplying  0.259  1000 , that is the specific weight of water  1000 plus gamma s  is 
the that is the dry weight , so that is 1050, so  we wi ll get 1309  kg per metre cube . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:51)  
 
Now, you have to choose the references axes  for horizontal and vertical forces . So, in 
this figure , we have to choose the  reference  axes. So, here I am putting taking this 
downstream location, this is the O, this is my reference point , because of this horizontal 
forces and this upward forces , the turning will occur along this  point , so that is why  I 
have taken this o point as my you c an say reference point . And I will be taking a 
reference line along this downstream edge  that is for you r horizontal forc es, because  I 
have to compute the  moment um, so that is for my all these vertical forces . For all the 
vertical forces , this is my axes r eference axes , and for all the horizontal forces like F 1  
my reference axis is the base of this  apron , so that the base of this apron , so this point  as 
taken as my reference point . So, next then I will calculate all the distances along this line .  
 (Refer Sl ide Time: 31:10)  
 
Now, I have to fill up the table right now here . I have to estimate what is my force F 1,  F 
2, F 3, F 4, F 5  all the se, and what is the  magnitude . You know that the force is equal to 
the pressure into the area that pressure  triangle , so that is estimated a s for F 1, because 
this is equivalent fluid pressure , so it is half into 805 my g amma  equivalent into 2.8  is the 
height of the  that equ ivalent pressure . So, you can see from the previous figure , so into 
the height again 2.8, so  that I am getting  1355.6 . 
And the distance  centre of gravity from reference ax es is 1.233  meter , so that is equal to 
0.3, so  that is the base of the ap ron, the thickness of the apron  plus 2.8 is the height 
divided by 3,  because the centre of gravity will acts  at a distance one -third of the height 
from the base . So, the moment will be the magnitude into the di stance , so I am g etting 
here 3891  that is my turning moment , because there is a horizontal force , and it is 
causing turning moment . 
F 2 is for headwall. And her e the magnitude will be  equal to area into the  weight density 
of the concrete that is  2400, so  I am getting 1680. A nd the distance of centre of gravity 
from refere nce axis is 3825  that you can estimate by  looking at that  figure . And the 
moment is 6426,  which is restoring in nature , because this is the vertical force . 
Similarly, F 3, F 4, F 5,  F 6, F 7, and F 8  all are vertical forces and these are having the 
nature that is your restoring in nature , because these are vertical forces . And these f orces 
can be estimate similarly , which is gamma w or gamma that is the  specific weight of  
 concrete into the area of the pressure triangle . And this is the distance of the centre of 
gravity , so that you can follow the figure and you can compute all these distances , and 
you can do the calculations subsequently . 
(Refer Slide Time: 33:51)  
 
Now, coming to the uplift pressure  similarly , you can do for  water above crest  for water 
above crest that is F 9 . So, the density is gamma w that equal to  1000 kg per metre cube , 
and thi s is my area  0.75 is the heig ht of water into 0.55  is the distance or the  that is the  
length of the apron on which this  pressure is acting , so that is we will get a rectangular 
type of  pressure diagram . So, in this case , you will get F 9 as 412.5. A nd simi larly, this is 
restoring . F 10  is also restoring , F 11 that is tailwater above endsill that is also restoring 
in nature . And all these  uplift pressure that is F 12 to F 15  all are turning in nature , so 
that we have already estimated in our previous problem . And the moment values are 
given here calculated like this , so you can try on your own .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 35:05)  
 
 
 
 
Now, the resultan t vertical force will be sigma V, so  that is equal to sigma  the vertical 
forces , which is causing downward minus the  summation of vertical forces , which are 
upward , so we will get a s 6843.2  kg. And the resultant moments si gma M  will be equal 
to restoring moment minus sigma turning moment , so that is equ al to 37428 minus 
20285, so  that e qual to 17143  kg metre that we hav e taken from the previous table . 
So, z value w ill be getting sigma M divided by sigma V, so  that equal to  2.505  metre . So, 
what is this z value , if you remember in the previous lecture , we have already discussed . 
So, this figure if you  look at this figure  is the plan of base , and we have taken O as here 
not here , but here it is O, and my reference axis is downstream edge , and the this is the 
my centroid point , this is d by 2  that is equal to 4.5  metre . And here z is equal to  2.505,  
which is just exceeding t he centre point or the centroid  axis from this reference axis . So, 
this is my  2.505  metre . But, d by 2 equal to 2.25  metre , and this is my eccentricity .  
 And all these  vertical resultant vertical forces are acting at this location . So, this 
eccentricity is estimated as here in this figure , it is this whole distance is z , this is d by 2, 
so e will be equal to z minus  d by 2, so  that equal to z we have  estimated as  2.505 , and d 
is equal to 4.5, so  we are getting 255  metre , so that is my eccentricity . 
(Refer Sl ide Time: 37:21)  
 
 
 
Now, we know the form ula that is the pressure sigma V divided by A whole into 1 plus 
minus 6  e divided by d . So, if we will take plus symbol and put the values , you can get P 
a equal to 19769.24  kg per metre square . And for 1 minus 6  e divided by d , you are 
getting 10644.98  kg per metre square . So, all these values are positive values . Since, 
these values are positive , here pressure P a or P b both are positive, so  the structure is 
safe against overturning . And all these vertical forc es are acting here . So, if the 
overturning forces are acting here , then they are not able to overturn this structure . So, 
this is the condition for overturning , so that our structure is safe against overturning . 
So, in this lecture , we have estimated how t o compute a uplift pressur e, and what is the 
condition of overturning . For the overturning , what are the horizontal moments or the 
restoring  the turning moments , and the restoring moments  by equating those , we can  
 estimate our eccentricity . And based on th at we can estimate what is the , whether our 
pressures are positive or  negative . If it is the pressures are positive , then you can  tell that 
the structure is safe against overturning . 
So, for all these  when we are going for solving all these problems , first we have to know 
that how to ; first we have to understand the problem  that means, the pressure diagram is 
very much important , the force diagram is very much important . Because , based on the 
force diagram , you can estimate what is my pressure , what is the area of this pressure 
triangles  then the force will be equal to area into the  pressure . Then at what location the 
centre what is the  location of centre of gravity , so that you  can estimate the moments of 
the special forces , then we can equate the  moments . So, we are ending here , in our next 
lecture will be on specifically  how to prevent from sliding , we have to  design for sliding . 
Thank you . 