Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr. Poulomi Ganguli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 50 
Chute Spillway  
 
Hello this lecture is about the last component of the  Chute Spillway Design that is the 
energy dissipation part . So, this is the last component the energy dissipation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:35)  
. 
So, first we  went through the ogee spillway then the design principle of part one part two 
the last component is energy dissipation . (Refer Slide Time: 00:39)  
 
So, what is the energy dissipation of below the spillway ? Since water is flowing over the 
spillway it requires lot of kinetic energy by the time it reaches near the toe of the 
spillway . That is since the water is flowing from the top so, conversion of potential 
energy is into the kinetic energy .  
If the arrangements are not made to dissipate this huge kinetic energy of water and if the 
velocity of water is not controlled large scale squad or the erosion occurs at the point 
place at  the downstream of the dam . So arrangements is to be provided for energy 
dissipation , which is widely known as energy dissipaters.   (Refer Slide Time: 01:24)  
 
In general the kinetic energy of the super critical flow can be dissipated in two ways . So 
by co nverting the super critical flow into sub critical flow , by hydraulic jump or by 
directing the flow of water into air and then  making it fall away from the toe of structure . 
So, these are the two ways  in which we can dissipate the energy .  
(Refer Slide Tim e: 01:55)  
. 
So, hydraulic jump formation  so, hydraulic jump  can form in a horizontal rectangular 
channel when the following relation is satisfied between pre jump and a post jump depth . 
So, pre jump is y 1  and the post jump depth is y 2 . So, all of you kn ow that  hydraulic jump can be  created  and then we can get conjugate depth equation . So, this is the basic 
form of equation to be used  for y 2 and y 1.   
 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:32)  
 
So, for a given discharge intensity over the spillway and at a depth of y 1 so, this is the 
first conjugate depth y 1 is equal to  q by V 1. So, this is the discharge this is the total 
energy line th is is H L the gradient and H 1 the discharge is  a y 1  is the ratio of the  
critical discharge  divided by V 1. 
And V 1 is determined b y the drop V 1 and equal to root under 2  g H. So, the entire 
equation comes out to be q upon 2  g H 1 the H 1 is the height  and total energy line height 
of the total energy line from the dam bottom to this point .  (Refer Slide Time: 03:31)  
. 
For a given di scharge intensity and given height  of the spillway generally y 1 and y 2  are 
fixed . Availability of depth equal to y 2  in the channel on the downstream depends on the 
tailwater level which depends on the hydraulic dimension and the slope of the river 
chann el. If a graph is plotted between dis charge and tail water depth a curve is obtained 
this curve is called  sorry ; this curve is called a tailwater Curve. 
 The graph between discharge critical discharge and tailwater depth like if a curve is 
drawn this is ca lled tailwater curve and if a graph is plotted in the same graph bet ween q 
and conjugate depth y 2,  the curve is known as jump water height curve  so, this is called 
T W C  and this is called J H C  or the y 2  curve . So, these are two different curve  which  
is related to hydraulic jump formation . (Refer Slide Time: 04:40)  
. 
So, there are five possibility in this case . So, the T W C  or the tailwater curve when 
coinciding with y 2  curve or the J H C  curve  so, this looks as a on the same point . So, 
this one is co inciding with this  where  T W C  is coinciding with J H C  this depth and this 
is the critical discharge . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:10)  
. 
And the second possibility is when T W C  is laying above the y 2  curve . So, this is T W 
C curve this is y 2  curve  and a thir d possibility can be if T W C  is lying below the y 2  curve at all the discharges . So, first one is T W C  is above this and the second one is just 
reverse the situation .  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:33)  
 
  
There is a fourth condition when the T W C  is lying  above  the y 2  curve at a smaller 
discharge and laying below the y 2 curve at a large discharge . The condition w here both 
are intersecting y 2  curve is below and  T W C  to curve is  in the next stage it is above . 
And the fifth  condition is just reverse of this sit uation where T W C  curve lying below y 
2 curve at smaller dis charge and lying above the y 2  curve at a large discharge . So, these 
are the five different possibility that a hydraulic jump can  generate a huge amount of  
energy . (Refer Slide Time: 06:22)  
. 
So, how to dissipate this energy ? So, we will first go for case one when both the  graphs 
are coinciding when T W C  coincides with y 2  curve at all discharges . This is the most 
radial condition for the jump formation the hydraulic jump will form at the toe of  the 
spillway at all discharges . And in such case a simp le concrete apron of length 5  times Y 
2 minus Y 1 is generally sufficient to provide protection in the region of hydraulic jump . 
So, this concrete length  is if you provid e concrete length this is the simple solution for 
this. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:08)  
. So, this is the condition here there is a formation of hydraulic jump and you provide a 
simple horizontal apron in this c ase and this is sill e nd still here .  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:21)  
. 
Now, coming t o case two when the T W C  is lying above the y 2 curve at all discharges 
when y 2 is always below the tail water , the jump farming at the toe will be drowned out 
by the tailwater and in this case what happened a little energy will be dissipated . This 
probl em by  is can be solved by two or three ways . So, first will go by constructing 
sloping apron above the river bed ; this will going to show in the next slide . 
So, Jump will form fall on the sloping apron  where depth equals to Y 2 second Slope of 
the apron is  made in such a way that the proper condition for a jump will occur 
somewhere on the apron at all discharges . (Refer Slide Time: 08:14)  
. 
So, this is a sloping apron is provided above the bed . So, like this and this is the end sill 
and this is the hydraul ic jump this is the apron is going like this and is slope .  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:27)  
. 
Now, the second way to solve this by and we are continuing the same case when T W C 
is lying above the y 2 at all discharges the case two  second  solution is to provide d roller 
bucket type energy dissipator . Roller which is formed downstream of the bucket tends to 
move the sco ured bed material towards the dam thus preventing the serious scour at a toe 
of the dam . Sometimes , the scoured material may  enter the bucket under  the action of upstream roller and may cause severe abrasion . So, what we can do in that case a 
dentated bucket lip  may therefore, have to be provided  so, as to permit removal of 
material caught inside the bucket . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:22)  
. 
So, in the ne xt slide I am going to show the structure . So, like this a bucket kind of 
arrangements is to be provided and is a sloping apron above the bed here is there is a 
formation of whirlpool and this bucket kind of arrangement here .  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:35)  
. Now, when the T W C  is lying below y 2 curve at all discharges . So, here case this is the 
case three . So, by providing a ski jump bucket energy dissipator if tail water level is very 
low so, if provided a ski jump kind of bucket here . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09 :58) 
. 
The second way to solve this is by providing a sloping apron below the river bed . So, the 
same case three is continuing that is when T W C  is laying below the y 2 curve at all 
discharges . So, a sloping apron is provided below the river bed here .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:21)  
. Now, the third way to  solve this construction of a subsidiary dam below the main dam is 
subsidiary dam is to be constructed and that can take care of this energy dissipation 
problem  so, subsidiary dam is here .  
(Refer Slide Time : 10:39)  
. 
Now, we are  see the case four when the  T W C  curve as the y 2 curve and both are 
coinciding and a T W C  is lying about the y 2 curve at small discharges and lying below 
the y 2 curve at all large discharges . So, this problem can be solved by pr oviding a 
sloping apron partly above and partly below the ground level . 
So, this is my case four and this is a combination of case one and case two . So, here it 
provide  sloping apron partly above and the partly below the ground level . So, this way 
we can s olve this kind of energy dissipation problem . (Refer Slide Time: 11:30)  
. 
And now that last case the last case is when this also the case when T W C  and  y 2 curve 
both are intersecting where the case is just opposite of case four , that is a T W C  is lyin g 
below the y 2 curve at smaller discharges and lying above the y 2 curve at large 
discharges .  
So, here the arrangement will be same ; the same arrangement which was made in case d 
will serve the purpose , only difference will be that at low discharges , the jump will form 
on the apron below the bed ; and at high discharges , the jump will form the apron above 
the bed .  (Refer Slide Time: 12:20)  
. 
So, this is the case five just that is a rivers of case four  and this is the jump here is 
forming above the bed  below the bed and at high discharge the jump will form on the 
apron above the bed , the last case . So, these are the five ways we can solve the energy 
dissipation problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:53)  
. 
Now, coming to energy dissipation below other type of spil lway  so, if the spillway are  
some other type how we can solve this energy dissipation problem . So, first a chute or a 
shaft or a side channel spill way general discharges at a point away from the dam . Hence the protection is required only for the spillway as the danger to the main dam is not here . 
So, in this case a hydraulic stilling basin generally sufficient and may be provided at 
discharge point of the spillway . So, hydraulic spill stilling basin is sufficient to solve this 
kind of problem ; however, if there is a rocks are available , in that case a ski jump bucket 
may be provided which is at a low cost  ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:51)  
 
  
 
So, and stilling now the design now hydraulic jump formation depends considerably 
upon the Froude  number of the incomi ng flow. So, the pre jump depth and post jump 
depth or the conjugate depth  are given by  this formula . So, this is a Froude  number here 
and the Froude  number is the ratio between  V 1 up on root g y 1 this two depth .  
 
If the incoming Froude  number F 1 is higher the greater energy dissipation can take 
place .  (Refer Slide Time: 14:27)  
. 
So, here we  have  given the range of Froude  number and corresponding percentage of 
energy loss . So, from Froude  number range from 2.5 to 20  so, 2.5 is the Froude  numb er 
is low in number on 17  percent loss of energy happen ; however, if it is 20 around 85  
percent losses can happen .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:52)  
. 
Now, coming to types of jump for different ranges and their Froude  number : when F 1 is 
less than 2.5,  the jump is weak and energy loss is low . So, no blocks or other devices are 
provided in this range . So, we are basically safe in this range ; however, when F 1 lies between 2.5 to 4.5  the jump not troublesome and oscillating  and which gives rise heavy 
waves on the surface . So, in that case wave suppressor maybe needed in this range and 
the length of the jump may be taken as a difference between y 2 minus y 1 and 5 times of 
this difference .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:37)  
. 
When F 1 lies between 4.5 and 9  the jump is steady . The length of the jump is almost 
constant and equal to 6  of y 2. Hence for large spillways , where y 2 may be quiet high 
very long expensive stilling basin may be required . 
Some auxiliary devices  may also be introduced for further stabilizing the flow and to 
reduce the length of the basin . When F 1 is 9 and larger it is a strong jump , but the jump 
is likely to be rough and choppy bucket type energy dissipater is  preferred in this case 
and of this hydraulic jump  type.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:24)  
. 
Now,  the kind o f stilling basin ; so, various kind of stilling basins have been generalized 
for use on different types of work and various agencies . So design of this basin have 
been developed on the basis of long experience and model studies . So, these basins are 
not sim ple concrete apron , but generally provided with an auxiliary devices this device 
can help in dissipating energy of flow by offering resistance to flow  and may stabilize 
the floor in shorter length of the basin . 
So, in general a stilling basin may be define d as a structure in which the energy 
dissipation action is confined . So, stilling basin is a kind of structure in which energy 
dissipation can be taken place .  (Refer Slide Time: 17:17)  
. 
So, this kind of auxiliary  devices are designed for energy dissipat ion. So, one of them is 
chute blocks . So, chute blocks are a kind of  serrated device and provided at the entrance 
of the stilling basins . So, you can see this point here at the entrance of the stilling basin 
this small small chute blokes  are provided . So, incoming jet of water is followed and 
partly lifted from the floor a producing a shorter length of the jump  and which would be  
produce here and they also help in stabilizing the flow and then they can improve the  
jump performance in presence of this small small blocks .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:05)  
. Now, the other way of is to provide sill and dentated sills here sill or dentate d sill is 
generally provided at the end of the stilling basin . So, dentate d sill diffuses the residual 
portion of the high velocity jet reaching at the end of the basin . They help in dissipating 
residual energy and to reduce the length of the jump or the basin . So, these are the 
stilling basin here .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:35)  
. 
The third way is to provide the baffle piers . So, baffle piers are like this is the end sill 
and this is the chute blocks and now you have the baffle piers . So, they are the small 
blocks placed within the basin and across the basin floor . So, they help in breaking the 
floor and dissipate the energy impact mostly  by the impact . So, this baffle piers 
sometimes also called as friction blocks , are very useful for the small structure ; however, 
for large structure these are not suitable .  (Refer Slide Time: 19:14)  
. 
Now, another way is U S B R  silling  stilling basin t wo. So, this is the stilling basin two 
structure ; this is recommended for use on the large structures such as dam spillway and 
large canal structure . These are used when the incoming Froude  number is more than 4.5 . 
So, a large structure these are the  basic  device to we use .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:41)  
. 
Now  the relation between basin length and the Froude  number ; so, if the Froude  number 
is 4 so, the length of the basin is to be kept as 3.6  times of y 2 then at a two  interval if it 
is 6 then 4  times y 2, 8 4.2 times y 2, 10  or more 4.3 times y 2.  An economy in the length of the basin up to about 35 percent  so, 4.2 3 y 2 in place of 6  y 
2 is thus obtained by this auxiliary devices . The floor of the basin should be set at  such a 
level as to provide 5  percent more water depth than  y 2 . So, if you remember t he design 
we did we kept as 5  percent more of y 2 in the water depth in earlier slides .  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:38)  
. 
So, U S B R  stilling basin four ; it is used for Froude  number varying from 2.5 to 4.5,  
which is generally occurs in canal weirs , canal falls , diversion dam, etc . So, this basin is 
applicable only to rectangular cross section . Since oscillating waves are generated  in this 
range of Froude  number , they are tried to control at a source by providin g large chute 
blocks .  (Refer Slide Time: 21:08)  
. 
So, this is U S B R  stilling basin four  here. So, this is the top surface of the 5  degree 
angle . So, length of the basin and sill is optimum optional and floor of the basin must be 
set in su ch a way that level provide 5 to 10  percent more water depth and its theoretical y 
1 value . So,  the floor is to be kept in such a way  it can pr ovide 5 to 10  percent more 
water depth and the length of the basin is generally kept as the  5 times the difference 
between y 2 and y 1 the conjugate depth and the pre jump depth , so,  
Thank you . 