Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 34 
Structural De sign of Drop Spillway – 1 
 
Hello students , welcome to the 4th lecture on the Design o f Drop Spillway .  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:26)  
 
In this series , this is our fourth lecture  and I will be discussing of part 1 of this design . (Refer Slide Time: 00:32)  
 
So, the main purpose of this lecture is to evaluate the horizontal pressure force s acting on 
the d rop spillway . You know that for evaluating the stability of any structure , we need to 
estimate what are the different pressure  forces  acting on this drop structure ?  
So, here we will be a estimating  the different horizontal pressure forces  which may be 
because of the static water pressure , the lateral pressures  due to dry and moist backfill 
materials and the tail water pressure you can see this figure  the tail water pressure . If 
there is tail water , then some negative pressure is created  which is opposite in direction  
as compare d to that of the static water pressure at the upstream side and lateral faces due 
to dry and moist backfill materials . (Refer Slide Time: 01:43)  
 
So, before that , you should know what are the different functions of d ifferent structural 
parts of this drop structural ? So, we have headwall extension it mostly permits  stable soil 
fill, it prevents the piping  around the structure . So, the piping f ailure is avoided by this , 
the sidewalk holds a stable soil fill prote cts against erosion due to water passing over the 
spillway , the wing wall holds a s table soil fill  and also prevents  the serious scour of the 
soil fill and gully banks . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:22)  
 Similar, the cutoff wall prevents the piping under the structure , generally , the piping 
occurs because of  water pressure in the upstream side here. It exerts water pressure and 
because of that the water is emitted  through this contact surface of this cut off wall and 
toe wall to arise at the downstream section like this . So, cut off if the cutoff wall depth is 
more than  generally , the piping failure is avoided . Then, to reduces the uplift pressure , it 
resist sliding prevents the piping around the structure  and th e toe wall also prevents 
piping around the structure  and pre vent undermining of apron . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:26)  
 
The horizontal pressure forces generally depend on the characteristic of backfill material 
against the wall , soil, permeability , cohesion , angle of internal friction , dry weight , moist 
weight , submerge d weigh t, void ratio and moisture content . Then, relative permissibility 
of the f oundation material and bac kfill material elevation of water table  and the backfi ll 
drainage  based on past experience for safe design , generally the total drop  is considered 
as less than equal to  4.57 meter , but in general cases we allow maximum 3 meter  and F 
plus h should be  less than equal to  6 meter . (Refer Slide Time: 04:15)  
 
So, before estimating  the different horizontal pressure forces , we should know what are 
the differe nt conditions of backfill . So, general ly we consider three  cases of backfill as 
shown in this  figure the case A so, that the no backfill against headwall . So that means, 
there is no backfill  and the depth  Y 0 a shown in this figure is equal to the water de pth 
which is below the crest level . And the middle figure shows  the case B which is for gully 
graded fill to crest elevation  so that means,  the gully is graded  up to the crest elevation . 
So, in this case you  have to estimate a way to know first what is the  line of saturation ? 
You can see this the line of saturation is  at a depth of  Y 1 from the crest and after 
knowing this  Y 1, you can estimate what is the value of  Y 2 that equal to here  Y naught 
minus  Y 1 so, that equal to  Y 2. So, this is the case B condi tion and case C condition is 
for compacted earth fill  constructed to crest elevation . You can see here there is in this 
case there is  tail water , the tail water depth is given as  t plus S and the saturation line is 
shown here this is  saturation line  and wh ere it is touching the head wall  so, that is my 
depth  Y 1. And below the saturation line , the depth below to the bottom of this 
foundation is  Y 2 such that  Y 1 plus Y 2 equal to  Y naught and h is my depth of weir . 
So, for designing , for estimating the horizontal pressure process , you have to know this 
value that is  Y 1, Y 2, Y naught t and S. So, once this values are known , we can estimate 
what are water my pressure forces . So, we should do remember this three  cases case 
what is case A, what is case B and w hat is case C?  (Refer Slide Time: 07:08)  
 
Now, coming to the effect of water table elevation , the elevation of the water table above 
and below the sp illway before and after construction has a significant effect on loads on 
the head wall and other element s of the design . If the water table is low and the 
foundation material is relatively h omogeneous and permeable , the flow of water from a 
reservoir or from p ercolation , through backfill in the channel above the dam , tends to 
pass towards through the foundat ion in vertical direction , until it merges  with the 
subsurface flow . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:42)  
 And if the water table is high which is close to or above proposed approach apron 
elevation , so in this case , a differential head created by the dam of water w ill result in 
uplift pressure on the base  of the spillway and increased pressure on the head wall. 
Then, the magnitude of this uplift and increased headwall pressure depends upon various  
conditions like the total differential head , type and efficiency of d rainage provided above 
the head wall , relative permeability of the back fill above the head wall and various strata 
in the foundation , depth of cut off and toe walls , physical characteristics of backfill and 
foundation soils  and tail water elevation with up lift and in this case the possibility of 
piping . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:38)  
 
So, for that we have  to provide differen t drainages . You can see from this figure  there are 
different drainages are provided  on basically reserve  of two types ; one is type small a 
and type small b  and types small b is mostly recommended to ensure stability again st 
sliding and piping failure . 
So, here you  can see in case of type a , this is a graded gravel filter and the outlet is given 
here and this is your backfill  material which i s compact ed earth fill here and in case of 
type b  the outlet is given here  and there is  pitrun  sand and gravel filter are s hown in this 
case. So, in most of the cases , type b is recommended .  (Refer Slide Time: 09:41)  
 
So, for designing , you have  to know this table , so, there are  three  cases as we have 
discussed for back fill condition case A, back fill condition case B and backfill condition 
case C and the water table condition can be high or low as we have discussed , then 3rd 
column shows the relative pe rmeability  of the foundation material to backfill . Then next 
column  shows the drainage type , so, type small a or type small b, generally we have 
already discuss  that is  type small b is most recommended  and the elevation of the 
saturation line that is  Y 2.  
You can see from this figure  Y 2 is the elevation below the saturation line and that can 
be estimated under no flow and under full flow condition . Under no flow condition , Y 2 
equal to  Y naught for case  a and for full flow condition also  Y 2 equal to  Y naught. And 
for high water table  and depending on different type of  foundation relative 
[per/ permeability ] permeability  of foundation to back fill, you can estimate what is the 
value of  Y 2 from this figure and here S is the  depth of end sill and  F is the tot al fall  and 
this t S and a values are given and accordingly you can see whether there is piping 
problem or not . If it is yes, then there is piping  flow piping problem  and if there is no , 
there is no piping problem . 
So, depending on that condition , you can select what is the value of  Y 2? Your design 
value of  Y 2, so  while selecting  Y 2 suppose  I have highlighted here the red one for 
equal permeability condition  and type your drainage no flow condition . So, Y 2 will be S plus 0.5 F and for full flow conditio n Y 2 will be equal to  t plus S plus 0.5 F and in this 
case, there is a  piping problem  in case of full flo w in case of C condition  of backfill  so, 
you may get tail water . So, here the t  process is the depth of tail water ; fine by knowing 
all these things f rom the table , so you can estimate what is your horizontal pressure 
force s? So that means, you have to know this table , without this table , you cannot design 
or you cannot estimate the horizontal pressure forces . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:38)  
 
Now, everything  will be clear if will solved a problem . This typical problem , a drop 
spillway is to be constructed with the following d etails . Total fall is given as 2.5 meter, 
height of endsill , S equal to  0.3 meter , depth of flow above crest  that equal to  capital H is 
given as 0.75 meter , tail water height small t  that equal to  0.75 meter , relative 
permeability for foundation equal to  backfill .  
So that means, you have to use the equal condition as you have seen in the previous table 
water table is high  and backfill cas e is C that is compact ed earth fill berm constructed to 
crest elevation . So, all these values has to be used in the previous  table as  I have shown 
to find out what is the value of  Y 2 and by considering the  Y 2 value as shown in this  
figure , you can go for  estimating the value of  Y 1, Y naught and t plus a that is your total 
tail water height above the apron , then I can estimate what is my pressure  forces . (Refer Slide Time: 13:56)  
 
And what else you need , so, for this , the given values of backfill propert ies are for dry 
weight for earth  is 1600 k g per meter  cube , pitrun  sand and gravel 1900 that is mostly 
used for drainage type b , moist weight is 1750 for earth , for pitrun  sand and gravel it is 
2000, angle of internal friction 25 degree for earth pitrun  sand and gravel it is 35 degree  
submerged weight for earth is 1000 , And for pitrun  sand and gravel it is 1050 and one 
you should know that this is the formula that is ratio of lateral earth pressure to vertical 
pressure equal to 1 minus si n phi divided by o ne plus sin phi where phi the angle of 
internal friction . 
So, here vertical pressure is nothing  but that is the total weight of the earth . So, weight 
can be computed by using the density of dry weight or moist weight then phi is known . 
So, by using  that yo u can estimate what is the value of the lateral earth pressure ? So, the 
question that find the equivalent fluid pressure of the triangle load diagram for  no flow 
type a drainage , no flow type b drainage and with flow type a drainage ? So, in this figure 
you can see this is type first one is a type a drainage and second one is  a type b  drainage 
in which case you have used pitrun  sand and gravel filter . (Refer Slide Time: 15:34)  
 
So, once these are clear , so now, you can go for designing . So, this figure show s a 
triangle load diagram  the pressure forces are generally estimated as, pressure that equal 
to gamma pressure is extended gamma into h you know this h is your height of any soil 
fill or water  gamma is the  specific weight . Then you have to estimate what i s the 
pressure diagram in this the pressure triangle what is the area of this pressure t riangle , 
then you can estimate what is the total force  from this ? 
So, here you can see that the different forces acting on this , F 1, F 2, F 3, F 4 and the 
question was  that you have to estimate  the total lateral pressure forces in terms of 
equivalent fluid pressure . So, this the main criteria , you have to understand this problem 
may be attentively . So, come no flow and type a drainage , for the backfill case C and 
type a  drainage considered the backfill as earth for the total height of headwall . 
So, in this case you have to follow the table , whatever  table  I have shown , so, this table 
are given  I have cut a portion of that . So, here you have to design for equal permeabili ty 
condition , drainage type small a  and in this case for no flow condition , I am getting  Y 2 
equal to  S plus point 5 F and this is for  full flo w condition . So, have to use the value of  
 
 
 F is known as 2.5 S equal to  0.3, so, I can estimate it has 1.55 meter . 
So, height of headwall from this figure you can see , the height of head wall is given as Y 
naught that equal to  F plus S. So, that equal to  2.5 plus 0.3 that equal to  2.8 meter . So, 
once  Y 2 is known , Y naught is known , so I can estimate what is the  value of  Y 1, so, 
that is 1.2 5 meter . And this F 1 diagram shows the moist soil pressure and the diagram  F 
2 shows the active e arth pressure that is P a, the submerged soil lateral pressure  is given 
by P a 1 which is given by th is triangle which is in yel low colour . 
Then this blue colour  F 4 is given as lateral water pressure that is P a 2 which is acting 
below this  saturation line  and this triangle which is a brown colour . So, this show the 
equivalent flied pressure and this XX is my reference line . So, you have to take the 
moment of all these forces along this X X line to estimate what  is my equivalent  fluid 
pressure corresponding to different pressure forces of F 1, F 2, F 3 and F 4. So, this is my 
basic concepts . If you can understand this basic concept , then you can go for estimating 
the lateral pressure forces .  
Now, you have to estimate what are the pressure acting  below this pressure triangle . For 
F 1, you can see the pressure is acting as P a, this value  is P a. So, this is moist soil 
pressure , so, moist soil pressure will be gamma into this heights , the w eight of moist soil 
into h . So, h is your  equal to  Y 1 that equal to  1.25, so  gamma into  Y 1, so  that will be 
equal to  moist soil pressure .  
So, that can be  equal to P a, similarly , we can estimate for active earth pressure by using 
the previous equation  W into 1 minus sin phi divided by 1 plus sin phi , then you can 
estimate the pressure at the bottom of th is different pressure tri angles . Then you can 
multiply with area to estimate the total pressure  area of th is triangle , then you can take 
the moment about  X X line. So, those these tail soil discuss in the next slides . (Refer Slide Time: 20:48)  
 
 
So, P a is estimate  that is  
  
W is your vertical pressure that is nothing  but you weight . So, here phi i s 25 degree  so, 
you can get P a equal to  0.4 naught 6 W. The W is the weight of material per unit area in 
k g per meter square  at crest elevation  (
 ), there is no pressure at crest elevation . 
So, P a will be equal to  0, at 1.25 meter below crest .  
So, at along the saturation line you can see , along this saturation line you have to 
estimate the value of W. So, W equal to that is the weight of the or the pressure due to 
the moist weight of e arth. So, gamma into Y 1, here, gamma is given as 1750 in the 
questio n is given and  Y 1 equal to  1.25 meter . So, you can get 2187.5 k g per meter  
square and that equal to  2.1875 ton per meter square .  
The lateral pressure due to mo ist backfill  can be estimated  as because , this is your 
vertical pressure or vertical w eight that is W here. Now, I can use that equation to 
estimate what is the value of P a that equal to  0.406 W. So, you can get  0.888 tone per 
meter  square . 
Now, at 2.8 meter below crest , so, 2.8 meter below crest means it is along the X X line or 
the bottom . The lateral pressure due to su bmerged weight of soil  is given by 0.406 gamma into  Y 2. So, that equal to 0.406 into 1000  that is your submerged weight which 
given the question and  Y 2 equal to 1.55 meter . So, you will get 0.629 ton per meter  
square . So, this is  my that is equal to  P a 1 as shown here .  
Then letter pressure due to water that equal to P a 2, so, that is different by the force  F o. 
So, P a 2 will be equal to  gamma  W into the height of water that equal to  Y 2. So, 
gamma  W equal to  1000  into 1.55, so, you are getting 1.55 ton per meter square . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:35)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
So, once this is known , now you have to calculate the areas of different  pressure  
triangles . The area of  F 1, you can estimate that is best as P a as seen in the figure  and 
height is here  Y 1. So, this area will be equal to  half into P a into  Y 1.  
Similar  for F 2, it is a rectangle , so, we will get P a into  Y 2. So, this height is  Y 2 so, P a 
into Y 2. Similarly , for F 3 the base is P a 1 that equal to  0.629 and height is  Y 2 so, this height is  Y 2 so, it will half into P a 1 into Y 2. Similar ly, for F 4 the base is P a 2 so, that 
is 1.55 ton per meter square , you have estimated and the height is also  Y 2. 
So, once this is area are know , so, you can estimate what are the pres sure forces . Now, 
you have to estimate what are the centre of gravity for all these pressure forces that is  F 
1, F 2, F 3 and F 4. So, the center gravity for  F 1, F 2, F 3 and F 4 from the bottom 
surface are given by this value . So, for F 1, it is Y 2 plus Y 1 divided by 3, it is acting 
here, then for  F 2 it is Y 2 divided by 2 for F 3 Y 2 by 3 and for  F 4 it is Y 2 divided by 
3. So, now, you have to take the  moment  I was the reference axis X X. So the moment 
for this equivalent fluid pressure and here base  is gamma equivalent into  Y 0 into height 
is equal to  Y naught that equal to  Y 1 plus Y 2. So, this area also you can estimate  so, 
this is your equivalent force  which is at acting  at a distance x by 3 from thi s base at the 
centre of gravity .  
Now, you can take the momentum of this triangle on that is should be equated to the sum 
of the moments of all these  pressure forces of t riangles . So, that you can estimated , that 
you can estimate by using this equation . So, the first one shows the moment  of the 
equival ent fluid pressure , the second one is the moment of the force  F 1.  
This term shows the moment of force  F 2, this one shows the moment of force  F 3 and 
this shows  the moment of force  F 4 from  the X X line. So, once this is known , you can 
put all these valu es of these values are already calculated . So, you can get by solving this 
we can get the value of q gamma equivalent equal to  0.828 ton per meter cube . 
So, this solve solves the first part  of the problem . So, once this is solved , now I will go 
little spee dily for other conditions . So, once this understood , the same procedure must be 
followed for solving the  next bit of the problem . (Refer Slide Time: 27:23)  
 
 
For no flow type b drainage  so, let us assume that  the backfill is pitrun sand and gravel 
for th is phi equal to  35 degree and you have to and this is fill up to the height of the head 
wall. So, in this case P a can be estimate are  W into 1 minus sin 35 degree divided by 
divided by 1 plus sin 35 degree that equal to 0.271 W and from the table , you can  get Y 2 
equal to  S plus 0.15 F from the drainage table  that I have already shown . 
So, here Y 2 equal to  0.675 meter and Y 1 will be equal to  Y naugh t minus  Y 2. So, that 
equal to  2.125 meter and here you can see  there are similar forces are acting because  you 
know flow type  F 1, F 2, F 3, F 4 and the equivalent pressure are shown in the  diagram . 
So, you can follow the same procedure as done in the first bit of this problem .  (Refer Slide Time: 28:25)  
 
So, at crest level P a equal to  0, at 2.125 meter , you can estimate P a that equal to  0.271 
gamma  Y 1. So, that will give you 1.151 8 ton per meter  square , then at the crest level P a 
equal to  0 or not 2.25 meter , we can calculate P a equal to 1.151 8 ton. So, this value and 
a 2.8 below crest level , you will g et P a 1 equal to  1.921, this value and P a 2 will be 
equal to  gamma  W Y 2. So, that equal to  0.67 ton per meter  square , so, this value and 
after getting these values , we have to repeat  the steps as we have done in the previous  bit. 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:4 5) 
 
  
 
 
Now, for the third problem  we have to  use th e type a drainage  for type a drainage , here Y 
2 is computed as t plus S plus 0.5 F from this table . You can see  from this table this 
value you have taken for flow condition  and Y 1 equal to  Y 0 minus  Y 2 that equal to 0.5 
meter . So, we can estimate  Y 1 equal to  0.5 meter . Here, additional force will be  the F 6, 
F 6 is nothing  but this is the negative pressure which acting backwardly because of this 
tail water . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:35)  
 
Now, at the cr est level , so there is standing water , so, H equal to  0.75 meter . So, will be 
getting some water pressure here  and P a will be equal to  0.406 into 1000 2.75. So, that 
equal to  0.304 5 ton per meter square  at 0.5 meter  that is below crest level , you will be 
getting  p equal to  0.406 gamma  Y 1. So, that equal  to 0.355 3, so, this is equal to  30.304 5 
at 2.8 meter below crest level , you will be getting P a 1 equal to  0.406 gamma  Y 2.  
So, that equal to  0.933 8 ton per meter square and P a 2 will be gamma  W into Y 2. So, 
that will be equal to  2.3 ton per metre  square this value  and tail  water pressure will be 
equal to gamma  W into t plus S because t plus S is the depth of tail water . Here, t plus S equal to 1.5 which is nothing  but the F 6 for F 6, so, will get 1.05 ton per meter square . 
So, this is my 1.05 ton per meter square . 
(Refer Slide Time: 32:09)  
 
Now, by similar way , now you can use the moment matching te chnique  about the line X 
X. So, the total moment due to the equivalent fluid pressure that is given by gamma  eq 
into Y naught q divided by 6. So, at the sum in the total moments you can see here , the 
negative pressure because of tail water is given by  F 6. So, that is half into  1.05 into 1.05 
into 1.05 divided by 3 and this value is the distance of the centre  of gravity from the 
bottom of the  foundation of that X X axis. So, we can get this value  is F 1, this is F 2, 
this is the distance of centre of gravity from the X X axis and similarly , this is the 
distance of the centre of gravity from the X X axis, this is F 3, this is  F 4, this is  F 5 and 
this is  F 6 which is negative . So, by equating that one , you will get gamma equivalent 
equal to 13.7470 k g per meter square . 
So, the same procedure is followed as I have told you in the previous bits in the first bit , 
you can do this exercise then more clarity will be there . Unless you want to solve this 
one will be difficult to understand this  because , slightly difficult is there here in 
calculating  the area of the pressure forces , then you have to calculate  total fo rce equal to  
pressure into the area of the pressure triangle . Then you have to estimate what is the 
centre of gravity the distance of the centre of gravity from this  bottom surface that is your X X line, then force into the distance that is a moment  and you have to equate the 
moments  for equivalent fluid pressure and the other pressure forces . 
Then, you will get what is the equivalent pressure corresponding to different lateral  
pressure forces . So, this ends the  lecture here , so, you have to little practice t he problems , 
then only you can understand all the details other it very difficult to cover each and every 
bit of this  pressure calculations . So, you have to in detail have already told in first bit and 
you use  those first bit solution to solve  the second bit and third bit of this problem . So, 
this ends our lecture here . 
Thank you . 