Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 31 
Hydraulic Design of Drop Spillway  
 
Hello students . So,  I am Dr. B. Sahu I am associate prof essor of School of Water 
Resources  IIT, Kharagpur . So, in this lecture we  will be talking about the Hydraulic 
Design of Drop Spillway , the hydraulic design of drop spillway . You know that the drop 
spillway  is one erosion control structure which is specific ally used for the stabilization of 
the gullies ; it is a gully control structure . And it is mostly used for the  elevation 
difference of or drop of around 3 meter ; maximum we can use go for 3 meter of drop . 
So, today we wi ll discuss  that; what are the compon ents of this head wall  this drop 
structure . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:18)  
 
You can see this figure . So, the different components of this drop structure  you can see  
there is head wall ; this is head wall , apron, wing wall, longitudinal  sills, end sills , toe 
walls, cut off wall , side wall , head wall , extension and the flow direction coming  from 
this side ok . So, the main function of this head wall  is that the front wall against runoff flow in the 
drop spillway  constructed occurs the gully or channel width . Second  is your head wall 
extension  so, this is your head wall extension . So, this is one head wall extension as well 
as this is another head wall  extension . So, it is the extended portion of head wall into the 
gully sides that provides stability  and a means agai nst piping failure .  
Then third is your wing wall  you can see this is my  wing wall . So, there are two  wing 
walls this side and this  side. So, these are the walls constructed at the rear end of the 
structure with usually  at 45 degree from the vertical they provide stability to the soil field  
and protect the gully banks . Fourth one is the cutoff walls ; you can see this is your  cutoff 
wall. So, this side one cutoff wall on this side also there is cut off wall . 
So, these walls provide  structural strength agains t sliding of the drop structure prevent 
piping  failure and reduce uplift pressure . Then toe walls you can see this is my  toe wall . 
So, these toe walls they prevent under contain of  apron due to erosion . Then we have 
sidewalls  these are  sidewalls . So, this is one side wall and this is  another side wall .  
So, these walls confine the water flow within the  apron then there are end sills you can 
see this is the longitudinal end sill and these are the end sills this is longitudinal sill this 
is the end sill and t hese are the  longitudinal sills . The end sills are the elevated sills of the  
Apron up to obstruct  is usually mostly used to offer the water from directly moving into 
the channel below on raised the tail water level to create hydraulic jump for dissipation 
of energy of the flowing water . 
The longitudinal sills are constructed lengthwise par allel to side walls to make the apron 
stable  and this is the  apron. I t is constructed for dissipating the maximum kinetic energy 
of falling water by creating hiding job . So, that the velocity of tail water  is significantly  
reduced . (Refer Slide Time: 04:37)  
 
Showing the section of  center line  and in the left side there is  downstream elevation or 
side view  and also plumb . You can see the different comments head wall , wing w all, 
head wall, extension transversal sill, sidewall , wing wall , downstream elevation , footing . 
So, all these components will discuss in the next slides in detail . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:05 ) 
 
So, this is the section on central line specifically downstream front view . We can see  
here L is the length of the weir; specifically we use here rectangular type of weir. So, the 
length of  L is generally selected based on the width of the approach channel  in which that is the width of the gully . So, approximately we  consider how much would be the 
length of the weir; small h is the depth of weir it is including the freeboard  capital F is 
the drop through spillway from  crest of weir  to top of transverse sill S  is the height of 
transverse sill  and E is the length of head wall extension . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:57)  
 
From the plan b we can s ee there are footings  there is longitudinal sill and the re is apron. 
So, on the  apron there is longitudinally sill  then there are transverse sill and along the 
transverse sill that is call ed as also end sill on these are footings and these are footings 
are mostly constructed at 45 degree angle to the vertical . (Refer Slide Time: 06:24)  
 
This is the downstream elevation or side view you can see this small h is the depth of 
weir, capital F is the drop through spillway from crest weir to top of transverse sil l, S is 
the height of transvers e sill , C is the depth of cut off wall below top of  apron. L b is the 
length of  apron, t is the depth of two wall below top of  apron and j is the height of w ing 
wall and sidewall junction . 
And we provide also  fillets  to the cutoff wall . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:04)  
 For the hydraulic design we generally consider two types of criteria one is your 
hydrologic determinations it is based on the peak of runoff in the gully  or in the channel 
then inflow hydrograph of runoff . Second is the frequency or return  period of the design 
flow selected on the basis of internal life of the drop structure probably extent of damage 
if the sp illway fails due to lack of discharge capacity and relative size and cost of 
structure . The frequency or return period generally we can use for these the extreme 
value type of distribution functions are probably distribution functions to get the design 
flow at a specific return period . 
(Refer Slid e Time: 07:57)  
 
Then coming to the design approach ; so, for the design approach there are two possible 
cases  it can be either free flow condition or maybe s ubmerge flow condition . For free 
flow condition s generally the water should be freely flowing there  is no disturbance are 
the tailwater on in case of submerged generally the tailwater height is above the crest 
level of the rectangular weir. So, this could be of two possible cases one is first is the 
known thing that the discharge capacity Q which is kno wn before or estimated before 
and total drop is capital F. 
So, these two things are known and we have to find ; what is the length depth h of the 
weir to provide adequate discharge capacity and freeboard small h. In the second case it 
is the known values are capital F capital L or small  h and we have to find the discharge 
capacity of the spillway operating with adequate free board or at maximum capacity . (Refer Slide Time: 09:08)  
 
So, this is a picture showing the fre e and submerged flow you can see this pi cture . The 
tailwater is much below than that of the crest level . Here the velocity of approach of the 
flow above the crest level is capital  H 1 and the tail water is not obstructing the flow of 
the water which is approaching to the crest . So that means there is no disturbance of tail 
water to the upstream flow .  
So, free flow occurs w hen the tail water surface is a t or below the crest of the weir 
consequently the discharge over the weir is independent of the tailwater elevation and the 
depth are the weir and in this case the depth of weir is generally considered as the 
calculated as the critical depth of flowing water . So, that is h equal to d c. (Refer Slide Time: 10:07)  
 
In case of submerged flow condition the submerged weir flow occurs when tailwater 
surface is above the crest of the weir the difference in the downstream water surface 
elevation on the crest of the weir is the depth of s ubmergence that is capital H 2 we can 
see in this figure . So, it is capital H 2 it is the depth of submergence ; for subme rge flow 
the discharge may or may not be independent of the tailwater elevation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:40)  
 
 
 For free discharge  the discharge capacity of an aerated rectangular weir without 
submergence can be given by this formula which is  
 
The factor V a square by 2  g is the kinetic energy head which is nothing , but H v and 
capital H if you will see this figure capital H is the water height above the crest . 
So, we can calculate Q  equal to C L that is the  weir formula general we use Q  equal to  C 
L H plus V a square divided 2 g whole to the power 3 by 2; your Q is the discharge in 
cumec , L is the length of weir, capital H  is the water head on weir, V a is the mean 
velocity of approach , g is the acceleration due to gravity which is 9.81 meters per second 
square and C is the dis charge coefficient which is usually 1.84 taken for  rectangular 
weirs . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:52 ) 
 
For estimating the velocity of approach the specific energy head causing the flow on the 
weir is given by you will see this figure H is equal to small m plus capital H plus H V 
that is V a square divided by 2 g. Here capital H is the depth of flow on the crest  and 
small m is the elevation difference between the bottom profile of approach channel and 
that of the crest elevation . Usually m is remain remains at the level of the bottom profile 
of approach channel , but many times m also little bit is negative in that case  the bottom profile of approach channel is just above the crest level , but it generally kept at the sa me 
level of the crest el evation . 
So, in that case many  times m is equal to 0 and all these  heads like velocity and  all these 
heads they are generally measured  at distance  3 H 3 capital H you will see this figure the 
green line 3 H or more from this weir. This is two over the fluc tuations in the heads ; it 
should not be  so, for upstream that the energy losses between the chosen section and 
weir will affect the design . And the velocity of approach can be computed as V a equal 
to discharge divided by  the area of the approach channel . So, here A is the cross 
sectional area of the chosen sections chosen section means it is the cross section of the 
approach channel ok . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:48 ) 
 
Now, we will talk about aeration . So, the free flow occurs when the weir is adequately 
aerate d a completely aerated weir is one in which unlimited quantities of air h ave free 
access  to the space between the nappe  and the head wall . You can see this figure this is 
the napp e; we call it nappe . So, the discharge o ccurring from the crest and you wi ll get 
this portion as some negative pressure is created in this portion .  
So, if some negative pressure he created in this person w hat happens generally this nappe  
gets sawed towards this negative pressure  so, to prevent that we generally provide some 
holes here or aerated holes . So, that this negative pressure is minimized  and we get the 
atmospheric p ressure in this region this will not  obstruct the flowing of water . So, for this  the nappe will be subject to atmospheric  pressure on both upper and under 
surfa ces. For complete aeration  however, is seldom attained  and therefore, there should 
be a provision  to air to the underside of the nappe  by air vents . This will our formation of 
excessive negative pressure below atmosphere under the nappe ; which otherwise ma y 
cause fluctuation of head instability of flow on increased pressure on the head wall . So, 
where to design provide designs . So, that are you have to choose appropriate holes for 
this which is generally provided at are the sidewalls . So, two holes are two side walls . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:33 ) 
 
Now, how to design the size of air vent ? So, this can be estimated by the equation  
 
here a is the required area of aeration in centimeter square  L is the length of weir meter  
H e the specific energy head causing fl ow through the  weir in meter  and small p the 
differential pressure between atmosphere and  pressure under nappe  in meter of water ok . 
So, if you wi ll see this figure . So, this is the aeration hole  and this has to be designed  and 
this A whatever the area we are getting  that is for the aeration hole of the air vents for 
two side walls . So that means,  for each side wall you will get the value as  a divided by  
two. (Refer Slide Time: 16:35)  
 
Now, coming to determin ation  size of aeration  hole; so, this is one pro blem example is 
given. So, in this case the value of  L is given 9.2 H e equal to 1.2 meter . And you have to 
find the area of aeration of hole required to limit the differential pressure  p we maximum 
of 0.6 meter so ; that means, here small p  equal to 0.6 meter then the diameter of aeration 
hole required in each side wall to satisfy the condition . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:08)  
 
   
 For this these are the given values L equal 9.2, H equal to  1.2, p equal to 0.06. So, the 
size of the vent air vent is given by  
 
Now, if will put the values of L 9.2 H e 1.2 and p 0.06 you will get A  equal to 218.08  
square centimeter . So, the area of the aeration hole or the air vents equal to 218.08  square 
centimeter . Since there are two holes in two side walls  so, it will be divide d by two as I 
was talking before . So, if you  will divide by two then you will  get 109.04  square 
centimeter and the that is equal to pi d square pi by 4 d square and this pi by 4 d square . 
Where d is the diameter of the hole and pi by 4 d square will be equ al to 109.04 . So, 
from this you will get d  equal to 11.78  centimeter or approximately it is 12 or 0.12 meter . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:32 ) 
 
In the second example the given values are channel dimensions  are section A bottom 
width b is given as 12.19  meter  side slope that is 2 is to 1 that is your z is to 1. So, z 
equal to 2  and m equal to minus 0.3 meter that is the  bottom it is the difference between  
the bottom of  this profile and the crest level and you can see it is minus 0.3 means this 
level is actually e levated so  that means, this distance  the difference here is  0.03 meter 
and weir dimensions are like L the length of the weir. So, this 1equal to 9.14 meter small 
h this one that equal to 0.496  meter and the design discharge given  25.63  cumec and you 
know t hat for a return weir C equal to 1.8 you have to find the velocity head h  v are this section A. So, what is the value of  the velocity head and stage a water surface above 
crest of weir at section A that is capital  H. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:02 ) 
 
Now, for th e solution  you can use the weir formula that  
 
 
 So, we wi ll get 1.324 . In step 2 from this figure you can get  
 
 and m is minus 0.03 on in the first step 1 you have already obtained capital H plus V a 
square by 2 g equal to 1.324 . So, that will be equa l to 1.294 . (Refer Slide Time: 20:58 ) 
 
And in the step 3 from this figure we know that we know the value of h e in the previous 
slide we have already seen what is the value of h e m and capital H plus V a square 2 g 
and we need to find the value of capita l H plus V  a square by 2 g for this  we need to 
compute the value of d a you can see this figure the value of d a equal to small m plus 
capital H. So, that is the depth of flow in the approach channel which can be found by  
trial and  error method . 
So, the calculation can be done in a tabular form by assuming a trial value of d a and for 
each such assumed value by computing the area of approach channel  approach velocity 
V a V a square by 2 g and the specific energy head that is H e and comparing with actual 
value of H  e obtained  in step 2. Once d a is known the velocity head is computed  as V a 
square by 2 g that equal to H e minus d a once velocity head is known  so, H can be found 
out. You will see this figure the bottom figure the approach channel is a trapezo idal type 
of channel and the depth of water is here d  a where d a equal to m plus capital H and 
small b is the  bottom width and the side slope is z is to 1. (Refer Slide Time: 22:37)  
 
So, for the solution you can see this table for different trial values we have taken starting 
value d a equal to one then we are getting a  a v a  and finally, we will get what is the 
value of H e that is 1.166 . So, by this many trials in this case we have obtained if you are 
putting d a equal to 1.18. So, we are getting  the value of H e equal to 1.294  and that is 
matching with whatever the trial value have computed in the step 1. So, in this case d a 
equal to 1.18. So, you can get H equal to 1.294  here. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:23)  
 Hence d a equal 1.18 from this the table previo us table and in this case you will get V a 
squared 2  is equal to H e minus d  a. So, that equal to 1.294  minus 1.18 that equal to 
0.114  meter . So, velocity head will be 0.114  meter and you can get  the capital H value 
equal to 1.3 to 4 minus V  a square by 2 g. So, that equal to 1.21 meter . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:52 ) 
 
For free board it is the vertical distance from the maximum water surface elevation on 
upstream of head wall to the top of head wall extension  it is a factor provided against 
possible occurrence of conditions not anticipated during design and protection against  
overtopping by wave action . The total weir depth is given by that equal to small h. 
 
you can see this from the figure . (Refer Slide Time: 24:21 ) 
 
So, it is convenient and logi cal to consider free board in terms of increase d weir 
discharge capacity it also seems logical to assume that the required free board should be 
some function of the overflow through the drop  spillway  that is the capital F it is in the 
possible damage due t o failure increases with an increase in capital A value . Following 
this line of reasoning that the maximum district capacity of the weir with freeboard  be Q 
into 1 plus delta  
So, you will get  
 
The delta is the increasing discharge capacity weir  expresse d as a decimal due to an 
increase in head on the weir equal to f . (Refer Slide Time: 25:10 ) 
 
 
If you will for the freeboard calculation  we use this relationship that equal to delta 
 
 
 
. (Refer Slide Time: 25:35 ) 
 
Next is the wave free board the wave free board is mostly provided  in many cases . We 
use the drop  spillway for reserv oir also and in the reservoir will get the wave heights . So, 
for that our protection against these wave heights sometimes wave free boards are also 
provided . 
(Refer Slide Time:  25:57)  
 
So, for this we generally use the Stephenson’s  equation which is given by 
 and here capital D is the length of fetch  or the length of exposure from weir the wind is 
flowing  and small f W is the wave freeboard in meter . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:23 ) 
 
To solve one example  so, D is given 1800  meter we have to find out what is the value of 
f W. So, by using the Stephenson  formula we can put the value of directly D equal to 
1800  and we wi ll get the wave freeboard as 4.14 meter . 
Thank you . 