Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr. Poulomi Ganguli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 46 
Ogee Spillway  
 
Hello good morning , today we are going to start a new lecture on spillway des ign and 
design problems . Myself Doctor Poulomi Ganguli from agricultural and food 
engineering department at IIT Kharagpur is going to take this lecture . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:33)  
  
So, we have a couple of contents here Ogee  spillway  that is going to cover  at lecture 46 it 
is design principle and a few problems . (Refer Slide Time: 00:47)  
 
So, what is Ogee  spillway ? Ogee  spillway is an important improvement upon free 
overfall  spillway that is the free fall and widely used in concrete , masonry , arch and 
buttress dams . Normal ly, it provide  flow over  gravity dam section . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:09)  
 
Now, coming to the next slide , now the profile of Ogee  spillway  is made in accordance 
with the shape of the lower nappe of free falling  jet. So, this is the  kind of structure in the 
Ogee  spillway and here this is the upper nappe , the surface of the  water profile and the 
lower napp e, which touches the spillway structure and this one is the crest of the spillway . The shape of the lower nappe  of freely falling jet over t he sharp  crested weir 
can be determined by the princip le of projectile . 
In the straight drop spillway type , the jet  falls clearly away from the face of the spillway 
and the gap between the jet and the face is kept  ventilated . In the Ogee  or overfall spill 
overflow spillway , the falling water is made to glide over this curved  profile of the 
spillway . So, this is the kind of structures the Ogee  spillway has and this part is the 
upstream face of the Ogee  spillway . So, depending upon the structure this may be t he 
vertical and it may have some angle . So, this is the kind of structure that we can play 
around . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:33)  
 . 
Now, designing the crest of the Ogee  spillway . So, several standard shape have been 
developed by U. S. Army Corps of Engineer at a Waterway Experimental Station . So, 
this waterway experimental station this is abbreviated as WES  taking the first word of 
each of this word . So, such shapes are known as  WES  standard spillway shape . 
Now, the equation for downstream profile can be appro ximated by the simple empirical 
equation . So, 
 , where K is a constant , H d is the design head including the 
velocity head and y is the co ordinate , x and y are the coordinates of the point on the crest 
profile with the origin at  the highest poi nt C. And K and n are constant depending upon 
the slope of the upstream face the values of K and n can be retrieved from a table . (Refer Slide Time: 03:41)  
 
So, now as  I was telling that a slope of the upstream face of the spillway can be varied  
and depen ding upon the shape and K and n values are also varied . So, for the vertical 
means it is 90 degree angle  K is 2 and n is 1.85. For one is to 3 slope that is one 
horizontal and 3 vertical K value is 1.936 and n value is 1.836. For the slope 1 is to 1.5 
that is one horizontal and one hand half vertical K value is 1.939 n is 1.810. So, 
depending upon the kind of problem  generally these values are given beforehand . 
For a spillway  having vertical face the downstream crest is given by following empirical  
equation  where 
 , n is the constant , 2 H d to the  power 0.85 and multiplied 
by y, y is the total  vertical  height from the gro und surface up to the spillway top. (Refer Slide Time: 04:57)  
 
 Now, as I was mentioning the  different  upstream shaped curve are given by WES  for 
different slope . So, this is the example of vertical face where it is kept at a 90 degree 
angle and here r 1 the radius  is 0.5 of H d, r 2 is 0.2 of H d, a is the this gap which is 
given by point 1.75 of H d and b the breadth is 0.282 of H d. So, these are the kind of 
dimension is given for the vertical face of the Ogee  spillway . 
Now, coming to 1 horizontal and 3 vertical  so, the spillway shape looks like this and here 
again the dimensions are given as per the table . So, r 1 is 0.68 H d, r 2 is 0.21 H d, a is 
again this gap 0.139 H d and b 0.237 H d. And this is the downstream curve and this is 
the upstream curve in case of 1 is to 3 slope . And now coming to 1 is to 5, 1 is to 1.5 
slope  so, this is again a little bit steeper as compared to 1 is to 3 slope and here again the 
design values are given r  1 is 0.48 H d, r 2 0.22 H d, a is 0.115 H d, b is 0.214 H d. So, 
this is the different shape and corresponding dimension of the Ogee  spillway crest 
profile . (Refer Slide Time: 06:41)  
 
Now, coming to the n ext design step  so, now, we will  going to learn the vertical and 
horizontal  coordinates and how to design the shape crest profile of the spillway . So, y is 
function of x, where it is  and again an empirical formulation . So, y is 0.724 multiplied by 
x plus 0.27 H d, where H d is the design height over the  spillway crest  whole to the 
power 1.85 divided by H d. So, this is the kind of equation we are going to use for  
designing of y given we have x values . 
 
So, the upstream shaped  profile is extends up to the p oint where x equal to minus 0.27 H 
d, where the H d is the design height . So, co ordinates of the upper  nappe  for various 
WES  shape of Ogee  spillway are also available and can be utili zed in design  of training 
wall and spillway bridges etc . So, this table is given in the next slide  so, that you can 
understand how this profile and co ordinates  vary with respect to the space . (Refer Slide Time: 08:05)  
 
So, this is the table for making Ogee  profile  so, as I mentioned . So, this is the H d, where 
H d is the  design height  just on the top of the spillway crest and to the surface  of the  
upper surface of the profile and this is  the point where the x  y co ordinates are located . 
So, x is the horizontal , x bar is the horizontal distance and y bar  is the  vertical distan ce 
and this is the upper nappe  and this is the lower napp e. So, based on this  calculation we 
can design the free fall of the  spillway crest and the corresponding upper and lower 
nappe . 
So, this is the table for making Ogee  profile . So, x bar by H d and we can get the 
corresponding values of y, the upper and the lower nappe  co ordinate . So, if we put x  
equal to  0 the corresponding the lower nappe will be minus 0.125 and upper nappe is 
0.832. 
So, like this we again increase  by after certain interval like the tabulated values are given 
for 0.10, then 0.25 and that continues up to 5 and we can get a corresponding values of 
the lower nappe  as well as the upper nappe . So, this is the way we can get the profile of 
the spillway and corresponding lower and upper napp e. (Refer Slide Time: 09:43)  
 
So, now coming to the designing of the crest of the Ogee  spillway . So, co ordinates of 
the lower nappe  is determined by the crest profile . So, here is the  sample for the Ogee  
spillway where we can see the co ordinates of the upper  and the  lower nappe and plotting 
of upper nappe  is useful in determining the clearance between spillway deck bridge and 
the top level of the training wall . And after plotting most of the profile a smooth  gradual 
reverse  curvature is provided at the d ownstream face . As you can see this part is 
highlighted in a circle . 
The reverse curvature  turns the flo w into the apron of the  stilling basin . So, here the 
apron  is located or on  to the spillway discharge channel . So, this is shown in the figure 
and heigh t we mention  keep it as R equal to h by 4 generally and there is some angle on 
which this design is  calculated . So, here the angle theta is kept at 60 degree , but 
depending on the problem it again varies . (Refer Slide Time: 10:57)  
 
Now, the discharge form ula so, this is the sample spillway where H as I explain ed earlier  
is the  height between the ground  and height of the upper profile of the spillway . H d is 
the design head , H a is the velocity of approach or it can be  explained as  approach 
velocity head an d 
 , that is sum of  velocity of approach as well as the design 
head . Here it is the total th e tail  water and is the water level of the upstream surface of 
the spillway . 
So, the design discharge is explain ed in C equal CL e He to the  power 3 by 2 where 3 by 
2 is the  exponent here . So, L e is the length of the spillway crest C coefficient of 
discharge that again depends on many  factors and we are going to explain the step by 
step how this coefficient of discharge varies . H e is the total head over the crest  including 
the velocity of approach . So, H e as I explained earlier is a sum of H d and H a where H 
d is design head and H a is the approach velocity . (Refer Slide Time: 12:21)  
 
Now, the variation of coefficient of discharge  so, the how the coefficient of d ischarge 
varies depending upon the problem in hand . So, C depends on the depth of approach or 
in other words the ratio between h  by H d so, this is the h and H d. So, the C varies  
between the ratio of h by  H d here . So, if h by H d is greater than 1.33 velocity of 
approach has negligible effect on the discharge in such a case H a is 0 and since H e is a 
summation of H d plus H a, if we put H a as 0. So, H e will become equal to H d and in 
that case C will become 2.2. So, as you can see this design chart whe re C is shown as 2.2 
in case of  h by H d ratio is 1 point greater than 1.33. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:35)  
 However , if h by H d ratio is less than 1.33 a curve  like the  shown in the figure is used to 
evaluate the value of C. Now, the upstream  slope the value  of C found out up to now is  
for only the vertical upstream face , but in case of  the upstream V by h ratio is more  
somewhat different the correction factor by which above value of C should be multiplied 
if it is the  V by h ratio is  something different from  1 is to 1. So, a curve  is drawn here  so, 
in the centre this is V by h ratio is 1 is to 1 and here  if the slope are different to that . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:17)  
. 
Now, coming to the submergence problem , if this is a case is showing where the 
submergence p roblem can arise . So, here h d where d  is the depth of submergence and h 
d plus d again  h d is the design head here and d is the depth of this profile and divided by 
H e is the total again the sum of H a and  H d is greater than 1.7. Then what happens ? 
There is no effect on C or the coefficient of discharge , otherwise a graph is used to 
obtain a correction factor thus we can get a final value of C. (Refer Slide Time: 15:00)  
 
Effect of  actual prevailing head on the discharge capacity of spillway . So, head ov er the 
spillway crest will not be same at  all the time . So, when the head passing over the 
spillway is less than the neglect  design head the coefficient of discharge tends to reduce 
and in that case it is given by  
 
 Where H is actual operating head or the velocity head and H e is the design head 
including the velocity head . 
So, for lower head coefficient of discharge goes on reducing and it tends to become 
constant at about 1.7. (Refer Slide Time: 15:53)  
 
Now, coming to the design of the length of the Ogee spillway . So, here you can see the 
various  shape of the piers  are located . So, L e so, L e is the length of the spillway is a 
function of L that is that net clear length of the spillway crest and  some empirical 
constant . So,  
  
where n  is the number of  piers  used for the design and  which is multiplied by  H e that is 
total design head on the crest including the velocity head . As you remember the  H e is 
again the sum of H a plus that is velocity of approach plus H d the design head . 
So, the corresponding different shape of the pier  is shown here . So, it can be in many  
form like pointed nose  pier, again the 90 degree  cut water n ose pier, square pier with 
corners round  and blunt nose  square . So, these are  some commonly used piers are used in 
practice  and dep ending upon the design we use the coefficient of discharge as well as the 
C p constant varies . (Refer Slide Time: 17:15)  
 
Now, coming to different values of K p so, for the square nose pier without any rounding 
as you can see  here this is the square nose power  pier, but the corners rounded , but here 
the square nose pier with without any rounding the coefficient of  contraction is taken as 
0.1. Again the square no se pier with cor ner rounded on radius equal to 0.1 of pier 
thickness it is 0.02. 
So, like that f or different values of  different  kind of shape the pier shape as well as the 
shape of a butment  the coefficient of contraction  the value K p as well as the coefficient 
of contraction coefficient  K a varies and a table value  is given depending upon the 
probl em at hand . (Refer Slide Time: 18:13)  
 
Now, these are  some of the simple design principle  which we explain ed earlier and now 
based on that once we have the problem it will be more clear how to design a Ogee  
spillway . 
So, now, coming to the design problem  design a suitable section of  for the overflow 
portion of a concrete gravity dam having the downstream face sloping  at a slope of 0.7 
horizontal  and one vertical . The design discharge for the spillway  is kept around  8000 
cumecs , the height of the spillway c rest is kept as little relative level  of 204 metre and 
average river  bed level at the site is 100 metre . The spillway length consists of 6 spans 
having a clear width  of 10 metre each . 
So, this information will need it for  designing the capacity and the thi ckness of the pier 
may be taken to be 2.5 metre . So, these are  some of the basic information we are given . 
So, how to design the spillway in this case ? (Refer Slide Time: 19:25)  
 
 
 
So, first we  will study the discharge capacity of the spillway and the l ength and then one 
by one we are going to  approach this problem . So, first as we mentioned earlier  so, H is 
the height here and H e is the total height which  is combination of velocity of approach 
as well as design head . So, these  things we already have in  mind . So, the discharge  
acquired  to the constant of the times the L e the length  e and H to the power 3 by 2. 
So, let us  first out and work out an approximate value of H e here. So, the L e is the 
length of the clear  water way  which was  as I explain ed earlier which is a 6 pier. So, 6 
multiplied by 10 which is the 10 metre  was the width of this spans . 
So, total length is around 60 metre . So, now, plug-in into this  figures here . So, the 
discharge is  8000 and see first it is an approximation . So, first we take C as 2.2 and H e 
is the 60 metre , L is the 60 metre here and H e and thee to exponent 3 by 2. 
So, like this we calculate the value of H e which is the total head is coming around sorry  
total head is coming around 15.5 metre . Now, coming to the next step. (Refer Slide Time: 21:10)  
 
 
Height of the spillway above the river bed . So, here h is 204 which is this figure here. 
The height of the spillway crest is kept RL as 204 metre and average river  bed level at 
the site is 100 metre . So, the total height of t he spillway crest  is h 204 subtracted by 100 
is total now 104 metre. 
Now, since h by H d that is the ratio between 104 and the design head is mor e than 1.33, 
we can  directly  assume that it is a high spillway and therefore, the effect of velocity head  
is negligible . Since, H d plus d  upon  H e is also we calculate and we found that it is again 
more than 1.7. So, here you can concl ude that  discharge coefficient is not affected by tail 
water condition and spillway remains act as a high spillway . (Refer Slide Ti me: 22:23)  
 
Now, we designed upstream  profile , the upstream face of the dam and spillway is 
proposed to be kept vertical here ; however, a batter of 1 is to 10 will be provided from 
stability point of view in the lower part which is shown here . So, this ba tter is small  will 
not have any effect on the coefficient of discharge . So, this is the axis of this  spillway 
which is supposed to kept vertical ; however, a batter clearance of 1 is to 10 is provided 
for stability  point of view which is shown here . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:01)  
 
 Now, coming to the design of effective length of the spillway where  length is given by 
this formula assuming that 90 degree cut water a  nose piers  and rounded abutment shall 
be provided . So, in this case we have from the table the K p value  is 0.01 and K a is 0.1. 
Hence, as the problem given the number of pier was 5. So, n equal to 5 here so, assuming  
the actual value of H e is slightly more than the approximate value whic h is worked out 
here let it say 16.3 metre . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:51)  
 
So, H e the coming to the L e after plug ging all these values here which is the length is 
coming to be 55.1 metre . Now, plugging to the old equation  the discharge coming here 
the H e is 16.4 metre  where again  the coefficient of discharge was taken  as 2.2 and L we 
calculated the 55.1. So, if we plug  these  values  here we get a H e value as 16.3 metre . 
Hence, the assumed H e for calculating L e is and the crest  profile will be designed for H 
d that is  height 16.2 metre and  neglecting the velocity head . (Refer Slide Time: 24:30)  
 
 
 
Now, coming  to alternate way of calculating the velocity of approach . So, the velocity of 
approach can be calculated in any of this 2 formula other than the one we calculated . So, 
velocity of approach is can be the ratio o f the discharge divided by the  area. So, since 
this is the area calculation and the discharge we already given as the  8000 cumecs  and 
thickness of each pier is 2.5 metre and  we have the 5 piers  and this is taken here . And the 
velocity of head is V square b y 2g. So, this is this way  also it can be calcu lated . So, this 
is very small therefore, it neglected . (Refer Slide Time: 25:15)  
 
Now, coming to the downstream profile , the downstream profile is given by following 
formula . So, before we determine various c oordinates of downstream profile we first 
determine the tangent point . The down stream slo pe of the curve is given as 0.7 
horizontal and 1 vertical  so, dy by dx is 1 upon 0.7. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:39)  
 
So, now, we need to differentiate and after different iating this equation we can get the x 
value as 22.4 metre and y  value as 14.6 metre . (Refer Slide Time: 25:49)  
 
Now, we have this co ordinate and after plugging  this value , we can get a profile shape 
or the curve . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:57)  
 
 
 Now, the u pstream  profile maybe design ed using this equation and using H d equal to 
16.4 metre  we can get a profile shape here and this curve should go up to x equal to 
minus 0.27 H d which is shown here . (Refer Slide Time: 26:13)  
 
Now, after plugging  this value 1 upon another we can get the clear x values and 
corresponding to y value of profile shape we can obtain . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:23)  
 
Now, this profile of the spillway  is plotted in the figure and a reverse curve  at the toe as a 
is mention ed here h by 4. So, 26 metre can be drawn at an angle of 60 degree  as shown 
in the figure . 
So, so in this way the profile shape is located , this is a tangent point  axis of the spillway 
and this is the  height that 1 is to 10 batter clearance is provided here at an angle and h ere R equal to 26 metre profile at the end . So, this way you design a  Ogee  spillway and  it is 
lecture is ended  here. 
Thank you . 