Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultur al and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 26 
Gully Control Measures  
 
Hello, friends . Welcome back , to NPTE L online certification course on Soil and Water 
Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendra S ingh, Professor in Agricultural and Food in 
the department of  IIT Kharagpur . We are in week 6, this is lecture 26 and the topic today 
is Gully Control Measures . Let us look at the cover content  for this particular week . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:40 ) 
 
We are studying  this week today lecture 26, where we wi ll be introducing gully control 
measures . Lecture 27, will be covering gully control measures again , but the focus will 
be on permanent  structures ; lecture 28 will be on design considerations for permanent 
gully control  structures and then in lectures 29 and 30 we will cover the basics of open 
channel hydraulics in two parts . Part – 1 in lecture 29 and part – 2 in lecture 30. (Refer Slide Time: 01:15)  
 
So, let us  start with the gully  control measures and  the gully control measures since 
prevention of the formation of a gully is easier and preferable than controlling  an 
existing gully . One of the major steps in the gully control  program is to plan the co ntrol 
of runoff from the  drainage area . So, basically is the old saying goes prevention is better 
than cure , so it can prevent the formation of the gully  itself that will always be better 
economical from an environmental point viewpoint of view also it wil l be better and  
obviously, preferable .  
And as we know the entire process of gully formation , you remember  we have to go into 
the basics of the  soil erosion mechanics you remember that we started with the soil 
erosion and we say that it all starts with the  raindrop splash erosion . So, whenever a 
raindrop occurs , there will be a splash and the loose soil particles will be spread on the 
surface . 
When the rain continues after satisfying the infiltration requirement of th e soil after 
satisfying the infiltration  capacity of the soil flow  starts on the surface that is o verland 
flow starts and typically the flow is in the form of a thin sheet of layer , and that is why it 
is sometimes referred to a sheet flow and once this flow starts taking place whatever 
loose soi l particles are there on the surface , they will be washed away. They will be 
taken  along or they will be carried along with the flowing water and this kind of erosion  
referred to is sheet erosion . And, if the sheet flow is allowed to continue for a long pe riod of time there on surface 
finger  life structures are created and these finger -like structures are referred to as rills 
and this erosion is referred to as rill erosion . But, we also know that these rills can be 
easily taken care of by primary tillage  equipment or  through primary tillage operations , 
but we do not take care of these ril ls and allow the water to flow through these rails , 
slowly their dimension and grows  and gully formation occurs . 
So, basically in the nutshell , it is the flow  that is respon sive for right from the sheet 
erosion to rill erosion  to the gully erosion . So, the formation see s the gully formation 
happens because of the flow or because of the runoff . So, that is why if the statement 
here says  that if we can control runoff then  obvio usly, we can control the formation  of 
the gully  itself. 
Now, there are three  possible ways of controlling runoff . One is the retention of runoff in 
the gullied  area, the second is the diver sion of runoff around the gullied  area and the 
third is the conveya nce of runoff through the  gully . So, there are these are the three 
possible ways in whi ch we can control runoff . So, let us  see these possibilities one after 
the other . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:40 ) 
 
So, if we  talk about the retention of runoff in the gullied  area then it is possible through  
good crop management and by adopting  appropriate conservation  practices . So, up till 
now if you remember in  several lectures , where we are talking about soil conservation majors , we talked about the biological  or vegetativ e measures , we also talked about the 
engineering measure s. And, some of these were contour  farming where we  do all 
cultivation along the contour . Strip cropping where there are three  types of strip 
croppings if you remember  well strips crops are grown in s trips across the slope or the 
engineering majors like bunding  and terracing . So, either we can go for  bunding a 
particular area or  terracing a particular area and we know that all the images focus on 
conse rving the water on th e surface . 
So, I mean if we al low or if we go for contour farming or strip cropping then whatever 
water is there , two things are there that in between these contours whatever area there . 
The f irst thing we are cutting down the  slope length is that we are not allowing flow to 
take off -take for  flow through for a longer slope length number 1. Number 2 we have 
provisions of storing , the water in between two contours or in between strips and because 
of that  the infiltration opportunity  time is more ; that means, more of water could 
infiltrat e into the soil and  soil moisture reserve will go up initially and finally, 
groundwate r recharge will also take place . 
The s ame is the concept in bu nding , contour bunding  especially , and the terracing that is 
bund terracing  or even the level type of terrac ing which are focused more on moisture 
conservation . So, we know that  where contour bunds are used runoff  is greatly reduced  
because we know that  we have discussed in great detail  that when we build contours then  
obviously, what we see that this particular  area, which acts as a catchment  area in 
between th is two contour . So, whatever rainfall occurs there that we would focus on 
retaining that over that particular area , we do not allow water to flow away . So, that is 
why runoff is contour  or runoff is  comple tely conserved within the contour area . 
So, on cultivated areas , small and medium -sized gullies can also be reclaimed by placing  
a series of  earth fills across  the g ully. So, already we have seen contour  farming strip 
cropping bunding  and terracing these a re effective measures for retaining runoff within 
the gullied area or the catchment , which is affected by gully formation , but even the 
cultivated areas where there are small or medium -sized gullies are there they can be 
reclaimed . If we cannot go  for any of these measures then at least by placing a series  of 
earth fills across the gully . So, these earth fills which if they have phased across the gully they will nothing , but act 
like contour bunds  or a dam in the gully  itself and  that means, whatever water is there in 
between two of these earth fills that will be conserved . Also, this earth fills  will cut the 
slope length , also the re are not allowed or rather they will regulate the flow of water . So, 
because of that also it will  possible to retain most of th e runoff within the gullied  area 
and over the period  the grasses or  the vegetation will grow and  the gully could be 
reclaimed  in this particular fashion . So, this is how retention of runoff in the gullied area 
is possible . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:03)  
 
But, here you know many times we are referring to  small , medium gullies . So, it is 
worthwhile to have a relook at the gully  classification as per size  because throughout the 
lecture or following lectures will be again referring to this small , medium , and large  size 
several times . So, it is worthwhile to have a relook at the gully  classification as per size .  
So, a small gully earlier we classified that a small gully is  a gully is called small when 
the depth is less than 1 meters and the contributing drainage  area is less than 2 hectares . 
It is referred to  as this medium when the depth varies  over 1 to 5 meters and drainage 
area where is over 2 to 20 hectares and gullies effort is large when the depth is greater 
than 5 meters and drainage area is greater  than 20 hectares . 
So, just now we saw we said small and medium gully is  can be declared by putting earth 
fills, so that means, you are talking about the  gully  within these classes that is where the depth was limited to  5 meters and the drainage area  was limited to 20 hectare s. So, this is 
the table  I mean  whenever we say a smaller medium or large will be referring to these 
numbers or these parameters . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:21)  
 
 Then , next is a diversion  runoff gully  runoff around the gullied area . So, complete 
elimination of runoff from the gullied area is , of course,  the most effective control . So, 
just now we saw that if we can retain everything within the gully  area, then there is 
nothing like that and , but if it is not possible then the other alternative is should divert the 
runoff around the  gullied area and for that terraces and diversion ditches  can be used  for 
diverting runoff from  it is a natural outlet . 
And, terraces are very  effective in the control of small gullies on cultivated fields or even 
medium -size shallow gullies . So, basically what we are saying is that  if because gully 
typically  if this is the gully . So, the gully typically will the flow is allowed along the 
gully it will go to is a natural outlet , but what we are saying here that , we will diver t the 
flow will not allow the flow to pass through this gully , but will we will divert the flow . 
So, will construct terraces or diversion ditches  so, that the flow can be taken to a 
different outlet and . So, the flow will not pass through the gullied  area that is  the 
function here . 
So, if the slope above a  gully is too  steep for terracing or if the  drainage area is pasture or 
woodland then  divergent ditches may be used to keep the  runoff  out of the gully . So, if terracing is possible then  obviously, we will  go for terracing , but if the slope conditions 
or the cultivation conditions or land use  is such that it is not worthwhile to go for t erraces  
then we can straightaway go for divergent ditches and  already we have discussed that 
function of these terraces ar e divergent , you would be to divert runoff  from the  natural 
outlet of a particular watershed or catchment , which is a gullied  area that we are talking 
about . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:23)  
 
And, the third option is the conveyance of runoff through the gully  itself. So, if it is not 
possible to either retain or divert runoff , we saw that for retaining the no retaining the  
runoff  we should have strip cropping , contour  farming , or engineering measures like 
contouring or terracing , but if that is not possible then we saw the diverting that is we 
can use terraces or diverse you have  to take the flow of it to another outlet . But if these 
possibilities are not there then  obviously, we have no option , but to allow the runoff to  be 
conveyed  to the gully  itself. So, the gully has to be used for conveying the  excess flow , 
and for that  I mean that could be possible if vegetation is  established in the gully . 
So, obviously, since we do not have any option , but to allow the flow to pass through the 
gully . So, then we must take precautions that the flow is at a non -erosive  velocity that it 
does not  cause any erosion  of the gully bed or the gully sites. So, that the size of the 
gully  will not extend and also no erosion takes place . So, nonerosion flow velocity and 
for that , it is essential that vegetation is established  in the gully . So, if vegetation bed s in sites are completely covered ; that means, they are  a gully is converted mostly into a 
vegetative waterway or to into a vegetated water way then obviously, if the flow takes 
place, then that will not be the interest -only thing we have to see that  flow is allowed to 
take place it at a non erosion  velocity . 
Then another possibility could be th ere soil conservation  structures are built at  critical 
points to give primary control . So, along  with vegetation , we can also go for soil 
conservation  structures like dams which are like we  just earlier discussed  earth fills also. 
So, earth fills or dams  so, that if they are constructed . So, they will cut down the flow 
length number 1. Then, because they will have certain in  I mean certain  sill height over 
which the flow is allowed to take place . So obviously, there will be some temporary 
storage it in within the gullied  area or the gully  itself and that will allow the water to 
infiltrate that is  the total flow  can be  reduced to a certain extent . 
So, that means, these are the three  possibilities either w ill retain the entire runoff in the 
gullied area if possible , if not then we  convey the water  or divert the water to another 
outlet by using terra ces or diversion ditches and if both these are not possible and we 
have to definitely conve y the water through the gullied self, then we have to see that first 
the gully  is completely covered with vegetation or it  basically it becomes it  behaves like 
a veg etative waterway and if the flow is even more then we can even take the help of 
some kind of soil conserva tion structures that can be built across the gully  to further 
control the flow or to cut down the slope length and the total flow also . So, these are the 
possibilities of  controlling  runoff . So, either of those  we can adopt . (Refer Slide Time: 15:45)  
 
Now, gully control measures if we see , then broadly they can be classified into two 
categories biological  or vegetative measures and engineering  measures . So, there are the 
two different sites and if you look at the  biological or vegetative measures then there are 
several possibilities like  sort flumes , anti-erosion cropping or crops , low sodded  earth 
fills, changing gully into the grass ed waterway , sod strip che cks, trees shrubs . So, there 
are many possibilities utilizing which the gully can be controlled  and all these belong to 
biological or vegetative measures because as you can see that some kind of vegetation is 
involved in all of these . 
Then on the ot her side , we have engineering measures if the flow is much larger or 
significant then ; obviously, we have to go for engineering measure s and engineering 
measure s can further be classified into two categories that temporary  gully control  
structures and  perm anent  gully control  structures . So, we have biological or vegetable 
vegetative measures , we have engineering measures and engineering measures can be 
further classified as temporar y gully control structures  or permanent gully control 
structures . (Refer Sli de Time: 17:05)  
 
And, if we talk about the measures to control gully then we have , of course,  we have just 
now seen which biological or  vegetative measures , where an ti-erosion crops are grown 
that not  only stabilize the gully  but can also supplementary income . So, for establishing 
the gully we grow some kind of anti-erosion  crops and of course  because some these  
crops are grown . So, supplementary  income will also be there and the re may be  
supplemented by  gully control  structures as we have seen by earth fill and all . 
Then , on the engineering  measures we have temporary  gully control structures which are 
effective for low runoff  and have a life of  3 to 8 years and  other the  category permanent 
gully control structures and we will see each one of them in great detail  in this lecture or 
in following lectures . (Refer Slide Time: 17:57)  
 
So, today we look into vegetative measures , various vegetative measures . One of them is 
converting  a gully into a grass waterway , just now we saw that if you have to convey  the 
flow of water through  the gully then one way is to convert the gully  into a grass 
waterway and small and medium -sized gullies can be cut water  into grass waterways and 
that is why we are also saying that we always refer to th is sizes -small , medium so , that 
means if we refer the value ; that means, the depth is limited to 5 meters and the drainage 
area is limited to 20 hectares , that is  when we say small and medium -sized gullies . So, 
they can be converted into grass waterway s. 
In practice , the gully is  shaped a nd suitable species of  grasses are grown . So, some kind 
of shape is given to  the gully may be parabolic as  we discussed the various grass 
waterways , they can be triangular , trapezoidal , or parabolic ; parabolic  is more practical . 
So, some kind of shape has to be provided and a suitable  species of grass has to be grown 
and already we have seen that there can be various types of  grasses we have seen  
discussed during the vegetative waterway  when if you are just talkin g about the 
vegetative waterway . 
And, channe l cross -section should be  broad and flat to keep  water spread uniformly over 
a wide area . And, that is primarily because every time  we have to  talk about  non-erosi ve 
either non -erosi ve velocity  or we have we also used another  term permissible velocity . 
So, for either of these , we have to keep the velocity limited to  these either no n-erosive or permissible , so that the flowing water cannot cause any erosion . So, that is why the 
cross -section has to be flat enough . So, that velocity is limited to  within the p ermissible 
limits or within the  nonerosion  limits . So, this we have to take care of . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:56)  
 
Next, major could be sodded flumes  sod is nothing , but turf, basically that is soil with 
grass that is sod  that is  another  common term used is turf. So, this is used to control over 
fall in  gullies  with less than 3-meter  head and  10-hectare area . So, kind of  medium gully 
it can be controlled .  
So, total over the length the total fall is less than limited to 3 meters , and the area  
drainage areas are 10 hectares . And, because it is a sod flume as you can see there will be 
a flume kind of  structure will be provided ; that means, sloping  the sods will be placed in 
such a way that it x like a  flume through over which the water flows through . 
And, the sl ope with that is to be provided that is the slope we are talking about  that 
depends on soil type , size of the  watershed , height of  over fall , and type of  sod used . 
Basically , when we say  the size of the watershed , basically the flow  magnitude that is 
that the structure has to handle , soil type  talks about the stability of  slope  that is  we know 
that the slope is always decided for even for bunds  etcetera  based on the soil type . And, 
the height of  over fall will also determine how much energy is to be a job a nd type of sod 
used that is what kind of turf  here using all these usually govern  what is the type of 
slope . And, to maintain a non -erosive  velocity flume should be  wide enough just now we 
discussed for gully also that we have to maintain  a non -erosive  velocity of flow over the 
wide and maximum depth of flow where the flume should not exceed  30 centimeter s. So, 
this is another limitation that the flow depth here on the surface is the  flow depth  we are 
talking about  that is limited to  30 centimete rs. So, but use these  practically used in field 
conditions and vegetative measures . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:13)  
 
Then the other  measure could be where again sods are used  and this time the measure is 
called sod strip checks . So, basically , these are best adapted in  small gullies that have 
small to  medium -sized  water sheds . So, small gullies  small to medium -sized water sheds. 
Then here , there is the name  itself suggest we use sod strips as fully  as check . So, strips 
are laid across the gully channel having a minimum width  of 30 centimeters and 
extending at least  15 centimeter s on gully sides . 
So, basically , as you can see here that  the width of these strips which we are provided . 
So, you can see that  this series of  strips are provided sod is  strip; that means, the turf is 
basically put here  to form these strips and  usually these strips width of these strips is 30 
centimeters and the strip is spacing  usually varies  from  1.5 to 2 meter . So, strip to strip 
distance is 1.5 to 2 meters , and is already mentioned that  not only the  bed of the channel 
bed or gull y bed  but also it is extended to th ese sites. So, that th ese sites are also protected . So, there is no erosion or soil sediment coming from these sites into the 
channel bed . So, this is what we have to be careful  of. 
(Refer S lide Time: 23:45)  
 
Then, we have  third categories sod checks . So, they can be use d a substitute  temporary 
gully control  structures in the small  and medium -sized  gully . So, they behave more like a 
temporary  gully control structure . So, here you can see  that sods are put in to form a kind 
of a dam . So, this is nothing , but we can also call it a  sod dam a kind of dam is put here 
across the  gully and the typical dimensions of these are maximum height is 45 
centimeters , upstream side slope is 3 is to 1 and down stream side means 4 is to 1. 
So, we see that the approach as well on the downside we have a  flatter slope , so that 
suddenly water do es not approach these structure  and also while flowing out  it does not  
fall directly , but passes through a  flat slope  so that the velocity general control and not 
too much of kinetic energies generated . So, that is why these typical dimensions are used 
in the case of  these sod checks . (Refer Slide Time: 25:01 ) 
 
Then, we have  temporary gully control structures  the next and the temporary gully 
control  structures are made from locally  available materials and a life of  3 to 8 years . 
This is also important thing is there  they are made of  locally available materials and for  a 
life of 3 to 8 years . And, various  temporary gully control  structures could be woven wire 
check dam , brush  dam, loose rock dam , plank , or slab dam. 
And, the basic purpose they serve is to retain  more water as well as  soil for proper plant 
growth that is soil and water conservation , and prevent channel erosion unt il satisfactory  
vegetation is established . So, it is basically gully reclamation , so that vegetation grows 
sufficiently  so that no further erosion or no extension in size of the gully  could take  
place . (Refer Slide Time: 28:57)  
 
So, design criteria for te mporar y checks are the overall height of these temporary 
structures  should be limited to 75 centimeters , this is an important thin g. Then spillway 
capacity of the check  dam is generally designed  to handle peak runoff that  may be 
expected  over 5 to 10 years . So, 3 to 8 years of life . So, that is why the frequency  at 
which the peak runoff either rate or the volume has to be calculated a s 5 to 10 years.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:29)  
 
And, next condition is that  this deals with the spacing between the  temporary ch ecks. So, 
check dams  theoretically should be  spaced in such a way  that the crest elevation of one will be the same as the bottom  elevation of the  adjacent dam upstream . So, this is the top , 
this is the  bottom . So, they should be aligned , in such a way  that this bottom matches 
with the top here or the crest here . And that will the elevation will depend on  the distance 
will depend on the  land slope will  govern the spacing . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:11)  
 
And, of course,  another important part is that most of the check dams  an apron must be 
provided . So, on the downstream side apron  has to be provided , so that the  to catch the  
water falling  over the top and to conduct it  safely without  scouring. So, that no scouring 
takes place on the downstream side . (Refer Slide Time: 27:33)  
 
So, let us start with woven wire check dams used in gullies of moderate slope and small  
drainage area s. The d am is commonly built -in half-moon shape  with open . So, this is 
basically a half-moon shape and  it shows that flow is coming from thi s side , and offset 
equal one -sixth of the width of the gully  at the dam site is optimum . So, this is off-set 
when we say  this is off -set basically . So, what kind of a  dia is used that is  governed by 
this offset . So, this offset  is one-sixth . 
(Refer Slide T ime: 28:13)  
 Then, continuing with this a row of posts is set along the curve of the proposed  dam at 
about  1.2-meter interval s and sixty to ninety centimeter s deep . So, this is the interval is 
1.2 meters and these are going in up to 60 to 90 centimeters . Heavy gauge woven wire is  
placed against the  post with the lower part  set at 20 –15 to 20 deep  so that 25 to 30 
centimeter s project above the  ground surface along  with the spillway interval . So, that 
means, the woven wire goes even below the surface soil s urface this is the woven wire if 
you can see . So, it is placed even below the surface . 
A sod fill is  used on the  upstream side to  regulate the flow o ver the c rest. So, is some 
kind of fill is used  so that water  gets to stand . So, suddenly a large flow does  not hit the 
structure  and rock brush or  sod may be placed for the length of  1.2 meters  to form the 
aprons on the downs tream  side we  have an apron  and on the upstream  side, we have a 
sod fill . So, these protections are also provided . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29: 21) 
 
Then we have brush dams . They are best  suited for gullies  will small drainage area s for a 
distance of 3 to 4, 4, and half meters along  with the site of structure  sides and bottom of 
the gully  are covered with a thin layer of straw  or similar fine mulch. So, wherever we 
decide that we will put this structure  so, over around  3 to 4 for 3 to 4 and a half meters 
we put  the straw or fine mulch . 
Brushes are then packed close together over this mulch . So, then brushes are put together 
and several rows of sta kes are driven crosswise  in a gully with rows 60 centimeter s apart and s takes  30 – 60 centimeter s apart in the rows . So, several rows you can see row 1, row 
2, row 3 we will put several sti cks and then finally, heavy galva nized wire is used  to 
fasten the stakes in a row as well as firmly  compress the  brushes in place  
So, that I mean there are several rows  so that they  block the flow of water they conserve 
the energy of the flow and also control the flows for that  erosion  velocity could be 
controlled . 
(Refer  Slide Time: 30:33)  
 
 Next is loose rock damp . So, it is the name  itself suggest ed in this case we use loose 
rocks  and these are also suitable  for small to medium -sized drainage area s. A trench is 
first made across the gully  to a depth of about  30 centime ters to form the base . So, a 
depth is used  30 centimeter s to the base is formed .  
Flat stones are the best choice as they can be  laid in such a way that  the entire structure is  
key together . So, if stones are flat then one over the other they can be laid , and the center 
of the dam is kept  lower than the  sides to form , a spillway . So, this is the center . So, the 
center is always kept (Refer Time: 3 1:13). So, some kind of depression is there , so that 
that x is we are opening . 
And, to serve as an apron several  large flat rocks may  be countersunk  below the spillway 
extending about  1 meter  downstream  from the base of the dam . So, the on the downstream side will  provid e an apron  by countersinking  large flat rocks for about 1-
meter length . 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:41)  
 
 Then we have a plank or slab dam which is  suitable for areas with plentifu l timber . 
Suitable  for gullies  with large drainage areas and these planks are placed across the  gully 
to form the dam . So, as you can see here  these planks surface to form the da m, and a 
suitable opening for  the spillway  notch is made over the headwall . So, some kind of 
opening  will be provided here . So, some kind of  I mean when  these are placed  they have 
placed something like this  so, the opening will there . 
And, on the downstrea m side on the upstream face , a well-tempered earth fill is  made 
again like . So, that flow comes smoothly and  on the downstream side , an apron is made 
true for  looser. So, almost in all  cases , we have to see that flow  approaches there is some 
kind of approa ch and there is a n apron that is a must . (Refer Slide Time: 32:39)  
 
And, lastly , we have a long dam  which is  the stabilized gully head . So, basically , locks 
are used here . They are used for gully  stabilization which ha s less than 100 meter s in 
length and the catchment area  is less than 2 hectares and the maximum height of  the dam 
is 1.5 meters from the ground surface .  
So, that you can see that  it is a maximum of 1.5 meters from the ground surface , this is 
the natural ground and the spillway is  rectangular  in shape . Typical a spillway is  
provided that is in most of the cases either rectangular or semicircular and  the length and  
depth of the spillway are 1 to 2 meters and  0.5 to 6 meters respectively . So, this is 0.5 to 
6 meters and  this is spillway length i s 1 to 2 meters . So, these are the typical dimensions 
that are recommended . 
So, we have seen that we have vegetative or biological measures , on one hand . Then we 
have  also temporary structures  where which are made by locally available material . So, if 
logs or slabs are available we will go  for that , if only sods are there then we wi ll use 
them  if nothing else is there we can convert  the gully into a vegetative waterway .  
So, I mean depending upon the availability and depending upon the size of the gully  as 
well the drainage area will either adopt biological measures or temporary  gully control 
structures and  so, that the whole idea is that the flow is controlled and  so that no erosion 
could take place no further erosion could take place in the gullied  area. So, with this background , we will close today and then we will see  about the permanent 
gully  control structures in the next lecture . 
Thank you very much . 