Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr. Bhabagrahi Sahoo  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 37 
Gate-Type Q uestions on Drop Spillway  
 
Welcome students our next lecture on the solution of some Gate Questions on this 
specifically the Drop Spillway . So, in this lecture we will discuss about some of the 
Typical Gate Type of Questions  on the design of Drop Spillway . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:38)  
 
Now, if you look to look to pr oblem number 1  on the  slide . The question  is the design 
discharge of a drop spillway is 7 cumec . If the length of the re ctangular weir is 4.2  metre , 
what is the height  of the end sill? 
So, from here  you can see  discharge q is given 7 cumec . The length of the weir is given 
as 4.2 that is equal to  l and you know that the height  of endsill that is s equal to d  c by 2. 
So, d c means that is the critical depth , to compute critical depth  we have to  use the 
formula q square divided g l  square whole to the power 1  by 3. (Refer Slide Tim e: 01:17)  
 
 
 
So, by putting these values  we will get d c equal to  0.657 becaus  e Q equal to 7 g equal 
to 9. 81 and L equal to 4.2. So, we will get 0. 657 as the critical flow depth . 
So, once the critical flow depth is known , the endsill height  can be est imated as d  c by 2 . 
So, that is equal to 0.657 divided by 2 . So, you will g et approximately  point 0.329  metre 
ok. So, this is a typical  question on the design of endsill if you will know the  design 
discharge  ok. (Refer Slide Time: 02:04)  
. 
Now, coming to the second problem ; you have already solved similar type of problems . 
So, the question is that a gully  section having a drop of 2.5 metre  receives runoff from a 
100 hectare upstream  area ha ving runoff coefficient of 0.3 6. So, here the gully  section is 
having a drop means that is your F, F equal to 2. 5 metre as shown  in this figure . 
So, your F equal to 2. 5 metre and  your catchment area is equal to 100 hectare because it 
is the area which is contributing runoff to the gully section and the runoff coeffic ient of 
this catchment is 0. 36. So, k is equal to 0.36 the design storm for this area is 12 
centimetre per hour so ; that means, i the rainfall  intensity is 12 centimetre per hour 
which is occurring  mostly for the duration of equal to the time of concentration o f this 
catchment ok . 
So, once  i is known the runoff coefficient k is known area is known . So, you can use the  
rational  formula to compute what is your peak runoff ; that is your  design peak run off. 
So, that equal to q  equal to c  i a or k  i a ok. So, then th e question is that if  the practical 
length of  the weir section  of the drop spillway to be constructed at this gully section is 5 
metres so; that means, L should be 5 metre  the length of the weir should be 5 metre . So, 
once l is known the question  that what  should be the height  of the head wall. 
The height  of head wall can be given as f plus s  so, you can see this height  in the figure . 
So, the drop plus the height  of the  endsill s  so, in this case the valu e of drop is given as 
2.5 metre . So, you need to we have to compute the , what is the height  of endsill that is equal to S. So, you have  already  estimated what is the height  of S in the previous 
question . So, in a similar way you can estimate the height  of endsill  that is s equal to d c 
by 2 or critical depth of flow divided  by 2. So, for this  the first  step is to compute what is 
your design key value ok . Now we will estimate the design key value by using the 
rational formula . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:43)  
. 
 
 
 
We can see here the given value of drop is 2.5 metre, weir length is 5 metre , area of 
catchment is 100 hectare , design intensity of rainfall is 12 centimetre  per hour and runoff 
coefficient of the catchment is 0. 36, the height  of the endsill  height  of the head wall is 
given by  F plus S; so, S equal to d c by 2 so, you will get F plus d c by 2.  
So, in this formula first you have  to compute  what is the value of d  c to compute the 
value of d  c you need the value of Q the design discharge  and the length of weir ok. So, 
Q can be estimated by using the rational f ormula which is nothing , but Q equal to KIA. 
So, K equal to 0. 36 I A is equal 10 centimetre per hour and sorry here  I equal to 10  
centimetre per hour  and A equal to 100 hectare ok . So, we wi ll get 0.36 into this is 10 into 10 power  minu s 2 into 3600 . So, it is the unit 
conversion  from  because  this is in centimetre 10 centimetre for  hour; so, from centimetre 
per hour to metre per second . So, for that you  have  to multiply with 10 to the po wer 
minus 2 divided by 3600  into 100 hectare 100 hectare is your catchm ent area . So, into 10 
to the power 4 metre square is the  area so, that is the conversion factor you  are using . 
So, you wi ll get 12 cumec  so, from this you will get 12 cumec your  design  discharge . 
You will put this value of 12 cumec here L equal to 5, then you will get d c equal to 
0.8373 metre  so, they nearly  equal to  0.84 metre . So, height  of the head wall will be equal 
to F plus d c by 2 that is F plus s . So, you will get 2. 5 is F and d c is 0. 84 so, this d c by 2  
will be is a mistake here d c by 2 will be  equal to 0.2 4 so, this value is wrong . So, you 
will get 2.5 plus 0. 42 ok. So, you will get equal to 2.92 metre ok . So, the height  of 
headwall will be  equal to 2.92 metre ok . Then we wi ll get another type of problem  in 
problem number  3 
(Refer Slide Time: 0 7:26)  
. 
 In a drop spillway the height  of the flowing water above the crest  is 0.75 metre if  the 
angle of internal friction of the back fill material  is 35 degree , what is the horizontal 
pressure exerted on the head wall due to this water pressure ? So, what  is given here the 
height  of the flowing water ? So, the value of H is given as 0.75 metre ok  and the angle of 
internal friction of the back fill material  is 35 degree . So, phi is given as 35 degree . Then  what is the horizontal  pressure exerted on the headwa ll due to this water pressure , 
generally what ever the water level is there it exerts a vertical pressure  ok. So, it exerts 
vertical  pressure on this backfill  material and this water pressure  will be converted as or 
converted into the horizontal water press ure if you multiply with the k  b value you have 
already studied  what is the value of k  b. So, that is the ratio between the horizontal to 
vertical water pressures  or horizontal vertical pressure  so, that is equal to given by one 
minus sin phi divided by 1  plus sin phi . So, whatever vertical pressure  will be getting 
from this water  so, that will get transmitted to this backfill and that is the vertical 
pressure , then you have to convert into the horizontal pressure ok . So, with this concept 
now we will solve  the problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:12)  
. 
 
 
 
The vertical pressure due to water  you know that P equal to gamma  w into H gamma w 
is the specific weight  of water . So, that equal to 1000  kg per metre cube and H is equal to 
given that equal to 0. 7 5 metre  ok. So, horizontal pressure exerted on the headwall will 
be K b times P v and K b is computed as 1 minus sin phi divided by 1  plus sin phi and  
here phi equal to 3 5 degree . So, you will get the value of K b equal to 0.2 71. And if you multiply that value wit h this  vertical pressure P v, then we will get  0.271 into 
1000 into 0. 75 which has come from here  ok. So, you will get 20 3.25 kg per metre 
square . So, this is my horizontal pressure which has been transferred to the back fill 
material  because of t he water l evel that is equal to  0.75 metre ok, and that is exerted on 
the headwall ok . Now this is clear . Now we will go to our next problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:35)  
. 
So, this is another typical problem in a drop spillway the height  of backfill material 
above th e apron is 2. 8 metre . You can see from this  figure  the height  of backfill  material  
is given as 2. 8 metre that is equal to Y. The tail water depth is 1.05 metre  you can see 
from this figure the tailwater d epth is given as 1.0 5 metre above the apron the angle  of 
internal friction of the back fill material is 12 degree so ; that means, for the back fill 
material  phi equal to 12 degree  under no flow condition what is the resultant horizont al 
pressure exerted on the head wall specific weight  of backfill is 1050 kg pe r metre cube . 
So, it is telling under no flow condition . So, no flow means there is no water here there is 
no water above the crest  so, it is just like a dry cell ok. So, no water pressure is there on 
the head water ok , so that will b e equal to 0 . So, here what  I have to do ? You have to  
calculate  what is the resultant horizontal pressure . So, the resultant pressure there are two 
horizontal pressures : one is acting  in the positive direction because of the backfill 
material and  another is acting in the revers e way because of the tail water because this is 
your tailwater of 1.0 5 and the resultant will be the upstream water pressure horizontal  water pressure minus the downstream water pressure ok . So, with this concept we will 
now solve the problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:27)  
 
 
 
 
So, from this figure you can see  Y is given as 2.8 metre that is  the height  of the backfill t 
is the tailwate r depth that equal to 1. 05 metre phi is given as 12 degree . That is the angle 
of internal  friction of this backfill material a nd the specific weight  of backfill  is given as 
gamma b  that equal to 1 050 kg per metre cube . 
So, similar you can calculate what is your horizontal pressure due to backfill  the vertical 
pressure will be equal to the weight  of this backfill  material for a height of 2.8 metre  and 
that you can compute  as gamma b  into y and if you multiply with the factor k  b , then 
that will be converted into the horizontal pressure ok . 
So, our vertical pressure is gamma b into Y. So, this vertical pressure  into the k b that is  
equal to 1  minus sin phi  divided by 1 plus sin phi ; so, that will be equal to your 
horizontal  pressure ok . So, you have  phi equal to 12 degree  so, it will be 1  minus  sin 12 
12 degree  divided by 1  plus sin 12 degree into gamma b equal to 1050 and 1.8  is 8 is the  height  of the backfill ok . So, by multiplication you will get 1928.64 kg per metre square . 
So, that is the upstream water pressure  sorry upstream pressure because of the back fill 
material ok . 
Now, you have to  compute  what is the horizontal  pressure due to tailwater which is 
having a depth 1. 05 metre which is acting the opposite direction ok . So, for that simple 
formula you know that is equal to gamma w into t the height  of water depth . So, gamma 
w you know that equal to 1000  kg per metre cube into 1. 05. So, you will get 1 050 kg per 
metre square . So, the resultant horizontal pressure will be P b minus P w. So, that equal 
to 1928. 64 minus 1 050 kg per metre square . So, you will get 878.64 kg per  metre squa re 
which is acting on this head wall in  this direc tion ok . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:58)  
 
Now, we wi ll go for our next problem number 5 in a drop spillway the depths of water  
above the crest , moist backfill , and a submerged backfill are 0. 5 metre , 1.45 metre and 
1.75 metre respectively . So, you can see the f igure , the de pths o f water depth is given as 
0.5 metre  that is given by H ok. 
Then the depth of moist back fill that is given by Y 1 that e qual to 1. 45 metre  and Y 2 
which is  submerged that  equal to 1. 75 metre . If you will  remember  in our previous  
classes we have studied for different type of drainage condition like type a and type b 
type of drainage condition . So, there is saturation line here  and here there is a filter . So, because this saturation line you wi ll get this area this back fill these backfill ma terials  
submerged  ok. 
And because of because your saturation line is here  so, this soil will be naturally mo ist 
and the specific weight  of this moist  backfill  is given as 2000  kg per metre cube and the 
submerged backfill  is given as 1050 kg per metre cube and you know the specific weight  
of water is 1000  kg per metre cube ok . Then question that what is the total vertical 
pressure exerted on the foundation material  due to the water and backfill material . So, 
simply you have to calculate what is the vertical pressure . 
So, vertical pressure equal to gamma into H ok. So, the total vertical pressure will be 
equal to the vertical pressure  due to this water the vertical pressure because of the moist 
backfill having depth of 1. 45 metre and the  vertical pressure  because of  the submerged 
backfill . So, all the se 3 components will be added ok . Now with this concept we will 
solve our problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:12)  
. 
 
 
  
So, vertical pressure  due to water is 1000 into 0. 5 so, that equal to 500 kg per metre 
square . Vertical  pressure due to moi st backfill will be equal to 2000  is your gamma m 
into 1. 45 is the depths  so, you will get 2900  kg per metre square vertical pressure due to 
submerged backfill . So, gamma s equal to 1 050 into 1. 75 is the depth Y 2. So, you wil l 
get 1837.5 ok. 
So, once these three  forces , three  pressures are  computed , now you can  add this  three . 
So, we a re getting 5237.5 kg per  metre square . So, this is a  total weight  vertical pressure 
which is exerted on this foundation material ok . So, this is  a simple  problem , now we 
will solve another problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:07)  
 
 
From the illustrated figure for a drop spillway estimate the horizontal water pressure due 
to the submerged  foundation material above  the plan e of sliding . So, you know wha t is 
the plan e of sliding the plan e of sliding is along this line ok . So, along this line you have  
to estimate that estimate the horizontal water pressure you can see  estimate the horizontal 
water pressure due to the submerged  foundation . So, in the submer ged foundation ; that 
means, this is your submerged foundation and the depth is here Y 3 equal to 1. 6 metre . So, very simple the water pressure will be equal to gamma w into Y 3 ok, so that will be 
equal to 1000  is your gamma w 1000  kg per metre cube  is the  specific weight  of water 
and height  equal  to 1.6 metre . So, that equal to 1600  kg per metre square . So, this is the 
horizontal  water pressure  because of the water which is inside this foundation material 
ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:18)  
. 
Now, we will solve  another typical problem in a drop spillway with 4.5 metre square 
base area and 1  metre base width the  estimated result ant moment  the estimat ed result ant 
moment  means it is restoring  moment minus sum of the restoring moment minus sum of 
the turning moment . 
So, that is given as 17143 kg metre and the vertical resultant  vertical  force is  6843.2 kg. 
So, sigma V is given ok . So, it is asked what is the eccentricity for the structure ; you will 
see this  right hand side  figure the eccentricity is computed as this  d is given as 4.5 
because it is a 4.5 divided by  1 metre . So, you will get d equal to 4.5 metre ok . 
And d by 2  where the centroid through  the centroid line will be equal to 4.5 divided by 2  
ok. So, this is our d  by 2 and this drop spillway  this is the head wall and this is the plane 
of sliding ok , and this is the contact  surface  ok. So, you have  we have taken  origin here 
and our line of reference axis are the downstream is you can see this is our reference axis 
ok. So, from this all these moments  are calcula ted and the vertical force V is acting here 
because the head wall is this side . So, naturally the vertical for ces will be acting little bit  nearer to the head wall from the centroid . So, this distance is e so, you have to estimate 
what is the value of eccent ricity e . 
So, from  this figure you can see e  is equal to z minus d by 2  ok. So, from  this figure you 
can see  d equal to z by 2  because this is my z  value ok. So, we can calculate what is our 
eccentricity . So, first step is the  since we know this d value eq ual to 4.5 so, we have to  
estimate what is my value of z ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:30)  
. 
 
 
So, to estimate the value of z , we know that z equal to sigma m divided by sigma V. So, 
sigma m is the  resultant moment that is given as 17143 kg metre and sigma V is the 
result ant vertical force that is given as 6843.2. So, we will  divide you will get 2. 505 
metre and d  equal to 4.5 metre . So, you will get d by 2  equal to 2.2 50 metre . 
You can see from here that z is greater than d by 2 since z is greater than d by 2 which is  
in this case in this figure you can see  this value is larger the 2. 505 and d by 2 equal to 
2.25 so, this is my d by 2  ok. So, if you will make it m inus e equal to z minus d by 2,  so, you will get 2. 505 minus 2.2 50. So, you will get 0.2 55 metre . So, the eccentricity is 2.  
point  0.255 metre . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:45)  
. 
 
Then our next problem on the weight ed creep distance . So, in this figure  you have to 
estimate what is the weight ed creep distance  the figure is given and all the dimensions 
are al so mentioned in this figure . So, you know that  weight ed creep  distance is equal to 
sum of all the horizontal  distances at the contact surface or along the line of  piping 
failure  plus one third of sorry it  is the sum of all the vertical  distances plus one t hird of 
the distances which are horizontal  or flat in nature . 
So, in this case first you identify what are you r vertical  distances . So, you can see here 
the vertical distance s are ab then cd ef and g h and this values are 1. 4 metre all are 1. 4 
metre . So, you will  get the sum of all these vertical distance s that equal to ab plus cd plus 
ef plus gh  all are  all are equal to 1.4 plus 1.4 plus 1.4 plus 1. 4 all are same . So, you will 
get 5.6 metre . 
Then the horizontal distances , the horizontal distances are here b c then fg then this 4.3 
that equal to d  and also this distance  so, that is your hi. So, bc equal to 0. 35 d equal to 4.3 
fg equal to 0. 35 and hi equal to 0. 5 metre ok . So, you have to take one third weight  of 
these horizontal distances . Then you will get th e length of this horizontal distance equal to 5.5 divided by 3 so, you 
will get 1. 833 plus 5.6 you will get 7.433 metre . So, the weight ed creep  distance equal to 
7.433 metre ok. So, this solves our  problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:09)  
 
 
Our next problem is , if the weight ed creep ratio of the foundation material  of a drop 
spillway is 5 metre . So, the C w value that is your weight ed creep ratio is  given as 5 find 
out the weight ed creep distance for 3 metre differential head . So, the 3 metre differential 
head  means it is the  differential head between the tailwater and the upstream water ok , 
and we know the formula the weight ed creep ratio is  given as weight ed creep  distance 
along the foundation material divided by differential water head . 
So, you will get weigh ted creep distance that equal to C W times differential water head  
h and C W is given as 5 and differential water head as  3 metres . So, you will get 15  
metres  so, the weight ed creep distance is 15 metre it is very simple question . (Refer Slide Time: 26:07)  
. 
Now, problem number 10 in a drop spillway if horizontal contact distance along the 
foundation is 4.5 metre  and vertical contact  distance is 6 metre , what is the weight ed 
creep ratio for 1. 5 metre differential head  between head water and tail water . So, this is a 
similar  problem the horizontal contact distance is given as 4.5. So, for calculating the 
weight  you have to take one third of that  distance  then vertical  contact distance is 6 
metre . So, you have to take as such 6 metre ok , then what is the weigh ted creep ratio for 
1.5 differential head . So, h is here 1. 5 metre differential head ok . 
So, if the table value of the weight ed creep ratio of the foundation material is 4 is the 
structure safe  against piping failure . So, the given value  the foundation  material value is 
given as a 4 C w value you know that if your structure or computed  value of C w is 
greater than the  table value then the structure is safe  against piping failure . So, if we can 
compute  if you  will compute  that C w value which is greater than  4 then you can see that 
you can say that the structure is safe against piping failure ok . (Refer Slide Time: 27:25)  
. 
So, the solution is given here  
 
L V is the sum  of all the vertical distances which is 6 m given and L H is the horizontal 
or flat cont act distance which is 4.5 metre  you have to take one third of this width . So, 
one third of this width that is equal to 6 plus 1. 3 into 4.5. So, you will be getting 6 plus 
1.5 ok. So, that equal to 7.5 and this divided by H. 
So, your H is given as 1. 5 the d ifferential head  ok. So, you will get 7.5 divided by 1. 5 
that equal to 5 so, the estimated value is 5. C w is 5 and that is this is greater than the 
table value the table value  is given as 4 you can say this is 4 not 5. So, since the 
computed  C W is greate r than 4. So, the structure is stable against piping ok .  (Refer Slide Time: 28:36)  
 
Now, we will solve the next problem . So, this is problem 11 the coefficient of friction in 
the foundation material of a drop  spillway is 0.21 . So, coefficient of friction  mu is given 
and the cohesion  resistance along the area of plane of sliding is 7200 kg. So, that is equal 
to C A if you remember you have studied . So, it is 7200  kg is equal to C A the result ant 
vertical force on the foundation along the plane of sliding i s 6000 kg. So, sigma V here 
equal to 6000 kg. So, what is the horizontal force which is resisting  slide ? 
So, you have to compute what is the value of R H you can see from this equation you 
have to compute what is the value of R H mu is g iven that equal to 0.21 sigma V that is 
given as 6000 kg and C A is already computed  so, it is given as 7200 kg. So, you will get 
the horizontal force resistance slide equal to coefficient of friction times  result ant vertical 
force plus cohesion  resistance for the total area  from  this equation . 
So, we will put the value of mu that equal to 0.21  into 6000 plus 7200 you will get 8460 
kg and this is the horizontal force which is resisting  slide it is acting along the plane of 
sliding in the opposite direction and that is balanci ng the horizontal force on the 
head wall ok , which is acting above  this plan e of sliding ok . So, this complete s our the 
gate type of questions the solution to different gate type of  questions ok . 
So, we will stop here and this is the end of our lectures for  the 8th week and  similar type 
of gate problems also you  can solve and you can go through this  what are the 
assignments are given and the assignments are similar to your also gate type of  questions and this will  I think  clear your knowledge and the fundame ntals on the design of drop 
spillway . 
So, thank you very much . 