Soil and Water  Conservation  Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra  Singh  
Department  of Agriculture  and Food  Engineering  
Indian  Institute  of Technology,  Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  – 27 
Gully Control  Measures  (Permanent  Structure)  
 
Hello friends , welcome  back  to NPTEL  online  certification  course  on Soil and Water 
Conservation  Engineering . I am Rajendra  Singh, Professor  in Agriculture  and Food 
Engineering Department  of IIT, Kharagpur . We are in week  6 lecture  27 and the topic  
today  is Gully Control  Measures  Permanent  Structure s just to have  a look at the course  
content  of this week . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:40 ) 
. 
We started  this week  lecture  26 where  we introduced  gully  control  measures . Today , we 
are continuing  that and looking  at the gully  control  measures,  permanent  structures . In 
lecture  28, we will look into design  considerations  for permanent  gully  control  
structures . And, lecture s 29 and 30, would  be devoted  to the basics  of open  channel  
hydraulics  in part 2, 2 parts  part 1 will be lecture  number  29 and part 2 will be lecture  
number  30. (Refer Slide Time: 01:15 ) 
 
 Just to give a quick  recap  of what  we have  discussed  earlier , we in the previous  class  
discussed  gully  control  measures . And, we said that the gully  control  measures  can be 
broadly  classified  into biological  or veget ative  measures  and engineering  measures . At, 
then we saw on the biological  or vegetative  measures  there  are sod flumes  anti-erosion  
crop, low sodded  earth  fills, sod strip checks , and one way was to chang ing gully  into a 
grassed  waterway  and of course,  tree and shrubs  are always  there . And, then we also had 
a look at the temporary  gully  control  structures  in the previous  lecture . And, today  we 
will look at the permanent  gully  control  structures . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:05 ) 
. And, talking  about  permanent  gully control  structure s, they are 3 basic types  of 
permanent  structures , that employ  stabilizing  gullies  and these  are drop spillway , drop 
inlet spillway , and chute  spillway . So, they are 3 basic types  of permanent  structures , 
drop spillway , drop inlet spillw ay, and chute  spillway . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:33 ) 
. 
And of course,  like all gully  control  structures , they are used in a gully  for stabilization , 
but here it is typically  they are adopted  for medium  to large  drainage  areas if remember  
when  we talked about  the vegetative  measures  are the temporary  gully  control  structures . 
They are all limited  to small  to medium  gullies , but in this case, permanent  structures  are 
typically  adopted  for medium  to large  drainage  areas and in situations  where  temporary  
structur es may fail. 
So, if you remember  temporary  structures  typically  are adopted  for gully  which  is up to 5 
meters  in depth  and where  the drainage  area is less than 20 hectares . And, if the gully  
size is larger  or the drainage  area is more , then we have  to empl oy a permanent  gully  
control  structure . 
Because , in those  scenario s, temporary  gully  structure s may fail, and these  are structures  
are referred  is permanent . Because , usually  they are built of masonry  or reinforced  
concrete  so; that means, the life of life span is  much  longer  as compare d to temporary  
structures , which  is only 3 to 8 years  as we saw in the previous  class . And, permanent  structures  or permanent  gully  control  structures  are adopted , in any soil 
and water  conservation  program  or watershed  manag ement  program , because  they have  
proven  their efficiency  or their utility  for efficient  erosion  control . So, they are 
considered  efficient  erosion  control  tools  or structures  and that is why they are always  
will be part of any soil and water  conservation  program .  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:30 ) 
 
Now, coming  to the drop spillway  the first one; is a weir structure , in which  flow passes  
through  the weir opening , falls on an apron, and then passes  into the downstream  
channel . So, this is how it looks  it is a weir structure  because  the main  spillway  is 
nothing , but a rectangular  weir. So, this is a rectangular  weir and this is the upstream  
side. So, flow is coming  from  this direction  flow is approaching  the structure  in this 
direction . 
So, you can see this is referre d to as sill. So, this is sill height . So, of course,  the moment  
the water  level  in the upstream  channel  is above  the sill height , the water  will flow over 
the weir are over the sill or the weir. And, then it will fall on the downstream  side. Now, 
because  the waterfalls  are from  a certain  height , then it might  cause  severe  erosion  
because  the kinetic  energy  of the flow will be much  higher . 
Therefore, to provide  protection  to the downstream  side, we provide  an apron . So, water  
has to fall on these apron s details of this apron , and apron  design  will see later classes,  
but typically  when  water falls on this apron  because  it is a protective  area. So, it may not cause  erosion  and then smoothly  passes into the downstream  channel . So, this is how our 
drop spillway , looks  like.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:11 ) 
 
Now, coming  to components  of the drop spillway , there  are several  components  in a drop 
spillway . So, you can see here this is the weir sill we just talked about  this is a weir this 
is the main  opening  through  which  water  passes  on the downstream  size. And, this is this 
component  is referred  to as  a headwall  and this headwall  is extended  beyond  the gully  
width . So, to in the sides  also, and this is referred  to as headwall  extension  and either  
side head  wall extension  is there . 
Typically , after the structure  is built it will be filled  with earth . So, earth  fills will be put 
and that is why this site cannot see, but this site you can see just for explanation  has been  
kept like this. Then, waterfalls  over them re weir or passes  over the weir just to keep  a 
protected  within  the confines  of the gully  sidewalls  are constructed  on either  side. So, 
these  are 2 sidewalls . 
And, the downstream  that we all already  saw that when  the waterfalls ; it should  fall on a 
protected  area which is an apron  at the end of apron  the. There are wing  walls  that are 
provided  that are again  to protect  the banks  this savings  type of structure . And, that is 
why it is being  been  the name  is, 2 types  of sills longitudinal  sills and end sills are 
provided  on the apron  to provide  stability  your strength  to the apron  because  it has to be a lot of loads. And, then to protection  in walls  below  the earth , they are provided  one is a 
cutoff  wall on the upstream  side and there  is a toe wall on the downstream  side. 
So, these  are the various  components  of a drop is filled , whether  is a headwall , extension  
sidewall , cutoff  wall, toe wall, longitudinal  and end sills, wing  wall, and apron . And, we 
will see, what  are the functions  of each of these  components  in while . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:18 ) 
. 
Coming  to functions  of various  components  talking  about  headwall . It acts as a front  wall 
against  runoff  in the drop spillway  that I already  mentioned  that the water  will this is the 
up from  this the upstream  side from  which  wate r is flowing . So, the water  we first hit the 
head wall, and once the water  level  in the gully  above  the sill height  in water  will flow 
over the weir. 
So, this is the first wall. So, it says acts as a front  wall against  runoff  in the drop 
spillway . And of co urse,  the size of the weir which  is provided , which  is sitting  over the 
head wall that should  be sufficient  to pass the design  discharge  safely  which is obvious  
because  if the capacity  is not good  enough , then the structures  life of the structure  might  
be in danger  itself. 
Then, there  is this headwall  is extended  on either  side which  is referred  to as headwall  
extension . And, it permits  stable  fill and prevents  piping  due to seepage  around  the 
structure . So, as I already  mentioned  there  will be earth fills on either  side. So, that this head wall extension  provide s stability  to this earth  fill which  is provided  there . And, also 
once  the water  is flowing  in the gully  there  might  be some  seepage  occurring  from  the 
side. 
And, if the seepage  is continued  then slowly and slowly  it takes  a shape  of piping that is 
why this phenomen on is referred  to as piping . So, once  headwall  extension  is there  then; 
whatever  seepage  occurs , that is checked  at this point  itself and the piping  phenomenon  
is eliminated  by the headwall . 
Then, there  are side walls  these  are to guide  the water  and protect  the fill against  erosion . 
So, these  are the sidewalls  and of course,  they protect  the fill against  erosion , which  is 
obvious  because  water  will be flowing  at a velocity  on the other  side. And, if no 
protection  is provided , then the earth  fields  on either  side will be in danger  of erosion . 
So, that sidewall  protects  the fill against  erosion . And of course,  guides  the water  so, that 
water  is confined  within  the width  of the gully  on the downs tream  side.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:43 ) 
. 
Then, come  continue  with other s we have  wing  walls , we can side all on either  side, we 
have  wing  walls  in the shape  of a wing . And, they provide  stability  to fill and give 
protection  to gully  banks  and surface s. So; obviously, protection  to sill is protection  to 
earth  will is one impartment  earth  fill or whatever  kind of fill be used, that is  the first 
step function  of all the walls  which  are provided  like headwall  extension  likes  side wall-
like, wing  wall. And, but at the same  time, it also protects  the gully  banks  from  erosion . Then, we have  an apron  this is an apron , which  we already  saw and this dissipates  the 
kinetic  energy  of falling  water  by creating  a hydraulic  jump . So, hydraulic  jump  
phenomenon  metric  place  will discuss  all these  hydraulics  letter  half of this week , later 
part of this week  rather . And, then, but this is the apron  which  is provided  for dissipating  
the kinetic  energy . Then, we have  longitudinal  sills, which  provide  stability  to the apron  
itself. So, these  are provided  to give stability  to the apron . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:00 ) 
 
Then, we have  the end sill it is main  function  is to obstruct  the water  from  going  directly  
into the channel  below . So, I mean  is kinds so, the kind some  kind of protecti on to the 
downstream  side. And, then there  are 2 was cut off the wall and toe all. So, a cut-off wall 
prevents  piping  under  the structure  besides  reducing  uplift  and preventing  sliding . 
So, like we saw that there  could  be piping  from  the side of the struct ure that could  be 
piping  below  the structure  also. So, the cutoff  wall is provided  to check  that piping . And, 
also there  will be, of course,  hydrostatic  pressure  working  on the structure , because  of 
the water . And of course,  because  of its is own way there  will be sliding tendency . So, 
head  this cut-off wall provides  a stable structure  and preve nts from  uplift  or sliding  and 
also prevents  piping . 
Toe wall does a similar  function  on the downstream  side, that it prevents  undercutting  of 
apron  that if water  which falls, it might  see below  the structure . And, then the apron  may 
be undercut . So, one's toe wall is there  in this toe wall, which  is here this prevents  this seepage  of water  back  under  the structure  and that prevents  the undercutting  of an apron . 
So, these are different  functions  of different  structures .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:33 ) 
. 
Now, coming  to site selection  proper  site selection  is dependent  on the availability  of 
adequate  field survey  and, foundation  data on all practical  alternate  sites. So; obv iously, 
when  we are going  to construct  a drop spillway , then we have  to have  an idea about  
various  sites possible . And, the relevant  data of those  sites have  to be analyze d. And, site 
selection  should  be such that structure  satisfies  the objective  that means it provides  
protection  to the gully  meets  the stability  requirement  that is it is stable  for it is the life 
span and of course,  the cost is minimum . 
So, these  are 3 different  criteria  which  the structure  must  satisfy  or the site must  satisfy  
for the destruction , for the structure  to be constructed . (Refer Slide Time: 14:25 ) 
 
They coming  a material  of construction  the material  of construction  could  be concrete  
masonry  concrete  blocks  or reinforce  concrete  and this is the most  widely  used material  
reinfor ced concrete  and because  it is suitable  for long life and it has a low annual  cost 
including  maintenance . So, it is the annual  cost of structure  built using  reinforced  
concrete  material  construction  is found  below . 
In a case in a number  of structures  are involved  the selection  of material  should  be based  
on the required  lifespan  of a structure  and annual  cost comparison  including  
maintenance . So, of course,  the selection  of the material  of construction  will depend  on 
the lifespan . And, also the annual  cost comparison  includ es maintenance . 
So, which ever material  so, of the purpose  of providing  stability  over the entire  life span 
and also where  the cost of annual  cost is the lowest  that is chosen  as the material  of 
construction . (Refer Slide Time: 15:33 ) 
 
Then, the use of drop spillway  can be used in similar ways , to control  gradient  in either  
natural  or constructed  channels , of course,  that is  the measure  function  that true stabilize  
gully  we provide  them , to serve as reservoir  spillway  when  the total drop is relatively  
low. So, even  they can be used in the reservoirs  for as the spillway , to control  tailwater  at 
the outlet  of a spillway  or conduit  they can also be used is outlet  structure  of a spillway  
or a conduit , in order  to control  the tailwater  or they can also be put to serve  as inlet and 
outlet  structures  for the tile drainage  system . So, many  possible  ways  in which  drop 
spillways  could  be utilized . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:25 ) 
. Now, coming  to advantages  drop spillways  are quite  popular , because  they have  certain  
advantages , for example,  the first inform ation  is stability . Drop spillway  is a very stable  
structure  and the likelihood  of serious  structural  damages  is remote , as we have  seen that 
is a simple  weir is structure d construction  is very simple  no complications . And, that is 
why is stable  and there  is no possibility  of serious  structural  damage  if it is properly  
design ed of course . 
And, another  advantage  in the form  of the rectangular  weir, which  is used in drop 
spillway s, which  is always  less suscept ible to clogging  by debris  etcetera . So, the non-
clogging  of the weir is also a great  advantage , which  provides  not only provide  stability  
but also from  a functional  point  of view  there  is no possibility  of flow stoppage  
completely . So, that is  a big advan tage. 
Then, of course,  ease and economy  of construction , relatively  easy to construct  already  
said because  the very simple  design . So, it is very easy to construct . Low maintenance  
cost because  the no moveable  parts  or no complicated  parts  so; obviously,  the 
maintenance  cost is very low. And, standardization  may be standardized , which  may 
result  in savings  in engineering  and construction  costs . 
So, because  they are design s is very simple  and if once the flow conditions  and the site 
conditions  are similar  in a given  area where  soil conservation  program  is to be taken  up 
and a series  of up spillways  are to be constructed . There, it might  be possible  to 
stand ardize  the design  input  to a similar  kind of struc ture. So, that every  time you do not  
have  to invest  money in engineering  or design  costs .  (Refer Slide Time: 18:28 ) 
. 
Then, next is the disadvantages . Disadvantages  see the disadvantages  that the maximum  
drop for which  drop is spillway  could  be employed  that is limited  to 3 meters . So, the 
capacity  as per as maximum  drop it can handle  is limited  to 3 meters , if used for more  
than a 3-meter  drop they may be costlier  than other  structure s. So, that is  the, I mean  they 
can be used, but if you use for more  than 3 meters  they may not be economical . And, that 
is why it is good  if their uses are limited  within  3 meters  of drop. And, it is not a 
favorable  structure  where  temporary  spillway  storage  is desired  to obtain  a large  
reduction  in the discharge . 
So; obviously, as we have  seen that the only possibility  of storage in the gully  is still the 
sill height , which  is not very significant . So, there  is no question  of temporary  spillway  
storage , especially  with reference  to reduction  in the total discharge . So, it will be a very 
significant  storage . So, if a particular  site is a search  where  we do want  to store  water  
temporarily . So, that the discharge  could  be reduced  largely  then drop spillway  may not 
be a suitable  structure . So, these  are 2 disadvantages  of drop spillways .  (Refer Slide Time: 19:57 ) 
 
Now, we come  to the second  structure  which  is drop inlet spillway . Now, a drop inlet 
spillway  is one in which  the water  enters  through  a horizontal  circular  or rectangular  box 
type inlet and flows  to outlet  through  a circular  horizontal  conduit . So, basically  here as 
you can see that the inlet is either  circular  or rectangular  box type. So, either  circular  
opening  will be there  or it could  be rectangular  box type, but they will be put horizontal  
horizontally  they will be put horizontally  and that is why this specified  they are 
horizontal . That means water  has to come  from  all the sides  and channel  flow that is  the 
idea. And of course,  there  is a conduit  is put, but that is also kept horizontal . 
So, the orientation  is horizontal  both of cond uit and both of in, but it is a then and then it 
is a circular  or rectangular  box type inlet structure  could  be there . There are some  other  
like this particular  shaft this shaft  is there . So, this is also refer red to as a riser or inlet 
which  could  be made  of RCC  or brick  masonry . And of course,  as you can visualize  that 
they are circular  types where  conduit  is there . So, typically  they are put behind  a dam. 
So, it is a dam where  the structure  is put and the water  is coming  out of this spillway  on 
this site. And, this conduit  is this condui t could  be also concrete  or corrugated  metal  
pipe. So, it could  be metal  it would  be concrete .  (Refer Slide Time: 22:04 ) 
. 
Now, there  is a specific  type of drop inlet spillway  also, that is when  the inlet is funnel-
shape d as you can see is here it is a funnel -shaped  structure . Then this type of structure  
or then the drop inlet spillway  is referred  to as a morning  glory  structure  or glory hole 
structure . So, morning  glory  spillway  or glory  hole spillway  is the specific  type of drop 
inlet spillway , where  the inlet is not the circular  or box rectangular  box type which  we 
solve  earlier , but  it is funnel -shaped . So, that is  why a specific  type of drop inlet 
structure , which  is referred  to as morning  glory  or glory hole spillway .  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:47 ) 
. Then the discharge  characteristics  of drop inlet spillway  were  very interesting  because  
they vary with the range  of head . So, they are 3 possibilities  as long as the outflow  
through  the box remains  less than the capacity  of the pipe that is at low heads . Discharge  
is governed  by the riser or the inlet and the pipe flows  only partially  full. 
So, it when  the head  is small  then the flow is such that the pipe of this conduit  is only 
partially  full then the flow is governed  by the riser or the inlet. When the outflow at the 
box exceeds  the capacity  of the pipe the box inlet fills and the discharge  is then governed  
by the pipe capacity . 
So, here when  the discharge  is less the pipe is partially  full it is the inlet which , inlet 
characteristics  which  govern  the discha rge where  and when  the head  is high such that 
pipe becomes  completely  filled  up pump  pipe runs full, or the conduit  run full, then it is 
the discharge  characteristic  then govern  by pipe characteristic  basically . 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:16 ) 
. 
And of course,  in between  these  2 cases , that is Riser or weir flow and Full pipe flow. 
So, that is riser or weir flow or full pipe flow there  is a third  category  which  is called  
tube flow in transition . So, there  is a riser or weir flow, when  the head  is small  pipe 
cann ot run full or pipe run full partially  filled , then it is the riser cap characteristics  that 
govern  the discharge  characteristics  of the spillway . When the head  becomes  highe r such 
that the pipe runs full, then it is the pipe which  pipe characteristics  which govern  the 
discharge  characteristics  of and in between  these  conditions  there  is a tube flow in transition . So, there  is a third  3 types of discharge  characteristic s that can be studied  in 3 
different  parts . 
The control  will shift according  to the relative discharge  capacity  of the weir the 
transition  and the conduit  or tunnel  because  which  as we can see the condition . For a 
larger  diameter  crest , greater  outflows  can be discharge d over the weir at low heads , and 
the transition  will fill up and tube control will occur  with a lesser  head  on the crest . 
So; obviously, which  is quite  obvious  that of course,  the conditions  are very clear  that 
when  a pipe is partially  full or pipe is full completely  filled  up then, the shift change s and 
these are the typical  characteristic s curves  which  will discuss  later on. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:57 ) 
. 
Adaptability  and Usage if you consider , then they are used for gully  control  when  drop 
exceeds  3 meters  that is where  to drop spillway  cannot  be used preferred  when  there  is 
an opportunity  to provide  temporary  storage . So, both there , characteristics  are 
completely  reverse of drop spillway , the drop is spillway  cannot  be used temporary  
storage  establish  to provided , but if temporary  storage  is to be provided  then drop inlet 
spillway could  be used. 
They are used in principle  spillways  for farm ponds  or reservoirs  as we have  seen that 
there  is a dam through  which  the flow is control led. They are also used as culverts  in roadways  and they can also be used there  flood  prevention  struc tures . So, so (Refer 
Time: 26:41)  possible  uses of the drop inlet spillway  as well. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:48 ) 
 
The advantages  are it requires  less construction  material  than a drop spillway  which  can 
see their number  of parts  of 2 little is compared  to a drop spillway . And, where  an 
appreciable  amount  of temporary  storage  is available , the capacity  of the spillway  can be 
material ly reduced , which  is a favorable  factor  in downstream  channel  grade  stabilization  
and flood  provision . So, large  storage  could  be put on the upstream  side and only a little 
bit of flow is allowed  to pass through  the spillway . So, that is  the measure  advantage  of 
this kind of structure . (Refer Slide Time: 27:25 ) 
. 
Then, but they are certain  limitations  as well, a proper  design  is required  to prevent  water  
from  channeling  along  the sides  of the pipe. So, proper  design  has to be put. Ahead  or 
stage  of water  is normal ly required  to obtain  full capacity  of the inlet, which  may make  
the berm  height  unreasonably  high. So, I mean  this is also an issue  that you have  to be 
careful  when  while  designing  the shaft  or the riser and it could  be more  expensive  than 
other  systems  for high flow rates . So, if Q is high then they can be more  expensive  than 
other  in structures . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:04 ) 
. Then comes  the third , permanent  structure  that it chute  spillway , a chute  spillway  is a 
steeply  sloping  open  channel , which  leads  the water  from  a higher  elevation  to the 
downstream  channel . So, here is a steeply  sloping  open  channel  from  higher  elevati on to 
lower  elevation  takes  the water  chute  is sometimes  of constant  width  but is usually  
narrowed  for the economy  and then widened  near the end to reduce  the discharge  
capacity . 
So, the width  may be kept constant  or it may be varied  for bringing  for cost-cutting . And, 
the slope  of the chute must  conform to the slope  at the site that is longitudinal  and cross -
sectional  survey  at the site is essential  because  a typical  shape  you can see then; 
obviously,  the slope  of the site is becom ing very important . And, that is why we have  
longitudinal  and cross -sectional  survey  data with us  for designing  the chute  spillway . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:07 ) 
. 
This is a typical  section  through  a chute  spillway  as you can see here. So, this is the 
water  level  and this is the chute section . And, these  are could  be typically  RCC  slabs  
interlock ed, watertight  to avoid  seepage . And, then in order  to whatever  little seepage  
may take place , tile drains  surrounded  by gravel  may be provided  for taking  their 
seepage  water  out. And, the thickness  of this RCC  could  be 25 to 50 cm centimeter . And, 
then these are curve  curves  are design ed. So, design  details  will see later will we discuss  
this is spillway  in great detail . (Refer Slide Time: 29:53 ) 
. 
 As per as the applicability  is concerned , they are used when  the drop exceeds  3 meters  
tropics  it is 3 meters . 
They are superior  to drop inlet spillway s for large  discharges . So, drop-inlet and chute  
spillway , are both adopted  when  the drop is more  than 3 meters . But if large  discharges  
are to be handled  chute  spillway  the superior  to drop inlet spillway  is preferred over 
drop-inlet spillway  when  there  is no opportunity  to provide  temporary  storage . So, this is 
characteristic  of chute  spillway  similar  to drop spillway , that there  is no temporary  
storage. But as far as drop characteristic  are concerned  is similar  to the drop inlet 
spillway  that we adopted  for more  than 3 meters  of drop.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:43 ) 
. 
Disadvantages : there  is a considerable  danger  of undermining  due to rodents  additional  
precautions  are required  to handle  this problem . Because of the profile  typical  profile  of 
this chute  profile , there  is always  a possibility  proper  is not taken . And, in poorly  drained  
areas  there  is a problem  of seepage  such areas  may not be suitable  for chute  spillways  as 
seepage  tends  to weaken  the foundation . 
So, one has to be careful , and if such areas  if it has to be constructed  it all then provisions  
to control  the seepage  are essential . So, in poorly  drained  areas  seepage  has to be a major  
concern  while  designing  or constructing  these  structures . (Refer Slide Time: 31:30 ) 
. 
So, just to close  the lecture , if you look at the permanent  gully  control  structures  and if 
we intercompar ison, then drop spillway  is preferred  when  drop is less than 3 meters . 
And, there  is no provision  of temporary  storage  on the upstream  side. Drop inlet spillway  
is used when  the drop is greater  than 3 meters  and there  is a possibility  of upstream  
temporary  storage , chute spillway  is used when  the drop is greater  than 3 meters , but 
there  is no possibility  of upstream  storage. 
So, these  are the conditions  depending  upon  the requirements  one may choose  one or the 
other  structure . So, we have  seen that they are 3 types  of permanent  structures , what  are 
the typical  characteristics . And, we will be spending  significant  of time in the coming  
weeks  while  designing  each of these structures  to see the functions  of each of the 
components  and other  requirements . 
Thank  you very much . 