 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department  of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 17 
Bench Terraces  
 
Hello, friends . Welcome to NPTEL  online certification course on Soil and Water 
Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendra Singh, Professor in Agriculture and Food 
Engineering Department of IIT Kharagpur . We are in week  4, lecture 17, the topic  is 
Bench Terraces . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:36)  
 
To give you an idea about the co urse conte nt of the week , in the previous lecture , this is 
the starting lecture of this week . We started with the introduction of the terrace . In 
today’s  lecture , that is lecture 17; we will go through bench terraces , in lecture 18; we 
will utilize the c oncepts learnt in this lecture to solve problems dealing with the design of 
bench terraces . In lecture 19, we will go through broad -based terraces and in lecture 20, 
we will solve problems d ealing with the design of broad -based terraces . (Refer Slide Time: 0 1:12)  
 
Let us start with the bench terrace . Just a recap ; bench terracing  consists of the 
construction of a series of platforms along contours cut into hill slope s in a step -like 
formation . So, basically , a series of platforms that  is what ; bench terraces are and  form 
they are constructed along contours . And primarily meant for hill slope , that is , wherever 
the land slope is steep , and there is a step -like formation that is created after cutting the 
soil.So, here you can see in this picture , this is the original la ndscape  and as you can see 
that the cutting and filling operation has been done . So, is to get these step -like structures 
here, there are a series of steps  which we can see here , and these are referred to as  bench 
benches  or bench terraces . And plat forms  are separated at irregular intervals by vertical 
drops or by steep sides  and protected by vegetation and sometimes by stone s retaining . 
Then, this means that these  platforms or these steps  are separated  at regular intervals by 
either  these vertical or slante d. And these  are refer red to as risers , these are vertical 
drops , these are refe rred to as ris ers, and they can be  vertical or they could be having 
some slope , and if there is a slope , then typically they are protected by vegetation or 
some kind of stone c hipping .So, as to avoid any kind of  erosion that might occur if 
water falls from the upper platform to the lower platform and  so on so, this is what bench 
tracing is all about . (Refer Slide Time: 03:28)  
 
They are typically adopted in an area where the land  slope is 20 to 30 per cent; that 
means  they convert a steep slope of 20 to 30 per cent to a series  of level or nearly level 
benches  so, that is what it is done  basically . And; they, as you can see that adaptability,  is 
20 to 30 per cent and as you can gue ss that because cutting and filling operation takes 
place at that  elevation  that that is a steep  slope . So obviously, it is a costly affair , and that 
is why bench terracing is a costly  conservation  measure . And here , as you can see earlier , 
also we saw thi s is the original land slope , which is 20-30 per cent and here these level or 
nearly level benches are constructed . These level s could be either  level or they could be 
either sloping  outward . That is , if the slope is in this direction , then w e call it slop ing 
outward , and if the slope is in this direction , then we call it  as sleeping sloping inverse . 
So, when w e are sloping inward is this one and sloping outward is this one  so, the slope 
is inside a slope is towards outside that defines . 
So, and there are t hree types of level s. This is the horizontal one levelled, sloping in ward 
and sloping outward . And ris er, as we have already seen , may be vertical or inclined , and 
if inclined then , the typical slope is 0.5:1 or 1:1. So, either 0.5:1 or 1:1 commonly 
adapte d slope  of the riser. These are the commonly adopted  slope of the ris ers. (Refer Slide Time: 05:22)  
 
Now, coming to the classification of  bench terraces , based on the slope , bench terraces 
are classified in to three different categories . The f irst one is a bsorption or level or 
tabletop terraces ; that means  three possible names are there , either  level or tabletop or 
absorption . The second one is outward sloping , and the third one the in inward sloping  
so, there are three types of terraces which we have seen earlier that level outward sloping 
or inward sloping . And if it is level , then it is also termed as absorption or tabletop 
terraces . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:06)  
 Let us see these terraces  one after the other , now, starting with absorption  or level or 
tabletop terraces a s the name itself suggest the  step-like structure or bench is level in this 
case completely horizontal . And they are constructed exactly on contours and provided 
with sufficient freeboard  so that they can trap all the rain that falls . So, basically , the 
main fun ction is moisture conservation or  water conservation , and that is why  the term 
absorption is also used . And that is why in  fact, in all kinds of terraces , this shoulder 
bund, this is which is here that at the end of this  we create  a bund kind of structure ; 
which is referred to as here a small one . So, just to  I am magnifying  the same thing  so 
that it is clearly visible , and this is referred to as shoulder bu nd. 
In this case of level or tabletop terraces , a sufficient free board should be p rovided  so that 
all the rain that falls can be trapped . So, we do not allow any moisture or any water to 
move away , and we wish that all the water that , all the rain that falls over this particular 
area over the tabletop this is all  conserved . And these ar e suitable for areas having evenly 
distributed medium rainfall and having deep and highly permeable soils .   
Rainfall has to be medium , and the soil characteristic is very important . The soil should  
be deep enough , and it should be highly permeable , or the infiltration capacity of the soil 
should be  high enough because  if the infiltration capacity itself  is not high . And these 
terraces are designed in such a way that  no water will be allowed to flow o ut, so; 
obviously, that will create a water logging situat ion, and that might create a problem for 
the crops , or at the same time , it may also hamper the machinery operation . So, that is 
why it is very important that whenever they are adopted , the area has to b e of medium 
rainfall siz e, and the infiltration capac ity of soil should be significantly higher  so that 
they can retain most of almost all the rain  that falls over these  benches in this area . (Refer Slide Time: 08:41)  
 
Then, the next one is an outward slop ing terrace as we already saw that you c ould see 
that had it been a level then , it would have gone like this . But, if we see that there is 
some slope given in an outward direction and that is why it  is an outward sloping terrace . 
And bench terrace  is sloping outwa rd or effective in low rainfall areas with permeable 
soil of medium depth . So, they are preferred or adopted in low rainfall areas , and where 
the soil ed job medium depth , but which has  permeable , I mean infilt ration  capacity is 
high. At the lower ends  of this terrace , graded  channels are provided fo r the safe disposal 
of runoff . So, by the side of this shoulder bu nd here , a channel kind of a channel is 
provided , and the grade is provided perpendicular to the  screen here . 
That whatever excess rainfall that occurs that is take n out  safely from the area  and, of 
course,  shoulder bu nd is essential because , if shoulder  bund is  not there because of the 
slope this direction , the flow velocity will be much higher . And if we allow to which 
water is allowed to fall then , it will cause severe erosion in the lower  branches or in the 
riser itself . So, that is why shoulder bu nd is very sincere in this case , and these  outward 
sloping terraces are useful for slopes up to 15 per cent; that means  their adaptability is 
limited to sl opes of 15 per cent, and they are suitab le for orchards . So, wherever orchard 
plantation has to take place or wherever the slope of the land is limited to  15 per cent, 
then we go for outward sloping terraces . And provided it  is a low rainfall area and  soil 
medium -depth soil of  permeable higher i nfiltration capacity is available . (Refer Slide Time: 10:54)  
 
The third category is the inward sloping terrace , so, as you can see here , the slope is in 
this direction ; otherwise , had it been levelled, the level terrace woul d have been  like this  
but, as you can see that there is a steep  slope in the inward direction . So, bench terraces 
of sloping inward type are more effective in heavy rainfall area s so. They are selected in 
heavy rainfall area s. So, we ha ve three different categories ; level benches which are for 
medium rainfall , then outward sloping , which is for low rainfall and inverse sloping , 
which is for high rainfall . I mean , categorization could be based on rainfall  itself , and the 
suitable drain a t the inward end of each of these terraces is provid ed to drain the runoff . 
So obviously, whatever rainfall occurs that gets drained towards the inner end of the 
terrace and as a channel is provided with sufficient grade perpendicular to the board . So, 
that whatever excess rain runoff is generated is safely  taken  to an outlet . And these 
prevent  ponding of water and are useful for crops that are susceptible to water logging . 
So obviously, because  they are designed in  such a way that whatever excess rain fall 
occurs is quick , that flows towards the channel here . And that is taken away  from the 
area, so obviously, there is no question of ponding of water in this case , and that is why 
they are suitable for all crops that are susceptible to water logging . So, anywhere , if you 
want to grow any crop that is susceptible  to water logging and where the rainfall is 
significantly high then , we have to  choose this kind of terrace that is an inverse sloping 
terrace . (Refer Slide Time: 12:46 ) 
 
Now we go to  the desig n of bench terraces  so. The design of bench  terraces  consists o f 
determining the following ; is a type of bench terrace , the terrace is spacing or depth of 
the cut , terrace  width  and terrace cross -section . So, when we say we want to design a 
bench terrace that t hese are the four decisions we have to make what is the type of bench 
we are selecting , what is the terrace  spacing or depth of cut , what is the terrace width and 
what is the that is a cross -section . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:19)  
 And for doing  so, we require certain data for sure , and these data are average annual 
rainfall , soil type in -depth , the average  slope of the area and crop and soil management 
practices . So, these are the essential data that we must have if you want to design a bench 
terrace for a given area .  
 Now the selection of the type of bench terrace is the first design decision we have to 
make , which  depends on rainfall and soil conditions . So, already we have seen there are 
three types of terraces , and the adaptability also ha s seen. So, for example, if moderate 
rainfall occurs  in an area having high ly permeable soils , then level or tabletop bench  
terraces  are recommended . So, we have already seen that three types of terraces for three 
different kinds  of rainfall conditions and , of course,  the soil characteristics have to 
match . 
 On the other hand , if an area has high rainfall and crops are suscepti ble to water logging 
then, inward  sloping terraces are preferred . So, depending upon the rainfall and the soil 
characteristics also the crop and  soil management that we are going to adopt in a given 
area, we will choose what kind of  bench terrace we are going to design or choose for a 
particular area . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:41)  
 
Then this is a little bit detailed definition sketch of bench terrace , already we have seen 
this, but the important point here is tha t a riser slope which we talked about that it may 
be vertic al, it may be having a slope of 0.5:1 or 1:1, that is referred to as batter slope . So, whenever we say ba tter slope , it simply means ; the slope of the  riser we are talking 
about . 
Then obviously,  we have already seen that cut and fill there , this is  cut this is fill  cutting 
and filling is there by through cutting and filling only  these benches are made . So, this is 
basically the depth of cut , that is , the base of the terrace and from the  point where t he 
original slope  is getting changed , this is the original slope , so; this is referred  to as a 
depth of cut . And then , the horizontal interval from starting to the lower point is refer red 
to as the width of the terrace . 
So, this is the depth of cut , this i s the width of the terrace , and of course,  the shoulder 
bund design is very si milar to the bund , and this is the ba tter slope . So, these are some of 
the design parameters which we have to dis cuss. And one important thing is that that the 
volume of soil to be cut and fill ed is kept equal  to minimize the cost , so; obviously, 
whatever we cut if you fill then , obviously, the cost will be minimum . So, cutting and 
filling is balanced . That is what we try al l the time . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:15)  
 
Then coming to terrace  spacing , terrace  spacing is the vertical distance between two 
successive bench te rraces . So, very similar to the bu nd, we have already seen vertical , 
interval , horizontal interval . A similar  conc ept is used . So, if you  simply take  two 
corresponding p oints , then we will get  the vertical distance as a vertical interval , and that 
is why it is similar to the vertical interval we define d in the case of bun ds. And obviously, as you can see here , this is the  depth of cut , and this is a depth of  I mean 
this i s the fill and because  we have already said that  we try to balance  keep ing a balance 
between  cut and fill . So, that is why typically it is equal to  twice the depth of cut  so 
because the depth of cut and depth of  fill is more or less similar . That is why it  is twice 
the depth of cut . And of course,  it depends on value depends on soil depth and land slope 
and prevalent local practices and practical experience guide the decision . So, what 
should be actually the v ertical interval that will not only depend on so il depth and land 
slope  but also what is what are the local practices and what is the experience in any  given 
area? Based on that , we decide the vertical interval . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:43)  
 
Then comes  the width of the terrace . Now the width of the trace should be as per the 
requirement  that is the purpose for which the terrace is being constructed . And 
obviously,  because we want these terraces to be cultivated . I mean there should be the 
width sho uld be sufficient to support cultivation that  is fundamenta l. Now width depends 
on the soil characteristics . As wide benches require deep soils and higher construction , 
they involve higher construction costs . So, now higher the  I mean higher  the width ; 
obviously, the depth of cut will be more and cut , and filling  will be more  so, the 
construction cost will be higher and of course,  if the depth of cut has to be more than soil 
has to be deep enough . So, that cutting could it could support the cutting . So, typically 
recommended widths are 2.5 meter s to 5 meter s for ma nual cultivation  and 3.5 meter s to 
8 meter s for mechanized cultivation . So, if it is purely  manual calculation then , it could be 2.5 to 5 meters , but if it is mechanized , then it has to be wider  that is 3.5 meters to 8 
meter s. So, these are the typical ly recommended width . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:05)  
 
Now, once the width of the bench terrace is decided , the depth of cut and the vertical 
interval can be calculated . Their relationship can be us ed for doing this , and we will see 
how to do that . 
(Refer Slide Tim e: 19:23)  
 
For example , when the terrace cuts are vertical , that means  the riser is vertical , so if we 
discuss  a case where the riser is vertical so ; obviously, in-depth , this case if you consider the figure here  that is  ABC represents the cut . So, this AB = DB/2 and this width of the 
terrace  BD is W, and at this point that is  BC, this is  W/2, and this is the depth of cut is  
D/2, that we have already seen . 
At the same time , we also know that t he land slope is  S per cent so that means, if you 
consider  a triangle MNA. So, MN is S, this is  S, and this is 100. So, that is  S meter fall 
over 100 meter s. That is the concept we use . So, in that case , if we consider  a triangle , 
AMN and M is S and AM is 100 b ecause  the land slope is  S per cent. Now we consider 
triang le AMN  and triangle  ABC as equivalent triangles . 
So, that simply means that: 
(D/2)/(W/2) = S/100 
D = WS/100  
This is the relationship  between  D, which is nothing  but twice the depth of cut or the 
vertical interval . So, D is the vertical interval , and W is the widt h of the terrace , S is the 
land slope . So, S is the land slope in per  cent D/2 is the depth of cut , and W is the width 
of the terrace , so very simply we can find  a relationship  between  D and WS. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:36)  
 
The vertical riser or the vertical cut is used only if the soil is very stable or when the 
depth of cut is small , which  is only up to 1 meter . So, if 1 depth of cut is limited to 1 meter and soil is stable , then only we go for vertical risers . Usually , this is for the 
stability of fill or embankment . A batter slope of 0.5:1 or 1:1 is provided typically . We 
use a batter slope . 
It must , howev er, be kept in mind that flatter the batter slope , larger will the area lost due 
to bench terracing , which is quite obvious because , if we draw a  bench here  so, if this is 
let us say that this is the land slope . So, this is typically for vertica l, we are saying , but if 
we make this slope larger , that means  this terrace will be here  so, this will be much 
larger . So, we are losing a much larger  area under the terrace as far as cultivation is 
considered . The relation between the width of the terrace and the depth of cut for batter 
slope of 0.5:1 or 1:1can also be easily found out . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:52)  
 
For example , when the ba tter slope is  1:1 So, that simply means that this is  D/2 and this 
is also  D/2. This is because this  is our 1:1 riser. So, that simply means what ? That this 
distance because the width will begin from this point . So, this distance ; distance  BC 
becomes W/2 plus D/2. This is the relationship we get and  D/2. 
So, here using the e quivalent triangles  ABC and AMN in this case , 
(D/2)/(W/2 + D/2) = S/100  
D = WS/(100 -S)   
(Refer Slide Time: 23:47)  
 
Similarly, when  the batter slope is 0.5:1; 
(D/2)/(W/2 + D/4) = S/100  
D = 2WS/( 200-S) 
(Refe r Slide Time: 24:13)  
 
We can also w rite a general relationship for this case that is  D = WS/( 100-S×Sr) 
where  Sr is the riser slope .  
If Sr = 0, that is for vertical , we get  
D = WS/( 100) 
If Sr = 1,  
D = WS/( 100-S) 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:38)  
 
Now, coming to the terrace  cross -section ; so, the design of the terrace  cross -section 
consists of the dimension of the shoulder  bund , inward  sold of the slope of the terrace 
and dime nsions of the drainage channel , if it is sloping inward type o f outward slope in 
case of sloping downward type . So, these are the decisions we have to make as far as the 
terrace  cross -section is concerned . (Refer Slide Time: 25:00)  
 
Now, shoulder  coming to should er bund  dimensions , it depends on the type of bench 
terrace . In the case of te rraces sloping inward , the size of shoulder  bund  is kept nominal 
because  it has almost no function , but in the case of terrace sloping outward or level top 
shoulder  bund  cross -section i s larger  because in both cases it has to hold water , rainwater 
on table  terrace top basically especially in case of the level  top. So, typical dimensions  
shoulder  bund  using bench terraces sloping out ward  is given that top wid th is 30 cm, 
bottom width is 120 cm, and height is 45 cm. This is a typ e we can design , of course,  
depending upon the  size of the terrace and  so on and  so forth . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:49)  
 Coming to inward and outward sloping terraces , the inward and outward slopes are 
bench  terraces . It depends on soil type and average rainfall . The i nward slope varies  from 
2 to 10 per cent, and the outward slope is from 2 to 8.5 per cent. So, these are the general 
ranges . For inward sloping terraces , a drainage channel is to be provided with the inner 
edge that we have already seen to suppose of the excess runoff . 
And channel dimensions are calculated knowing the excess runoff magnitude and using 
Manning’s  equation to ensure non -erosive flow velocity . So, runoff magnitude has to be , 
of course,  found out and then Manning’s  equation has to be used . So, that flow velocity 
remains non -erosion  so that there is no erosion taking place in the  channel . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:40)  
 
Now, coming to the area lost under  the bench terrace , the cultivated area loss due to 
bench terracing  can be calculated as follows  when the batter  slope  is 1:1. So, let us say 
that D is the vertical interval of the benches to be laid out on the land with a slope of  S 
per cent along with AB. So, AB is the land , where the vertical interval  is D, and we have 
to lay out bench terraces , and the batter slope of  the riser is a batter  is 1:1. So, L is the 
horizontal interval between the benches  that are projected length of AB on the horizontal 
plane  so, this is what L is, and this is wha t D is all about .  (Refer Slide Time: 27:45)  
 
So, from this , we can write  
AB = √(L2+D2) 
       = L(1 + D2/2L2 + D2/8L4 + ….) 
       = L + D2/2L 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:11)  
 
But we know all along  with that  L = 100D/S  
AB = 100D/S  + D2/2×(S/100D ) 
       = 100D/S  + DS/200  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:44)  
 
And then , we know that the W is the wi dth available for the cultivation of terracing :  
W + D = L = 100D/S  
W = (100D /S) – D = (100D – DS)/S 
So, the width which is not available for cultivation is AB, which was the original width 
and W, which is available for wi dth available  for cultivation . So,  simply we are putting 
values of AB and W here:  
= AB – W 
= 100D/S + DS/200 – 100D /S + DS/S  
= DS/200 + DS/S  (Refer Slide Time: 29:34)  
 
Width loss expressed this percentage that is  this is , and this is the original width that is  
= ((DS/200 + DS/S)/(100D/S  + DS/200) ) × 100 
= ((S/200 + 1)/(100/S + S/200) ) × 100  
= ((S+200)S / (20000  + S2)) × 100  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:01)  
 
 = (S+200) / (200/S + S/100)  
Then this is what the resultan t value will  be so, the per  cent width  lost in the percentage 
of original width  is this , and this is also taken a s the width  lost may  be taken as the 
percentage area lost  because it  is a unit length we are considering . So, this is how if 1:1 
riser slope is  there , this is the total area that is lost , the cultivated cultivatable area t hat is 
lost because of the terraces . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:29)  
 
Now, earth work per hecta re can also be considered . Earthwork involved in the 
construction of different types of benc h terraces is need ed to compute the cost of 
earthwork . And computation of e arthwork  involves finding the volume of soil that is cut , 
which can be obtained by finding the area of the cut section , which is a triangle and 
multiplying it by the length of the terrace . And terrace length is , obviously, 10000 /W, or 
that is the width of the terrace . If it is a 1:1 riser, then it is 10000 /(W+D). So, this is how 
we can find out the terrace length  and then if volume , we have to find out the area of the 
triangle . (Refer Slide Time: 31:08)  
 
And for the vertical riser , that is very simple . We have to find this area , and it comes out 
to be  
Area of cut,  A = ½ (D/2) ( W/2) = DW/8  
Henc e, the volume of earthwork  will be  
Volum e, Ew = (DW/8 ) × (10000/W ) = 1250D   m3/ha 
In the case of the riser with a 1:1 slope , the volume of earth work can be calculate d by 
putting the value of  D. 
So, here we can put the v alue of  D, which is  WS/(100-S) basically to get the volume of 
earth work for 1:1 riser or for any other riser for that case in that matter . (Refer Slide Time: 31:57)  
 
So, the volume of earth work  also ca n be found out for the inward sloping terrace , which 
is given by this relationship  
Ew = 1250  × W(S+s)/100 = 12.50W(S+s) m3/ha  
 For the outward  sloping terrace given  by this relationship : 
Ew = 1250  × W(S -s)/100 = 12.50W(S -s) m3/ha  
Where s is the inward or  outward slope of the bench terrace . 
So, this is what it is  so, we have discussed bench terraces , how to find the relationship 
between  depth of cut or this vertical distance and width , how to find out  the total area 
lost under  a terrace or how to find out the total earth work that is involved in per unit 
hectare area of terracing ? So, these derivations , if you practice , it could be much easier . 
And then , in the next class , we will see how to apply that in o rder to design  bench  
terraces . 
Thank you very much . 