Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 10 
Soil L oss Measurement  
 
Hello friends . Welcome back to  NPTEL online certif ication course en titled Soil and 
Water Conservation Engineering. I am Rajendra Singh, Professor in Agricultural and 
Food Engineering Department IIT, Kharagpur. W e are in w eek 2, the last lecture ; lecture  
10 of this particular week , and the topic is Soil Loss Measurement .  
In this week , we started with lecture 6 discussing the soil loss estimation using universal 
soil loss equation ; lecture 7, we devoted to finding out erosivity and erodibility , which 
are two important  components of  universal soil loss  equation ; in le cture s 8 and 9, we 
went through the modifications in universal soil loss equation that we saw modified 
universal soil loss equation and the wise soil loss equation , and we saw how to utilize 
them and the last lecture of this week that is today’s  lecture we ar e goi ng th rough soil 
loss measurement , that is how to measure soil loss . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:27)  
 
Now , the question is , why do we need to measure soil loss ? I mean , that is  an important 
question . And, we need to measure soil loss because it is helpful in the design of soil 
conservation measures, which helpful in design of dams and reservoirs, it helps us design stable channels and helps us determine  the effect of the conservation measures adopted 
in a basin . 
If you want to design soil conser vation for  a given  area, then what are we have seen that 
in our introductory  lectures , we have seen that various kinds of soil  conservation 
measures are possible,  there are some agr onomical measures , biological measures , then 
engineering measures of vari ous kinds the re. So, which combination or  soil conservation 
needs to be adopted for a given area that will be determine d basically by the amount of 
or magnitude  of soil loss that is taking place in that particular area . So, that is where we 
need to know the soil loss . 
Then, we discussed several types we discussed the dams and reservoirs that whatever 
studied is transported from a given area that is detach ed and transport ed from a given 
area. Finally,  that is  gets deposited in to water bodies , say reservoir s or ponds or channels  
or rivers . So, obviously, when we design a reservoir , there is in the life of reservoir 
something  defined is  dead storage  is there , and dead  storage is the provision of the 
storage while  designing  reservoir to  accumulate  silt or sand  that will come into t he 
reservoir over  its life period . 
So, we already know when we design reservoir s, we always know that some kind of 
siltation will always be there , and we  make a provision for that . So, how much storage or 
silt is expected over a given period of time of int erest for us that can be only known if we  
know the soil loss  rather than if we measure the soil loss in the upstream area . Similarly , 
based on this soil loss data , we can design stable channels for that channel . We know that 
when we design channel s, we always keep an eye on non-erosive  channels ; that means  
there should be no  So, obviously, that will be governed by the soil loss that is being 
generated , so that means  we need the soil loss data . 
And, finally,  if we have adopted a certain kind of conservation measure  in any soil 
consumption program in a basin , how effective is that particular conser vation measure or 
measures that we have adopted ? That will be only evaluated based on  the measurements 
of soil loss or  soil loss that has getting generated . 
So, soil loss measurement is very important  while designing or evaluating any of the 
conservation measures or  practices  adopted in a  given  water shed. (Refer Slide Time: 04:46 ) 
 
Now, coming to soil loss measurement , there are two possible ways  of measuring soil 
loss; one is runoff plots , another is by using sediment samplers . So, either of these can be 
utilized  runoff plots or sediment samplers . Let us take how to use them one by one . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:05)  
 
Now, the question is when to use runoff plots ? Now, runoff plots are preferred when we 
have to demonstrate  to farmers in the field becaus e they are mor e experimentally later 
they can  they are typically t hey are  in the field conditions . So, it is very easy for farmers 
to understand what we are trying to demon strate to them . That is why w e use runoff plots whenever we have to demonstrate soil conser vation measure or any cultivation practice 
that is favourable . 
Then for comparative s tudies ; if you want to compare two kinds  of cultivation practices 
or two kinds of conservation measures , then obviously, we need to use runoff plot 
experiments in order to be able to tell which  cultivation practices are better than the other 
or which measure is more suitable for a given area . Of course,  to obtain data  for 
validation  of models to predict  runoff and soil loss , we have several models availab le for 
predicting runoff and soil l oss I mean the re they simulate runoff or simulate soil loss , so, 
just to  be able to evaluate how th ese models are performing or validating  the result s of 
this models we need  experimental data , and then , in that case,  we use r unoff plots  for 
conducting our experiments . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:35)  
 
Now, there are different types of  runoff plots , and they are  classified based on two 
things ; one is based on  the structure of the plot another is based on the structure  based on 
the size  itself. So, let us  say we see th at based on the structure of the plot, then runoff 
plots are classified as natural or simulated rainfall fe ed plots  or bounded or unbounded 
plots . That is , two types of classification are possible in  these cases . So, when we say 
natural or simulated rainfall fe ed plots . So, natural plots the name  itself suggest that is 
natural that is the ra infall conditions in the natur al rainfall is natural rainf all, but in a laboratory many  times during in the laboratory conditions , we use  plots with simulated 
rainfall . 
And, the advantage of simulated rainfall is that  ah say, for example, this is the example 
of simulated rainfall feeded plot . So, here the advanta ge is that  once the rainfall is being 
simulated by us so, we c an create rainfall  of desired  intensity . That is , we can vary the 
intensity . We can experiment with various kinds of storm patterns. A rainfall first rainfall 
is a very high intensity than low i ntensity then high i ntensity or high intensity then low 
intensity then . So, we can simulate all kinds of storm patterns when we are simulating 
rainfall. The duration of storm duration is another variable that  we can always  capture 
using rainfall simulators . 
So, that means,  various kinds of  variations are possible when we ar e simulating rainfall 
using  rainfall simulators and also because  they are put into  laboratory  condition most of 
the time so , obviously, it is also possible to use sophisticated measuremen ts by say ing, 
for example, we can use  various kinds of  sensors , we c an use  data loggers  and we can 
also I mean  various kinds of  variations are possible  when we use a rainfall  simulated 
rainfall feed  plot which is generally done under control environment un der laboratory 
conditions . 
And, then the second type of  ah plots a re bounded or unbounded plots , so that means, 
boundary whether the re is a boundary or not . So, here we say  the example there is a 
boundary here  so, it is an example of bounded plot , but if you go just outsid e ah to any 
field condition  and that can also be  a runoff plot  because  ah I mean we can say that  it is a 
runoff plot  because runoff will defian tly occur when then it can be in unbounded 
condition . So, unbounded plots are again quite natura l, where as bounded plots are a  little 
bit control led because we are controlling things here . So, that is  based on the structure of 
the plot . (Refer Slide Time: 09:56)  
 
The other  classification I already mentioned  is based on the  size of the plots , and the re 
are three  types based on size ah . There are three types of runoff plots; micro plots and 
medium plots,  which are also referred to as a USLE plots. Remember , we discussed the 
standard  USLE plot so, these a re standard  USLE plots , and they can be the third  one 
large plots or even the watersheds and th e natural conditions . So, they can also be called 
runoff p lots. So, based on the structure  based on the size , runoff plots could be of varying 
types . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:37)  
 Let us  go into details of variou s kinds of plots , and let us  begin with micr o plots . So, the 
size of micro plots can vary from  0.05 to about 2 square meter s. So, you can see that the 
size is really small , and that is why the term micro is used . So, the size li mitation is  that 
size could  vary over  0.05 square meters to about 2 square  meters , and because of the ir 
size advantage , they are frequently used in laboratory experiments under simula ted 
rainfall conditions . So, this is ah the micro plots are typi cally used in laboratory 
experiments and with simulated rainfall conditions.  
And, they are particularly suitable for studying inter -rill erosion . So, we saw various 
kinds of erosion processes . So, for inter-rill erosion , micro plots are very suitable , and 
this is the typical  diagram of a micr o plot . This is the land slope direction that we see 
here.  
So, here you can see that this is  really  the experimental area , this is where simulated 
rainfall occurs  and whatever  variables we want to measure we will be measuring , and 
then at the end of this  area, a funnel  kind of shape is provided in order to direct the flow 
and sediment being generated  from the runoff plot  to a collection tank , and this  
collection tank all around this collection take metal bund is  there to prevent runoff from 
entering the ta nk from outside the plot s; that means, the fl ow should only come from the 
runoff plot that i s why they are protected and of course,  on top also there could be a 
cover on this  tank so that no kinds  of external flow or pollutant can reach the  flow. 
So, this is how typically a micro pilots a plot looks  like. (Refer Slide Time: 12:39)  
 
Then the second type is medium or  USLE plot, and we have already seen that USLE 
plots are standard  USLE  plots are specific  characteristics . We saw that the length is 
22.13 meter s, and the slope is  9 per cent. This is the  standard requ irement of a standard  
USLE plot. So, the u sual size of the medium plots we use is  4 meters by 22.13 meters , 
and the minimum width should be at least 2 meters . So, it should be a minimum of 2 
meter s by 22.13 meter s, and then it can go beyond . 
They are used for  the validation of the  USLE model . We saw that  not only validation  but 
also we saw that  while estimating universal soil loss equation while defining various 
components various factors  be it conser vation  practice factor , be it crop management 
factor, be it topographic factor we always said that it is the standard  USLE plot which is 
used as a reference that is all  definitions they come with reference to the  USLE plot, and 
that is where  other term use d is medium runoff plots or medium plots . 
And, here also I mean diagrammati cally you can see that  the length is 22.13 meters and  
width could be appropriate it says that it could be it should be minimum 2 meters , it 
could be up to 4 mete rs. In comparison,  and the elevation difference  from the upstream  
to downstream  is 2 meters , and if you calculate the slop e, then two by 22.13 that is a 2-
meter fall over  22.13 meters length comes out to be  0.09 or the 9 per cent slop e which 
we have to maintain if it is a sta ndard  USLE plot. And, other requirements are that the cover is fallow , that there is no  cropping done over 
these plots and tillage is continuously tilled . So, they are continuously tilled in some kind 
of tillage  operation  is done in up and down slope direct ion, but no cultivation takes place . 
So, these are the requireme nts of standard  USLE plots and medi um, which  is called 
medium when the width is  between 2 meter s to 4 meters . So, this is the second kind of 
plot. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:11 ) 
 
The other plot is , of course,  the large runoff plot and the size of the se plots could be a t 
least 100 square me ters. So, any plot runoff plot which is greater than 100 square meters 
is referred to as a large runoff plot , and that is why we also said that even natural 
water sheds  could be called runoff plots , and these are suitable for s tudying the combine d 
process of rill , inter-rill and gully erosion .  
So, obviously, because they are very large in size so, obviously, all the erosion processes  
will take place  when ever rainfa ll occurs , whether under simulated condition s or natural 
cond itions. So, that is why it is possible to reach t he combine d effect of the process like 
rill erosion , inter-rill erosion and gully erosion together . 
And, these plots represent  a sample of the lan dscape and capture the different erosion 
phases , which is again qu ite possible  because of  the size of t heir lies  so, there could be 
natural variations within the landscape . Of course,  we have already said the  different 
erosion phases be  it phases of erosio n we  saw detachment , transport , depositions . So, because there is they are rapidly large in size and the natural landscape is the re so, 
obviously, at certain portions , there will be detac hment certain  other portion s there  will 
be transportation , and the re might be a  downstream  side the slop e condition should b e 
search ed the soil get s deposited also. So, detachment , transportation and deposition are 
all three  phases of erosion . It will be possible  to study using large plots . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:56)  
 
And, of course,  there are certain merits and demerits  of runoff plots . The merits ar e they 
are useful in  assessing the magnitude or severity of erosion and  its effect on soil 
productivity . So, obviously, whenever we require  erosion data or what happens to the 
crop productivity , then we can always use the runoff plots . That is  the one adva ntage . 
And they are useful in designing and establishing erosion control practices .  
We already know that we discuss that why do we need to measure soil loss . So, 
obviously, we saw that whenever we have to design any kind of conservation practice , or 
we ha ve to evaluate any kind of  conservation measure t hat is already adopted , then we  
always need to measure soil data , and for that , runoff plots are the best place to find  
But, then the re are  certain demerits also of the rainfall plots and one of the demerits 
major  demerits is they are expensive for both initial construction and maintenance . So, 
both construction and maintenance of runoff plo ts are expensive unless and until it is too 
natural , ah. We are not doing any kind of instrumentation or any kind of modification into the natural conditions. I t is natural ; otherwise, if you want to create a runoff plot, 
then both construction and maintenance are  expensive . 
And, as you  know , most of the things are done in field condition soil laboratory 
condition s. Obviously, a huge amount of labour is required . So, a large number of 
workers are required in order to be able to do experimentation or for maintain  runoff 
plots and the problems of co llecting samples and recording the soil , and water data still 
remain becau se it is quite open quit e large , if especially  if it is l arge plots  or if it is under 
natural rainf all condition s then measurements of or collect ion of samples is a  problem . 
So, it is very difficult to  collect the samples accurately . That is  one of the de merits of 
runoff plots . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:02 ) 
 
Then , we come to the sediment load classification . The sediment is classified  in two 
different ways based on transport mechanism an d the practical size and total sediment 
load. If we talk about  both classification s, they are two component s. Let's talk about the 
classification based on the mechanism of transport. W e call it a suspended load and bed 
load that is the heavier larger parti cles that are referred to a s bedload, and those lig hter 
particles that are tra nsported in the suspended form are referred to as  a suspended load .  
On the other hand , on the  base basis of particle size , they are referred  to as a wash load 
and bed material l oad. So, larger particles are referred  to as bed material , and the smaller ones are referred  to as a wash load . So, this is just a terminology which is  used. So, one 
should be aware of this  terminology . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:01)  
 
And, then the second  type of measurement or a second source of obtaining the  soil loss 
data is by use of sediment samplers  and. Sediment sample rs are basically use d to collect  
sediment -laden water  samples fr om a  flowing water body coul d be a river tributary canal  
anywhere that is anywhere  we want to find out the  soil loss through then  we can collect 
sediment samples . 
And that  means collecting the sediment -laden water sample , and then we  take this  
sample to laboratory analysis to determin ing the chemical , physical , toxicological or 
biological composition of the sediment . Depending upon the nature of the study , what is 
the objective of the study we can do all or  limit our analysis to a nyone are two categor ies 
most of  the time , we definitely  do the physical analysis . 
And then samples a re also collected t o collect scoops or cores of s oil from a known silt 
deposition site , for example, reservoir bottom flood plain , to gather historical 
information . So, obviously, the idea here is not to really find out the magnitude  but to 
find out how ol d the sediment  is actually . If we take from a re servoir bottom then 
sediment because the life  of reservoir s could be  50 years , 100 years so , obviously, the 
sediments that are deposited could be could also have a longer life of 50 years to 100 
years . So, that is basically the area of collecting using th ese scoops or cores  kind of samples  in 
this case . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:48)  
 
Then coming to se diment sampling methods they ar e several possible methods , but we 
will confine our discussion only to two types th at are slot sampling and grab sampli ng. 
These are the two sampling methods we will discuss  in the in-class , and let us  start with 
the slot sampling . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:07)  
 That slot samples  samplers are used in any erosion studies from small test plot s to the 
watershed of severa l square kilometre s; that means  there  is no limit  I mean various kinds 
of slot samplers are available which can use for the smalle r or larger study area , and 
these samplers are typically automatic , and no observer is required du ring the operation . 
So, all around  the clock  data could b e obtained . 
And, also the sampling could continue under heavy runoff events . So, various limitations 
which are there with the runoff plots can be taken care of  using the slot samplers , and the 
two main types of slots samplers are  multislot divisor and Coshocton -type of runoff 
sampler . These are the two types of major runoff  samplers  that are used in this case . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:09 ) 
 
So, let us  talk about the  first kind of  ah sampler , slot sampler  that is the multislot divisor , 
and the multislot divisor is useful for measuring runoff and soi l loss from small plots . So, 
this is the  qualifying statement  that multi slot divisors are preferred for  small plots , and 
typically this multislot  divis or has three pots parts ; slot divisor , collection tank a nd 
cistern tank . 
So, here you can see this slot divisor, which is the major component  here you can see . 
So, basically , this is th e flow direction , and the water or  sediment -laden water re-enters 
the divisor . It is getting there  are slot divisor s here. So, the sample ge ts divided into the 
central one. Then, it finally reaches the collection tank and cistern tank where it gets collected and where the sediment characteristics are the characteristics , and the quant ity 
and quality of samples are  analyzed . 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:28)  
 
The details of the slot divisor are  given here . It is always provided with an odd number 
of slots . So, these are the slots which are you can see here . So, the slots are always  
provided in  odd numbers , and the middle  slot is connected to the cistern tank  to collect 
the excess runoff . So, as you  saw previous,  it is always the middle slot that is collected 
which is use d for the collection of the  water  sediment -laden water . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:05)  
 The collecti on tank  has four compartments of different dimen sions , and the typical 
dimension  of a collection tank is 1.5 meters to 2 meters times 0.62 meters . The type of  
compartments used are various kinds of s ophistication are possible there the y could have 
certain provisions for pumping water out they could have a floating chamber that is a 
float could be there which can automatically record the water level and so on so on  forth . 
So, these variations  are p ossible  are what is  there in this  collection tanks and the four 
compartments about . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:54)  
 
And, then finally, we have a cistern  tank which is nothing . Still, a circular drum and the 
cylindrical shape  with a lid provided to the tank , which is quite obvious  to cover any 
kind o f foreign elements entering the sample , is installed at the height of 5 to 10 
centimet res from the ground to avoid corrosion because  of some typically metallic  
cylinder . 
And these one is connected to slot divisor as you can see he re, these connected with slot 
divisor  so, the water sample gets collected here , and a capacity of drum is typically 500 
litres with a radius of 0.42 meters and height of 0.90 this a typical value , but anything  
any variations are possible as far as cistern  tanks siz e and dimensions are concerned . (Refer Slide Time: 26:43)  
 
Then coming to the procedure of layout , basically if just this  just to an  idea abo ut how in 
field c onditions these are used . So, for experimenting , we have to select a particular 
place wit h a slope of say 60 and 90 per cent. Let us  say, for example, that the slope could  
vary, and af ter making the area into slopes of 60 and 90 per cent, the soil is compressed 
to be firm . So, soil conditions have to be made s o that they look like they are in the  
natural condition; th at is, bulk density of the soil of the natural soil condition must  be 
preserved . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:23)  
 And, then after completing  the plot area , it is separated into four plots . As you can see 
here, different plots are  created , and the dimens ion of p lots typically is 15 meter s by 4 
meter s in both the slop e conditions and the separation is done typically by GI sheets . So, 
you s ee that GI sheets are being use d for creating  the separate plots , and runoff collection 
channel channels are constru cted for ea ch plot to collect  the runoff . So, that is outside 
this area, there i s a runoff collection example also is collected . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:04 ) 
 
And, then we have to create th ese pits here as you can see here of varying sizes , typical 
size 3.6 meters into 1.4 meter s to install runoff tank and of course,  the cistern tank is also 
installed in this pit by extending the length if required . And, the collecti on tank installed 
in the pit is divided into four compartments with that we have seen , and then the runof f 
tank is connected with a slot divisor  to collect excess runoff into  the cistern . So, from 
this plot, a multi slot divisor is put here and th en collect ed into tanks . (Refer Slide Time: 28:43 ) 
 
And, once the runoff water is collected into the compartment , the volume is calculated 
by measuring the height . So, once you r height is measured, we know the dimension so 
we can know the total volume . And, then finally, runoff water is stirred well in the tank 
to make the  soil distribution uniform in water , and then  the runoff water field is filled 
into two bottles of  one lit re each, and these bottles are analyzed  in the lab for soil loss . 
So, soil loss measurement is  done in laboratory  condition s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:16)  
 And, once we know the total runoff volume , we know the runoff volume  then and the 
area we know . So, the magnitude of runoff is calculated and then  obviously, under 
laboratory conditions , we can find out what i s the total dry weight o f the soil that has 
been collected with samples , and the soil lo ss there can be estimated in kg per hectare . 
So, runoff in lit res soil loss in kg per lit re and then  obviously, for the area we  can also 
always use , or for  a unit, we can  always get  conversion of unit we can use . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:58)  
 
Then, the next type of  sampler is the Cosho cton-type runoff sampler , and it collect s and 
concentrates runoff from test plot s or natural watersheds . So, the first one , multi slot 
divisor was from a  small plot . This can be use d from large watersheds , and here the 
collected water falls on a water wh eel. So, this is a water wheel basically , on which the 
collected water f rom here falls , and this is this water wheel slightly inclined , therefore, 
causing the wheel to rotate . So, because it is  slightly inclined , whenever water fall s here 
because of the momentum, th ese wheels rotate . 
And, then an elevated sampling plot mounted on the wheel is used for extracting the 
sample of water -sediment mixture  with the repr esentative proportion and just now as we 
saw the total volume of runoff c an be m easured  and from analy zing this  sample  we can 
find out how much soil loss is there,  soil weight  is how much  weight of the dry soil can 
be found out and then the proportional  soil loss  in kg per hector  we can calculate  for 
Coshocton -type wheels also, like within multislot divisor . (Refer Slide Time: 31:18)  
 
Then the  other case we discuss is grab sampling; that is,  grab sampling is the simplest 
way of taking a sample . So, here a container is dip ped into the stream at a point  where it 
will b e with the water, and sediment wi ll be well mixed . Typically , 300 mm below the 
surface is recommended , and the sediment contained in a measured volume of wa ter is 
filtered , dried and weighed  and then . Finally, we can determine  the total soil l oss from a 
given area . 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:50)  
 And grab  samplers could be of various kinds ah . So, they can have a set of jaws that shut , 
say, for example, here. So, where ver you want , you can shut them so that the sediment 
sample gets collected or they can be a bucket shape that rotates into the sediment -laden 
water for collecting the sample . So, you can see here th is soil sample is collected and 
typically , grab samplers are prefer red because they are easy to handle , easy to maintain 
and easy to use, and  quite economical . Also, they are mod erately priced . So, that is why 
these grab sample rs are quite commonly used . 
So, with this , we come to the end of this . So, soil loss measurement we saw , either we 
can use runoff plots or sediment samplers , and as far as sediment sampling is concerned 
we saw multislot divisor , we saw Coshocton -type of a wheel or simply grab samplers can 
be use d for getting the samples and then using laboratory  experiments knowing the 
volume of water and the magnitude of soil , we can find out w hat is the total  magnitude 
of soil loss from a given area . 
Thank you very much . 