Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 11 
Bunds - Introduction  
 
Hello friends . Welcome to  NPTEL  online certification course on  Soil and Water 
Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendra Singh, Professor Agriculture and Food 
Engineering Department , IIT Kharagpur . We are starting week 3 today , which  is lecture 
11, and the topic today is Introduction of Bunds . This is just to give you an idea a bout the 
course content that we will be covering  this week . This particular week lecture 11 , we 
will introduce bunds.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:51)  
 
 In lecture 12 , we will go for contour bunds . That is , we will see  the theory behind 
contour bunds , their appl icability, where they are able, their adaptability, and  the design 
features . And then , in lecture 13 , we will use those concepts to solve certain problems 
dealing with the design of contour bunds . That is how to design various  cross -sections or  
other  param eters related to contour bunds . Lecture 14 will be on graded bunds, where we 
will be seeing the  adaptability of the theory behind the design of  graded bunds . And then , 
in lecture 15 , we will handle the problems on  design ing upgraded bunds u sing the 
concept s, which we will lead read learn ing into lecture number 14 . (Refer Slide Time: 01:43)  
 
To start with the bunds , bunds are  basically  small  embankments , embankment type 
structures  constructed  across  the slope of the land  either with soil or stone. So, their  
important  components are : they are small embankment type of structures; that means, 
simply  kind of embankment or dam what you see , that is  some kind of a cross -section  
some like this or  whatever be the section  this is how  they will look li ke. 
They are con structed across the slope of the land ; it is very important to remember that 
all previous classes discussed that most of the soil conservation measures we take or 
adopt across the slope, not along the slope . So, if the land slope is in this direction is 
shown above  picture , our bunds will obviously  be constructed across the slope in this 
direction . So, that is how you see this is  a bund , this is a bund line , and this is another  
bund line. So,  it is always taken across the  slope ; that is , the slope along the  length of the 
field, and this is  across the slope . And the material of construction is soil or stone . So, 
that is the material that is readily available in the nearby  positi ons. That is, it could be 
soil, which is preferred because  of the cost economy  with a major  constraint. Or if the 
soil is not of good quality  is not available , then we  bring stones also to build this cross -
section . 
These bunds are  popular soil and water conservation  major because of their ease of  
which the  advantages we will see a little later . But just at this point , I must  tell you that 
because of the ease of construction, ease of maintenance, and  the economics that are there,  they are inexpensive  because they can be built using the local locally available soil 
or stone . So, that is wh y these are one of the very popular soil and water conservat ion 
measures  adopted in field conditions.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:12)  
 
Now, coming to functions of bunds , the functions are , that is , they are built to  prevent 
soil erosion , to collect  surface runo ff, to increase water infiltration  and to prevent  gully 
forma tion. As we have already seen , we have seen that  this is the typical cross -section , 
which is a trapezoidal  kind of cross -section, which is shown in the above  picture . So, this 
is the  slope direct ion, and this construction is d one across the slope in this direction. And  
the same thing is shown here in this picture . So, as you can see , this is one line of a bund , 
and this is another  line of the bund . So, because of this kind of shape constructed her e, 
whatever rainfall occurs over this area, whatever rainfall occurs over this area  gets 
collected within these two bunds, which is this within this area itself .  
When we discussed soil erosion , we saw the types of erosion . The first water erosion 
process  is raindrop splash erosion that whenever rainfall occurs  because of the  impact of 
the kinetic energy impact , the splash takes place; that means  detachment takes place . 
And then next is transportation and deposition . The second process is transportation . And 
for transportation , we saw that the overland flow  causes the transportation . And here 
what we are doing is that  we are storing the water whatever water is falling within this 
area that is rainfall occurring over  this area , we are storing that we are not allowing that to flow beyond  this bund structure. The s ame is true in whatever rai nfall will occur here  
that will be stored  between  this and this bund.  
So, that is how  what we are doing is that  we are basically preventing the flow of water . 
And that is how  this function comes : to collect the surface runoff. So, surface runoff ge ts 
collected  between  the two bunds ; whatever rainfall occurs that gets collected that surface 
runoff that gets collected . We are checking the flow of water , which simply means when 
we are checking the overland flow process itself , that means there is no cha nce of sheet 
erosion . Once sheet erosion does not occur, there will obviously be no soil 
transportation; that means  there will be no  soil erosion , and that is how the bunds prevent 
soil erosion . 
Now, another function increase s the water infiltration . Now when you have seen that 
whatever rainfall occurs , that will get stored in between  these two bund sections . And if 
that happens , that means  water is  standing there for a longer period  of time . So, enough 
time is available with the  water to infiltrate into the soil , so; that means  there will be  an 
increase in the total infiltration that would have taken otherwise when the flow was  
allowed to take place . 
And also , you remember the  next f unction is the prevention of gully formation . You 
remember we say we said that there w ould be sheet erosion , which results in rail erosion, 
which if continues  results in  gully formation or gully erosion. These are the various types 
of erosion . So, once we check  the sheet erosion itself, there is no question of r ill erosion  
and no question of gully erosion or gully formation . So, this is  by simply  storing the 
rainfall between these bunds  within this particular area . We are ensuring that various 
functions of bunds are  taken care of , that as prevent ing soil erosion , collection of surface 
runoff , increase in the water infiltration  and prevention of the  gully formation.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:36)  
 
If you consider the suitable conditions of bunding , then these ar e preferred in low rainfall 
areas ; as you can see, whatever rainfall occurs,  we try to store that in between 2 bund 
areas . So, if it is a very high rainfall area , either the cross -section has to be too big; that 
means the cost will be a factor , or too much  land will be required for constructing these 
bunds . So, that is why they are always referring  to low rainfall areas . And also , the land 
slope has to be  within 2 to 6 per  cent slope. So,  these are the 2 limiting cases  that are 
they are preferred . Bunding i s preferred in low rainfall areas , and for land slopes that are 
limited to 2 to 6 per cent,  red clay soils and mixed soils are suitable  for constructing 
bund s. As we saw that  we simply build a trapezoidal section , most  that are the most 
preferred  section  so; obviously, that is because we use the soil  to create this . So, 
obviously,  from the stability point of view , we have to see the soil should be stable . And 
that is why red clay soils or mixed soils are preferred . Generally, pure sand will not be 
preferred  because st ability will not be there . So, from a stability point of view , red clay 
soils and mixed soils are  preferred  for constructing  bunds .  (Refer Slide Time: 10:11)  
 
Some of the functions we have already seen . So, advantages are related to that  they 
effectively store surface runoff and prevent  soil erosion. We have already seen in great 
detail  that in between 2 bund sections , the surface runoff , whatever rainfall is occurring 
that gets stored . And obviously, because the flow of water is not taking pla ce; so, soil 
transportation is not taking place; that means soil erosion is  prevented . 
They are relatively simple and cheap  implementation s, as we have seen that the 
construction material is soil or stone, which is readily available in the field condition and 
because they are very simple . So, they are very simple to construct basically  and; 
obviously, because the material  of constr uction is readily available , I mean we prefer 
readily available material of construction . So, generally , it is quite economical  in 
construction . 
Simply  because of the simple construction, they are easy to maintain  because  this is just 
a trapezoidal  cross -section . So, if any little bit of erosion occurs, we can always fill the 
soils that are  again readily available in the near bar a rea to maintain the shape of the 
bund. So,  the maintenance is very easy . And they are applicable to  fields  that are a ll 
already  under cultivation . So, basically , they are also used  for the land  which is under 
which is  for cultivable lands of course,  and th ey can be  adopted in  areas  which are under 
cultivation . And it results in effective utilization of nutrients and ferti lizers  if these are 
not washed away .  So, we have already seen that  when  bunds are  constructed , whatever rainfall occurs  gets 
stored in th is area. And this will be used for cultivation also. This area is also used for 
cultivation . So, obviously, whatever nutrients or fertilizers we apply here  because the 
flow of water is not  there , whatever application we make  will be readily available to th e 
crops . And obviously, they have not washed away because the flow is not allowed to 
take place from this area. So,  these are some of the advantages of  the bunds .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:38)  
 
One major disadvantage of  the bunds is the loss of cultivable la nd so; obviously,  if you 
have a certain  area available for agriculture , which has a slope in this direction . And if 
you want to build a bund here  which has a typical cross section already we have seen that 
the cross section typicall y preferred is trapezoid al. So, obviously,  the base area  that is 
equivalent  to the  base area  along this length  is really that is not available for cultivation. 
So, that means,  it results in loss of cultivable area , and as they are  there are series of 
bunds  in a given area  so; obv iously, they  that results in a considerable amount of  loss of 
cultivable area. So, that is a  major disadvantage . 
And then they also interfere with the farm operation. So, if the cross if the flow is large, 
we if you want to handle large flow then; obviousl y, the cross section of this bund will 
be much larger in section, and in that case,  they might interfere with the farm operations. 
Of course,  while designing , we try to see that  the farm operations are not affected , but 
sometimes it becomes inevitable . Then contour bunds need an even ground ; otherwise , water  will collect  in lower spots 
which may cause mosquito  breeding . So obviously, as we see that  initially when we 
design these , we always  say that  water should get  stored  in this area . And of course, this 
water will be infiltrated or carried away depending upon the function of the bund with 
time. But if there are some low lying  areas here in between these two bunds , water will 
obviously be standing there or more water will get collected here and will be stan ding 
there for a  longer period of time . So, that might result in water bond diseases , especially  
in mosquito breeding. So, that is why we must see that there are no potholes  between the 
bunds or the a rea where there is  no storage possibility of water over a longer period of 
time that we have to ensure . 
Then for stone bunds , construction  cost may be higher, which is quite obvious . The 
alternate material we have seen is soil, which is readily avai lable in the field , and then 
we allow  that soil or rather , they use that soil that is available for constructing the bunds . 
But in this case, while it is not suitable  then, obviously, we have to go for a  stone as a 
material of construction , and in that case , a stone  has to be brought maybe it has to be 
purchased . So, that is why the construction cost  will be higher in this case compared to  
what would have been i n the soil . 
Then  temporary water logging problem s may be faced in  heavy clay soils , which is quite 
obvious because we are allowing water to stay here for a longer period of time . 
Assuming that most of this water will get infiltrated ; but if it is a heavy clay soil which 
has a n infiltration rate is ve ry, very low , then; obviously, water will not get infiltrate d 
and; that means, water will be standing there for a longer period of time  which might 
result in water logging  problems  or may affect the crop production in that particular  area. 
So, that is why we h ave to be careful  when  in what kind of soils  we are  constructing the 
bunds. So,  this is a matter of  concern , and we have to be careful about that . Then we 
come to the types of bunds.  (Refer Slide Time: 16:18)  
 
We are n ow coming to types of bunds . Based on the functional requirements , bunds  
could be of two types  that are contour bunds , which are used for storage of  water , and 
graded bunds which are primarily used for safe disposal of excess water. So, two 
categor ies of bunds are used , similar kind of struc ture we will go into details of these in 
the following lectures . 
So, when we say contour bund , it is basically m eant for storing water for a long period of 
time. When we say graded bund , they are for the safe disposal of excess water . Of 
course, the  cross -section remains  the same  in both cases , and only a few changes take 
place , which we will  see in detail  when we g o further in the  next lectures of this week.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:10)  
 
Coming to the adaptability of these two particular type s of bunds , if you consider contour 
bund,  then typically , we adopt them for low rainfall areas we have also seen . And the 
magnit ude here is less than 700 mm. So, this is a n annual rainfall . So, if annual rainfall is 
less than 700 mm, then we go for contour bunding . Also , the land slope has to be less 
than 8 per  cent. We saw that typically they are adopted for 2 to 6 per  cent, but in any 
case, land slo pes should be  less than 8 per  cent. And soil should be shallow and light . 
Light in the sense that infiltration capacity will be  capacity should be  a little bit  higher. 
So, that infiltration and groundwater recharge takes place , and what  logging problem is 
not faced because water is allowed to store for  longer period of time .  
On the other hand, if we consider  the graded bunding, where the function is safe disposal 
of water from the area , then we have 2 cases . One is that when the rainfal l is greater than 
700 mm. In that case , land slope conditions remain  the same that it should be less than 8 
per cent. But also, in this case , it should be shallow and light. So, if shallow and light less 
than 8 per  cent, rainfall is greater than 700 mm , then we go for graded bunding because 
we do not want  the water to withstand . We want  safe disposal of water ; if it is less than 
700 mm, then we go for contour bunding under similar conditions ; but if the land slope is 
less than 8 per  cent. Rainfall is less t han 7 00 mm , and the soil is heavy clay where 
infiltration is very low . We saw that  in the case of  contour  bunding  if a very clay soil is 
there , the infiltration is not taking place , then water logging may happen . In that case , we 
go for graded bunds . So, th ese are the conditions that slope in  any case for bunding  should be  less than  8 per cent. Rainfall  should be less than  700 mm, and if shallow and 
light soil , then we go for  contour bunding ; if it is less than 700 mm, but heavy soil , we 
go for  graded b undin g. If greater than 700 mm, even for shallow and light soil , we go for 
graded bunding. So, these are the adaptability conditions for two types of bunds  that are 
available , which we will see in the  next few lectures also.  
(Refer Slide Time: 1 9:43)  
 
Then the re are some other types of bunds associated with bunds also . The side bunds are 
constructed along the slope at the two sides of contour bunds. So, this is  across the slope  
and along the slope just on this side of the con tour bund . We construct these  bunds , 
which are referred to as side bunds  because they are built on the side . Then another 
category is lateral bunds , which are constructed  along the slope in between  two side 
bunds for preventing  the concentration of water o n a particular side. So, basically , as you 
can see here , if you just join together all the side bunds, all along the  length of the field , 
then it is referred to it is lateral bund. And obviously, the idea is that no water should be 
allowed to flow  in this dir ection. There is no flow of water  will be possible because  there 
is a bund here. So, if you want to check the flow of water in this direction , we construct 
the lateral bunds on the side.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:48)  
 
Another type of  bund is a  semi -circular bund . And as the name itself sugge st, they are  
semi -circular  shape  or half -moon design . And they are well suited for  planting  individual 
trees. So, as you can see here , this is how they look like. So, they are semi -circular or 
half-moon  shape  or half -moon design . They are built , and then m oulds are buil t here, and 
trees are planted here ; so, for planting  individual trees . And each bund , because of its 
typical shape, each bund has to be made similarly by hand , making them  time-consuming 
in implementation , and the labour require d will be  much  higher in this case . And semi -
circular bunds can also be applied  to steeper slope s because the y have their own 
catchment  and the shape typical shape , which can store water behind  the bund. So, even 
on a steeper slope , they can be  preferred  as compared to the contour or greater bunds that 
we have seen earlier.  (Refer Slide Time: 22:01)  
 
Then  coming  to the  design criteria for bunds , we must never forget  certain design 
criteria . Like, one is the allowable submergence of land . Since the area of land 
submerged  due to ponding affects crops , the level of the waste weir and the amount of 
land to be submerged should be carefully  chosen . So obviously, we should allow  the 
only limited area to get submerged  under different conditions. For example, if we have 
paddy , which requires ponding  water that is  it requires ponding water on the field in 
general , then the bund  dimension should be such that no runoff is permitted. So, that 
means  we would like to store  most of the water in between bunds so that water is 
standing wha t is there to sustain the paddy crop or to meet the paddy crop requirement . 
But if pad dy is not the crop we are growing for some other crop , then, obviously,  which 
may not require ponding water. Then the height of the waste weir should be designed in 
such a way that bunds store just sufficient water  to meet the  requirement of the crops. So, 
what is done  when we construct  these  bunds  in the field. So, here what we will do is we 
will provide some kind of weir here  over which  even if excess water is there that  
overflows and  goes to delivery one. So, obviously, if the flow is allowed , but in a 
controlled fashion , so thus, to allow just to see that not enough water is standing  here to 
affect the crop production. So, that is  how submergence is an important criteri on while 
designing these  bunds.  (Refer Slide Time: 23:44)  
 
Then economy in construc tion which is obvious that cost of bounding should be kept at 
minimum which is ; obviously, not only true for bunding, but  for any measures that  the 
cost should  always i s a major criteri on. And here , the important thing is that cost should 
include expenses on ear thwork and the value of land lost  permanently due to bunds . So, 
this is important that  not only the cost involved  in earth work  while  building or 
constructing the bund s should be  taken into account . But also the land lost permane ntly 
due to  bund that also  makes a component cost component which should be taken into 
account while calculating the total cost of  any kind of  bunding  structures.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:30)  
 Then another  very important design criteri on for bunds  is the  seepage consideration . 
Typically, what happens is that when we have this  kind of design . So, obviously,  we 
allow water to stand on the  on behind the on the upstream side of this dam . So, once  the 
standing water is there, and once the material of construction  is soil , then, obviously, 
some seepage will take place over this. So, this is basically referred to  as a seepage 
phase . If you have read a little bit of soil mechanics , probably you already know  in the 
case of earthen dams , we handle this . That there is  a seepage phase  through which  
seepage takes  place  and that obviously, this  because it is  standing water .  
So, seepage will continue , and the water  will go further and further the seepage  water . 
And it will wet the entire cross -section . And this top  fretting line is referr ed to as the 
seepage line . And in that case , what is done is  what is important is that is a thumb rule ; 
the seepage line must pass through  the base of the bund. So, we design in su ch a way  that 
this seepage line should never cross the downstream section  because if that happens  then, 
these two becomes  susceptible to failure .  So, that is why we always see that  the seepage 
line crosses through the base of the bund . So, this material o f construction  and this side 
slope  that determines the seepage through  the structure.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:15)  
 
Then  another important criteri on is the non -erosive velocity . The velocity ba sically is 
used calculated using manning's equation : 
 V = 1/n  (R)2/3 (S)1/2 
Where R is the hydraulic radius ; S is the  bed slope ; n = manning's roughness coefficient  
and the typical value  is 0.04. 
The important thing is that the result ing build in velocity should be  non-erosive . And the 
upper limits of non -erosive veloci ty are  for sandy soil, it should be less than  0.5 m/s, and 
for eros ion resistance soil , even for clay , it should be less than 0.65 m/s. So, wherever  we 
have to calculate the flow velocity , we use manning's equation . And then , we have to 
ensure that  the vel ocity is within the  non-erosive limits that should be is s howed.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:21)  
 
Then just to give you an idea about the two types of bunds we talked about , that is , 
contour bund and graded bund , which we will discuss in great detail later on . So, 
basically , contour bund involves the construction of  narrow -based trapezoidal bunds  on 
contours  for impounding runoff water behind them  so that it could gradually infiltrate 
into the soil . 
So, these are important the underlined  points are important . So, these are narrow -based 
trapezoidal bunds. So, basically , the cross -section is trapezoidal  that we are saying  and 
narrow -based. So, we should design in such a way  that the base width should be as l ittle 
as possible because  we already saw that  when we cons truct these bunds, it results in a 
loss of cultivable land . So, obviously, if the base could be limited to  a certain extent , then the loss of soil land fertile land  cultivable land can be minimized  so that we have to take 
into account . 
These are built on c ontours . So, that is why the name contour bunds. So, they are always 
constructed following the contours contour lines in a  field. So, that is why I refer to it as 
contour bund . And the function is impounding water runoff water behind them . So, 
obviously, w hen this is there , this is constructed water. So, whatever flow , whatever 
rainfall occurs  that gets stored or gets impounded behind  the dam  and, obviously,  when it 
is allowed to stay there for a longer time . So, it gets infiltrated into the soil . 
They are generally recommended for low rainfall areas, receiving less than 700  mm 
rainfall which we have already seen  in adaptability . They are usually constructed on 
lands having  2 to 6 per cent slopes, that that also we have  seen already. In any case , 
slopes shou ld not be more than  8 per  cent.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:11)  
 
And the functions  are the advantages whatever we say we have already seen . Series of 
such bunds  divide the area into strips  which we have already seen . Check the flow of 
water , reduce the amount a nd velocity of runoff , check erosion  they enhance infiltration 
and impro ve groundwater recharge. So, very similar  already , we have discussed the 
functions of bunds.  And these functions of contour bunds also are more or less in similar 
lines.  (Refer Slide T ime: 29:46)  
 
Then graded bunds are small embankments . That is laid out across the land slope , not 
along the contours important thing is that they do not follow contours that are the graded 
bunds do not follow contours  in agricultural fields . The entire sp acing between two 
consecutive bunds  acts as a channel , where a lo ngitudinal slope along the bund is 
provided  for letting the runoff out safely from the channel . 
Because you remember the function of the graded bund is safe disposal of water . So, this 
entire  thing acts as a channel . And a slope is provided perpendicular to the board . We 
provide a slope , longitudinal slope , and w e are talking about , that is , the perpendicular 
board you provide . So, that runoff out  runoff water is taken  safely out of at a non -erosive  
velocity.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:59)  
 
And these are preferred in the areas where land is susceptible  to water. Erosion so il is 
less permeable , and water logging  problems are there , so; obviously, the soil is less 
permeable . So that means  if we stand for a longer period , time infiltration will not take 
place , and water logging will take place , and that is why we go for graded bun ds and 
primarily designed  to dispose  of excess runoff safely from  agricultural land. So, that is 
the main function . 
So, the major difference between contour bund s and graded bunds is advances that 
contour bunds are constructed for water conservation, where as graded bunds are  meant 
for disposal  of excess runoff  so that you  should always remember  contour bunds, water 
conservation , graded bund, disposable or disposal of excess runoff.  (Refer Slide Time: 31:46)  
 
And these are constructed  in typically constructed in hi gh rainfall areas, having more 
than 700 mm of rainfall  and where excess  water has  to be removed safely  to avoid water 
stagnation . The l and slope  is 2 to 8 per cent, a maximum of 8 per  cent we have already 
seen, and if the soil is  deep black soil or less permeable , then they can also be used for 
rainfalls , lesser rainfalls or rainfall less than 700 per  cent, which we have already seen in 
the adaptable table . And this typically , for example, in the Bellary region of Karnataka , 
where soils are deep black soils , we go for graded bund  even though the rainfall is  less 
than 700 millimetres . 
So, thus we have seen  water bunds , what  are the types of bunds , what are the functions 
what are their advantages . And then , we also saw based on functional requirements. 
There are two major types of bu nds, contour bunds and graded bunds . And in future  
classes this week , we will go through the d etails of th is contour and graded bunds  and 
see how to design them  by using the principles  of design . 
Thank you very much .  