Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultur al and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 12 
 Contour Bunds   
Welcome , friends . Welcome , back to NPTEL  online certification course on  Soil and 
Water Conservation Engineering . I am Professor  Rajendra Singh  of Agriculture and 
Food in Department  IIT, Kharagpur . We are in week number – 3. Today , we are going 
through lecture number  – 12, and the topic is Contour B unds . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:38)  
 
Just to give you an idea about the course content of this week , in the previous lecture is 
lecture  11, we introduced bunds . In today’s lecture , we will see through the concepts of 
contour  bunds , some of the design concepts as well . And then , in the follo wing lecture , 
lecture number – 13, we will utilize those concepts which we learn ed today for handling 
or tackling  problems , dealing with the design of contour  bunds  and in lecture number – 
14, we will  go through graded bunds  and lecture number  – 15, then we will  utilize the 
concepts  learned in lecture number – 14 for designing graded bun ds. So, let us  go 
through today ’s lecture .  (Refer Slide Time: 01:18)  
 
Now, we just gave you a brief idea  in the previous lecture . Also, the contour bu nds 
involve  the const ruction of  narrow-based trapezoidal bu nds on contours  for impounding  
runof f water behind them  so that it could gradually infiltrate into this soil . So, that simply 
means that they are trapezoidal . They have  a trapezoidal cross -section which is as you 
can s ee here , they are typically  trapezoidal cross -section  and narrow -based ; narrow -
based means the base width  is as narrow as possible from this stability point of view . Of 
course,  it has to be .  
Because , as we in the previous class , we saw one of the  drawback s of their contour  
bunds  or bunding is  that it results in the loss of  cultivable land  and as you can see that if 
this cross -section is built here , and here and here  and if the base width  deal too much  
then; that means, which will result in  a higher amount of loss of cultivable  land so, that is 
why we always see that  the base width of this is the base width  of the  contour  bunds are  
as narrow as possible .  
They are always constructed on contours , and that is why they named contour  bund. 
Contour  bund , the name  come s because they are bunds  constructed on contours . So, 
contour  bund  is how the name comes , and their primary function is impounding runoff 
water  behind them . So, the primary function is the storage of water . So, because of the  
construction , whatever ra infall occ urs that get  is stored here  and obviously, because it is  standing there for longer period of time  so, more  and more of infiltration  could take 
place besides  checking erosion and flow of water .  
Contour  bunds  are generally recommended like  any oth er type in bund  case. Also, we 
saw that they are recommended for low rainfall areas  which receive less than 700 
millimetre s of rainfall  annually . So, in any place where  the annual  rainfall is there  is 700 
mm of rainfall , we can go for  contour  bunds , and th ey are us ually constructed  on lands 
having  2 to 6 per cent slope . We saw in the previous lecture  there was a n adaptability  
table that said that the slant ed slope should always be limited to  8 per cent. So, it can 
never be constructed  for slant  slope having  eight  more than  8 per cent slope , and usually , 
the usual recommendation is  2 to 6 per cent of the land slope .  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:01)  
 
Now, some of the functions or advantages , a series of such bunds  divide the area into 
strips . So, as you can see her e, because they are constructe d on contours , so, obviously,  
what is happening is that the entire land is getting divided into  narrow strips , and 
obviously , it checks the flow of water . So, as we have already seen that whatever rainfall 
will occur  in betwee n the area  occupied by two bunds  that are stored there  so, and 
obviously, that is not allowed to flow .  
So obviously, the total flow or total amount of water  which otherwise would have been 
available would have been flown out of the area  that is not there in this case because they 
are constructed in  this direction which shows that  the land slope is in this direction . So, if these strips would not have been there much larger amount of flow would have  reached 
this point , but in this case , because of these str ips, narrow strips  which are where water 
gets restored , the total amount of water which is available or flows that flows out  is much 
less, and of course,  the velocity of  the runoff is also checked because  we are storing 
water in between these  structures .  
And, obviously, once  the amount of water  is not allow ed to flow , velocity is not there , 
so, obviously , the erosion is not there because if overland flow is not there , the sheet 
erosion process will not take place . Transportation of eroded material will not  take place  
so that either  is how it checks erosion . And as far enhancement  of infiltration is 
concerned  because water is standing for a longer period of time in between two bund  
structures . So, that means  more opportunity time is available for water to in filtrate  and; 
that means  the total infiltration will be much larger , and in effect , it will  result in 
groundwater recharge . So, ground water will be recharged  wherever contour  bunds  are 
constructed .  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:01)  
 
Now, coming to the design of  contour  bunds : basically , while designing contour  bund , 
we need information on rainfall that is because  we wish to know how much water needs 
to be stored or what is the maximum amount of water  is available for storing in between 
the bunds .  Then the land s lope that basically governs  adaptability , of cour se, that ways  we know 
that it should be less than  8 per cent and normally between 2 to 6 per cent and some of 
the design components also are governed by  land slope  and, of course,  the type of soil 
the soil t exture and soil depth , because it also  is related  to adaptability .  
Now, based on the soil type , once we know the soil type a stable si de slope , side slope 
means  this is  typically this is the cross -section we have seen . So, this is referred to as 
side slop e, the slope of the  sides  that is referred to as side slope . So, we have to decide 
based on the soil type ; we decide on a stable soil slope  because stability is a factor here . 
So, if and if the soil is very sandy , then obviously we have to  have a very . I mean, if it is 
clay soil , then we can have a  steep slop e; otherwise , if it is sandy soil , then the  slope has 
to be flat . So, the step  from the stability point of view  of the soil types helps us in 
deciding the side slope .  
Subsequently , we calculate the ver tical and horizontal intervals , which basically govern  
the spacing between the  consecutive  structures . And then also calculate the  bund cross -
section , and when we say b und cross -section , this involve s base width , top width and  
bund height . So, if we consid er this is a  typical  cross -section , then obvious ly this is  
nothing , but  the b und height , this one is top width , and the base width is  this to this 
which we  have  already considered  earlier  this is  base width . So, basically , when we say 
construction  the cros s-section , we have to decide on the height , the top width  and the 
base width  and of course,  the spacings has to be decided .  (Refer Slide Time: 08:34)  
 
Now, we use two terms , vertical interval and horizontal interval , which  define the 
spacing between the  bunds  basically . So, what are these ? So, the vert ical interval is the 
vertical distance  between two successive bun ds. So, if we  take two successive lines of 
bunds , and then we take any corresponding  points in the two successive  bunds, it could 
be the upstr eam toe, it could be the downstream toe, it could be the centre, whatever 
corresponding point you check . 
So, if you take the upstream  toe here, the same upstream to e has to be taken here . So, if 
we take two corresponding points , and then we find out the ve rtical distance , the measure 
the vertical distance between the se two, these two corresponding  points  are referred to as  
vertical interval  or the vertical spacing between two consecutive bun ds. So, this is a 
vertical interval .  
Then, the horizontal interval  is the name  itself suggest ; basically , it is the horizontal 
distance between two successive bunds . So, in this case , also we can take any 
corresponding points . So, if you  say, for example, if you consider the downstream toe, 
then for both bun ds, we have t o consider downstream tow, and if we draw the vertical  
lines here  and then measure the horizontal distance  between these two points , that is 
referred to the as horizontal interval . And in this case , we had to draw  the horizontal 
lines and then measure the vertical distance . So, horizontal line from two corresponding points , whether the vertical  distance that is 
vertical interval  and vertical lines and measure the horizontal distance between two 
corresponding points  that gives us the horizontal interval  and of course,  VI and HI 
represent the spacing between the  bunds. And, the cross -section already we have seen 
that when we say cross -section  involves  height , bottom width and top width . So, these  
are the various design criteria . This is the side slope  H:V typical. Whenever we say a 
side slope , we always  represent H:V. So, the typical  convention  of representing side  
slope is H:V, horizontal :vertical . So, we will  see little detail of this little further .  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:03)  
 
Now, about the bund height , if continuing design , the bund height  should be suffi cient to  
store the expected runoff  from a rainfall event having ten years  recurrence  interval . So, 
that means,  for designing  these structures , the capacity is decided  based on the rainfall 
event having ten years recurrence interval ; that means  the rainfall e vent which is likely to 
occur once in 10 years . So, that is how the capa city of these structures are designed 
decided .  
So, the b und height includes the calculated  depth of  water corresponding to  10-year 
recurrence  interval runoff  and a free board pro vided to  avoid the overtopping of the bund . 
So, obviously,  when we say  if this  is the  bund cross -section , say, for example , so, once  
we know how much water to be  stored . So, first, we will  calculate  that so, this could be  
let us  say we call it  h which is the de pth of water  and then  this is the theoretical depth which we calculate first  and, then in order to avoid overtopping we provide some kind of 
safety , that is referred to it  freeboard . And typically , this freeboard is  taken in  
approximately 25 per cent o f h so, this h plus  25 per cent of h  gives us  the complete 
height of the height , which is  here the height of the bund . 
The bun d design also includes the estimation of  contour length  per hectare of land , which  
helps in estimating the total earth work required  and the cost of  constructing  the contour  
bund. So, obviously,  once we  have the cross -section  with us , when we know how many  
the vertical or horizontal interval s, then we can also find out  in a hectare of the area what 
will be the total contour length  and that will  tell us  knowing the cross -section of the 
contour  length total length , we can find  out what will be the total  earth work required if 
you want to go for construction . So, if you know the unit cost of earth work , we can 
calculate the total cost of earth work .  
And of course,  that will help us in  finding out the total cost , of course,  remember when 
we said the total economics is calculated , then not only the cost of earth work  but the cost 
of land which is lost due to construction b und is also considered . But, as far as only the 
construction or implementing these  measures are concerned , then obviously, we are  more 
focused on  the cost of  constructing  these contour  bunds .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:03)  
 
Then the side slope , which we considered earlier it comes into the pictur e. The side slope 
depends on the nature of the soil ; as I already mentioned , the stability of the dam  or structure basically is governed by  the side slopes . And may be taken from the  following 
table  as I already mentioned if it is clay , then we can have muc h steep slope , if it is a 
sandy then we have to have the flat slope and when we say one is to 2:1 as you already 
mentioned that  we always use the  convention  H:V that is horizonta l:vertical .  
So, if we say one is to 1, that is one horizontal t o one vertical ; that means  horizontal is 
equal to vertical . So, if we  say that  1:1 means  H is equal  to V. But, in the case of sandy 
soil, when we say it is 2:1, that means  H will be twice of V or in this ca se, in the loam 
soil, it H will be  1.5 times of  V. So, that means, H will be much  bigger , so that means, 
which  will be much flatter  structure and  that means, base width will be much larger . 
So, if it is sandy soil , then we have to have a very flat slope , and that means, in that case , 
the base width will be larger ; if it is a clay , then we can go for a steep slope and then 
base width  will be much smaller .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:51)  
 
Then, for calculating the vertical interval , we have several  formulae avail able this is the 
general relation  if it is given ,  
VI = S/a + b  
where  S is the  land slope in per  cent so, VI is represented as a function of  S here. And the 
constants a and b in this general  relationship represent the rainfall  magnitude  of a place , 
and the y can be assumed as follows .  That is , for heavy rainfall areas ,  
a = 1/10 and b = 60 
for low rainfall areas,  
a = 1/15 and b = 60 
VI will be in centimetres  remember ed because  of this empirical equation and  because 
these constant values are already given  in the empirical form . So, obviously, we have to 
always remember the units . So, S has to be in per  cent, and the resultant  VI will be 
calculated in centimet res if we use these values of a and b for heavy or low rainfall areas 
while using the  general  relation ship so that we have to  remember .  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:03)  
 
As I said, there are alternates available  so, one of the formula s which are I will be given 
by Ramser that is also used for estima ting VI and in this case ,  
VI = 0.3(S/3 +2)  
where there are fix ed values already given , but the change is that  VI is in meters and  S is 
in degrees . So, you have to remember  VI is in meters , S in degrees , and here what 
happens is that as you can see that  VI is only taken as a function of the land slope here .  
So, again , in this  case, soils hav e in order to account for the soil characteristics , that is , 
the soils having  high infiltration and  permeability . And in order  to take care of conservation practices or cover condition s and good conservation practice s, VI is 
increa sed by 25 per cent. So, considering only the slope , we first  calculate  VI and 
depending upon the r ainfall infiltration characteristics , the soil characterist ics and also 
the conservation practices , VI is increased by 25 per cent.  
But, when the soil ha s a low rate of infiltration or  permeability  and when the  
unfavourable  cropping conditions are used , then VI is decreased  by 15 per cent. So, in 
Ramser formula one , you have  to remember  that first , you use  an equation  to calculate  VI 
and then to know  the soil and crop cover conditions , we have to either increase or 
decrease  VI depending upon the conditions which are available .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:44)  
 
Then, the other a lternat ive is the Cox formula which is probably the most  popularly used  
formula for calcul ating the  vertical interval ,  
VI = 0.3(XS+Y)  
where  VI is in meters and  S is in per cent, so, very convenient to use . And X is defined as 
rainfall factor , and Y is infiltration  rate in  crop factor . So, here also  X and Y they take 
care of rainfall and soil  and cover conditions , and both  X and Y can be  taken  from 
standard tables  are available . (Refer Slide Time: 19:22)  
 
So, just we can see in the tables here  that these are the values . So, values of rainfall 
factor  X depend  on the rainfall , that is , whether it  is scanty moderate or heavy ; that 
means  the magnitude is also given that is rainfall inward rainfall  if it is less than 640 mm 
or around 640 mm it is referre d to as scanty . In between 640 and 900 mm, it is moderate . 
Greater than 900 mm is heavy . The value s of X vary from 0.8 to 0.4. But, remember , 
typically , we limit  the rainfall to 700 mm while designing  the bun ds, but in odd cases , it 
may maybe also  be designed  for heavy  rainfall areas .  
Then, similarly , values of  Y which are based on  integrated crop cov er, then integrate is 
below average and the cover condition is low , then the value of  Y is 1. If the integrate is 
above  or average or above and  the cover condition is goo d, the value is two and one of 
the average  factors favourable and  the other unfavourab le; that means, the if it is below 
average , but good cover or average or above , but low cover then we take  a value of 1.5. 
So, depending upon the rainfall conditions and  based on the soil and cover conditions , 
we can take  X and value from  X and Y value fro m here , and then we can use the  Cox 
formula for calculating the  vertical interval  and as  I said that this is one of the  quite 
popular  formulas  which are used .  (Refer Slide T ime: 20:50)  
 
Then  comes a  design of  the horizontal interval . Horizontal interval basically depends  on 
the land slope and is estimated  by this  relationship . So, basically , when we say  S per 
cent, so that means  the land slope is  this is  S per cent, and that simply  means  S meter 
over 100 meter s. Basically , it means  that is  S per cent mean s S meter suppose unit is  a 
metre  so, S over 100 meter or  S units over 100 units , that simply means what ? That if it is 
1 unit, then it will be 100 by S.  
So, that is why when it is  VI. Then if it is  VI, then this becomes 100S times  VI. So, from 
this very  simple relationship  itself, you do not  have to remember . Basically ,  
HI = VI/S × 100 
Knowing this relationship , we can always find out what is t he relationship between  HI 
and VI.  (Refer Slide Time: 22:02)  
 
Then comes  once the vertical and horizontal inte rvals are  estimated , then comes  the bun d 
cross -section and  obviously, we start with the  height of the bund . And, the height of the 
bund is decided based on the amount of water  that is to be stored  behind the dam ; that 
means  we have to know  how much rainfal l will occur and how much water needs to be 
stored be hind the dam .  
And, for that we just we are considering this  definition  sketch , that h is the height of  the 
bund that is this is the height of the bund , HI is the horizontal  distance  between  two 
successi ve bunds  that is here , W is the  width  of wat er spread  behind  the bun d this is the  
W here, and VI is the vertical  interval between two bunds . So, obviously, this is always 
the diagram that will be built  because in between two bunds , this will be how the  
condition will be . So, this is the definitio n sketch . If it consider s then obviously,  we can 
take this a little further . (Refer Slide Time: 23:09)  
 
So, based on  this figure , we have two triangles . One is  a triangle ; this is one triangle , 
triangle  CDE , and th e other larger triangle  is ABC. So, from a figure  based on a principle 
of similar triangles that is basic  geometry  
W/HI =h/VI or W = (HI×h)/VI      (5) 
 And, the amount of water that can be stored  behind the dam is basically the area of  this 
triangle . So, if we consider this figure here  and so , obviously,  from this point  itself, this 
is; basically , we are talking about th ese two triangles here , this is one triangle larger  
triangle , and this is a smaller  triangle . So, this we are saying is  h this is  W, this i s VI, this 
is HI, that is the same thing  we are talking about .  
         1/2×h×W or 1/2 ×h×(HI×h)/VI or 1/2 ×h2×HI/VI                       (6) 
So, behind the  bund per unit length , that is the total volume of water if you talk about  
then obviously,  that is Re times  HI because  basically if what we are saying is that we 
have  here and we have  another section  another bun d here. So, this is the water we are 
retaining . And that simply means the total volume of water that can be stored i n the total 
rainfall that is o ccurring in between this , this HI so, that is the total  horizontal interval 
which is available for storing the water  and  
The amount of water stored = Re×HI×1      (7) So, we have two thing s one is the volume of water that can be stored or the total water 
that can be the amount of water that can be stored , the volume we are not saying because  
it is a unit length , we are talking about , and this is the  total water that needs to be stored . 
So, that mea ns this, and this has to be equal . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:31 ) 
 
And, if we equate  these , then from equation s 6 and 7,  
1/2×h2×HI/VI  = Re×HI or h = √(2Re×VI) 
So, VI is the  vertical interval , Re is the amount of  excess  rainfall over 24 hours . So, if we 
know these two, then based on  that, we can  calculate the height o f the bund  and also , this 
is only the theoretical h. And, we already considered  that in order to avoid overtopping , 
we also  add a free board and this  freeboard  may be taken as 25 per cent of  S the total 
height of the bund will be  h plus 0.25h in order to th at is the total height of the  bund 
which we can calculate .  (Refer Slide Time: 26:17)  
 
And, then once the height of the bund is calculated , then obviously, we will have  the 
cross -section , and the cross -section is very simple . It is a trapezoidal section . So, the total 
area is  
A = (base width + top width)/2  × height  
So, under Indian  conditions , the top width and the bottom width are typically  fixed is are 
recommended  as 0.5 meters and  2 meters . So, one can always calculate these values , but 
suppose you wan t to use the thumb rules , then the top width  could be taken as 0.5 
meters , and t he bottom width  could be taken  as 2 meters .  
 But in any case , for stability purposes , the cross -sectional area of the bunds  should be  a 
minimum of 1 square meter  so, this is a  catch. So, if you want to use this 0.5 meters and  
2 meters , then your heigh t should be such that the total  cross -sectional  area is more than 
1 square meter . So, this is what we have to remember . So, height once we have 
calculated  the height , we can also c alculate  the top width and the bottom base width , but 
at the same time , we c an also use the  typically recommended values for Indian 
conditions  for developing the cross -section .  (Refer Slide Time: 27:41)  
 
Now, coming to  the design of contour  bunds  continu ing with  there are certain other 
dimensions also  which we need to calculate , and that is the length of bund  per hectare of 
land. So, once we have calculated the horizontal interval  and we know per unit area  
means  1 hectare of land had 10000 square meters . So, length of bund per hectare will be : 
L = 10000/HI  
And, we also know the relationship between  HI and VI, and so, by putting that   
HI = 100VI/S  
Then this equation , we will be able to get  
L = 100S/VI          (9) (Refer Slide Time: 28:44)  
 
Then, coming to  earth work computation and area lost , the earth work for b unding 
includes the main  contour  bund and side and lateral bun ds. We have already seen side 
and lateral bunds , these are the  lateral bunds , and the side bund  could be just limited on 
either side . So, depending upon  the condition , there could be side bund s, there could be 
lateral bunds .  
And, all these bunds  are assumed for ease of  calculation  may have the same cross -
section . So, that is  an assumption that the main bund  here and then the side and later al 
bunds  will have the same cross -section . That is a basic assumption could they could 
differ also .  (Refer Slide Time: 29:22)  
 
So, earth work computation in  the area los t basically : the length of a side and lateral bund  
are typically  assumed as  30 per cent of the length of the  contour  bund . So, from equation 
– 9, the length of  contour  bund  per h ectare : 
L = 100S/VI  
So, the total length of  the bund  will be 30 per cent aided that is   
L = 1 30S/VI 
So, that will be the total length of  bund  per hectare , including  the lateral and side  bunds .  (Refer Slide Time: 29:54)  
 
And, if you take into acc ount, the total  earth work that will be require d will be the total  
length of the bun d per hectare into a cross -sectional area ; that is , for each  bund , we ha ve 
already calcula ted the cross -sectional area . So, the total length times cross -sectional area 
will give us the  total earth work . 
And, the area lost per under the  contour  bund  can be calculated by multiplying the length 
of the contour  bund per hectare with  it is base width , because that is the base width  if we  
consider  anywhere  this is the area  which we are  basicall y losing on the  actual ground  
field. So, this base  width is taken into consideration . So, the total area lost  per hectare , 
AL = (100S/VI) ×b 
 And, like in the eart hwork  calculat ion here , also we need to add 30 per cent of the area 
lost due to  side and  lateral bunds . So, the total area lost  will be  
AL = (130S/VI) ×b 
 (Refer Slide Time: 31:02)  
 
So, once  we have  decided  on various cross -sections , when we know the cost  of work  
earth , then lastly , it comes to alignment and construction of a contour  bund. So, for 
alignment and  construction of  contour  bunds , we first need  the plan or a map of the area . 
So, that may map  may be readily available with us , or we can go for a plain table  survey  
if the ma p is not available . 
And today’s time , we can also use  digital elevation maps or RGI software  for creating 
the maps . So, and on the map , of course,  all-natural  features  like streams , gullies , field 
boundaries  have  to be shown  so, the complete map is first  either it has to be available , or 
this has to be created  for alignment and construction of  contour  bunds .  (Refer Slide Time: 31:56)  
 
And, once  the map is the area , then we divide the area of  a total area of the ma p into  
blocks  of suitable sizes , that is  for ease of management from a management point of 
view  and then on these blocks location of  contour bunds  are marked . So, basically , we 
require  contour we have to generate the contours , or we can always have  the contou rs 
lines are if already contours  are already identified , if we have a contour  map with us , 
then we can straight away  use the  direct contour  method  for locating  the contour bunds  
because they are always they will always follow the contours .  
And, the alignm ent of the bund should be started from the  ridge line of the area , that is 
the from the top , and the first bund  is located directly  in the field ; after that , the field is 
smoothened  to avoid undesirable  surface irregularities . And, the position of the second 
and subseq uent bund  is then mark ed as per plan . So, we know horizontal interval vertical 
interval . So, what we do is that  first mark if this  is the  total this is the true  area and let us  
says that this is the slope  and that means, we have to construct  our bund  in this direction 
and so if our  contour is  marked here .  
So, obviously, when we say these line s; that means, we have to start construction from 
this side , and then we do some kind of smoothing on this entire area  and, then once  
smooth  land is smooth ening then k nowing  the location of this knowing the horizontal 
interval whatever interval , we can decide on and also the contour line we know what should be the location of the second line , third line  and so on. So, this is how the 
contours can be  located and built in  the field .  
So, in this lecture , we have se en what contour bunds are , what are their functions , how to 
decide  the horizontal , vertical interval , how to calculate  the cross -section , especially the 
height of the bund , by using the principle of similar  triangles. And then what will be the 
total length of contour  per hectare , what will be total area lost  because of the contouring  
and how to align them , we have seen that  and then  in the next lecture  we will  take up 
certain problems , where we will se e how to app ly these principles which we have learnt 
today  for designing the contour  bunds . 
Thank you very much .  