 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture -16 
Terrace- Introduction  
 
Hello friends , welcome back to NPTEL  online certification course on Soil and Water 
Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendra  Singh,  Professor in Agriculture and Food 
Engineering  Department , IIT Kharagpur , and we are in week number 4, lecture 16 and 
the topic today is an introduction to Terraces . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:42)  
 
So, the T errace  is the topic basically , just to give an idea about the course conte nt, which 
we are going to handle  this week , week number 4, in lecture 16, we start today by 
introducing Terrace,  in lecture 17, we will talk about bench Terraces  that is their  
parameters , their design  considerations . Some  of the principles that are used in designing 
Bench  Terraces  and then lecture 18 will handle problems dealing with the design of 
Bench  Terraces.  Various  kinds of problems  we will handle in lecture 19, we will g o for 
Broad -based Terraces.  Another  kind of Terrace  that is  we will see the parameters , design 
considerations , design principles and then in lecture 20, we will solve problems dealing 
with Broad  base Terraces . (Refer Slide Time: 01:33) . 
 
They are s o, comi ng to terrace . Terraces are an a ncient erosion control practice  that 
facilitate s cultivation on steep slopes . So, the important thing is that terraces are meant 
for steep slopes or for hilly areas . So, whenever you might have gone to any illustration 
and m ight have come across w ith the  step-like structures , on which cultivation takes 
place like seen here , in this particular figure . 
So, the step-like structure where cultivation take s place is nothing  but Terrace , or this is 
this type of f arming referred to a s terrace cultivatio n or terrace farming . So, this is what 
Terrace is . So, terraces  are ancient erosion  control practice s that facilitate cultivation on 
steep slopes , and it has been used by many cultures to allow the production of grains , 
such as wheat an d rice on steep slope s. So, this is very important that  it is a historic al 
one. Ancient  that is , it has been used since time immemorial , and it has been used by 
many cultures means all around the world virtually by some name or the other , but 
terraces are  being adopted everywher e in the world and for producing grains or staple 
crops such as  wheat and ri ce on hilly terrains or steep  slopes , steep slopes . 
So, that is, what Terrace  is all about ? A terrace system consists of multiple continuous 
lines of earthen  embankments  constru cted across a field slope  to check erosion under the 
most intense cropping system  planned for the field . So, some important points here , that 
it is a system consist ing of multiple continuous lines of earth embankments . So, there are 
a series of terraces , which are constructed  across a field slope , which is quite obvious as we have seen all erosion control measures . They  are always adopted across the slope  
because along the slope , the flow of water is more so ; that means, the erosive capa city of 
the flow is  more will be more , and that is why we , what we try to do is try  to check the 
flow of water , a magnitude as well as velocity and for that what we do is that , we break 
the entire slope length in  two different components and that is why we  adopt all practices  
across the slope , be it burns , be it  terraces or any other , conservation measures . And 
biological measures also we saw  economic  and biological measures;  we saw that we 
always adopt , across the  slope . 
So, across the slope , we adopt to c heck erosion under  the most intense cropping system 
planned for the field . So, this is very important . What it is trying to say is that the  terrace  
field will always  be used for cultivation . So, this goes  off saying terraces are (Refer 
Time: 04:48 ) really built for cultiva tion and as we know that any cultivated field , 
because you have tillage operations , like ploughing , harrowing or various kinds of tillage 
operations  take place , which keeps the soil  in loose conditions and we as we saw in the 
introductory lectures that if the soil is loose then  obviously, with a little bit of flow taking 
place , that soil is , will get transported easily . 
So, that means  any cultivated field is prone to a higher rate of erosion . So, that is why it 
says that , for most intense c ropping system plan ned for the field , the or the  earth 
embankments . These  are the earth embankments  that are built to check erosion and to 
check  the erosion , as we have already mentioned  because we are building  embankments . 
So, what we are doing ? We are ch ecking the flow of water . That is , we are breaking the 
length of the slope , we are putting the entire slope into different compartments , and then 
each compartment  obviously, flows again . We are checking through embankments . 
So, once we are checking the she et flow ; obviously, one sheet flow is  not there , or 
overland flow is not there , the question of transportation will not place and just to remind 
you once again  the erosion process , we always said that there is a detachment , there is 
transportation , and the n there is a deposit ion. These  are the three major phases . So, 
detachment might be the ir loose tiles , might be there in this case , because it is a 
cultivated field , but because the flow is not there . So, they will not get transported . So, 
the transportatio n process , we are checking , and that is how we are checking soil erosion  
so, that is very important . (Refer Slide Time: 06:36) . 
 
So, now, continuing again , runoff water intercepted by the embankments is conducted to 
a stable outlet through non -erosive sta ble channels or stored and rel eased  through soil 
infiltration . So, basically , I mean in a simple form , you can see that there is a cut , there is 
a fill that , I mean  this is also referred to this channel and  ridge  basically . So,  this is the 
kind of system w e have .  
So, these are embankments , and these are the  channels . So, whatever water comes from 
the upstream side , water will flow in between these two , these two whatever water will 
flow that will be arrested by this embankment here and then it will be take n away , either 
taken away from the f ield. It is safe velocity or non -erosive  velocity , or it can also get 
stored . So that infiltration of the area could be enhanced . 
So, either of the possibilities is there , and it reduce s a terrace , reduces the length of 
hillside slope , thereby reducing sea t and rill erosion a nd prevent ing the formation of 
gullies , which we have already seen that what we are doing here , we are blocking . 
Otherwise , the slope length would have continued . What  are w e doing ? We are breaki ng 
in by constructing these  series of embank ments;  we are breaking the slope length . So, 
slope length getting is getting reduced to this extent . At the same time these 
embankments are there , we are checking the flow . So, basically , what we are doing is 
that we are not allowing flow to take place or overland flow to take pl ace, and that is why the sheet erosion , which is followed by rill  erosion , is not there , and once that is not 
there , then the formation of gullies will also not take place . 
So, that is how we a re taking roads , and this is another form where by cutting and filling 
we are making horizontal  or various kinds of possibilities are there , bar benches which 
are referred to as bench terraces . So, we all these details we will see in next lectures . 
(Refer S lide Time: 08:37)  
 
Now, coming to objectives of  terracing , there are three fold objectives ; one is land use, the 
second is soil conservation , the third is  water conservation . And so , land use, obviously,  
means that we want to facilitate farming on the steep  slope , that is , on steep slo pes or 
hilly areas , which otherwise cannot be cultivated  if we go for terracing  then the land can 
be used for cultivation , which is the primary objective . 
The n ext objective is soil conservation , and we have already seen that , because the total 
area is being broken into I mean , we h ave seen that simple structure , we saw that this is 
your channel and this is an embankment . So, this is an embankment , and this is a 
channel . So, we already saw that we are not allowing the flow of wa ter. So, we can also 
talk about water conservation first . So, water  decreases runoff. So, what we are doing is 
that we are  because we are blocking the total flow path , so obviously, whatever flow is 
generated within this area gets arrested here itself . So,  that is why the total runoff that 
would have reached the  outlet is getting reduced . Then increases  infiltration rate , which is quite obvious , because this water which is 
stored here in this channel or in this over , this area , that has lot more opportunity  time for 
infiltration . So, the infiltration could e asily take place from this area  because water is 
standing there for a longer period of time and because we are resting the flow of water . 
We have already said that , because we are resting  flow of water so  obviously, we are 
checking soil erosion and also w e are maintaining fertile fertility status , because earlier 
we discussed that it is the top soil which is the most fertile soil .  
So, if you are  not allowing the , you know , erosion of the top fertile soil , that means, 
indirectly , we are maintaining the  fertility status of the soil another important point is  
because this is getting cultivated . So, what we are doing , we are putting nutrients 
fertilizers and because we are not allowing that to flow away . So, that again is used  by 
the crop itself , or it is tendo n the soil  itself . So, that is why the fertility of the  area gets 
improved . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:16)  
 
So, these are the threefold objectives of  terracing  functions  again . We have already  seen 
the objecti ve, but the same thing  is to reduce erosion by sh ortening the length of the 
slope . So, we have already seen many times that how it shortens the total length 
conducting the runof f water on a non -erosive grade  to a stable slope . If that is the case , 
there co uld be the possibility of storing the water there if , if excess water is there , then 
we can take the water safely to it , at a non -erosive  grade to a stable slope . We have already seen that the channel enrich  kind of arrangement is also possible , then 
to co nserve moisture by increasing infiltration operation time , you have also seen that it 
is possible to I mean  because water is allowed to stand for a long period of time . So, a 
much  higher amount of time is available for water to infiltrate and facilitate cu ltivation 
and tillage operation on sloping lands that  are the primary objective , because  by, by 
taking up terracing . We are able to cultivate a hill , hill slope or sloping land , which 
otherwise might not have been possible . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:22)  
 
And there are ; obviously, certain limitations also , then the li mitations are , they can be 
used in all soils except that they said ; that means, they are some soil type, where they 
cannot be used . For example, if they are too stony sandy or shallow to permit pra ctical 
and economical construction and maintenance and that  is because due to earth moving  
because in this case we always sa y that there is a cut and fill that is involved ; that means  
some kind of earth moving is involved so ; obviously  if it is to o stony then and then earth 
moving will be a problem . 
So, there will be a limitation of earth moving and of course,  every sandy  and then 
stability will be an issue , and if the soil is too shallow , so, obviously, during the process 
of earth moving , it might . So, happen that the unfertile soil could come on top of the 
fertile so il, and because of that , there might be a  detrimental effect on the farm ability 
after disturbance of  these kinds of soils . Especially,  the shallow  kinds of soils  and also  the terracing is not advis able if the slope 
of the land is to o slight or to o excessive then; obviously, it will be , the cost will be a 
factor , because cost , the cost of construction and maintenance will be a big issue and if it 
is too slight  then, because they are expensive , these are expensive measures so ; 
obviously, there might b e much , inexpensive measures available that might be more , 
viable for land with slight  too slightest slope than to go for terracing . 
Then the way the topography is extremely irregular  because in that , if that is the 
topography  is extremely  irregular , then it will become uneconomical  because you know 
that then a lot of earth moving activity has to take place and that also on extreme slopes 
so; that means, the cost will become too high  and soil depth is not s ufficient just we saw 
a little bit earlier also .  
So, earth moving during construction may place subsoil on top of the fertile topsoil and 
affect productivity . Just now, we also discussed that if soil depth is not sufficient , then if 
when we go for earth moving, then it might . So, happen that the su bsoil which is not . So, 
fertile  will come on the top fertile soil , and then product s will be productivity will get 
affected . So, these are the limitations  we have to keep in mind while adopting the  
terracing . 
(Refe r Slide Time: 15:03)  
 
Then coming to the classification of Terrace  in India , terraces are classified into  two 
major groups that are broad -based terraces  and bench terraces . The broad base terraces  and bench  terraces , and broad base terraces are adopted wh ere the main purpose is either 
to remove or to retain water on sloping lands that are suitable for cultivation so ; that 
means, land that is suitable for cult ivation , but where the water is a n issue either , too 
much water or too less water . So, the either w e want to , either we have a case , where we 
have  to conserve moisture in order to be productive or the case where there is excess 
water , and we have to dispose of that  safely . 
So, basically in those both these cases , broad -based terraces are adopted , wherei n bench 
terraces  are mainly adopted to reduce  the land slope , so obviously, that this distinction 
tells us  that bench terraces are adopted mainly for much hig her slopes as compared to 
broad -based terraces . So, these are the two types of  Terrace  classes we have. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:22)  
 
Now, there is a much bigger picture of  classification also which is possible . So, for 
example, if we look at this  classification , the Terrace , as we have already seen that 
broadly , it is classified as the broad -based Terrace and bench terrace and if you look at 
the broa d base terrace . This can be further classified as graded Terrace  or level Terrace , 
and that is  drainage channel type or absorption  or ridge  type which we  already saw that 
the broad terraces  are adopted , where  the soil conservation  or soil sorry moisture  
conservation  or moisture removal is a n issue . 
So, grade  if you have to take the water away and level , when  we have to conserve the 
water and the graded one can be further classified with the proper channel or w ithout proper channel . So, these are the co mplete  classification for the broad -based channel , on 
the other hand , if you look at the bench terraces . They  are classified into four different 
types ; levelled  or tabletop sloping inward , sloping outward or Puert o Rican. So, these are 
the four types . 
So, broad -based terraces are graded , and level graded can be further is proper or  without 
proper  channel , wherein bench terraces are tabletop sloping inward sloping outward and 
Puerto R ican. So, these are the  complete  classification of the terrace system . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:52 ) 
 
Let us talk now  about the broad base terraces . So, broad -based  terraces  are defined  as 
terraces  for which all constructed and excavated  slopes are flatter than 5:1, and the entire 
Terrace  is cropped . So,  this is very important that the slopes ; obviously, whenever we 
say we are goin g for terracing , it always  involves cut and fill . So, we have to cut certain 
soil and then fill that soil . So, that this total slope can be reduced , that is the  main 
fundament al, for example, here this is your original  land grid  and what we are doing here 
that we are cutting this soil and then filling this soil here . 
So, the same soil is being filled here and  so that the land slope , which was this that has 
been brou ght down to t his level and  so that the entire thing can be cultivated and , that is 
why we always go for flat slopes for more than 5:1 earth  fill for the terrace ridge is 
normally , obtained from excavation of the terrace channel . So, that is here this chann el 
and ridge ; this is the channel , this is a ridge . So, the cut portion is channel and field portion is  ridge and adaptability is limited to 
smooth topography with  land slopes of less than 8 per cent. So, generally , they are 
adopted for much flatter lands compared to the bench, bench terraces , which we will see 
a little later and where the land slope is less than 8 per cent. 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:38)  
 
And broad -based terraces are preferred due to ease of construction with a plough  tractor 
blade or any eart hmoving equipment sim ply by moving the soil downhill to form channel 
energy . So, because the construction is very simple here , you have to this is the soil . So, 
you have to  adopt some earth moving  equipment . So, that soil could be cut from this 
portion  and then that same can be here . 
So, basically  what we have to  what you need is simply some earth moving equipment 
which could be a simply a plough  or a tractor blade which can simply help us in cutting 
the soil and then filling the soil here . So, that is why  because the construc tion is very 
simple that is why these are preferred , and the flat slopes of this shape allow farm 
equipme nt to operate on the constructed  ridge  slopes , therefore, allowing cropping of the 
entire field. So, because these slopes are kept very flat here  so, because of that , it is very 
easy for farm equipment  to move on  these slopes , and therefore, the entire field can be 
cropped . So, this is because of simpler construction  and maintenance , and that is why 
these are preferred . (Refer Slide T ime: 21:07)  
 
Now, coming to graded or channel type terrace s, these are constructed by cutting a 
shallow channel on the uphill side and using only this soil to build the embankment . So, 
here you see , the soil is cut here and filled here . So, this is a chan nel, and this is the 
embank ments , and it primarily removes excess water and minimizes erosion , and that is 
by reducing the slope length and conducting the interceptor run off to a safe outlet it is 
non-erosive  velocity .  
So, what is being done here  I am, of course,  the there you might be perturbed by seeing 
this simple construction , but what happens is that  if, even if we see this picture here , 
though  we see very slopes , here well -defined slopes here , but what happens that after  
certain years of , of cultiva tion, they will also be come like this . So, I mean when  we 
construct ; obviously, the flats are very well defined , but later on , they also become 
something like this  so, if you see the picture .  
So, do not get perturbed that  this is a very simple constructio n, but this is also 
constructed in a particular slope and all , but later on , the shape becomes like this . So, it is 
a much simpler  picturization of the channel graded or channel types Terrace . So, here as 
you can see that we have a series of channels and r idges or embankments . (Refer Slide Time: 22:54) . 
 
So, what happens is that total slope length , which otherwise would have been continuous 
that is being broken here , because here  this particular one here to here , if you consider 
this is acting like one par ticular catchment . So, whatever waterfalls  here, either  water of 
whatever rainfall occurs or flow generated in whatever way that will be  confined  to this 
particular area only and that water will not be allowed to flow further . So, what is 
happening is that the total slope length , which was available for the flow of water that is 
being broken this is number one and then conducting the interceptor runoff to escape 
outlet , it is non -erosive  velocity . 
So, because whatever water  is flown  here, because there is a  grade natural grade so; 
obvious ly, that will come here near this embankment , and because we have this channel 
here and we  perpendicular to the board , we also provide a longitudinal slope , we provide 
a longitudinal.  (Refer Slide Time: 24:08) . 
 
We provide a longitudinal slope  to this channel in such a way that  the flow which is 
generated here in between these two areas will be taken away that will be removed safely 
at a non -erosive velocity . 
So, while designing , we use the Mannings equation and all , and we know that , what are 
the non -erosive  velocity , we have already discussed that many  times . So, with that , that 
into that is kept in mind . 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:41)  
 Then, the side slope of both the channel and the ridge  is kept as flat as possible to 
facili tate the farming operation , so obviously,  these are kept as flat as possible . So, that 
farming operation could take place . So, these flat slopes are there and the bench terrace . 
We have anyways  seen that it  is flatter than 5:1 that is the first statement . 
We saw that since con struction and maintenance of a satisfactory channel are required , 
this should not be built on deep sands or on soils that are too stony steep or shallow to 
permit adequate construction . So, because the entire concept is that you store the water 
and then tak e that safely out so  obviously, the channel is a very important component 
here. So, that is why the conditions that where it has to be built will be taken into 
considerations . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:44)  
 
Then next is a level or ridge  type of Terrace . This is primarily used for moisture 
conservation that is the other type , the graded type or channel type , which is taking away  
the water but is for moisture conservation , and it is preferred  in low to moderate rainfall 
regions  for trapping  and holding  rainfall for infiltration into the soil profile . So, water is 
held and . So, that it can infiltrate , and they can be used even in high rainfall areas  if the 
soil is permeable  because infiltration is the key . So, if the soil is permeable or the 
infiltratio n capacity is high , then they can erupt  even in high rainfall areas , and an 
embankment is constructed of soil taken from both sides of the ridge . So, as you can see here , the much larger embankment is available here  because the soil is 
being tak en from eith er side . So, that more water can be conserved . So, the purpose 
totally is different of the two types in one case , and we want to take the water away , 
safely in this case we want water to stand here  so, that it gets , infiltrated . 
(Refer Slide Ti me: 26:52)  
 
The next category is a bench terrace and , bench terracing consists of the construction of a 
series of platforms  along contours cut into hill slope in a steep step-like formation . So, 
step-like formation is very important . So, here as you can s ee that there is one step , the 
next step and  so on. So, the step -like formation is there , and that is referred to as bench 
terracing . 
So, whenever platforms are built , such that they look like steps , they are referred to it 
bench tracing , and platforms are  separated at a r egular interval by vertical drops or by 
steep sites and protected by vegetation and some times by stones or stones by stones 
retaining . So, this is what we are talking about this . So, this is refer red basically referred 
to as riser , which we will see a little la ter.  
So, these vertical drops  can be completely vertical , or they can be sloppy and just in 
order to protect them . There  should be some kind of  vegetation that should be grown 
over these . So, that they remain protected and as you can  see that this  portion is being 
used for cultivation . So, here also cutting and filling is taking place , the horizontal platform is being used for 
cultivation , and these vertical portions is recommended that some grass or some 
plantations should be there  so, that it is prote cted from erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:24) . 
 
The bench terraces convert a steep slope of 20 to 30 per cent to a series  of level or nearly 
level benches . So, the important thing is , there  we saw broad -based terraces , they are 
recommend ed slope was 8 per cent wherein bench terraces  are adopted for 20 to 30 per 
cent and of course,  they, they, they convert a steep slope into series of , benches or level 
platforms and of course,  they are costly to construct . 
So, here this is the original slo pe, and there we are cuttin g and filling , and already I 
mentioned that this vertical thing , which could be completely  vertical , or it is the slope 
that is referred to it riser , which may be vertical or inclined , if inclined half is to 1 or 1 is 
to 1 are slope is common , and at the end of t hese platforms or terraces a s houlder bund is 
provided to check the flow of water .  
So, otherwise , if water flows and falls suddenly , then; obviously, it might cause erosion 
here. So, that is why  these shoulder bund s are a lso provided  and, these benches  are either 
level or nearly level may be sloping inward or sloping out ward  that. So, different types 
of benches are possible ; this is a typical sketch . (Refer Slide Time: 29:45) . 
 
The bench terraces are classified as absorpt ion or level or tabletop terrac es outward , 
sloping terraces  or inward sloping terraces . 
So, these three types of bench terraces are quite come  com popular . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:02) . 
 
So, absorption or level  or table tabletop terraces simply means  that th is platform is 
completely  horizontal that is completely flat . So, they are constructed exactly on the 
contours and provided with sufficient freeboard  so that they can trap all the rain that 
falls. So, the shoulder  bund  we are talking about , and these are s uitable for areas  having distributed medium rainfall and having deep and highly permeable soils . So, because we 
are storing water , most of the water here is falling , so; obviously, the importan ce of that 
infiltration capacity of the soil should be higher . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:4 1) 
 
Then we have outward sloping Terrace so ; that means, you can see here , this is a slope in 
this direction , this is slope direction and sloping out ward  are effective in low rainfall 
areas with a permeable soil of medium depth lowe r ends graded channe l are provided for 
safe disposal enough ; that means, here we provide a channel . So, that is water can be 
taken away . 
Shoulder  bund is essential;  because the slope is there , the flow of velocity will be higher . 
So, it might cause erosion  and if solar , but is not  provided , and it is useful for a slope up 
to 15 per cent, and it is mostly used for orchard  cultivation . So, outwards sloping type of  
bench terrace . (Refer Slide Time: 31:23) . 
 
And then the third category is inward sloping terrac es, and so, in this case , you see the 
slope is in this direction . They  are preferred in heavy rainfall areas and a suitable drain , it 
inward end s of each of these terraces  to be also here , there is a suitable drain provided 
susceptible , and these prevent p onding of water and are useful for crops that are 
susceptible  to water logging . 
So, any crop which we grow , which is susceptible to water logging , then we provide this 
inward  type of slope . So, that excess water can be taken off easily . So, with this  we have  
seen, we have introduced terraces , we have seen that terraces  are preferred in the hilly 
area for cultivation . We have seen that broadly , they can be classified as bench terraces 
and broad -based terraces . We also saw the classification . Further , classific ation broad -
based terraces  are channel type or ridge  type and , the bench terraces  could be just level 
or tabletop or inward  sloping or outward sloping , and we will see how to design them in 
next lectures . 
Thank you very much . 