Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 19 
Broad - Base Terraces  
 
Hello friends, welcome back to NPTEL online certification course on  Soil and Water 
Conservation Engineering.  I am Rajendra Singh, a Professor in the Agriculture and Food 
Engineering Department of IIT  Kharagpur . We are in week -4, lecture -19 and the topic 
today is Broad -Base Terrace . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37 ) 
 
Coming to the  cours e content that we are covering this week, we started this week  with 
lecture -16, where we introduced Terraces . Lecture -17 was on Bench Terraces , and in 
lecture -18, we solved problems dealing with the Design of Bench Terraces, using the 
concepts learne d in lecture -17. In today’s lecture , that is lecture -19, we will be talking 
about  Broad -Based Terraces  and in lecture -20, we will solve problems dealing with the 
Design of Broad -Based Terraces by utilizing the concepts we learn today . (Refer Slide Time: 01 :17) 
 
Starting with the Broad -Base Terraces,  Broad -Based Terraces are defined as terraces for 
which all constructed and excavated slopes are flatter than 5 :1, and the entire terrace is 
cropped. So, as we saw in the previous case also, terrace means it  is used for a steep 
slope or area hill, hilly terrain where the slope is steep. So, here you can see that  an 
original ground surface is at a steep slope and what we are we typically do is that we cut 
the soil on the upstream side and utilize the same soi l to fill on the downhill side.  
We cut on the upstream side and fill in the downhill side , and in the process, what is 
done is that , we have certain excavated slopes that are which is here.  This is nothing  but 
the excavated slope  and then constructed slopes . So, these are the regions.  This is 
basically a channel , and this is refined as the ridge. So,  these slopes are constructed 
slopes. So, the excavated slopes and constructed slopes  all are kept flatter than 5:1. So, 
that is very important,  and they are k ept fl atter than 5 :1 so that the entire terrace can be 
utilized for agricultural cropping. It was s o, cropping or for agriculture production.  So, 
earth fill for the terrace ridge is normally obtained from excavation of the terrace 
channel. So, this is nothing, b ut we are talking about this is terrace  channel,  and this is, 
this we are defining as terrace ridge . So, what we are doing?  We are excavating this 
channel and then  utilizing that particular earth  for constructing the  terrace ridge. So, 
basically , this terr ace ridge is constructed by the earth field obtained from excavation of 
terrace channel and their adaptability is limited to smooth topography with land slopes of 
less than 8 per  cent. The important thing is that  the land slop es should be less than 8 per  cent in this case, and 
the topography should be smooth  because we want that  this entire area should be 
cultivated , and that simply means  that they there,  there will be that once it is cultivated 
area; that means, there will b e movement of agricultural machi nes, machinery tractor, 
power tillers or whatever, it could be manual cultivation also.  So, because there will be 
movement of  agricultural machines , so, this land should be smooth enough for 
agricultural operations or cultural operations. So, that is why  we keep these flat , and 
typically , this area should be smooth , and slope should be limited to 8 per  cent, for the 
adoptive or the construction or for the adaptability of Broad -Based  Terraces . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:37 ) 
 
Now, these are preferred, due to ease  of construction with a plough, tractor blade or any 
earth moving equipment, simply by moving the soil downhill to form a channel in the 
ridge. So, the construction is very simple as you can see, their construction is very simple  
because you see that, simp ly what we are doing you are removing the soil from the 
uphills, the uphill side that is this side, we are removing the soil . This is soil that is being 
cut from the original  land, and this soil itself is being fille d here to create this ridge.  So, 
basical ly, this is simply earth moving, that is the operation involved , and that is why it is 
easier to construct  because that can, this operation can be performed by simply a plough 
by tractor blade or any simple earthmovin g machinery or earth moving equipment , 
which, with which,  which can be performed. So, that is why it is so simple,  and the flat slope of this shape allow s farm equipment to operate on constructed ridge slopes , 
therefore, allowing cropping of the entire fiel d. 
So, this point we have also  seen ear lier, and we have seen that  all these slopes, we try to 
keep , flatter than 5:1  even here. So, all the slopes we try to keep  flatter ed than 5:1. So, 
that farm equipment could move easily , and agricultural operation  or cropping  could take 
place , easily witho ut any hindrance or  without any problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:25 ) 
 
Now, coming to types of Broad -Based Terraces , Broad -Based Terraces are classified  
broadly into two categories . One is Graded , or Channel Type Ter races  and the other is 
Level or Ridge  Type  Terrace.  (Refer Slide Time: 06:51 ) 
 
Let us discuss these, one by one . Starting with Graded or Channel Type Terrace , these 
are constructed by cutting a shallow channel on the uphill side and using only this soil to 
build the embankment. So, already we ha ve seen that  the cutting and filling, this is the 
primary operation which is involved in this case and , thus, in this case, a shallow , a 
shallow channel is cut on the upstream side as you can see here this is the cut portion and 
then it is filled on the th is is the filled portion. So, this is cut , and this is fil l to build the 
embankment.  So, this is this ridge basically is nothin g, but it is a form of the 
embankment and , I mean,  this is cut and filled already it is shown here, this is cut, this is 
fill, bu t the important thing is that  you should not get perturbed by seeing this simple 
shape  because earlier we saw very smooth  or flat , shapes basically . 
In this,  I mean that is , possible also, because if you , what happens is that, even if we see 
this case , very organized one where flat slopes are very organized one when we construct 
these we see, that this slope is very organized  under normal circumstances, but what 
happens that with time when the agricultural operation takes place then. So, even this 
will beco me something like this. So, this is precisely what we are seeing , but. So, you 
should not get perturbed by looking at that pic ture. So, this is what basically, we,  we are 
talking about that this is the cut portion , this is the fill portion, even in this pi cture . So, 
coming back to this picture once again , so that is why  it is cutting a shallow channel on 
the uphill side and usin g only this soil to build the embankment, that is what is shown 
here, and primarily this Graded or Terrace channel removes  excess w ater and minimizes erosion. So, the important thing is  excess water , so; that means, that is why  the Grade or 
Channel type.  The grade is graded or Channel Type slope, because what happens that , 
this cut portion which is nothing, but this which function say s channel ; this one is 
provided with a longitudinal slope  or slope in the longitudinal direction.  
That means  perpendicul ar to this screen. So, all along the length , this is provided with a, 
a grade , so that water can be taken away. So, that is how the exce ss water removal of 
excess water is a major function of this Graded or Terrace Type Channels.  So, that is the 
major fun ctional difference here , and obviously, it reduces the minimizes erosion by 
reducing the slope lengths , so, as you can see here that we c reate a series of 
embankments . So, that means  the area,  area between , any two burns that  acts at the 
catchment area.  This is nothing, but this is these acts as a catchment area for this 
particular  terrace. So, what happens is that whatever rainfall will oc cur here, that will be 
confined to this particular area and only that much area ; that means, the flow which is 
generated here that  this channel has to take away .  
So, what we are doing is that we are totally total length of the slope, we are cutting down 
into different segments by constructing a series of  terraces, like Graded or Channel Type 
Terrace s. So, that is why  total length is reducing and conducting the intercepted runoff to 
a safe outlet at a non -erosive velocity.  So, they are , too, because we are cutting down the 
total flow.  So, obviously , we are, what we are doing is that we are , the total flo w, we are 
reducing by reducing the slope length, so; obviously , the transport capacity of the water 
is reduced to a large extension  that is why  erosion canno t take place , or it is minimized.  
Similarly, whatever water that falls here that is intercepted by this channel and because a 
longitudinal grade is  provided ; so, because of that, it is taken away it is to a safe outlet 
with a non -erosive velocity.  
When we design the channel, we ensure that the velocity of flow is non -erosive.  We 
know  we hav e seen this non -erosive velocity many times. So,  because we ensure that, so; 
obviously, there will be no erosion taking place even in the channel. So, that is how the 
total erosion is minimized, in this case . (Refer Slide Time: 11:41 ) 
 
Now, the side slope s of both the channel and the ridge  are kept as flat as possible to 
facilitate the farming operation, which  we have already seen that typically for , for Broad -
Based Terra ces, the slopes are kept as flat as possible flatter than 5:1. So, that farming 
operat ions could take place, and since construction and  maintenance of, of a satisfactory 
channel are required; these should not be built, because here we see that safe removal  of 
water is a major function.  So, the channel is the major component . 
So, that is why  these should be avoided.  I mean,  these types of graded type of terraces 
should be avoided  in deep sands or on soils that are too stony steep or shallow to permit 
adequat e construction. So, if  it is deep sand , then the construction of a channel its 
stability wo uld be issue similarly it is too stony or too steep or too shallow soil, then; 
obviously, sufficient depth . It may not be possible to have a sufficient cut or suffic ient 
depth of the channel  to be able to carry the  required  desired flow at a  non-erosive 
velocity , so; obviously, one has to be careful , where,  where these channels or where 
these Graded or Channel  Type of Terraces should be constructed.  
Now, typically , Broad-Based Terraces are adopted for slopes less than 8 per  cent, but if,  
if for  example, any for any case, if it is adopted for slope greater than 8 per  cent, then 
back slope is grassed. So, this is the back slope. So, this is grassed , and it may be the 
slope may be provided 2:1. So, this is  a 2:1 slope , and the  grassed this  should b e 
protected by grass. So, that by chance , if any over talking take s place, then also there will be no chance of any erosion occurring. So, th is care ha s to be taken while constru cting 
these terraces . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:39 ) 
 
Now, the next category is Le vel or Ridge Type Terrace and is primarily used for 
moisture conservation. So, that is the major difference from functional difference Graded 
or Channel Type are more for removal  of excess water, where a Level or Ridge Type 
Terraces are more for moisture cons ervation, and they are adopted in low to mid 
moderate rainfall regions , for trapping and holding rainfall for infiltration into the soil 
profile . 
The purpose here is that most  of the rainfall  that occurs between two terraces, that should 
be trapped wi thin that area and then, the entire water should get infiltrated into the soil 
profile. So, that moisture is conserved , and they can be used even in high rainfall area s. 
If the soi l is permeable or if the infiltration capacity of soil is high , high enough, t hen 
they can be used even in high rainfall area s, because even more rainfall that can be , that 
will be , conserved , through infiltration process, in such soil  and from cross -section point 
of view the difference is that embankment, is constructed of soil, tak en from both sides 
of the ridge.  So, here as you saw, in the  graded terrace , only one side up a stream side 
was cut, but here both sides you see, the cut here also and the soil is taken to create the 
fill. So, that we have a sufficiently high embankment built so that entire moisture could be stored and conserved within the terrace area , so, that is very important , from  that is 
from the operational point of view for these terraces . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:25 ) 
 
Now coming to the design of graded terraces , design of graded terraces when we say, it 
includes spacing that is terrace spacing, terrace grade.  We have to make a decision, 
terrace length and , of course, the cross -section. So, these are the four major parameters 
on which we have to make a decision  when we  are talking about designing a graded 
terrace . And the design is primarily governed by a land slope which is , obviously, the 
most important feature.  (Refer Slide Time: 15:51 ) 
 
Then soil characteristics, like soil type and soil depth that, we have seen that how depth 
could affect , the selection of a particular even Graded Type of Terrace , cropping pattern, 
that is what kind of crop, we are going to grows, what is the soil managem ent practice 
and of course, climatic conditions, that is the rainfall which is the mo st important, 
because that will govern , the most of the design parameters, that how much water is to 
store and  so on. So, these are the primary data that are required for designing a graded 
terrace . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:29 ) 
 Now coming to the first  criteria, that is , terrace spacing , terrace spacing is expressed as 
the vertical or horizontal distance between corresponding points on two adjacent 
terraces. So, this point we  have already seen  is the vertical and horizontal interval.  This 
is true for bunds  also, earlier we saw in the case of bund also , and we have also seen in 
the case of  bench terrace that vertical and horizontal intervals are calculated . So, the 
terrace is s pacing is quite a common feature we do  not need to discuss and , horizontal 
spacing we know is useful in determining the row arrangement and vertical spacing 
useful in that terrace layout and construction then, how , how the terraces relate and how 
they will  be constructed that is governed.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:19 ) 
 
So, this is a spacing part we ha ve already , we already know what it is, but the important 
thing is that , in the case of graded terraces, they are certain recommenders the 
recommendations given f or deciding the vertical interval based on climatic regions and 
soil types.  For example, if it is a hu mid region and soil is erodible , then; obviously, for 
such places , narrow terraces will be required.  In this case, formula,  
VI = (S+4)/10  
where S is the land slope in per  cent.  
Wherein, if it is a less humid region or  sub-humid region  and soils are not so erodible, 
that is normal soils then, this equation can be used equation that is  VI = (S+ 6)/10 
So, as you can see that this will result in a slightly nar row terrace is compared to this. So, 
these equations can be straightaway used for  deciding on the vertical interval . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:15 ) 
 
And, recommended spacing of graded terraces, as per the recommendation by the United 
States Soil Conservation S ervice , which we already see is now known as NRCS,  
Naturals  Conservation Service and it’s for this for different lands of say ing, for example, 
4 per  cent land slope vertical terrace spacing is 1.2 meters , and horizontal spacing is 30 
metres , if it is 10 th en it is  2.1 meters , and the horizontal interva l is 21meters. So, straight 
away , one can use these recommendations of US NRCS or one can also calculate, but 
these recommendations are available which can be adopted . (Refer Slide Time: 18:59 ) 
 
Terrace Grade s, if you talk about terrace grades are , shoul d be sufficient to provide good 
drainage , which is quite obvious , and that is the primary  purpose of the graded channel.  
A grade or Graded or Channel Type Terrace and to carry away desired flow without 
scouring  the channels  that is it  is the non-erosive veloci ty that we have already 
considered.  
If grades are not sufficient, then the waterlogged condition may occur.  So, obviously, if 
grades are not sufficient, then a sufficient amount of water will not be taken a way. So, 
water logging may take place , and as a result , crops may be drowned , and farm operations 
may be difficult. So, we should always  be provided in such a way that water logging 
conditions should not be created. Otherwise , crop characteristic crop,  crop production as 
well as farm operations wi ll be  hindered . And the graded terrace is constructed with 
variable or uniform grades. So, both grades are possible . (Refer Slide Time: 19:57 ) 
 
In the uniform graded terrace , the slope remains constant throughout it s length , and we 
adopted for short terraces, where the slope range is between 0.1 to 0.6 per  cent 
depending upon soil condition and length of the terrace.  So, if a uniform graded terrace, 
then it is adapted for short terraces , and the slope range has to be  between 0.1 to 0.6.  
Wherein  a steeper grade  is reco mmended for impervious soils and short terraces. So, if it 
is impervious your soil and short terrace then, we may go for a steeper grade that is 0.6 
per cent maybe , and maximum velocity is erosive non -erosive velocities , this I  am 
putting, because there is s ome conflict here American Society of Agriculture Engineers 
in the US, 1972, they recommended that , non-associative velocity 0.646  meter per 
second for most erosive soil and 0.61 meter s per second for o ther soils.  
Earlier, in  a lecture, we read that 0.5 meter p er second and 0.69 meter per second is non -
erosive velocities , but these are almost similar though not exactly the same  but almost 
similar. So, we have to see either of them are met and most likely  if we should go by the 
lower one that is the ASAE recommendat ion. (Refer Slide Time: 21:28 ) 
 
So, that  if this is met , then obviously, this recommendation automatically be met , and a 
US NRCS has also  recommended channel grades for variable graded terraces . So, if it is 
150 to 240 meters, a terrace length in between  that range , so, a lower quarter could have 
0.4 second quarter could have 0.3 third quarter could have 0.2 and upper quarter could 
have 0.2.  So, 0.4, 0.3, 0.2, 0.2 are the recommendations  one can  straightaway take from 
these tables , or one can always ma ke own decision , depending upon the site conditions . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:06 ) 
 Now, coming to terrace length, terrace length is dependent on the size and shape of the 
field, outlet position, rate of runoff infiltration rate and channel capacity. So, ther e are 
many  parameters, which affect the terrace length , and the maximum length for a graded 
terrace should be limited to 200 to 500  meters . 
So, whatever be the conditions that are, whatever be the s ize and shape of the field outlet 
position rate of runoff and  N ch annel capacity, the max length is limited to 500 meters , 
and the length of graded terrace may be greater in  permeable soil than in  impermeable 
soil, because it is expected that over the leng th, also some water will be absorbed by or  
get infiltrated in the chann el length; and the terrace length should be such that the flow 
velocity remains non -erosive.  So, whatever be the condition , this is a must condition, that 
flow through the channel shoul d always take place at non -erosive velocity, that we have 
to always ensu re, that is a very important,  consideration . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:13 ) 
 
Now, coming to terrace cross -section , terrace cross -section consists of a channel and a 
ridge which we have alr eady seen , and these are proportioned to fit the land slope, the 
crops g rown and farm machinery used and , that typically the width is such kept such. So, 
that farm machinery could fit into it , and the cross -section is made up of three different 
slopes , and these three different slopes are cut slope, front slope and back slope.  
So, as you see here, this is the channel cut. So, this is called cut slope , and these are built 
constructed slopes. So, this is the first constructed slope which is referred to as the front slope , and this is the second constructed slope which is referre d to as the back slope. So, 
there are three, there is a cut slope, there is a front slope , and there is a  back slope , and 
sometimes this one is referred to as upper cut slope , and if thi s continues here then, it is 
also referred to as lower cut slope.  But these three slopes will definitely be there. So, 
these are referred to as cut slope, front slope and back slope.  So, these three slopes are  
there . 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:28 ) 
 
Now, the fr ont slope width is kept equal to machinery width ordinarily, used for row 
crop operations. So, typically th ese are some of the definition sketch es here. So, 
basically , this is we, we saw in the previous example, that this is upper , this is cut slope, 
this is the front slope, this is the back slope, this is cut, this is fill, this i s filled. So, this 
portion is the channel centerline, this is a channel centerline , and this is the terrace 
centerline . 
From this portion, that is from where the channel is the starting point is there and that 
centerline this width is referred to as Wc that is this width of the cut slope or, or  channel 
or cut slope basically c for cut slope, where in from  channel centerline to the terrace 
centerline this is referred to as Wf or widt h of the front slope and from this terrace cent re 
line, to the end point it is referred to as Wb or width of the back slope.  
So, they are three  slopes , and there are three widths here. So, Wc, Wf and Wb, and if we 
draw a horizontal line from here and also a horizontal line from the upper  end of the ridge, the difference between these two is h, that is  h is the depth of flow or  the total 
depth, actual  depth of between depth total depth and , this is this portion cut that is from if 
we draw a horizontal line fr om the original la nd surface to the bottom of the channel that 
is cut and from the top of the ridge to the original line . 
So, the original land line, if we draw a what major did vertical this is ridge this is fill. So, 
this is cut , this is fill , this is h the difference between the top of this and top of this the 
horizontal -vertical interval difference is h; this is h that is the total depth and . So, here 
this Wf that is the width this one is kept equal to machinery width ordinarily used for the 
row to row c rops the front  and b ack slopes are kept gentle to facilitate the cultural 
operations using machinery usually flatter than 5 :1. So, that is why  so we have to keep 
them as flat as possible , flatter than now 5:1 , and the depth of flow that is d equals to h 
minus freeboard this is h. So, a freeboard is there, it determined from the peak runoff rate 
for 10 -year return period storm.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:44 ) 
 
So, in this case, because this is the  excess flow, we have to take it away. So, we have to 
consider the peak runoff rate , and f or that 10 years frequency is considered for the storm , 
so, with equal side slope widths. So, if Wc that its cut slope is equal to  Wf front slope 
equal to Wb that is back slope equal to W that is terrace width. So, if Wc, Wf and Wb all 
are equal , that is eq ual to terrace width, then cuts and fill from the geometry are  
C + f = h  + S×W where  C is the cut, f is the fill, h is the depth of the channel including freeboard, S is the 
original land slope , and W is the width of the  side slope  or width of the terrace. So,  this 
condition is true if W c = Wf = Wb.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:19 ) 
 
So, obviously, using this relationship , we can find out cut and fill , corresponding to  
channel depth. That is a relationship . Basically , we can find out . And the commonly used  
dimensions of the graded terrace , per USDA , Soil Conservation Agriculture Handbook, 
number 57, which is now NRCS. So,  for a particular land slope,  let us say, we can see 
there are 4 per  cent land slope and if terrace length says, 60, 120, 120, let us consider 120 
meters for dif ferent length it is given  terrace ridge height will be 27 centimet res, the unit 
is Centimeters.  
For 4 per  cent land slope,  120-meter  terrace length , the data range height will be 27 and 
the channel back slope, ridge  fore slope and ridge back slope, that  is basically the cuts to 
what we talked about the cut slope ; this is nothing but cut slope  this is Wf that is W front 
slope , and this is nothing but Wb or back slope, the same thing we are talking about. The 
values are  6:1, 8:1, and 8: 1. So, that means, using this if we know, the field slope and 
once we have decided the terrace length, then also we can take the standard dimension 
say as per USDA, SCS Agricultural Handbook also. So, this is how we can different , 
paramete rs of a graded terrace can be decided.  (Refer Slide Time: 30:43 ) 
 
Now , we talk about the design of  the level terrace. The concepts or principles remain the 
same ; only certain changes are there. So, if we talk about design specifications, terrace 
length it s length  is comparatively much longer than the graded terrace. So, it is may be up 
to 800 meters. In the case  of the graded terrace , we saw that it is limited to 300 to 500 
meters. That is 500meters, which was the upper limit where in this case, in the case of 
the level terrace, it  could go up to 1000  meters . 
Channel gradient, we saw, there was a gradient of 0.1 to 0.6, but in this case, because the 
gradient is not a factor. So, in this case, flat terraces are used. So, the channel is not 
provided with any grade in this case. Terrace width; terr ace width is kept the same as for 
graded terraces  because it is the farm machinery width that basically governs the terrace 
width. So, the same concepts are used whether  it is graded or it is a level terrace.  
The verti cal interval, horizontal spacing and sid e slopes, are calculated in the same way 
in the case  of the graded terrace , so that means  almost all the  calculations are done 
almost in a similar way . The o nly difference is that in this case, in the case of the level 
terrace, because we are more concerned  with moisture conservation , that means the total 
runoff volume . So, 10 -year frequency runoff volume is used in this case, where in this the 
other case, level the graded terraces case we were interested in peak flow.  So, the peak 
flow rate was used here . It is run off volume is used , and on other differences that the length is in that graded terrace is limited to 500 meters , in this case,  it will be taken as 
1000 meters.  
So, with this, we come to the end of this lectu re, and we have seen how to decide  vario us 
parameters . It is the spacing, be it grade, be it length, be it cross -section , the cut and fill 
and channel height relationship all those we have seen and utilizing these concepts, we 
can design graded , or level t erraces is the case, may arrive or the or  other the Broad -
Based Terraces.  
Thank you very much . 