 
 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultur al and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 14 
Graded Bunds  
 
Hello friend s, welcome to  NPTEL  online certification  course on Soil and Water  
Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendra S ingh, a Professor  in the Agriculture and Food 
Engineering Department of IIT, K haragpur . We are in week number  3, lecture -14, and 
the topic today is graded bunds . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37 ) 
 
Just to remind you of th e cours e content of week 3, this week , we started lecture  -11 with 
introducing bunds ; a lecture -12, we went through the concepts of contour bunds , and in 
lecture  13, we saw how to apply th at conce pt for designing contour  bunds . In today’s 
lecture , we will go through  concepts of graded  bunds, and then in lecture -15, we wi ll see  
how to solve problems on  graded bunds or how to design graded  bunds.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 01:09 ) 
 
Just recap  this, we already saw earlier  that that graded bunds are  small embankments  that 
are laid across the land slope  but not along contours  in an agricultural field . So, basically , 
small embankments just we saw already that  be the  contour  bunds or graded bunds , they 
are typically  small  embankments , and also the cross -section is typicall y trapezoidal . 
And they are always like  we have already seen that all the conservation measures we 
adopt , there always taken  across the land slope  because we want to check the flow ing 
water that  is the  basic purpose . And the importan t point here is w hich a  not along 
contour . This is to distinguish  that the graded bunds are different from  contour  bunds. In 
the case of contour bunds , we always put the bunds on contour lines , wherein in graded 
bunds , we do  not have to follow the contour  bunds. This is a major difference . 
In these b unds that  is graded bunds , the entire spacing between two consecutive  bunds 
acts as  a channel , where a longitudinal slope  along the b und is provided for letting the 
runoff out safely from the channel . So, basically  what it says is tha t if this is your land 
slope an d suppose we are adopting these  graded bunds , two consecutive bunds , so that 
simply means that what it is saying that  in the case of contour bund we saw that whatever 
rainfall occurs in between these two b unds that we try to store that we try to conse rve 
over the total area . 
But in this  case, we also saw that  the function of this is  basically  disposal of excess 
water , safe disposal of excess water , so that is why this entire area is here. And when we  
 say the area, there  is a length  perpendicular to the bo ard also  is very important . We have 
to understand that  this is there is a this if we can draw like this  in this direction , so this is 
something like this ; in this direction , this will continue  along the length  of the field . 
So, this is what we are talking ab out is this is the horizontal  interval , and this is the 
length . So, along this length , there is a longitudinal slope . We provide a longitudinal 
slope . And this entire thing the area between these two bun ds that acts as a chan nel, so 
that this entire ar ea acts is a channel  and then we provide a longitudinal slope  along the 
bund for taking the run off order  away to some safe disposal . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:12 ) 
 
So, basically , that is where ah this longitudinal slope along the bund is coming to the 
picture , and obviously, then the entire channel is used for letting  the runof f out safely 
from the channel that is the purpose .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 04:27 ) 
 
These are preferred in areas  where land is susceptible  to water erosion , the soil is less 
permeable , and the area  has water  logging  problem s. So, whenever  of course,  susceptible 
to water erosion , that is why we are going for any erosion  control measure , be it conto ur 
or graded bund , but in this case , the qualifying statements are  that soil is less  permeable ; 
that means,  the infiltration rate is very low , or infiltration capacity is very low . And the 
area has  a water logging problem that is water gets stored because infiltration capacity is 
low. So, wherever these conditions are there , we go and adopt grade d bunds . 
And just to remind , the graded bund  system is  primarily designed  to dispose of excess 
runoff  safely from a gricultural lands . So, any area which is water logged or where the soil 
is less permeable ; obviously, we do not want wate r to get stored there , and that is where 
we adopt graded bunds  so that the excess runoff  can be safely disposed o f. 
So, the major difference between the contour  bund  and grade d bunds is that  the cont our 
bunds  are constructed  for water conservation . So, there water conservation measures  
where are  graded bunds are  meant for disposal of excess runoff , so that is one major 
difference between  contour  bunds and graded bunds . And in  the case of contour bund , 
the area between two bund s is used for conserving moistu re; where in the case of the 
grade d bund, the area between two is used as a channel  for safely  discharging the water 
or carrying the water to a safe outlet . That is the  major difference between  these two 
bunds  types of b unds.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 06:11 ) 
 
Now , typically adaptability is concerned ; these are constructed in high rainfall areas 
having more than seven  millime tres 700 millimetres of rainfall  and where the excess 
water has to be remove d safely to avoid water stagnation . So, basically , in high rainfal l 
areas  having more than 700 millimetres  of rainfall , this is the typical  adaptability 
condition . 
And usually recommended for 2 to 8 per cent of a land slope , so we saw that 2 to 8 per 
cent of the land slope is  or less than 8 per cent is recommended for  both contour  and 
grade d bunds. And a general recommendat ion for contour  bund is  6 per cent; here, it is 2 
to 8 per cent. Contour bunds are usually adopted in less than 700 mm of rainfall , where as 
graded bunds are adopted for more than 700 mm of rain fall unde r normal  circumstances . 
In the case of highly imp ermeab le soils like deep  black soil , graded  bunds may also be 
recommended for less er rainfall area s. So, if they have to be adopted in less than 700 mm 
of rain fall, then the conditions ha ve to be very specif ic that the soil has to be highly 
impermeable  or infiltr ation capacity has t o very low . For example,  it happens with the 
deep black soil , and that is why if you go to the Bellary region of K arnataka , in the 
Southern State of K arnataka , then you will find t hat type because the soils are deep black 
soils there . So, graded  bunds are preferred in those areas .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 07:45 ) 
 
Then we have already seen that we provide some kind of a longitudinal slop e here . So, 
this is the channel . So, we provide som e kind of  longitudinal slope depending upon 
which direct ion we have to take the water . And this gradient  may be uniform or variable , 
which  is also a possibility. Y ou can have a uniform throughout . The length  of the grade  
could  vary also . The uniformly grad ed bunds are suitable  where the discharge  is less, and 
thus the length of  the bund is also less. So, if the b und of  discharge to be handl ed is less , 
and the length of the b und or the length of the field itself is less , then we go for 
uniformly graded bunds . And variable graded bunds are suitable where  the discharge is 
more and the length of bund  required to handle th e discharge is more . 
On the contrary , if the dischar ge is more and the length of the bund is more , then we 
provide variable grades . And variabl e grades are provided  in different sections  of the 
bund  so that the veloc ity of flow is kept within  the non-erosive  limit . So, with the case of 
uniformly graded or variable graded , this condition of non-erosive  velocity is always true 
that is you always ha ve to  see that  water flows only at a non-erosive  velocity  so that 
there  is no erosion  in the channel . And but in the case of variable grade s, if it is the 
length of the b und is more , we can provide variable grades  in different sections of  the 
bund .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 09:20 ) 
 
So, water flow in the graded channels  constructed on the upstream  side of bunds  is at 
non-erosive  velocities , and the flo w is led to saf e outlets or grassed  waterways . 
Sometimes , I mean  though  we have said that the entire area between the two bun ds can 
be used as a channel , sometimes if the discharge i s not so much or it is not expected to be 
very high , then we also provide  that just construct  channels  upstream side of the b und. 
So, that only means what  that just now we saw that if  this is our example ; once again  I 
draw  these two consecutive bunds  and again to make  it easy to understand  let us say that  
we are putting the third dimension also , so that means, this is the land slope  across this is 
across  we are constructing these  bunds and this is the area we  are talking about . 
So, in the previous case, we saw  others while defining the grade bund ; we said  that the 
entire channel area is used as a channel ; I mean , the entire area between these two  bunds 
is used as a channel . But in some cases  like the case , it is saying here that graded  
channels are constructed on the upstream side of the  bund . So, if this is the  upstream  side 
of the bund , in this case , it will be here because the slope is in this direction ; we are 
saying  the slope is in this direction . So, water will flow, so that simply means by the side 
of this b und itself , we construct  the ch annel . The channel is constructed  here, and the 
grade is provided there , and the remainder of the area is left as it is, so that is also a  
possibility .  
 But, in any case , the channel portion of the gr aded bund  is put under cultivation , and the 
grass ed waterways  are kept permanently under  grass . So, depending  on opening up on we 
always cultivate the b und area which is  the which is why we really go for  this 
conservation measure , but the grass water way or waterway wherever  we are carrying the 
water through  that should be  kept under the grass  so that erosion  can be checked  that is 
very important . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:44 ) 
 
Now,  coming to the design of graded b unds , there are certain aspects we have to take 
into account . So, like in the case of co ntour bund , we need information on  rainfall which 
gives us an idea about  how much water really the structure is  likely to handle . The land 
slope , which basically the first thing is it decides  is helped us in deciding the adaptability  
of which kind of b und or also , this land slop e is used in designing  various other  
parameters of the structure , then soil texture and soil depth . So, these are the t hree basic 
pieces of infor mation which we  required . 
And based on the soil type , we select a suitable  side slope . And subsequently , calculate 
the vertical  and horizontal i ntervals , and determine the b und cross -section and grade . 
And bund  cross -section when we set includes  base wi dth, top width  and bund width . So, 
these are  kind of  a reputation  for what we have already seen in the case of contour  bund .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 12:52 ) 
 
The bund  design also includes  the estimation of length per hectare of land , which  helps 
in estimating the total earth work  and cost of constructing  the graded bunds . 
The design  of many graded bunding  system s is based on the value of  estimated design 
discharge  from the  field, which is quite obvious . And then , the known  value of design 
discharge and other locatio n-specific  varia bles like soil type , rainfall in filtration  is 
related mathematically to determine  the different design parameter s so that we will see  
one aft er the  other . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:39 ) 
  
 Now, coming to  definition  is the sketch that is various d esign  parameters , very similar to 
the graded  bund  contour bund , but here also once again we see this is the trapezoidal  
cross -section normally we use , this is the trapezoidal cross -section . 
Here you  can see , and the bottom width is  B, the top width is  T and H is the total height 
of the b und, and the depth of water pounded behind the b und or theoretical dept , which 
we normally  calculate first . And then we provide t he here basically the difference 
between hand H is nothing , but we provide a  kind of  freeboard . So, this his you 
calculate , and then we  add free board to get the total height . 
And z here is the side slope ; we say we always said that it  slope  we always w e represent 
in terms of  horizontal is to vertical ; that is two  horizontal is to one vertical . So, this value 
is z; z is nothing  but this side slope we have to put . And the ns is the slope  of the seepage  
line because the seepage line  also has a particular  slope, and that is being represented 
here by ns. So, these are the  various components we have to  keep an eye on . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:00 ) 
 
Now, vertical interval  determine s the vertical interval and horizontal spacing , the same 
principle which w e used while  designing contour  bunds  is adopted . And this is a vertical 
interval ; this is a horizontal  interv al. We remember we had three different formulas , but 
as I said that  the Cox formula is most commonly  used for calculating the vertical 
interv al, where it is given as    
 VI = 0.3(XS  + Y) 
Where S is the  land slo pe, VI is the  Vertical Interval . And X and Y are the factor s 
accounting for rainfall  and soil characteristics  and al so the crop cover  conditions . And 
the value s of X and Y we always obtained from  tables which we have seen in  lecture 
number  12 and 13 both those lectures we have used these tables to find t he value s of X 
and Y. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:12 ) 
 
Now, the grade  is one is grade is concerned ; a uniform grade is  used for shot  bunds  of 
100 to 250 metres . And variable grade  when  the b und length goes beyond  150 metres . 
For most of the soils , the gr ade range is over 0.2 per cent to 0.4 per cent, but in the case 
of long bunds  with impermeable  soils, the grade may be 0 per cent t he beginning that is 
the variable grade  we are talking about , and maybe increase d to a maximum  of 0.5 per 
cent at the tail end . So,  general ly recommen ded is to be  0.2 to 0.4 per cent, but for a 
longer bund , it could be start ed from 0 per cent in the beginning , and it  could go as high 
as 0.5 per cent in the tail end .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 17:00 ) 
 
The side slope recommendations remain the s ame because  they are a function of soil 
characteristics , and so they do not change the t ype of b und. So, here the side slope is 1:1 
for clay soil , if it is loam soil , it is 1.5:1, for sandy soil , it is  2:1. So, you remember  these 
things we  always used . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:36 ) 
 
Now,  the most important thing is the height of the bund ; the height of the bund general 
recommendation is it could vary between 50 to 80 centimetre s that are the general 
recommendation , that could be 50 centimetre s to 80 centimetr es. But the calculation of  
 the height of bund we can do , and there is a research paper published by Singh’s  and 
others in 2010 , and so we will use that paper  to express the same thing . 
And this is the cross -sectional  view of a graded  bund  showing design pa rameters , most 
of the design parameters all already we have seen , and some of these will be requir ed and 
will be us ed slowly . So, here what are we are seeing is that the h is the hei ght of the b und 
which is being used . There are  two triangles that are used here; the two triangles  being 
used here are  abc and b cd. And z generally we use  z side slope , so that is why this 
becomes zh. 
Similarly, this is S per cent slope , so the length will be 100h/ S because  the soil is S per 
cent slope . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:10 ) 
 
So, with th ese definitions , let us see  the total cross -sectional  area of the channel bed  will 
be the sum of areas of abc and bcd.  
Area o f abc (a 1) = 0.5 ×(100h/ s)×h = 50h2/s 
Area o f bcd (a2) = 0.5×( zh)×h = zh2/2 
  
 (Refer Slide Time: 20:08 ) 
 
So, the total area will be , obviously, some of  these two .  
A = 50h2/s + zh2/2 = h2(50/s + z/2)  
And discharge typical ly is given  by the contin uity equation  
Q = A × V 
Where velocity is calculated using  Manning’s equation  which is given by  
V = 1/ n R2/3 S1/2 
Where R is the hydraulic radius  as given by A/P; where  A is the cross -sectional area , and 
P is the  wetted perimeter .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 20:57 ) 
 
So, we have to if you have to apply this equation , then we have to calculate  the wetted  
perimeter . And wetted perimeter , basically , is if you  read the channel on any ch annel . So, 
if it is a channel , where this is the water level , and we have to find out the wetted 
perimeter s. So, all the surfaces are the sum of the length of surfaces  that are in contact 
with water ; this is referred to as  wetted perimeter . So, this is a wetted perimeter . 
Say using the same principle here, the water con duct is here and on the surface , and that 
is why the wetted perimeter is  this length which is  P1, and this length  it is P2. And from 
the triangle  formula , Pythagoras  theorem , P1 will be nothing  but 
P1 = √(h2 + (zh)2) 
P2 = √(h2 + (100h /s)2) 
P = h(√(1+(100/s)2) + √(1 + z2))  
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:18 ) 
 
So, now, we have  to know the area , we know the wetted perimeter , so we can  calculate 
the hydraulic radius . The hydraul ic radius is  R equal  to A/P. So, A, we h ave calculated , 
wetted perimeter we have calculat ed, so that is how  we get  the value of R in these terms 
in terms : 
R = (h2((50/s) +(z/2))) / (h(√(1+z2) + √(1+(100/s)2))) 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:45 ) 
  
 So, now we can  put everything into the  velocity  equation . And then substitute the value 
in the Q equation . So, if we can put in th ese equation s,  
Q = (h2(50/s+z/2))× 1/n × {(h2(50/s+z/2))/(h(√(1+z2) + √(1+(100/s)2)))} × (S/100)0.5 
Remember , there are two slo pes being used here ; this s is the land slope , which  is all the 
time we are using  this in all equations ; Whereas  S is channel  bed slope. So, we have to 
remember this  in this formula . So, basically , we are s imply putting the values of  area and 
R, which calculated  S already is there in the continuity equation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:07 ) 
 
So, after arranging the se terms  finally, for h , we will give get th is equation ;  
h = {(Q×n)3/8 × [√(1+z2) + √(1+(100/s)2)]1/4} / {(S/100)3/16×(50/s + z/2)5/8} 
Where Q is the discharge , z is the side slope , h is the land slope , S is the channel bed 
slope , and n is the Manning’s  roughness coefficient . So, this is how using this formula ; 
we can calculate the h. And then gro ss height or the height of the b und can be 
determined by adding a nominal 20 per cent or 25 per cent freeboard . So, H will be 1.2 
or 1.25 h, whatever we want to  calculate , that is how it will come like .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 25:09 ) 
 
So, now we reach  ah once we have calculate d h, then we can go and calculate other 
things  like a cross -section . So, there are some general considerations while designing the 
cross -section . Cross-section of the  bund should be sufficient for stability , which goes 
without saying , so the structure has to always  be stable  and that we have to keep into 
account . 
The highest flood level s hould be  below the top of the b und, and that is why we always 
provide the freeboard  because we do  not want that . That is why we always c alculate the  
theoretical height , and we calculate , we add the free board  so that overtopping is avoided . 
And this third consideration is the seepage  line should lie below the to e of the bund  on 
the downstream  side. And seepage line is  basically . What happen s is that, because the  
material of construction  is soil, so obviously, whenever  standing water is  there , seepage 
starts taking place and slowly , this whole thing  gets wet . 
The problem is that we want to avoid  ah this. We do not want that  this downstream s ide 
should be we t because the moment it happens , there might be a failure of the structure  
because th e toe will fail. So, there will be cutting  of the two , and then the entire  structure 
will fail, so that is why  we should  always ensure that the seepage  line should lie below  
the toe of the b und of the downstream side . And that is why , when  we take th e seepage 
line, we always ensure that  the seepage  line crosses the  toe, and the R we case  always  
 say that the seepage line  must pass through the base of the struc ture; so that is what we 
always recommend .  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:57 ) 
 
Now, coming to  the cross -section , the see page line  should have the following  slope 
under different soil types . So, for clay soil , it is three  to 1; for sandy loam soil , five is to 
1; for sandy soil , it is six to 1, so these are the general recommendations . So, while 
calculating the base width , we must t ake into account the  seepage line , slope 
recommended for a different soil . So, we know that what is the soil  material of 
construction . So, based on that , we should always take that into account .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 27:30 ) 
 
Now, the base  width  when  we calcul ate; obviously, we have to take this into account . So, 
base width  when we say , so base wi dth will have  two components basically ; if this is the 
h, so this one is  to account for this  slope , that is the  z the side slope of the b und itself , and 
this one  to account for  the slope of th e seepage  line. So, this slope  is ns, this slope is z, 
and the height is h; so obviously, this is zh, and thi s one will be ns times  h. And that is 
why the total  base wi dth; 
B = (ns×h)+(z ×h) 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:26 ) 
  
 Now, once the base  width you  calculated . The top wi dth generally varies between 30 
centimetres 90 centimetres  depending upon the  height of the bund . Generally , it is 50 
centim etres. You remember , in the case of contour bund , also we say that for Indian  
conditions , the top width is 0.5 metres , and the bottom width is 2 metres . So, that is the 
general  recommendation . 
So, top width  calculation , obviousl y, will take into account the total height of the  bund  
which we have calculated . And so here,  
T = B - 2×z×H 
Where B is the base  width , z is the side slope , and H is the gross height  of the  bund . 
(Refer S lide Time: 29:42 ) 
 
And then comes the earthwork computation like contour bund , here also earthwork is a 
product of  cross -sectional  area and the total  length of the b und. And the earth work   
Ew = A c × L 
Ew/L = ((T+B)/2)×H 
Where Ew is the volume of earth work in cubic metre s, and L is the length  of the  bund  in 
metres . So, this is per hectare . Basically , we are calculating . So, this is how  it can be 
where  L is the length of the bund  in metr es.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 30:51 ) 
 
And say  is then the cost of construction  per unit length of the graded bund  can be  
obtained by multiplying the earthwork volume involved in  the construction  of unit length 
of bund  and unit  cost of earth work . So, if we know that the unit cost of earth work is 
UCEW, then the cost of  construction per unit length ; 
CC = Ew/L × UCEW  
So, with thi s, we come to the end of  the graded  bund. We also saw here  that I mean  how 
to consider  various slopes , that is , the slope of the seepage  line of the bed slope  
depending on the soil conditions . And if we know the total flo w that we have to handle 
how to cal culate the h, and we also saw the derivation of a direct formula , otherwise also 
it can be solved , but we solve  a direct formula . And then , we will apply all these 
concepts  to the next lecture to see how to really solve  design problems on the graded  
bund . 
Thank you very much . 