Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 01 
Introduction  
 
Hello friends . Welcome  to NPTEL online certification cours e on  Soil and Wate r 
Conservation Engineering. I am Rajendra Singh,  Professor in Agricultural and Food 
Engineering Department of IIT Kharagpur . I welcome you  to this course , and this is  
week number - 1, lecture - 1. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:45)  
 
We are starting with the introduction , and I will first introduce you t o the course outline . 
In week 1, we will begin  with introducing soil erosion , causes and types of soil erosion , 
erosion a gents , and the factors that affect erosion . Then we will go into the various kinds 
of erosio n an d what are the mechanics behind them . Finally, we will talk about 
agronomical and en gineering measures that are use d for controlling water erosion . In 
week 2, we will switch to soil loss estimation and explain  one popular method  called 
Universal Soil Loss Equation  (USLE ). Over the years , several modification s have been  
made in USLE , so we will go through the modified forms of  USLE . After that , we will 
move into the estimation of  rainfall ero sivity , soil erodibility and other immediate factors  
for estimating  soil loss using  USLE. F inally, we will close the week with a measurement  of soil loss . In week 3 onwards , we will mo ve into various kinds of engineering measures 
adopted  and design  contour and  graded bunds , one of the standard  engineering measures 
adopted  for controlling erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:59)  
 
Then, in week 4, we will go to the design of terraces , another level of  engineering 
measu res. We will def ine the level and graded broad -based terraces , bench terr aces and 
how they are designed . In week 5, we will design grassed waterways that are  basically 
the channels  where grasses  are planted  or vegetation has grown , which can be used for 
carrying the water safely to any outlet . In week 6, we will go into gully control , see the 
principles behind gully control, and then  see some of the vegetative measures that can  be 
adopted for controlling gully . Finally, we wi ll go through the temporary structures and 
diversion d rains that are used for  controlling the gully . (Refer Slide Time: 03:58)  
 
In weeks 7 and 8, we will start with  the permanent gully control structures , and we will 
begin  with the drop spillway design . First, we will see the design fundamentals and any 
permanent gully control structures have three  types of design ; hydrologic , hydraulic and 
struct ural. So, we wi ll see how to go for hydraulic hydrologic and  structural design . In 
week 9, we will move to the next structure, the drop inlet spillway. We will use all the 
principles you have adopted, including  hydrologic , hydraulic and structural design 
principles we will adopt for drop inlet spillway  again . In w eek 10, we will m ove to 
anoth er permanent gully control structure  that is a chute spillway . Again, we will se e 
how to design a chute spillway . (Refer Slide Time: 05:07)  
 
In week 11, we will move t o the second important wind  erosion  agent that is wind 
erosion . We will go through t he mechanics of wind erosion , and then we will see the 
vegetative and mechanical control measures that can be adopted for controllin g wind 
erosion . Finally, we will go for designing two major engineering measures: windbreaks 
and shelterbelts, which are used to prevent  wind erosion . In week 12, which  is of the last 
week , we will go through the land capability classification , sedimentation rate , silt  
monitoring  and storage los s in tanks . What are the impacts  of soil erosion ? 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:11)  
 In the course co ntent for this particular week (week 1) ,  today  (lecture 1) , we will  
introduce  the subj ect. Then we will go to lecture  2, and we will see causes and types of 
soil erosion . In lecture 3,  we will see factors affecting soil erosion  and the effects of soil 
erosion . Lecture 4 will be on soil erosion mechanic s, and lecture 5 will be on water 
erosion control measures . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:40)  
 
Let us start with  the cou rse, but before we go into the course  actual content, there are 
certain things  called learning outcomes . Why are we  learning this cour se, what will be 
the impact once you learn this cours e, and the knowledge you gain . We use Bloom 's 
Taxonomy of Educational  Objectives for learning outcomes in the educational sector , 
which was first given in 1956 and l ater revised in 2001 . 
Bloom 's Taxonomy was develo ped by a group of educational ex perts  led by Benjamin 
Bloom, an American educational psychologist , that is why it is named behind him . There 
are six levels of cognitive  skills starting from low to high  in this taxonomy . Cognition is 
the mental action or process of acquiring knowledge and understanding th rough thought , 
experience and senses . That means  anything our mind does to  any action it takes to gain 
knowledge by further understanding thought, experience, or  sensing that i s referred  to as 
cognition .  This cognitive cognition has six levels of skills ; that is why there are six 
levels of cognitive skills is starti ng from low to high . We will start with the lowest one, and the lowest level is knowledge and remembering 
that is our lowest level . I mean , that is very common in our life because when we were 
toddler s, our parents were always telling us that this is a cat, this is a dog, or they were 
asking us to repeat 1, 2, 3 or a, b, c. They are always asking us to recall those , so that was 
the process of g aining know ledge or remembering . That is the lowest level of cognitive 
skill. Let me  also tell you the  first term here: knowledge, which was given when Bloom 's 
Taxonomy came in 1956 and then , the sec ond term understanding , which  was given 
when  Bloom 's stocks Taxonomy or mo dified in the year 2001 . So, there  are two terms 
for each level . The second  level has comprehensio n and understanding that is once you 
know something , you have pretty  specific  knowledge , then you start understan ding. 
Then th e third level is application or applying . Once you have  remember ed something or 
your acquired knowledge , if you have understood th at, the next thing will be to apply 
that knowledge to your area of domain. O nce you have applied , the next  (fourth)  level 
will be analysis or analy sing. That means after remembering , understanding , and 
applyin g, you want to analy se what happen ed when we ap plied you r particular 
knowledge to a specific  domain area of your interest . Then, the fifth level will come 
evaluation or evaluating . Once you have applied a particular knowledge , once you have, 
you have analysed  then you try to evaluate that what was the outcome . The last level is 
the synthesis or  creating . That means  after you acquire knowledge, remember something, 
understand , apply , analy se, and evaluat e, finally, based on whatever you have learned , 
you create somet hing. That is what  your last level , and  that i s synthesis or creation , is all 
about.  (Refer Slide Time: 10:48)  
 
During the course , we will try to apply all six levels .  After successful ly completing the 
course, we expect that students shall be able to understand  the fundamentals of soil 
erosio n processes and soil conservation  measures . I will take you back to the previous 
slide  because  I wanted to  tell you that we have used a colo ur code . Your first level is 
black,  the second level is red, the third level is light green, the fourth level is blu e, the 
fifth level is deep green and the  sixth level  the final level synthesis  or creating is in 
yellow . 
When we go back to our learning outcome, we start with level 2 here because level 1 is 
well understood that if you want to study something, you have to  remember certain 
definitions, certain formulae, and  certain variables . We start with  the second level , that 
is, we have to unders tand explain  the fundamentals of soil erosion  processes and  soil 
conservation measure s that you should be able to do. 
Then, the next level is to analy se and utili se the available data for designing soil  and 
water conservation structu res. If you  see here designing is the third  level of cogni tive 
skills , and you are using that  third level to design soil and water conservation struc tures . 
Once you have  the design , utilise level 4, analyse and utilise the available data from  
designing this  soil conservation structure . 
Then you should also be able to demonstrate and evaluate various soil conservation 
measures . That means  you are now us ing level 5 of cognitiv e skill and finally, once you have learned or done all these things,  you should be able to develop solutions to real-life 
soil and water conservation problems . That is the final outcome . Finally, y ou wi ll be able 
to und erstand the fu ndamentals of soil erosion processes and soil conservation measures. 
You will be able to analy se and utili se the available data for designing soil and water 
conservation structures . You will be able to demonstrate and evaluate various soil 
conservati on mea sures , and you  will be successful in developing solut ions to real-life 
soil and water conservation problems . That is the learning outcome  we expect after the 
successful completion of this particular  course . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:03)  
 
Now, we com e to two important factors in our  subject n ame soil and water conservation 
engineering . What are soil and water ? We know that soil and water are two essential  
natural resources t hat must be conserved and utili sed judic iously . That is because for 
meeting the food, fi ber and shelter needs of the growing population, we  need the 
efficient utili sation of these resources . As you know , there is an increase in population in 
India and  all over the world . That simply mea ns that the va rious sectors  compete for  
limited soil and water resources , so we have to  manage our resources efficiently . (Refer Slide Time: 15:09)  
 
Now, next is soil water conservation engineering . Basically , this course deals with the 
engineering principles that are involved in soil and water conservation . We have already 
seen in the course outline that we will be using engineering principles involved in soil 
water conservation. We will try to understand and  apply them in designing various 
conservation structures . This course includes the classifica tion of ero sion process es and 
agronomic and engineering measures adopted for erosion control. We will design bunds, 
terraces,  and gully control  structures that various  engineering measures for  controlling 
water erosion . Similarly , in the case of w ind erosion , we will see the design of 
windbreaks and sh elterbelts .  (Refer Slide Time: 16:16)  
 
Then the question  comes  what soil is ? Then soil can be simply defined as the upper part 
of earth crust that is penetrated  by plant roots . If you see plants growing under natural 
circumstances,  you can automatically  say there will be  soil there . That is  the very 
simplified definition . Soil Science Society of America has formally defined soil more 
systematically . As per them , the unconsolidated mineral or organic material on the 
imme diate surface of th e earth serves  as a natural medium for  the growth of l and plants . 
Suppose you look at the simplified definition and this sophisticated definition. In that 
case, the last part is "penetrated by plant roots ", and h ere it says, "it serves a s a natural 
medium for the growth of land plants ". Thus , that part is common  in both . There we  only 
call earth crust ; here, it calls  the immediate surface of the earth , and it goes a little finer  
in detail that it will be a  consulted mineral or orga nic material. 
There is a n even more sophisticated  definition given by the Soil Science Society of 
America of the soil , and that  is more elaborated . That reads  as the unconsolidated 
mineral or  organic matter on the surface of the earth that has been s ubjected to e nsure  
effects of genetic and environmental factors of climate including water , and temperature 
effects and macro and micro -organisms condition by  condition by relief, acting on parent 
material over a period of time.  This is a more sophisti cated definition where  it just talk s 
about the unconsolidated minerals and organic matter on the earth's surface . Still,  it also 
show s that genetic and environmental factors that impact macro and micro organisms that are conditions the relief that act on the parent m ateria l for the creation of soil over  
time.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:41 ) 
 
Coming to the soil, we can see the soil is a system ; basically , it is a complex mixture of 
organic and i norganic components . There are three  main components involv ed in a soil  
system ; minera ls from rocks below or  nearby , and we know that it s the weathering of 
rocks is the cell that is possible for the formation of the  soil. Basically , the minerals in 
the rocks  form one of the main components . Then the other  main component is organic 
matter w hich is the remains of plants a nd animals that use the soil . If you really want to 
see the  soil,  take the  soil sample ; there will be certain remains of  dead plant roots  
animals and which  has been  conv erted into organic matter , and there can be living 
organisms that reside in the soil . I mean , these are the three  main components : minerals , 
organic matter and living organ isms.  Obviously, if you take a  chunk of soil t hen, you 
could  find bacteria , you could find fungi , you could find mite s, you could find  snails, you 
could find earthworms and  so on so forth . That is  what  complete soil system  and 
chemical , physical and biological factors contribute to soil development . Soil 
developm ent is a long slow  process  responsible for creating soil, and that is what our 
interest is  in this  particular subject . (Refer Slide Time: 20:19)  
 
Then coming to functions of soil , there are several function s of soil , and the most 
important one is , it serves as a medi um for the production of food , fibre , fuel and feed . 
We have already  seen that  the basic definition of the soil itself contains plant growth . 
Then next is it regulates water flow through the terrestrial  water cycle . When rainfall 
occurs there  obviously, it reaches the soil surface , and once it  reaches the  soil surface , 
the first proce ss that begins is infiltration that  is the vertical entry o f water into the soil. 
The infiltration takes place , and that infiltration fills the soil moist ure, and once it is 
comple tely filled up , excess water goes percolates  and joins  the groun dwater . Also, when 
the infiltration capacity is satisfied on the top , then overland flow star ts. That is , 
whatever rainfall come s that starts  flowing in the form of overland flow . From the soil 
moisture , the plant 's uptake moisture for their transpiration process , and 
evapo trans piration occurs .That simply means that the soil moisture reserve is an essential  
part of the water cycle, commonly called the hydrological cycle , and t hat is how soil 
functions  there. Then , soil regulate s the atmosphere by emitting and absorbing gases like 
carbon dioxide , methane , water vapo ur and dust. In today 's world , when we are talking 
about climate change  so much , then basically soil exercises  sink for storing these  
greenhouse gases carbon dioxide  and methane , which are prevalen t greenhouse gases .  
Then, it provides a habitat for animals that live in the soil such as mice and organisms  
such as bacteria and  fungi that account for most of the living things on the ea rth. Then,  
soil processes  recycled  nutrients, including carbon , so that living things can use  them over and over again . That is  responsible for the basic  recycling of  the nutrients . Finally, 
soils serve  as an engineering media for constructing  foundations , roadbe ds, dams  and 
buildings .  That is of interest to engineers th at wherever w e see any con struction , 
whether building or road  or dam or bridge,  whatever the ir soil will always be  an 
engineer ing media . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:45)  
 
Then, coming t o global soil resources, which World Resources Institute, 1997 have 
given, th ere are one hundred 12.66 billion hectares of land on the earth surface . Out of 
which  3.96 billion hect ares or 31.2 per cent is too dry to support any cultivation . That 
means  this is not available for cultivation . Anoth er 2 billion hectors or 15.8 per cent of 
the total earth surface  soil that occurs in  the cold tundra region means th ese conditions 
are too cold for any crop to grow . That leaves us with  5.92 billion hect ares or 46.8 per 
cent of the total 12.66 billion hect ares of land that could be  cultivated . Out of these , 
around 4.92 billion hect ares or 38.8 per cent of the total land , is currently being 
cultivated . (Refer Slide Time: 24:56)  
 
If you look at the w orld soil condition , soils are getting degraded in many regions . If you 
look at India and the co lour code , we have areas of serious concern in India , and that is 
why soil management is crucial . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:14)  
 
But, everything is not gloomy ; if you look at the nutrient  availability of soils in India , 
you find that  there are no or slight  constraints , which shows that soil in India  is of good 
quality and they are very product ive. If you can manage them we ll, we will get a very 
high level  of production . (Refer Slide Time: 25:36)  
 
Now, we come to the second factor that is water that is  if you look at the global water 
resources , we already kno w that almost 97.5 per cent of the total water resources are  in 
oceans . That is why we call called t he world of salt , and out of these , only 0.3 per cent to 
2.5 per cent is fresh water . Out of th is fresh wate r, only 0.3 per cent of the water available 
in lakes and rivers storages that is readily available for us  is around 105, 000 cubic 
kilometres  or 0.0076 percent of total water  is only available for use for us . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:21)  
 If you look at  the f unctions of water , then obviously, sustaining agric ulture is the most 
important use . If you lo ok at the world data , almost 82 to 84 per cent of th e total water 
resources are use d in agriculture . If you look at India it self, we u se more than 90 per cent 
of water in sustai ning agriculture , so agriculture is the largest water us er. 
Then, of course , an important function in meeting municipal , industrial , and municipal 
needs  is drinking water supplie s of the  most vital . That is one of the significant  functions 
of water , and last ly, the water has also t o meet the wildlife in recreational needs , so these 
are the major functions of water . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:15)  
 
Suppose you look at the status of food and water availability statistics given by food and 
agricultur e organization in 2003 and 2013. In that case , we find that word production of 
cereals that is kg per capita was highest in mediates and now it is it has declined , and 
almost it has stagnated.  
Simila rly, if you look at the global water  scarcity data at  2000, India was blue; that 
means  the water availability was greater than 2000 cubic meter s per person per year . In 
2050 this colo ur will change , and availability will be between 1000 and 2000 cubic 
meter s per person per year . That means  we wi ll drop from  wate r-rich to water -stress 
condition . (Refer Slide Time: 28:12 ) 
 
We in India need food and water to sustain around 1390 million of the population by 
2025, but the problem is that per capit a land and water availability is diminishing or 
decreasing.  Thus, per c apita land in a hectare , which was 0.5 hectares in 1983, has gone 
2.3 by 2008. Similarly , per capita water cubic meter  was around 5000 in 1955,  it has  
come down to almost 1700, so already we are water -stressed . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:54)  
 
Now, coming to so il erosion , what is soil erosion ? Obviously, soil erosion may be 
defined as detachment  and transportation of soil particle s from one place to another due to the action of rain, wind, and water in motion. This rain , flowing water and wind 
basicall y act as the agents of erosion .  
(Refer Slid e Time: 29:31)  
 
If you look at  the effect s of erosion in India , around 45 per cent of the tota l geographical 
area that is 147 million hectares , out of 328 million  hectares, is affected by water and 
wind erosion . Suppose y ou look at the National Bureau of Soil Science and Land Use 
Planning  (NBSS and LUP ) statistics . In that case , we find that almost 94 million hectares 
of land are affected by water erosion , and around 9.5 million hectares of land is affect ed 
by wind erosion . This probably should  tell you why w e should study this  course  because 
water and wind  erosion  are essential to managing our soil and water resources . If you can 
do that , we will be able to  solve  the water and food sec urity problem . (Refer Slide Time: 30 :25) 
 
Suppose you l ook at the spatial distribution of degraded and wastelands in India data 
provided by the Indian council of agricultural research in 2010. In that case , the colo urs 
see here  most of the colo urs line the first column probably  you cannot see, but this is 
basically  read water erosion problem exclusively . That means  these are the areas where 
water erosion is issued , where in if you  look at the Rajasthan , it is solely wind er osion. 
The entire countr y is facing some degradation  due to  soil erosion , and that is why you  
must study this course and manage our soil resources properly . 
(Refer Slide Time:  31:09)  
 Suppose you look at the water erosion vulnerability data provided by U. S . Department 
of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. I n that cas e, if you look a t 
India , the colo urs are mostly orange and  red, so that means that high  and very high water 
erosion vulnerability . 
With this background, you will probably  understand the importance of soil and water 
conservation  in soil and water erosion . That is what precisely we will cover du ring this 
course . 
Thank you very much . 