Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lectur e - 02 
Soil Erosion  - Causes and Types  
 
Hello friends . Welcome back to  NPTEL online certification course on Soil and Water 
Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendra Singh, Professor in Agriculture and Food 
Engineering Department IIT  Kharagpur . We are now week - 1, lecture - 2, and the topic 
is Soil Erosion, Causes and Types . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37)  
 
To give you an idea , this week , we started with an introduction in the previous lecture ; 
this lecture  is on causes and types of soil erosion . In lecture – 3, we will go through 
factors affecting soil erosion and the effects of soil erosio n. In lecture  – 4, we will be on 
soil erosion mechanics  and lecture  - 5  is on water erosion control measures . (Refer Slide Time: 01:03 ) 
 
Now, coming to causes of soil erosion , one of the for emost causes of soil erosion is the 
destruction of natural protective cover. T hat h appens by indiscriminate cutting down of 
trees  and what happens is that  when you cut down the trees . Then, we also lose the plant 
canopy . Basically , when the plant canopy  is not there , there will be no intercepti on of  
falling rain fall. Of course,  in the pr ocess , there will be no dissipation of kinetic energy. 
That means that when the raindrops read the soil surface, they will have a higher velocity 
and higher level of kinetic energy. Because of that,  the soil will be highly  vulnerable  to 
erosion . 
The other  reason is overgrazing of the vegetative cover ; if we allow overgrazing , then a 
similar effect occurs . That means  if we expose the soil surfa ce and once the soil surface 
is exposed , raindrops fal l on the soil surface with a higher level of kinetic energy . 
Obviously, there is a higher chance  of erosion . 
The third  reason is forest fire which  occurs only in forest areas  and during the summer 
season . Still,  here also  we lose canopy cover because , in the forest fire , the plants or trees 
are whol ly burnt .  Not onl y canopy cover  but also the surface vegetat ion is also lost . That 
means  it is a combination  of indiscriminate cutting down trees and overgrazing a 
vegetative cove r. In a forest fire , we have a combinat ion o f this , which simply means that  
area is highly vulnerable to  soil erosion . (Refer Slide Time: 03:21)  
 
The next cause could be improper land use, and improper land use could be the barren 
land subject to  rain and wind . A land that is left open without any cultivation activities is 
referred to as barren la nd. Because there is no activity taking place in such land , there 
will be no protective  cover on the surface . When rainfall occurs, the surface is e ntirely  
exposed  due to raindrop impact or loose particles  on the surface . Then, the wind will 
tend to take a way the soil particles, which  means a barren land is always  highly 
susceptible to erosion . Then when some land is under cultivation . 
Then, if we use improper cultivation or improper cropping pattern, we also  expose land 
surface . What happens if we select c ropping pattern in such a way or if you do not  
cultivate  in such a way where in between rows, we allow  a  lot of  exposed surface area . 
Then obviously, if the rainfall takes place in that particular area, there will be erosion. 
Also, because the surface wate r flow will take place  again , there will be higher chances 
of erosion . 
The other  improper land use could be the form of cultivation along  the land slope . If we 
cultivate along the land slope , so obviously, in between the rows , there be  some space  for 
water  flow. Because of the slope, this flowing water will have a significantly higher 
velocity and will have higher kinetic energy because of high velocit y. It will have  an 
erosive capacity  that will be much higher . So, that is why an y improper land  may be in the form of barren land , be in the form of 
improper cultivation of cropping pattern s or cultivation along the land slope a ll make soil 
susceptible to erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:40)  
 
Then, coming to types of soil erosion : Soil erosion can be b roadl y cla ssified into two 
categories : geologic al erosion and accelerated erosion. Accelerated erosion can be 
further classified into two categories:  water erosion and wind  erosion . Of cou rse, we saw 
that water and wind are agents of erosion s, so that  acceleratory e rosion could be 
classified as water erosion and wind erosion based on the agents . Overall , soil erosion is 
classified as geological or accelerated, and acceleratory erosion is  classified as water  and 
wind erosion . (Refer Slide Time: 06:26)  
 
Coming to geol ogical erosion , geological erosion is also refer red to as normal or natural 
erosion because  it is a natural phenomen on. It is a natural process responsible for the 
formatio n of and the loss of soil salt  simultaneously . We know that it is the weathering of 
rocks that is responsible for formation as well as the soil loss . This is because the 
forma tion of soil  and the l oss o f soil  go simultaneously, and they are more or less 
balanced . 
It is a prolonged  process  and continuous proces s and that often goes  unnotic ed. It is so 
slow and  continuously occurring  that we do not find  any change  with the naked eye , and 
that is why it is very di fficult to notice any geological erosion . All the topographical  
features on the land surface, like stream channels, valleys, and so  on, are formed bec ause 
of this ge ological eros ion. 
Basically , geological erosion is  normal , and natural erosion  is a prolonged  process  and is 
responsible for creating or forming  all the topographical features we see on the land 
surface . (Refer Slide Time:  08:01 ) 
 
There a re certain ly great examples of geological erosion  around the worl d. One of the 
greatest examples is the Grand Canyon in Arizona, USA, which is one of the world's 
geological wonders . The entrenchment of the Colorado River forms this Grand C anyon;  
as you can see here , the Colorado River  is bifurcated in two tributaries , as you can see at 
least. The important thing is that all the historical part is that that the Grand Canyon  
displays rocks from about 200 million to 2 billion years old . That means it is a place of 
history where you can see rocks that are 200 million to 2 billion years of age . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:5 9) 
 There are several other examples  if you look in India . We have a great example  in 
Marble Rocks, Jabalpur Madhya Pradesh in India and marble rocks are a gorge  on 
Narmada river . Here, the river narrows to almost 10 meters and carves through a large 
area of white marble , creating a beautiful gorge of about 3 kilometres  in length . As you 
can see here , with the Narmada river flowing  and either side , you can see th ese marble 
rocks , and this spectral phenomen on is over 3 kilomet res in length . If you get a n 
opportunity , go there and remember  that it is a geological erosion wonder existing in 
India . 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:48)  
 
In accelerat ed erosion , it is just the reverse of geological erosion , and that is why it is 
referred to as anthropogenic or  man-induced erosion . The geological erosion was natural ; 
this is man -induced , and it is activated by human activities that bring changes in natu ral 
cover and soil condition s. If you  cut the trees  is indiscriminate , improperly cultivat ing 
land, open the land barren , and cultivate along the slope , impacts  erosion and bring 
changes in natural cover in soil c ondit ions, resulting  in accelerated erosion .  
Soil removal  here is much faster than the nat ural soil formation process . In the case of 
geological erosion, we saw that it was slow process and the soil loss and  formation  was 
almost balanced . But, in this case , soil removal is much faster than the nat ural soil 
formation process , so it is mor e clearly visible to the naked eye . All around us , we can see some erosion happening . And of cour se, if erosion takes place , it leads to severe 
environmental  damages  that will see as we move in the course . 
(Refer Sl ide Time: 11:31 ) 
 
We already saw that accelerated erosion could be of two types water erosion  and wind 
erosion  based on the  agents of erosion . Water erosion can be further classified into five 
groups ; raindrop splash erosion , sheet erosion , rill erosion , gully erosion  and stream bank 
erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:36)  
 The first one is raindr op sp lash erosion ; this is the first stage of the erosion process  and is 
the primary cause of soil detachment and soil  disintegration . What happens is that  when 
rain takes place , the raindro ps impact the bare soil, wher ever bare soil is there, be it 
barren  land, be it improperly cultivated land , it impacts  with high kinetic energy , and that 
causes splash . In this process , the raindrop  impact breaks up the soil  aggregat es, and as a 
result , indivi dual soil particle s are splashed . As you can see , when the raindrop ta kes 
place, it is a soil surface, then obviously there will be some kind of a splash and because 
of that,  the loose soil particles will be taken care of . 
In thi s process , another p henom enon occurs that the soil particles  on the top  can be 
carried away by flowing water .  Subsequently ,  the loose par ticles also clog the soil 
pores ; infiltration  gets reduced , resulting  in the increase d runoff. When the runoff  is 
more, the loose soil particles on the soil surface  will be taken away . This is referred with 
raindrop splash erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:21)  
 
Next is  sheet erosion  which is the uniform soil remova l in thin  layers during the over land 
flow process . Now, in the previous lecturer , we say  when the rainfall occurs , it first 
satisfies the infiltration requirement of the soil . Once infiltration ca pacity is filled up , 
then water  starts flowi ng on the surface in the form of overland flow , and once the 
overland flow takes place , if there are loose soil particles on the surface , the floor will 
take the soil particles away . In this process , the most  fertile soil particles that contain most of the available nutrients 
and organic matter in the soil  are taken away . They ar e lost b ecause we know that it is 
topsoil which is always the most fertile soil . These are the  soil particles th at ge t loosened  
in the process of raindrop impact , and they are lying on the surface  so, the overland flow 
will tend to take this more  fertile s oil away . 
Typically it occurs gradually and goes unnoticed until most of the productive topsoil  has 
been los t because it  takes place in the form of a sheet , is very difficult to notice it . It goes 
unnoticed for a long  time unless you start  seeing patches like this on the soil surface . It is 
a very slow but dangerous proc ess because it takes all the fertile soil  away from us. The 
overgrazed  and cultivated soils are most vulnerable to sheet eros ion wherever  the soil is 
exposed , or soil particles are lying l oose on the surface ; they are most suscepti ble to  
sheet erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:17)  
 
The next is rill erosion . If the overland flow process continu es, its erosive action results 
in the formation of shallow channels  known as rills . We saw that first , the overland flow 
process w ould take away the soil particles , creating  some patches . If we allow this to 
happen , then formally , it might result in the formation of  these small rivu lets or channels , 
which are refer red to as rills , and once these  rills are formed , the water will tend to have 
a conc entrated flow through  these rills. That means  it will cause soil erosion there , and that is referred to as rill erosion . It is very 
common in  bare agricultural  land, overgrazed land , freshly  cultiva ted land wherever  the 
soil surface is exposed  and w herever  it is possible  raindrop s could  make an impact  or 
wherever s heet code  could remove  top fertile soil . Then obviously,  the ch ances of rill 
erosion  are more . 
One good thing  is that they are  so small that  they can  be re moved with  primary  tillage 
implements; that  means, if you  do plough ing of the land , these g et smoothened out. 
These rills  will b e lost  when ploughing  takes place on this surface area . That is  a good 
thing they can be quickly  taken care of  by primary tillag e implements . It is a n 
intermediate  stage between sheet and gully erosion which is the most se vere form of 
erosion. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:13)  
 
If rills  are not destroyed , and the detachment continues , then these  rills become  wider 
and deeper . Then they re sult in the deformation of gullies . They are much larger than the 
rills, so normal cultiva tion cannot smooth and out . That is the importance , as long as it is 
the rill  with usual primary tillage  implements  we can take care of them , but we allow that 
stage to pass , then probably  it goes beyond control , and this is refer red to as advance and 
last stage of erosion  (Refer Slide Time: 19:20 ) 
 
In the gully erosion process , there are two main processes involved ; waterfall erosion 
and ch annel  erosion .  The waterfa ll erosion  refers to the ove rland flow falling into the 
gully at the head e nd that undercut s it and results in  upslope extension of  the gully . This 
is the gully  head , and if the slope is in  this direction  if water continuously falls from this 
directly into  the gully,  it will tend to undercut  the head . Thus gully will tend to move  in 
the upward  direction  or get extended into the  upward  direction , resulting from  the 
waterfall erosion . 
The other one is channel erosion ; when water  starts flowing through the gul ly, it erodes 
the bed and sides , causing wall collapse and slumping of the side wall. When waterfalls 
and start flowing through the gully , it will tend to deepen and widen  the gully . The gully  
size goes on increasing  if we do not take  control measures to co ntrol . These are the two 
process es: waterfall erosi on, which is responsible for the gully's upstream extension,  and 
channel erosion, which is responsible for the widening and deepening of the  gully . (Refer Slide Time: 20:43)  
 
Coming to stages of gully ero sion, there are four stages of gully erosion . The first one is 
the fo rmation stage  that is channel erosion  by down ward scour of the top soil. There is 
waterfall erosion  and channel erosion .  Waterfall erosion is responsible for  upstream  
extension of  the gully, wherea s channel erosion  is responsible for widening  and 
deepening of the g ully. If we allow that the downward scou r of topsoi l, then is the 
conversion of rill into the gully . 
The next is the develo pment  stage where consists of upstream movement of the gully 
head and enlargement of the gully in width  and dep th. The s imilar process here but, on 
much larger scales , the waterfall and channel erosio n, because of that gully  extends in 
length a nd width and depth .  
Then the third stage comes, which re fers to th e healing stage, which  happens when 
vegetation growth start s in the gully . After a certain time , some grasses will start 
growing in the gully . If this  vegetativ e cover spreads over the gully surface to reach a 
stable gradient and walls reach a stable slope , it is referred to a s the stabilization stage . If 
we can allow this vegetation to grow , then ultimately a tim e we will come then the entire 
gully cross -section that  this vegetation will cover  and that means th at that will lead to the 
protective cover to t he gull y. That means  there will be no possib ility of  deepening and 
widening , or cutting the soil in t he gully . These a re the four major stages of gully  development ; forma tion stage where from rill to 
gully  conversion takes place ; development stage where upstream movement and 
deepening and widening of gully  takes place ; healing stage where vegetation is starts 
growing ; finally, the stabilizer sta ge where v egeta tion growth has reach ed a level where  
no further  gully development  occurs . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:30 ) 
 
Coming to the classification of gullies , gullies can be classified based on shape and  based 
on size . If we take it based on shape , they are  classified as U-shaped and V-shaped . The 
U-shaped is formed where both the topsoil and subsoil have the same res istance against 
erosion . That means that the soil  characteristics along  with the depth  or more or less the 
same that is why when erosion  takes place , it is almost uniform in safe and that is why 
the gully  takes a U shape . 
On the other hand , V-shape d is for med where the subsoil has more r esistance than 
topsoil against erosion . If the subsoil or the bottom layers  have a high level of resistance 
to soil erosion compared to the topsoils, there  will be  more erosion at the top and lesser 
erosion  on the bottom sid e.  That is why the shape which will get resembles the letter V, 
which  is why it is a V shape . The U-shaped takes place when the soil characteristics are 
uniform along with the depth, and V -shaped takes place when  the lower  soils of higher 
resistance are compared to the top soil. Based on the size, gullies are classified as small , medium and la rge. They are referred to 
as small  when the depth of the  gully is less than 1 meter and the drainage area (the 
drained area  that drains to gully ) is less than 2 hectar es. It is called medium when depth 
lies be tween  1 and 5 meters and the drainage area lies between 2 and 20 hectares . Based 
on the size, it says  that size is large when depth is greater than 5 meters , and drainage 
area is greater than 20 hectares .  
(Refer S lide Time: 26:02)  
 
Now, coming to the last type of water erosion, stream bank erosion , and as the name  
suggests , it refers to the sco uring and undercutting of the soil below the water surfa ce in 
a stream . That means,  in a flowing stream , water currents wi ll have a tendency to 
undercut both the bed and sides, and because of that, whatever erosion takes place  refers 
to a stream bank erosion . Another phenomen on that is responsible for  stream bank 
erosion  is water f lowing what the sides of the st ream. So, if the sides of the stream  are 
bare soils  because of  whatever human  activities  are going on, the soil is bare and if the 
flow comes from  this bare  soil to the st ream join s the stream , then obviously, it will carry 
a lot of soil particles . It is a natural proce ss, but human activities may influence the rate 
at which it occur s. That  means, very clearly , if on the banks there are  areas where 
vegetation has been removed , or overgrazing has taken place  or cultivation , there will be 
loose s oil particles present , and the rate  of soil erosion is high. (Refer Slide Time: 27:47 ) 
 
Then we come to the second  agent, wind erosion, and obviously, it refers to the  removal 
of soil  from an area due to wind . In the previous cases , we saw  that water was an agent . 
In this case , the wind  is an agent , and it m ainly occurs in low rainfall areas  when the soil 
moisture content is at a wilting point or below . That means , wherever soil particles are 
dry, there will be  no moisture ; they are light in weight  and loose . Then obviously, they 
are more susceptible to  blowing away  with the wind , which  is why they are more 
vulnera ble to wind erosion . It may be caused by light wind that rolls soil particle s along 
the surface through to a strong wind that lifts a large volume of soil particles into the air 
to create the dust st orm. If the wind is light , it results in the rolling of soil particle s. 
When  the wind is very light and soil particle s rolling , then obviously, they go unnoticed . 
When the  strong wind  is there , a large chunk of soil is lifted in the atmosphere  in the 
form of dust storm s, and then it becomes more visible . Then we really see wind erosion 
in effect. Still,  effectively whenever  the wind is blowing on an area that is dry or where 
loose soil particles are there, they are s usceptible to wind erosion that is wind erosion 
takes place there almost always . (Refer Slide Time: 29:35)  
 
Then the question comes how do people affect erosion ? We have seen that people are 
affectin g erosion , but I mean  to remind us once again  how we affect soil erosi on, of 
course,  in the form of deforestation . So, already we have seen  if we deforest , we are 
removing the canopy cover . That means  we are exposing the soil to raindrop impact or 
flowing water, which  means  erosion  will be more . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:11 ) 
 The next wa y we impact soil erosion  is through  residential or commercial construction . 
Whenever you see some kind of construction activity going on,  you will see that many  
loose soil particles are available . If that happens , that area is susceptible to eros ion. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:34)  
 
Suppose we allow users the traditional cultivation practices like ploughing or tillage. In 
that cas e, you can see that during t he process of ploughing here or any kind of tillage 
operation, you can see a lot of soil ha s already been being moved . In these cases, as you 
can see , that lot of soil is left exposed , and if rainfall occurs , a lot of the soil particles in 
the overland flow  will be  taken away in the form of erosion . 
We have seen what the causes are  and what are the t ypes of erosion in this class . Then 
we will further move to the next step  in the next lecture . 
Thank you very much . 