Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 28 
Design Considerations – Permanent Gully Control Structures  
 
Hello friends , welcome back to NPTEL  online certification course on Soil and Water 
Conservation Engineering . I am R ajendra Singh , Professor in A griculture and Food in 
Department , IIT Kharagpur . We are in week 6 lecture 28 and the topic today is Design 
Considerations of P ermanent Gully Control S tructures . Just to have a look at the course 
content of this week , we started this week  lecture 26 by introducing G ully Control 
Measures . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:48)  
 
In lecture 27, we continued with G ully Control M easures , but focus was on Permanent  
Structures . Today lecture 28; we will talk about Design C onsiderations For Permanent 
Gully Control S tructures and  next 2 lectures in lectures 39 and 30 will focus on Basics 
Of Open Channel H ydraulics in 2 parts , part 1 and part 2. (Refer Slide Time: 01:13 ) 
 
Just to  have a quick recap  we started  in the previous lecture we discussed the permanent 
gully  control structures and we saw that there are 3 basic types of permanent gully  
control structures , Drop is spillway , Drop in let spillway and Chute spillway an d we saw 
various components and what are the advantages , disadvantages , what are their 
adaptabilities . We also saw , their intercomparison  in the previous lecture and we will go 
into design considerations  today . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:50)  
 And we also  have a quick look at the purpose of designing gully  control structures . We 
already know that the main function of these gull y contr ol structures is , of course, gully 
stabilization  and soil erosion control . And the third major could be , of course,  water 
conserva tion because when water is retained in between the structures  then obviously, it 
is, it is, it infiltrates in the soil and of course,  beyond that , they can be also used for 
sediment control flood control or  drainage . 
So, these are the various purposes for which these  permanent gully control structures 
could be  adopted or these are designed . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:37)  
 
Now, as far as planning for design is concerned the permanent structures are constructed  
when the benefit from such structures are justifiabl e compared to  the cost of construction 
because we know that  typically either concrete or machinery or reinforced concrete is 
used for cost for constructing these structures so  obviously, the cost is a major 
component . 
So, while planning we have to ensure  that the benefits we derived out of these structures 
must be justified , with respect to the cost which we are going to incur . Then these 
structures must be designed after  careful investigation of various factors influencing the 
characteristics of runoff  approaching this structure with refere nce to specific site 
conditions . So; obviously, because  these are all structures that are likely to handle  large quantity of 
flow beat peak runoff rate , or beat  runoff volume so ; obviously, all the factors that could 
influence the runoff especially  for a particular site that has to be taken into account . 
We should also take into account the downstream flow characteristics that are we are 
providing this  structure whether the downstream channel has sufficient capacity to tak e 
that flow or not or  any other related characteristics we have to study and of course,  any 
other specific  requirements and all these precautions we are taking because  these are all  
these structures have a longer life span and the cost of construction is q uite high and also  
in case , they fail then the damages could be much larger . 
The design should also include an analysis of all the factors affecting the work , which is 
quite obvious , and another important thing which we have to keep in mind that there are 
no standard solutions which can be applied to all the problems encountered in the field 
so; that means,  case by case whenever a problem encounters the field conditions when 
we are going to we are planning for designing any of these structures that ha ve to be 
handled , there is no readymade package or practices that can be adopted for  while 
designing or  planning these structures . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:08)  
 
Now, coming to design considerations for gully control structures , the structures must 
have suff icient provision for safe  discharge so  obviously, because  in the previous class 
we, I mentioned that typically  these structures the return period T , or I must write also  return period  or recurrence interval T  is generally  50 to 100 years , rather , not it is 25 to 
50 years  for these structures . 
 So, these structures are designed for a recurrence interval of 25 to 50 years ; that means, 
they are likely to handle  the huge flow and that is why they should  have sufficient 
provision to handle such discharge . The structure  should have sufficient strength to 
withstand the pressure exerted by flowing water so ; obviously , not only the , it should 
have the capacity to handle the flow by the  same time  should be strong enough to handle 
or rather to withstand the pressure that migh t be exerted by flowing water and  the 
structure should be protected from erosion due to the flow passing over it . 
So; obviously, when the flow passes  is such a huge  flow passes through , passes through 
or over the structures that might also cause erosion an d that is why  there should be 
enough protection provided against erosion when the flow is taking place over these 
structures . So, all these three  important points refer to the hydrologic , hydraulic , and 
structural features of these structures . So, because , when we talk about the safe discharge 
then obviously, the hydrology  comes , when we say that there should be sufficient 
provision then hydraulics comes and we say that that structure should be  should  have 
sufficient streng th then structural feature come . 
So, for design consideration , we are referring to the hydrologic , hydraulic , and structural 
features of these  structures . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:28)  
 And that is why  typically  the design procedure of  these structures is divided into  3 
phases , 3 different ph ases and these are hydrologic design , hydraulic design  and 
structural design . So, there are 3 types of designs involved in a single structure , 
hydrologic design , hydraulic design and structural design and what are these mea nt for 
and how they are done , we will have a look  in the next slides . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:59) . 
 
Let us start with the hydrologic design , hydrologic design deals with the determination of 
peak  runoff rate and  flood volume which the structure is expected to handle . So, 
basically when we say we are  going for the hydrologic design of a structure then 
basically that focuses on determining the peak flow it could be rate , runoff rate or it 
could be  volume  either peak volume of  runoff or peak rate of runoff either that we have 
to find out or we  have to determine  and structure has to handle this particular flow . 
So, its structure has to be designed to handle the flow that is determined under 
hydrologic design . So, that is the importance of hydrologic  design that here we determine 
the flow magnitu de which the structure is likely to handle and that is the first information 
starting with which we  design the structure . And the prediction of peak runoff rates and 
flood volumes  includes the study of the factors influencing the runoff  that is 
characteris tic of rainfall and the watershed which is quite obvious that because we want 
to predict pea k runoff rate and flood volumes . Then; obviously, you know we have to always consider all the factors that influence the 
runoff , for example, the rainfall which is the main input and of course,  the watershed 
characteristics that  may absorb is  significant of  water or may not absorb . 
So, depending upon the characteristics of rainfall and characters of the watershed the 
flow characteristics will be , different from diffe rent area s or different watersheds and 
that is why we have to take care of these . And these structures are designed to handle 
runoff from the heaviest rains  that may be expected once in 25 to 50 years or more 
depending upon the estimated  life of this struc ture. 
So, this is what I was referring to about the T recurrence interval or  return period that  
while designing these structures are while determining the peak runoff rate or  flood 
volume  we take into account , recurrence interval of the runoff or rainfall event that is 
likely to occur once in 25 years that is  recurrence interval of 25 to 50 years is considered ; 
that means, that, that particular event is likely to occur once in 20 to 5 to 50 years and 
whether it is 25 or 50 that depends on the estimated life  of the structure . 
And for the design of the spillway for flood protection structures like drop  inlet spillway , 
information on  the total volume of runoff and inflow outflow and reservoir stage and 
storage characteristics are important . So, this is a very t ypical  design requirement that is  
related to a drop inlet spillway . The drop inlet spillway wherever they are used  is, is an 
integral part of a reservoir then  obviously,  besides  the total volume of runoff , the inflow 
outflow and reservoir stage and storage  characteristics also play an important that how 
much water will be released from the reservoir , that is governed by inflow outflow and  
reservoir  stage and storage characteristics of the reservoir . 
So, this information ha s also to be taken into account  while designing drop  inlet 
spillway s. 
So, the important thing is then and  hydrologic design , we decide the peak runoff rate or 
peak runoff volume for analyzing there or finding that or determining that we consider  
rainfall heaviest rainfall of  recurrence inte rval 25 to 50 years  here and this is a special 
requirement for drop i nlet spillway . (Refer Slide Time: 12:04)  
 
Then there is something called hydrological design scale and it is defined as the range in 
magnitude of the design variable from which a value  must be selected . So, it is a scale , it 
is a range  of a particular variable that may be runoff from which a value has to be 
selected . And design considerations , of course,  includes safety and cost  these are 2 
important things on one side , there is safety an d on the other side there is a cost and of 
course,  under all  circumstances , there has to be a balance between safety and cost of this 
structure . 
So, for example, if you are designing a small structure there should not be designed for 
large peak flow becaus e they may be  safe, but they may not be  cost-effective . On the 
other hand , if we are designing a  large structure , then it should not be designed for a 
small peak value because it may be  completely unsafe . So, that is why  we have to  always 
while designing a  structure , we have to keep a balance between the safety and cost we 
have to be  always careful , be careful about that . (Refer Slide Time: 13:12)  
 
Then there is something called ELV  estimated limiting value and the  lower limit on 
design value is 0 and uppe r limit on design values ELV  and so, ELV  is the largest 
magnitude possible for a hydrologic event at a given location based on best available 
hydrological information  and it  is an analysis that is  length of record reliability of 
information accuracy of the analysis . 
 So, ELV,  the largest magnitude possible for a  hydrological event  and while this doing 
this we may also have a look at the probable maximum precipitation , which is what is 
PMP  or probable maximum flood PMF , the data which are also available  or can be 
created based on if you have  a large amount of data available of the  rain gauges or the  
flood gauging sites in the vicinity of the area . (Refer Slide Time: 14:14) . 
 
The hydrologic design extreme events like floods and droughts  may be identified for  
designing structures having longer life expectancy and we always know that magnitude 
of extreme events is related to the frequency of occurrence . So, magnitude is inversely  
proportional  to the frequency of occurrence . So, if the frequency is high magnitude  is 
lower , frequencies low  magnitude will be higher and the frequency analysis typically is 
employed for  doing all this analysis . So, let us look into some basics of  frequency 
analysis . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:53)  
 So, frequency analysis deals with the chan ce of occurrence of an event equal to or 
greater than  a specified magnitude that  is the  definition of  frequency analysis . The 
objective of frequency analysis of hydrologic  data is to relate the magnitude of extreme  
events to their  frequency of occurrence t hrough the use of  probability distribution 
function . So,  basically , we use probability distribution functions . So, that the frequency 
of occurrence of an event and it  is magnitude  may be related . 
And for carrying out this frequency analysis it is assumed t hat the hydrologic data are 
independent and identically distributed and the hydrologic system producing them is 
considered to be stochastic , space independent , and time-independent . 
So, the entire analysis simply means is  it space independent and time -independent and 
stochastic that is there is a chance of occurrence  is always there the probability is always 
there . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:59)  
 
So, continuing with this  suppose P is the probability of occurrence of an event X which 
could be rainfall  or any  other hydrological variable  whose magnitude is equal to or in 
excess of a specific magnitude  xT. So, P, the probability of X which is the event we are 
talking about is greater than equal to xT which is a specified magnitude and the 
recurrence interval return period is related to p probability as T = 1/p which  is recurrence 
interval is university proportional to probability . And recurrence interval or return  period represents the  average interval between  the occurrence of rainfall of magnitude  equal to 
or great er than x T. 
So, that is the average interval between the occurrence of rainfall of magnitude equal to 
or greater than x T; that means, what is the average interval between a particular 
magnitude of same  or prevent  of same magnitude will occur that  is the  recurrence 
interval or return period ; that means, if we say return period is 50 years then it is likely 
that an event will occur  will reoccur after 50 years  or once in 50 years rather . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:14)  
 
So, if the  return period of rainfall of 20 centimeters is 24 hours in 10 years at a certain 
period , it implies that on an average rainfall magnitude equal to  or greater than 20 
centimeter s in 24 hours occur  once in 10 years period . That simply means that in a long 
period  of 100 years 10 such events  can be expected . So, that is the meaning of recurrence 
interval . So, if you say recurrence interval  ( Refer Time: 17:38)  10 years then over 100 
years 10 such events may occur . 
However it does not mean that such rainfall events will be separated by  10 years that is 
periodicity is not guaranteed does  not mean that  if any event occurred in 2000  then it will 
occur in 2010,  2020  and so on. And it is much more likely that  2 or more such events 
may occur within 1 year or even a few months . So, that is a possibili ty, but over a long 
period of time , they will be occurring  as per their return period . (Refer Slide Time: 18:12)  
 
And for sequence analysis methods are concerned  there are 2 methods of performing 
frequency analysis empirical or graphical method and the ot her is frequency  factor 
method , empirical or  frequency factor method . In the empirical method , the exceedance 
probability of the event is obtained by the use of empirical formula known as the plotting 
position formula . There are several formula s of plottin g position that has been de veloped 
over the period of time . 
So, in the empirical method , we use the plotting position formula . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:44)  
 And just to have a look at  some of the  plotting position formulae . Five are listed h ere; 
California , Hazen, Weibull , Chegodayev  and Blom. Here the probability is Weibull 
distribution , it is given by  m/(N+1),  where m is the rank assigned to the  data after 
arranging  them in descending order  of the magnitude . Thus the maximum value is 
assigned m equal to 1 the second -largest value m equal to 2 and the lo west value will be 
m equal to N,  N being  the number of records . 
So, first, we arrange the data and  in descending order of magnitude and then  we rank 
them to get the value of m  and N  is already defined as the n umber of records in the data 
series . So, once m and N are unknown we can find out the probability of each of the data 
point s in the series and the Weibull  formula is the most commonly used plotting position 
formula which is adopted . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:5 5) 
 
Now, once we have calculated  P or T because T is equal to 1 by P. So, in the formula , we 
can have  written P equals to m by N  plus 1. We can also write T equals N plus 1 by m it's 
a similar thing . So, having calculated P and T for all the events in the  series the variation 
of rainfall magnitude is plotted against the corresponding T on semi -log or log , log 
paper . 
So, here you have a rain rainfall for example if we are talking about the rainfall the 
magnitude and the  return period . So, we have  N data poi nts. So, for each of them , we have calculated  return period . So, we will draw , we will plot them in  a semi -log or log , 
log paper this is  a semi -log paper we are seeing . 
And rainfall magnitude for any recurrence interval  can be determined  by interpolating o r 
extrapolating the plot  between magnitude and recurrence interval . So, once we have 
plotted this and say , for example, we want this is 10. So, this is 20. So, if you want the 
rainfall magnitude for 20 year return period . So, we can use this graph  to get t he value of 
rainfall magnitude or  we can interpolate , we can also extrapolate to a certain level . 
So, extrapolat ing means we have to extend this curve a little bit on this side . So, for say 
for 30 years if you want then we can extrapolate and get the value , but for more accurate 
results  empirical procedures can give good results for small extrapolations , but the errors 
increase with the amount of extrapolation . So, if we extrapolate  to a large level then  
obviously, there will be a lot of error in the  estima tion in our estimation . So, that is why 
for more accurate results analytical methods using frequency factor are  used. 
So, probability distribution function  I mean this empirical method is very simple we use 
plotting position formula to for  any given series  to get P for each data point or T 
corresponding T and then we plot the magnitude versus a return period and we draw a 
smooth curve straight line relations . If we obtain and then we can interpolate or 
extrapolate for given  T value  or if you want more accur ate results we use an analytical  
method using frequency factor . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:12)  
 Before going to frequency factor I must also mention that some standard probability 
papers  are we do not need to plot the data on its log , log, or semi -log paper , but there are 
standard probability papers also . 
 So, if you feel that your data follow a normal distribution . So, we can use straight  away  
normal distribution  probability paper where X is plotted against the probability of  non-
accident or  probability of acc idence , and then we can get the read the value directly from  
here. Similarly, for all other distributions  graphs are available . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:44)  
 
Standard graphs or charts are available  this 1 is for Gumbel extreme value type 1 
distribution  say probability paper . So, for different return period s and magnitude , you 
can plot the curve and then can interpolate or extrapolate is the requirement maybe . (Refer Slide Time: 23:08) . 
 
If we come  to talk about the frequency factor method then; obviously, it is based on  the 
general equation of  hydrological frequency analysis  and the equation was given by Chow 
in 1951  in 1954 . 
XT = X bar + K 
Where, XT is the value of the variant X with return period T . So, this is the thing which 
we want to find out , this is t he unknown , Xbar and , they come from the  data series . 
So, X bar is the mean of the variant and Sigma is a standard deviation of the variant . So, 
once we have the data series , we first do simple statical analysis and find out mean and 
standard deviation . So, X bar and K  Sigma  are already known to us  then only unknown 
left is K which is referred to as frequency factor  which depends on the return period and 
probability density function of X. So, K is a function of  return period , we are talking 
about or we ar e interested in and the probability density function of X. 
Now , so, what probability distribution function our data follows that we should know in 
order to be able to get the value of K or frequency factor . So, so that once K is known 
then we can find the  value of XT from this equation . (Refer Slide Time: 24:36)  
 
So, for an assumed  distribution , a relation between K and T can be derived . For normal 
distribution K is simply given K is equal to z where z is referred to as standard normal 
variate , we will see  it is definition is later. For log -normal distribution value of K can be 
calculated from here where data is transformed  the X is our  observed data , we transferred  
and logarithmically  we transferred to Y and then we can find out the standard deviation 
and mean and then can find out the value of Ky. 
So, Ky here and then we can find the value of K. So, this is how  it can be calculated 
straight away from  this equation . 
 
 
where, Y = ln X, K y = (Y-µy)/y 
 (Refer Slide Time: 25:24) . 
 
Then if we talk about the n ormal distribution  we know that this is a G aussian distribution 
symmetrical  bell-shaped probability density funct ion 2 parameters it  is a 2 parameter  
distribution , it has mean and standard deviation  parameters and the function is given by 
this relationship  in terms of X.  
 
It is also expressed  in terms of z, 
 
where z 
  , So, X is our variant and mu and sigma are mean and standard deviation 
which we can calculate from the data series and then z for corresponding to each of the 
data points we ca n calculate the value of z and this z is referred to as standard normal 
variate and for normal distribution  K equals to  z, we already saw . 
So; that means, once we obtain the z mean if the value of K is also obtained for a normal 
distribution . (Refer Slide Time: 26:19) . 
 
The standard normal variate z has 0 mean and  unit variance and for different probability 
distributions like norm al, log normal Pearson type 3 or extreme  value standard tables are  
also available for obtaining K  value for different T. So, we have formulas we have 
tables . So, straight away these K values can be obtained and as we have seen that X T 
equals to  X bar plus K sigma . So, K is X bar and sigma we obtain from  the data points 
itself , data series itself this is the K which is unknown . 
So, once we decide or we find out that our data follows a log-normal distribution . So, I 
can and, and if the value of T is predetermined or decided then for lognormal and T 
either I  can calculate the value  or I can refer the value from a standard table . So, this is 
how it works . (Refer Slide Time: 27:15) . 
 
So, let us say I take a simple example , the following data presents  peak discharge of a 
river for 37 years , compute the 100-year peak flow assuming that data follows normal 
distribution . So, we are assuming  that the data is following normal distributions and 
these are the data , which are available with us . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:37)  
 
So, of course,  as I have already mentioned that we have to first calculate the mean and 
standard deviation of the data series . So, we are calculating here now in our case value of 
T is given as 100, we have to find out the value of K basically  K is a function of  2 things T and PDF that is probability distribution  function and  here, in this case,  we are already 
decided that it is normal . So, we have to find the value of K and in effect we have to find 
the value of z for given value of T. 
So, T capital T is 100 years . So, probability of exceedance is 1 by 100 or 0.01. So, 
probability of  an event  less than 100 years event or non -exceedance is 0.99 and from a 
standard normal curve , which is cumulative normal table the z value can be read as 2.33 
and this we can see  here. 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:38)  
 
So, this is a cumulative normal table we have found out 0.99 so, this is the value we ha ve 
to read and the value is z value is 2 which is X written  but is z 2.30,  2.31,  2.32, 2.33.  So, 
this is 2.33, the column corresponding to 2.33 where this value is here . 
So, we get a value of  z 2.33 and. So, once we get the value of  z or K then knowing X  bar 
in sigma  we can calculate X T which comes out to be 1607.04  c for the given data series . (Refer Slide Time: 29:34) . 
 
Then we come to the hydraulic design  which deals with the determination of dimensions 
of this structure , which can handle the estimated  peak runoff through drop  and chute  
spillway and design outflow and storage capacity in case of drop inlet spillway . 
So, basically , once we do frequency analysis and we get the flow value then we go for 
hydraulic design . So, once  flow is known then the dimensions of structure we  calculate . 
It also involves the study of effect of flow on upstream and  downstream reaches of the 
channel and dissipation of kinetic energy  liberated by drop in the water surface  elevation . 
So, these are also an aspect which has to be considered while  considering the hydraulic 
design of a structure . (Refer Slide Time: 30:20) . 
 
Then comes the structural design  and the structural design provides the required strength 
and stability to the co mponent parts of this structure . 
So, the size s we have sizes of the different parts we have calculated and the hydraulic 
design . Now under a structural design , we have to see that these structures  these 
component parts are provided strength and stability to handle the pressure . It involves the 
analys is of various forces  acting on this structure that as the  water pressure static and  
dynamic which acts on the structure ; the force is developed due to overflow over the 
structure and also the effect of water flow underneath  the structure that is seepage 
subsurface flow . 
 So, all kinds of hydrostatic  pressures or forces have to be taken into account and the 
structure must be stable under the action of the external forces and should be able to 
withstand the sliding forces resulting from its weight . So,  I mean  all the  hydrostatic 
pressure and the sliding and it should be safe against sliding  safe against  ( Refer Time: 
31:23)  all these  aspects ha ve to be considered while  carrying out the structural design . (Refer Slide Time: 31:34) . 
 
Now, then last thing we sho uld also  have a look at the causes of failure . The structural 
failure is caused mainly due to faulty hydraulic , hydrologic hydraulic , or structural 
design either alone or a combination of these . So, basically , if we are true with the 
hydrologic design , hydraulic design and structural design there is no chance of failure . 
Only if we  fail to correctly handle any of these , then only the failure  occurs and structure 
may fail because insufficient capacity  of the structure has been provided ; that means, we 
have n ot been able to do our hydrological  design properly . 
Insufficient provision for dissipation of kinetic  energy within the confinement structure ; 
that means while doing our hydraulic  design we have not been true . Unprotected banks  
near the upstream of struct ure, this is also a part of hydraulic design and  improper 
foundation causing uplift pressure to prevail  over the body of this  structure . 
So, that is structural design . So, if we are true or if we do our hydrologic hydraulic and 
structural design carefully and correctly , then there is no chance of failure of any of these 
structures . So, these are some of the design considerations we had a look at today  and of 
course,  when as I mentioned that will  take the detailed design of each of these structures 
and when we take that digit then , of course,  we will refer to these po ints back at that 
point of time . 
Thank you  very much . 