 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 20 
Problems o n Broad – Base Terraces  
 
Hello, friend s. Welcome back to NPTEL  online certificat ion course on Soil and Water 
Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendra Singh, professor in Agriculture and Food 
Engineering Department of IIT Kharagpur . We are in week four lecture 20, and today we 
will solve Problems on Broad Base Terrace . 
 (Refer Slide Tim e: 00:41 ) 
 
Now,  just to  remind you of the course content that we covered this week up  till now . In 
lecture  16, we started the week by introducing terrace ; in lecture 17, we covered the 
concepts  corresponding to bench terraces . 
In lecture 18, we used the c oncept s learnt in lecture 17 to design  bench terraces . That is , 
we solved problems dealing with the design of bench terraces . In lecture  19, we dealt 
with broad -based terraces , and in today’s  lecture , we will solve certain problems dealing 
with the design of broad -based  terraces . (Refer Slide Time: 01:22 ) 
 
Let us start with problem number 1, and this problem states that for a  broad -based terrace 
constructed on a 7 per cent land slope , the channel depth is  0.3 meters , and the width of 
the terrace  is 6 meter s. Compute the cut and fill height s and the slope ratio s for the front 
slope and back slope , assuming a balanced cross -section . 
So, that means  it is a broad -based terrace , constructed on a 7 per cent land slope , channel 
depth and channel width of  the terra ce are already given . And we have to compute the 
cut and fill height s. At the slope ratio s for the front slope and the back slope  and we have 
to assume a  balanced cross -section . And balanced  cross -section means the cut  is equal to 
fill. That is, this is the information  that is already given in this particular problem . (Refer Slide Time: 02:25 ) 
 
So, once again , the data given are land slope S equal s 7 per cent; channel depth , h equal 
to 0.3 meters ; terrace width , W is 6 meters  and balance d cross -section . So, we have been 
given his known to us , W is known to us and of course,  the land slope  which is here S 
that is known to us . 
So, these are  three  things which are known to us and of course,  balance cross -section  so, 
that simply means ; cut is equal to fill that is also  known to us  so; that means, this cut is 
equal to this fill that is known to us . And for this section , when it is a or width of the  
when all the three widths  are same that when means  when the section is balance d or the 
cross -section  is balance d. 
Then we know the relati onship between cut fill, the channel depth  and terrace width , 
which is given by equation 3, which we saw in the previous lecture . And that reads as  C 
plus f equal to h plus  S times  W. W here C is cut , f is fill ed, C is cut , f is fill ed, is the  
depth of the channel  and W is the terrace width , and S is the land  slope . So, this is what it 
is, and as per this problem statement , it is a balance cross -section  so, C is equal to f that 
is cut is equal to  f. 
So, from this relationship , C equal  to f is h plus SW divided by two because C plus you 
can also write 2 C equals to or two f equal to h plus SW or in this case writing  C equal to 
f equal to h plus SW by 2. And in this , we know the value of h , we know the value of  S, we know the value of  W, so; that means, by just by putting the  values of h  S and W, we 
can get the values of  C and f  that is cut and fill . 
And so, C equals f, which is equal to his 0.3; S is 7 per cent; that means  0.07 W is the 
width of the terraces , which is given 6 meters . So, by putting the value , you get C equal 
to f is equal to 0.36 meters . 
So, that is cut fill is 0.36 meters  so; that means, from the  this is the bottom of the 
channel , that is measured at the channel centerline  the bottom of the channel ; channel 
and this is the original land slope , the vertical  difference between two is cut . 
Similarly , here the terrace centerline  the top of the ridge  and the original land slope at 
this particular vertical line ; the vertical difference is the fill. So, the cut and fill value we 
have obtained in this problem . We have to  obtain the slopes . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:53 ) 
 
So, from the geometry for the front slope , the change in elevation over W is equal to h. 
So, this is the front slope , so that this is W and elevation change from here to  here. This 
is h basically . So, the front slope wi ll be S f is W by h and W value is known h value is 
known W is six h  0.3, so that means, it is 20. 
So, the front slope ratio  comes out to be 20 is to 1, that is  20 horizontal to 1 vertical . So, 
we are alwa ys in this subject typically ; we represent slopes as hor izontal is to vertical 
ratio. For the  back slope , if you see , the change in elevation over  W has two components . One is , of course,  hh this is already there , but at the same time , there is a n elevatio n 
difference of the original land slope basically . 
 So, that we have to take into account the width , which is the same , so it is h plus SW. 
So, that is why the back slope  is W divided by  h plus WS. So, six divided by 0.3, which 
is h W is 6 S is 0.07, and b y calculating this, we get 8.33 S b equals 8.33. 
So, the back slope  ratio is 8.33 is to 1 so, the front slope ratio comes out to be 20 is to 1, 
back slope  ratio comes out to b e 8.33 is to 1. So, that is means cut and fill is equal to 0.36 
meters , front  slope ratio is 20 is to 1, and back slope ratio is 8.33 is to 1. So, these  are the  
answers which we have obtained for this particular problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:18 ) 
 
Now, we go to the second problem , which says that design a 300-meter long variable 
grade d terrace for land having an average slope of 3 per cent. The maximum permeab le 
velocity of water in the terrace channel is 60 centimet res per second . The i ntensity of 1-
hour rainfall ex pected during a 10-year recurrent interval is 10 centimet res per hour . The 
region is less humid , and soils are normal . 
So, that means  we have to design a 300-meter long variable graded terrace for a 
lands cape of 3 per cent. The maximum permeabil ity velocity is given here 60 
centimet res per second . The i ntensity of 1-hour rai nfall for a 10-year re currence interval is given as 10 centimet res per hour , and the region  identified as less humid and soils a re 
normal . 
So, that is means remember we had a condition for the vertical interval . So, that simply  
shows that we can straightaw ay use one of the equations recommended for  graded 
terraces . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:31 ) 
 
So, the data once again with the symbol length of variable graded terrace l small l is 300 
meters , land slope S is 3 per cent, the maximum permissible velocity of wate r which is 
nothing , but the non -erosive velocity we call is 60 centimet re per second and intensity of  
1 hour 10-year rain fall is 10 centimet re per second , the region is less humid and  with 
normal soils . 
So, the first thing we need to estimate is vertical i ntervals  and vertical intervals , and for 
this purpose , we may use equation two previous lecture , in which  there was an equation 
given for vertical interval s for less humid regions and normal soil . So, as per the 
relationship , vertical  interval equals S plus six by 10, where  S is the land slope , the land 
slope which is 3 per cent in this case . 
So, putting the value of  S, we can calculate the vertical interval as 3 plus 6 9 by ten that 
is 0.9 meters . And the relationship between  HI and VI we already know beca use we know that  HI and VI are related  with reference to  S per cent land slope . So, this is  VI. 
This is  HI, so VI by HI is equal to  S by 100. 
So, this we have seen many times  so, from this relationship  HI is equa lled to 100 VI by 
S. So, same here 100 VI by S and VI value we already know  S value we already know  
so, putting these values we get horizontal interval equals to 30 meter s. So, for this 
particular ly given conditions  vertical interval is 0.9 meters , and the horizontal interval is 
30 meters . 
(Refer Sl ide Time: 10:31 ) 
 
Now, step two is to let the grades of variable gr aded terrace be we can use the standard 
table we already saw tab le 2, in lecture 19 0.5  0.4 0.2 and 0.2 for each quarter length 
from outlet respectively . (Refer Slide Time: 10:55 ) 
 
And th is we can see ah ; we can also see the table basically  by looking in to the table  
because here the channel grades  are recommended for variable graded terraces  based on 
us NRCS  recommendations . So, our terrace length is 300 meters ; that means  we fall here 
in this 260-360 range , and then the recommended  grades are in per  cent 0.50 for the 
lower quarter , 0.40 for the second quarter , 0.30 for the third qua rter and 0.20 for the 
upper quarter . 
So, right from  upstream to downstream , the slope is increasing point 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50  
slowly . So, this is these are the recommended grades which we can accept basically . (Refer Slide Time: 11:43 ) 
 
And so, that means,  these are the grades  which we have chosen . Next step three , we need 
to determine the peak  of runoff , and obviously, for this , we use the rational  method we 
already know that whenever we need peak . Peak rate of runoff , we use a rational method 
which is Q equals to CIA by 36. 
Where C is the runoff coefficient , Q is in cubic meter  per second , that is peak runoff r ate 
in cubic meter per second , C is the runoff coefficient , I is the rainfall intensity equal to 
time concentration  unit is centimet re per hour . And A is the d rainage area , and the unit 
used is hectares , and using this is the rational formula . Using this , we can use cultivate 
the peak rate of runoff . (Refer Slide Time: 12:34 ) 
 
So, for this case , the drainage area that is the terrace area which is (Refer Time: 1 2:40) 
drainage area is nothing , but the multiplication of length of the terrace and the horizonta l 
interval , because the area between two terraces that is used as a drainage area for  the 
designing the  graded channel . And that means  a length is given as 300 meters HI we 
have calculated as  30 meters . 
So, the area comes out to be  9000  square meters  and o r because the unit required q I am 
equal  to CIA hectares . So, we are again converting this 9000  square meter s into 0.9 
hectare s divided by 10000, where 10000 square meters equal to 1 hectare . So, it comes 
out to be 0.9 hectare s. Now we need to determine th e time of concentration because  the 
definition says that it is  peak rainfall intensity for a duration equal to the time of 
concentration .  
And for the time of concentratio n, we use the Kirpich  formula that is the standard 
formula we use , and as per this fo rmula , T c is equal to  0.0195 L  to the power 0.77 S to 
the power minus 0.385 , where L is the total flow length  and S is the  total slope  over the 
flow length . 
So, the total flow  length typically is l onger  time plus horizontal interval  that every time 
you ha ve seen that in between  two graded terraces will be built here. And then the 
second one is let us say here so ; obviously, this is the horizontal interval  between these 
two. So, this is the area that x is the terrace  area. So, the flow  has to  traverse this  distance , and along the  channel perpendicular , longitudinal distance  has traverse d this 
length of the terrace . 
So, that is why that is the t otal flow length is HI plus the length along the channel . So, 
this is 300 plus 30 or 330 meters . And the total slope  is elevation difference again the 
elevation difference here , plus the grade of the channel we have to consider and the total 
length for cal culating the slope . So, H is the difference  in elevation between  most remote 
point s and the outlet . So, the most rem ote point could be considered the upstream of the 
previous  terrace . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:57 ) 
 
Now, coming to the elevation difference between  adjacent terraces over  HI, the island 
slope is 3 per cent. So, 0.03 times 30 so, 0.9 meters , it comes out to be straight  away . 
And over the channel length , we have already deci ded the slopes that are 0.5 per cent. 
This should  be read as point 4 per cent. So, 0.4 percent , then 0.3 percent and 0.2 percent  
so, from table we read point 0.2 0.3 0.4 and 0.5 percent . 
So, that is why the , and total 300 meters  so, the quarter length is  75 meters . So that 
means  0.005  times 75 0.004  times 75 0.003  times 75 0.002  times 75 and then calculate 
slopes of these . So, the total elevation di fference is this  plus sum of these four . So, all 
sums come  out to be 1.95 meters . So, the total elevation difference is 1.95 meters ; the total length is 330 meters  slope over 
the total flow length is 0.006 that is the  slope we calculate . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:10 ) 
 
So, that simply means that now putti ng the because , we know L now we know S. So, 
putting the value in Kirpichs formula that is 0.0195 330  to power 0.77 0.006  to the power 
minus  0.385  we get the time of concentration equals to 12.15 meters for the given area . 
Now, we have been given a 1-hour intensity  is 10 centimet res per hour , and we have to 
obtain the intensity corresponding to 12.15  meters . So, like in the previous ah ; class 
where we solved the problem on  bench terraces , and we use d the standard nomograph . 
So, the same standard nomograph w e have to use here , which relates 1-hour rainfall 
intensity , 1-hour rainfall intensity to rainfall intensity for different durations . And the 
durations are given here 5 minutes, 15 minutes , 30 minutes , 60 minutes , 120 minutes and  
so on. 
So, for our case , it is 1-hour intensity 10 centimet res per hour , so; that means  1-hour 
intensity . So, our value will lie on this horizontal line , then corresponding to 10 
centimet res per hour , and we have to look for 12.15  minutes . So, this is a 5-minute line  
so, this is on e point of reference , and this is 15 minutes , this is one point of reference . 
And we have to find the m; this is ten will be somewhere here  so, 12.5 will be somewhere 
here so more tha n 20 somewhere here . So, roughly we are approximately we are saying 
this v alue is 22 centimet res per hour . So, we are assuming  rather from this nomograph , we are reading the value th at 
correspond s to the time of concentration , the intensity , the peak intensity  is 22 
centimet res per hour , and that is the value we will use in our  CIA by 36. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:12 ) 
 
So, that means, now we can use  the r ational runoff  formula , and for the , we assume  C 
equals 0.3 s o, now, CIA by 36. So,  C, we assumed at  0.3.  we ha ve just now 
approximated at 22 the area we have calculated as 0.9 hectares . So, putting th e value we 
get, Q value equals 0.165  cubic meter s per second , this is this should be read a  cubic 
meter per second , not the  3. 
So, it is a cubic meter per second or  cumec  which is the unit of discharge , because here 
we are calculating the peak runoff rate . Now,  once we have  calculated that ah ; discharge 
which our terrace would be able to handle or grade channel should be able to handle . 
Then we have to  come to  defin e the terrace cross -section . So, for the terrace cross -
section , we need to select the cut , front and back slopes . So, for this , again , we can use 
the standard table , that is , table 3 provided in lecture number 19 that is the  US SCS 
recommendation and from this ta ble, we will just see the table ; the table is here . (Refer Slide Time: 19:25 ) 
 
So, from this table , the land slope  is ours  3 per cent so, closer to this  3 per cent. And for 
this, the channel slopes are recommended as six is to 1, which  is a cut slope . This is ridg e 
fore slope or what we are calling as front slope eight is to 1, and the back slope is eight  to 
1. 
So, six is to 1 8 is to 1 are our recommended  slopes from the table . So that means  we can 
come back here and we see that using a standard table , we get S c equals to 6 is to 6 S f 
equals to 8 is to 1 and S b equ als to 8 is to 1. So, slopes we have taken a decision 
regarding . (Refer Slide Time: 20:17 ) 
 
So, now we need to choose the channel shape and determine it  is dimensions . So, let us 
say that we con sider a triangular channel . So, triangular channel means ; we are saying 
that the depth of the channel is h , that is , the depth of M bounding or depth of the cut 
channel is h . Here, in this case , so, obviously, the total cross -sectional area is the area 
that will be utilized for water flow . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:50 ) 
 
So, here, that means  the half is to  6 is to 1 times h because  this is the channel  here this is 
h, this slope is six to 1, this slope is eight  is to 1. So, that simply means that this width is  eight h and t his width is  six h and  so, two triangles . So, this triangle is half into six h into 
h, and the other triangle is half into eight h into the hand. This is how we can calculate the 
total cross -sectional area , which comes out to be seven  h square . 
Now, we can assume  we assume a simple value of h equals 0.3, which is the h value we 
are assuming . So, the cross -sectional area A is 1.27 square meters ; we also require the 
wetted perimeter because we have to calculate the hydraulic radius . 
So that means, length of this and the length of thi s sum of these two because  we know 
these two values we can always calculate using Pythagoras  theorem . So, here S 1 plus S 
2 that is h square plus six h square h square plus eight h square , here it will be  the eight h 
square , and if we solve this , it will come out to be  14.1 h for 14.15 h or the value of h we 
are assuming 0.3 s o, the wetted perimeter is 4.24 meters . So, the hydraulic radius will be 
the ratio of A and P A value we calculated as 1.27 P-value we calculated as 4.24. So, the 
value of the hydraulic radius is 0.3 meters . 
(Refer Slid e Time: 22:31 ) 
 
So, from there , Manning’s  equation can be used for calculating the velocity , which is n 
by n R R to the power  two by 3 S to the power half . So, n value we are assuming as 0.04,  
R we have already calculated , and the grade is already given  so 0.0025.  So, using this , 
the flow velocity we get is 0.56 meter s per second which are a non-erosive  velocity  as 
per recommendations . And Q of the channel is  A times  V A we know  V we know , so; it 
comes out to be 0.71 cubic meter s per second . So, the design channel  has sufficient capacity because  the capacity required w as 0.165 
cubic meters per second , wherein we are calculating 0.71 cubic meter s per second . So, 
now, we can say that the channel has sufficient capacity , so; assuming 20 per cent 
freeboa rd that is 0.2 h ridge height will be 1.2 h or 0.36 meters . So, this way , we have 
designed the  various cross -sections  various parameters of the channel . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:39 ) 
 
So, the answers are vertical interval is 0.9 meters , the horizontal interva l is 30, terrace 
grade s of 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 and 0.2 for each quarter length , terrace flow depth is 0.3, slope 
ratios are six to 1 8 is to 1, terrace ridge height is 0.36, and channel flow velocity is 0.71,  
terrace channel  flow capacity is 0.71 cubic meter p er second . So, these are the various 
dimensions we have already designed . (Refer Slide Time: 24:12 ) 
 
Now, we go to the third channel , which is also a design channel , design a n 800-meter 
long level broad terrace , for land having an average slope of 4 per cent, maximum  
expected rainfall having 10-year recurrence interval is 18 centimet res. The i nfiltration 
capacity of the soil of the area is such that 40 per cent of the rainfall is absorbed in the 
field, and the region is sub humid and has clay loam . 
(Refer S lide Time: 24:40 ) 
 
So, the data given are length , length of the level broad terrace is l is 800 meters , the land 
slope is 4 per cent, maximum expected rainfall having ten years recurrence  interval is 18 centimet res, infilt ration capacity is 40 per cent of  rainfall , and it is a sub -humid  region 
with clay loam soil . 
So, we need to estimate vertical interval  for the purpose we have to use the same 
equation because  it is a less humid region and normal soil . So, VI equals S plus six by 
ten, so; VI comes out to be 1 meter because S is 4percent  and HI once VI is known , HI 
comes out to be 25 meters . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:20 ) 
 
So, now we need to determine the maximum runoff volume and  so the maximum 
expected rainfall having ten years recurrence interval is 18 centi metres. And infilt ration 
capacity  is 40 per cent of the rainfall  that simply means the runoff potential is 60 per cent 
of rainfall because  40 per cent is absorbed in infilt ration . 
So, the level terrace system needs to be designed to handle  the maximum runo ff 
potential , which is 60 per cent of the rainfal l. So, it is 60 per cent of the rainfall ; that 
means 0.6 or 0.18 or 0.108  meters that is the maximum runoff to be stored . (Refer Slide Time: 25:59 ) 
 
Now, the storage area  is the maximum runoff depth times h orizontal interval , so, putting 
these values , we get 2.7 square meters . And here also , we need to choose a channel shape 
and determine it  is dimension . So, let us consider a trapezoidal section with cut slope , 
front slope , back slope with six is to 1, 8 is to 1, and 8 is to 1. 
 So, this ratio we are assum ing here and  a trapezoidal section we are considering so ; that 
means, the when we calculate the flow area that we have to consider three sections  a one 
a two and a three because slope here is six is to 1 here it 8 is to 1. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:42 ) 
 So, the cross -sectional area  so, three a one a two a three  the first  one is a triangle , half 6 6 
h into h , the second  one is a rectangle b times h , and the third  one is rectangle half eight h 
times h  so, it is the plus seven  h square . 
Since the storage area required is 2.7 square meters , the cross -section area of the channel 
should be equal  to the required storage area . So, assuming b equals 0.4 meters , let us say 
that the bottom width is 40 centimet res or 0.4 meters. And if we put in the  in this b  h plus 
seven  h square is 2.7, if you put in this equation  b equals to 0.4 we get  seven  h square 
plus 0.4 h equal to 2.7, or we can write seven  h square  plus 0.4 h minus 2.7 equals to 0. 
 So, the quadratic equation we can  use solve using a straight formula which we know 
minus b plus -minus square root of b square minus 4 ac by two a. So, by putting the 
values of b b, this is b , this is  a, and this is c . So, putting these values here , we get the 
value of h as 0.65 or 0.59. So,  we select ei ther of the two , so; we select h equals 0.65 
meters . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:09 ) 
 
So, assuming 20 per cent freeboard that is 0.2 h, ridge height  comes out to be 0.78 and 
terrace width  8.78 6.24 meters . So, terrace the answers are vertical inter val is 1 meter , 
the horizontal interval is 25 meters , flow de pth is 0.56 meters , channel bottom width 0.4 
meters , slopes ratio s are six is to 1 8 is to 1 and 8 is to o 1, channel  ridge height is 0.78 
meters , and the channel width is 6.24 meters . So, these a re all various parameters of this 
level  broad base terrace . (Refer Slide Time: 28:48 ) 
 
So, now, we take the last  problem , and that says the compute the depth of cut and fill and 
side slope of a broad base terrace for 30-centimet re depth of flow on an 8 per cent land 
slope . Consider that  the tillage operations are to be performed using machines , and the 
width of the machine is  4.27 meters . So, we have been given the  depth of flow , land 
slope and width of the machine . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:18 ) 
 
So, that sim ply means the data given are land slope S equals to 8 per cent, channel depth 
h equal to 0.3 meters that are here h is given here , this is h , this is h , this is the this is h it given here , and machiner y width is given as 4.27 meters . So, because the machine ry 
width of the terrace is typically kept  W equal to machinery width  so, W comes out to be 
4.27 meters . 
So, from a first problem , we saw this equation C plus f equals h plus S times W, now 
putting the known value of h S and W because  h S and W is known , C plus f we come  
out to be 0.68 meters . So, this is what we get C plus f equal to 0.18 0.64 meters . 
(Refer Slide  Time: 30:08 ) 
 
And since we normally use a balanced cross -section , where the cut is equal to fill so ; that 
means  C equal to f will be 0.32 meters . And then front slope because front slope we 
know the width is the width and the fall is h which is 0.3 so, it is 4.27 by 0.3 that is 14.2. 
So, the front  slope ratio comes out to be 14.2 is to 1, wherein for the back slope , when 
we calculate the back slop e, the el evation difference is h plus WS. So, here the slope 
ratio will be W divided by h plus WS, W is 4.27,  his 0.3, W is 4.27, S is 0.08. 
So that means  it comes out to be 6.67, so the back slope ratio comes out to be 6.67 is to 
1. So that means  the cut and fill  comes out to be 0.32 meters , the front slope ratio  comes 
out to be 14.2 is to 1, and the backslope ratio comes out to be 6.67 is to 1. 
So, with this , we have seen that we can design  broad base terraces , be it graded terraces 
or be it a level terra ces. And also , we can  find what should be the cut and fill for a given 
condition and what should be the  ratios , the slope ratios . So, these are the problems , but as I have said earlier also that there can be other forms of the problem . So, if you solve 
some more problems for practice , probably things will be even clear er, but I think that  
with this much practice its elf, you will be able  to design  broad base terraces . 
Thank you very much . 