Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 21 
Grassed Waterways  
 
Hello  friends , welcome back to NPTEL  online certification course on soil  and water 
conservation engineering . I am Rajendra  Singh , Professor in the Agriculture and Food 
Engineering Department , IIT Kharagpur . We are in week 5, lecture 21 and today 's topic 
is Grassed Waterways , just to give you an idea about the course content , which w e are 
going to cover this week . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37)  
 
Today,  we are starting with the grass water ways , and the next lecture that is lecture 22, 
will solve problems on grass water ways . Then  lecture 23, we will see parabolic grass 
waterways and t hen lecture 24 and 25, I will dedicate to solving  numerical gate  problems 
on, for gate examination that ha s graduated aptitude test in engineering on various topics , 
which we have covered like soil loss , rainfall little g et index , brant bunds terraces gras s 
waterways . So, all the problems that have been as in previous years question papers in 
the gate, we will solve in lecture number 24 and 25. (Refer Slide Time: 01:27)  
 
Coming to grass water ways , these are natural or manmade water courses . So, this there i s 
nothing, but the water course or a channel normally , the term. The n ormal  term we use is 
a channel , and here , we are calling it water course or waterway , and they could be either 
natural , or they could be constructed that is manmade . And they are typically  shape d to 
require dimensions and lined w ith erosion -resistan t grasses . 
The typical  thing is that we provide the required shape , either whatever it is natural or  
where it is manmade , and we provide the natural shape and thus , normal shapes which 
will se e little later are parabolic trapezoidal or triangular . Now,  out of which in field 
conditions parabolic is more popular . So, we give the required dimension , and then we 
line the bed s in the side of the channel or these waterways with erosion -resistan t grasses 
becaus e it is the name itself suggests they are waterways they are grass waterways . So, 
the idea is to  carry away excess runoff from a, from any area  to an outlet to , to a desired 
outlet and as we know , we have seen in previous classes , wheneve r we des ign a chan nel, 
even for b und, or for a terrace , we always ensure that the flow velocity is non -erosive . 
So, that is why we have to ensure non -erosive velocity , and that is why in order to  check  
erosion not only velocity , also there should not be any kind o f erosion c aused during the 
course of water movement in these waterways . So, that is why typically , they have lined 
with erosion -resistan t grasses . So, that there is no chance of any erosion in the channel of 
either from the bed or from the sides and water  could be tak en a smoothly at a non -
erosive velocity to the safe outlet and of course,  it is they are used for the stable conveyance or safe disposal of runoff from an area , that we know that whenever there is 
excess rainfall in an area or , or we want to t ake away water fro m a given area to the safe 
outlet , then we take the help of these grass waterways . And apart from disposing  of the 
runoff , these waterways also act as outlets for terraces or graded bunds . 
We saw in the earlier lecture when we design ed graded terraces , and so, we always said 
that graded  terraces mean  the channels are provided with a grade , in the longitudinal 
direction , and finally, they, they the terrace channels or terrace channels are bunds . 
Graded  bunds specifically  dispose of water to  a safe waterway . And thei r safe water way, 
we were talking , these are the grass ed waterways basically they are at the outlet and  then, 
whatever terrace channel or graded bunds , whatever discharge they , they carry , they are 
really taken away from the area u sing this grass ed waterwa ys. So, that is the function . 
So, here as you can see in this picture , it is a typical picture that , in the this is the channel 
bottom and the sights to service extent . We provide flexible grasses in the channel that is 
the erosion -resistant grasses and th en in order to avoid any kind of  poly trends entering 
into the water from these sides . We provide  these filter  strips again vegetated filter strips 
most of the time, and so that  say remain could be trapped in the capacity of these grassed 
away , that there is the design capacity of these grass water ways is not affected at all . So, 
that is how we ensure by providing these  filter strips on the side . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:24)  
 These grassed  waterway s are constructed along the slope  of the  area. So, here it i s, a 
major diversion . Earlier,  whenever you are, whenever we talked about water 
conservation , soil and water conservation structure , be it any biological majors or 
engineering majors like terraces or bunds . Every  time we sa y that they a re always taken 
across the slope , but in this case , they are p rovided along the slope . So, that is a major 
difference here , and that is why  I mean if , if the , if the said slope in this direction , let us 
say for example, in an area and if we have pro vided s ay burns  in this direct ion sa y for 
example,  in this direction . So, what happens that , when the water is taken away  by the 
great braided burnt in this direction , then on this side of the channel these grass 
waterways could be there . So, that whatever  water is taken from this area  to these , outlet 
to the  outlet of this burned or it can be , it could be terrace also then they can be taken 
along this slope . So, that is why they are constructed along this slope , because many 
times they are not only just independe ntly, but also they act as the outlet for graded burns 
or terraces . And the typically rational method is used to determine the peak runoff rate , 
which governs the carrying capacity of the grassed waterway s. 
For designing the capacity of these gr ass water ways, we use  we require p eak runoff rate , 
and for estimating peak  runoff rate as we have seen throughout , we use a rational method 
which is Q = CIA/36, and that is why in the introductory lecture  I said that this is a very 
important form ula, which formula , which one shoul d always remember  if you are 
studying , this course . And permissible velocity approach is used to design these grass to 
waterways  so as to carry the estimated flow without damage to the waterway or its 
lining . So, as we ha ve already seen that every time in  earlier designs , also whenever we 
design a graded channel , we alway s calculate the velocity using Manning 's equation , and 
we always see th at their velocity is non -erosive . So, there we were using the term non-
erosive velocity, but here the te rm being used i s permissible velocity  because , in a little 
while , we will see that there are some  permissible velocity  limits that are assigned to 
different kinds of grassed waterways . So, the idea is the same that the velocity has to be 
within certain lim its. So, that th ere is no erosion and during the process of  carrying the 
water through these water ways . So, that is the whole idea . (Refer Slide Time: 08:24)  
 
Now, comin g to the advantages of these water sheds , they may carry large flo ws, which 
make s them suitable for large water sheds . So, I mean there i s if the land is available , then 
designing a large capacity waterway is not an issue at all , and that is why  they can b e 
provided even for large water sheds . They  do not cause hindrance t o the tillage operati ons 
as farm  machi nery can easily cross them . So, their cross -section is such design ; their 
cross -section is such design that is the slopes are kept as flat as possible . So, that any 
farm machinery or tractor can easily  move  over them , and once the grass is  established , 
they do not require much maintenance . So, I mean , they are almost maintenance -free in 
the beginning when the grass is not yet established . Probably,  we have to take care , but 
once the grass is completely established along  the bed and on the s ides, then probably 
they almost become maintenance -free. 
Then one of the great advantages of these grass water ways , the disadvantage is that there 
is trick the installation of tile  drainage outlet and that is at the outlet side  because they 
also take a lot of space and they are always on the surface . So, the tile drainage system 
may not be , it may not be possible to install a tile drainage system , and at a few 
locations , the establishment of vegetation is very  difficult and ; that me ans, if the soil 
characte ristics are such that i t does not support the growth of vegetation , then probably , 
it will be  I mean the y the channels may require a lot of maintenance  so because  we have 
to always ensure that permissible velocity is there and ther e is no  erosion taking pl ace in 
the channel either through the bed all across the  sites. (Refer Slide Time: 10:16 ) 
 
Now,  there are certain general considerations . So, before designing the vegetated 
waterways following factors should be considered number o ne, the slope of the prop osed 
waterway . This may be, may need to be modified to get a satisfactory design , so; 
obviously , when we design  because we have to always see that veloc ity is within the 
permissible limit . So, obviously, the slope has to be  designe d accordingly . So, if the  
slope of t he, I mean slope of the particular area , where the  waterway has to pass through 
if that is not suitable then ; obviously, one has to be careful about that , that vegetation 
suitable for site conditions . So, we should know the soil and climatic con ditions of a 
particular place before choosing the right  kind of vegetation , because  we see that if 
vegetation grows properly , then they become maintenance -free, and that  is a big 
advantage . We have to take care of that then expecte d height at which vegetat ion cover 
will be maintained  both in growing and dormant seasons . So, this is important  because 
this governs the resistance to flow and also sometimes the capacity of the flow . So, that 
is why we have to be very clear about the exp ected height at which a v egetation  cover 
has to be maintained . 
Then allowance for the area of the field occupied by the waterway , I mean , of course,  
these are not being cultivated though machinery can , easily pass over them , these are not 
the, not being cu ltivated . So, from a cultivation poin t of view , these are loss of the area . 
So, one has to be really careful about that ; and allowance for freeboard , if required by 
local standards and specifications so ; obviously,  we, we do not want when we design a grass  vegetative waterway or g rass waterway . We do not want the flow to be overtop ping 
or the  banks , and that is why we have to provide some kind of freeboard , and for that , 
local standards and specification s may be taken into account . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:19 ) 
 
Now,  the success of co ntinuing with the general c onsiderations , the success of grass 
waterways also depend on good conservation treatment of the contributed watershed  
because better upstream  erosion control will cause less silting in the waterway . It will 
also reduce the peak r ate of runoff and volume o f water to be carried by the waterway , 
and of course,  it necessitates lesser maintenance of the waterway . Obviously, because , 
when these  grass waterways are being provided to carry , excess r unoff to , for s afe 
disposal that  is the function or now , if in a water shed from which the water is coming 
basically , if upstream erosion control will , is better . Then, obviously, there is no soil loss 
from the area ; that means, thus the flow , the soil shield that is bein g carried by flow to 
this grassed waterway , will be min imized to a large extent . 
Also, proper  conservation treatment is provided in the watershed then ; obviously, as we 
know , which we have seen with terraces and bunds and biological measures then the 
peak rate of runoff and volume  will be  controlled , to a l arge extent , because we know 
that whatever terraces or bunds we design , we always see that the slope length is cut . So; 
obviously, a lot of , if conservation is possible with a lot of moisture is conserved  then; 
obviously, in that  case, the peak rate of runo ff and the volume of water goes down , and for the , in that case , the capacity required for  the, for the grass waterway can be reduced 
significantly , and of course,  a flow will be less then ; obviously, maintenance will be ev en 
lower for a given water way. 
Now,  typically a grass lining is not suitable , if continuous flow for more than 72 hours is 
expected , what it means that just a grass lining probably is not suitable , if the flow 
continues for more than 72 hours that is a peak flo w continues for a longer period of 
duration , then just a grass lining may not suffice . And then , in that case , supplementary 
treatment like a stone centre  of the surface , subsurface drains might be needed , and that 
is a cited speci fic case , where the flow , peak flow continues for a longer peri od of time . 
And until the permanent vegetative cover is established in these vegetative  waterways , it 
may require frequent maintenance or repair . So, we know that once the vegetative cover 
is established , they become m aintenance -free, but by the, until that time , the vegetative 
cover established in a better way , they require frequent maintenance or repair , because  
you want that you do not want any erosion to take place in the channel . So, that i s why 
you have to always see that ; I mean , the surface is smooth , and t here are no loose soil 
particles in the bed or either in the side . So, that is why you have to keep on maintaining ; 
these are repairing these channels or water ways .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:38 ) 
 
Now,  coming to d esign considerations , the following site -specific factors need to be 
assessed while designing the vegetative waterways soil properties  because these govern  if permissible flow velocity and design discharge . So, these are we have al ready seen that 
we use permeable  velocity,  flow velocity concept . So, that is why soil properties are 
important th an vegetation management ; they are critical to provid ing the expected level 
of protection for the channel , protection of course , because veget ative that  is the  that is  
why the name itself a vegetative waterwa y or grass waterway and includes the choice of 
vegetation and it  is height to be maintained . So, obviously, we have to be careful , what 
kind of vegetation we have to grow , what is the height  to be maintained and wha t is the 
expected level of protection and  that is required for the channel . 
Then climate impact s the site hydrology and design discharge so; obviously, the climate 
or the precipitation or the rainfall that impacts , that is that bas ed on  that only , we decid e 
what will be the design capacity of the , of the  grass waterway . So, that is why the climate 
is very important and also climate affects the vegetation selection and level of 
maintenance required . So, not only in the capacity also , what kind of vegetation is 
chosen that depends on the climate . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:02 ) 
 
It is c oming to the design process , their certain steps that need to be followed . Step 1 
says; plan the  optimum location of the waterways centreline  so; obviously, that is from 
the layout p oint of view that in the field , we should have the  proper idea , where the 
waterway will be cent red along . Step 2; select design points along the waterway where grades drainage areas and type  of 
lining change significantly ; this is very important  becaus e the sites may require that if it 
is a channel , which is  if a waterway is designed  for a long  place long , for a long -distance , 
then the site conditions might require that the slope of the bed slope changes or the cross -
section changes . So, all those grades or  drainage area s or the type of lining , the flow total 
flow, coming to the waterway may also change . So, because of that , the conditions may 
change the design parameters may change . So, that is why we have to identify such 
locations  a priori , then step 3 says; determine the watershed area for the points in step 2 
and for the outlet . 
So, for each point here or and the outlet , we should know , what is the contributing area , 
because that will be essential to know how much flow is really , approaching  a given 
point or at the outlet  compute the peak runoff produc ed by the design storm . So, we have 
to choose the design storm and compute the peak runoff using the rational formula , 
which we have already seen , to determine the slope of each reac h of the channel from the  
topographic map profiles or cross -section . So, these ar e once we know that the cross -
sections will change . So, these are referred to as  reach . So, this could reach  1; this could 
reach two and so on . So, for each of these reaches , we have to really decide what should 
be the  slow provided , and for that , we can  also get the elevations , bed elevations from 
topographic map . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:18 ) 
 The next step is step 6; select the appropriate channel cross -section and type of chan nel 
to the line to be use d. So, we have to decide on what kind of cross -section w e want to 
provide and , then, what are the y, what is the type of lining or what is the type of grass or 
vegetation ? We are going to  choose a given place . Step 7; is to design t he channel for 
stability typically based on the sparsest  and shortest  vegeta tion expected , and so , that 
means, we have to , I mean to keep the factor of safety in mind , and that is why we have 
to always design for the worst conditions . That is , we have to a ssume that our  vegetation  
will be sparse st, and this is , it will be of  short length , short height , and for that , we 
designed the channel and then step 8; adjust  the depth to obtain adequate cap acity  based 
on the  densest and longest vegetation expected . So, we design first for wors e condition s, 
and then we adjust for the best possible conside ring that when our  vegetation will be 
dense st enough and it will be longest . So, our highest actually and finally, add apartment 
structures as needed to allow for prolon ged flow so ; that means, of some safety 
structures , we have to provide . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:42 ) 
 
Then, coming to initial design parameters , like slope  discharge section and lining , if they 
are significant changes in slope or discharge along the waterway , it may be necessary to 
design the waterway in reaches . Just now, we discuss ed this point . A reach or segment , it 
generally a  portion of the water that will have a near -uniform slope discharge , soil type 
and vegetal curve , so; that means  when we say we , we said a channel has t wo reach es, two reaches that is reach one and reach 2. So, each reach es we are , what we are talking 
about that each reach will have , nearly uniform  slope discharge , soil type and vegetal . 
That is why whenever there is a possibilit y of any kind of change , we d esign ed a channel 
in reaches , and the point of significant break  in slope is a point of division  between two 
reaches . So, if elevation suddenly changes , then; obviously, we have to change the reach , 
and a point of entrance or divergent or another  tributary , where the discharge is 
significantly increasing or increased may a lso be a point of division between two points . 
So, if suddenly we have designed and suddenly we expect that some tributary , some 
channel will join the flow , will join and the flow will bec ome significantly higher . So, 
then also we can , from this point on wards, we can go for a new reach . So, depend ing on 
the conditions , how many reaches should be there along  with a long waterway , then also 
large changes in soil p roperties may also require  cross-sectional modification . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:16 ) 
 
The cross -section changes , then also reach changes . So, where there is a significant 
difference in  cross -section or slope between adjoining reaches , it may be necessar y to 
install a transition section  between them . So, if you have designed a channel reach one 
and then there is a significant elevation different channel reach two moves like this then ; 
obviously, we do not want that if significant fall to take place here a nd that is why we , 
we typically d esign a transaction section to ensure a smooth transition of flow from this 
reach to this reach  and when the limits of two or more reaches have  been determined each reach is designed separately by standard procedure . So, once we know the 
conditions for eac h reach independently , then they are designed . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:15 ) 
 
Then continuing with the  slope discharge section and lining or initial design parameters , 
waterways are constructed to this , to discharge peak f low expected from at least 10-year 
frequency 24-hour duration storm . So,  10-year frequency 24-hour durati on is storm 
basically decides what the capacity peak flow is  or what is the cap acity of these 
waterways . The shape selected should be compatible with the surrounding land form and 
landscape  characteristic s more from the aesthetic sense that suddenly it  is a typical  shape 
should not be put it should conform to whatever landscape  desires ; side slopes  may be 
varied to better balance cut and fill. So, because  there will be when we design the 
channel or when we construct the channel , cutting and filling will be requ ired. 
We might adjust the side slope in such a way that balance  the cut and fill is  balanced . So, 
that the earth work required will be the least on sites where it is impossible to establ ish 
suitable permanent vegetation , a rigid or paved lining  may be used. So, this is divergent . 
If a situation does not allow at all any vegetation , then we go more for a paved lining 
material , and a freeboard or  extra depth should be provided to take care of sedimentation . 
So, that is always a factor of safety we always provide whenever we design a channel .  (Refer Slide Time: 24:41 ) 
 
Size of the waterway , the size of grassed water way depends upon the expected runoff  
from the catchment area , that is 24 hour, ten years frequency and , 10-year frequency ; the 
24-hour storm is used to calculate th e design , discharge of the waterway and cross -
sectional area of the waterway is estimated , using the  continuity equation that is  Q = AV, 
where A is the cross -sectional area. Q is the peak runoff rate , and V is the velocity of 
flow. Then the shape  of the waterway depends on the site conditions and types of 
construction equipment  that are used . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:11 ) 
 As I already mentioned that  three  basic shapes are parabolic  trapezoidal , and triangular . 
As you can see h ere, this is parabolic trapezoidal and triangular , and the basic design  
features of these are here . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:31 ) 
 
So, if it is tra pezoidal , where b is the bed width , d is the depth of flo w, z is the side slope , 
and H:V, and D is the depth of flow , plus free board provided , and t is the water surface 
width , and T is a channel top wid th. So, from then , from geometric characteristics , their 
typical formula e for trapezoidal , V-shapE/triangular or pa rabolic are here , A equal s to 
bd+zd2, zd2, 2td/ 3 and so on.  The wetted perimeter top wi dth, top wi dth with freeboard . 
All the formulae are  readily available , and from geomet ric, we can calculate also ; we do 
not have t o even remember these formulae . (Refer Slide Time: 26:22 ) 
 
Now,  coming to the velocity of flow as  I already mentioned , there is a permissib le 
velocity of flow in the grassed waterway , which depends on the type and condition of 
vegetation and , if the sparse grass cover is there , then the f low velocity recommended is 
0.9 to 1.2, if it a good grass cover than 1.5 to 1.8 and sod of excellent cove r, then the 
velocity could be 2 to 2.5 meter per second . So, this is the permissible velocity ; we have 
to always  design  keep in mind while designing a channel , and permissible velocity may 
also vary with the soil types . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:58 ) 
 So, for example, if it is sandy loam soil , if it is clean water , then permissible velocity is 
0.55 meters , and if it is colloidal water , then it is 0.75 meter s per second , but it is the 
vegetation that governs the permissible velocity basically . 
(Refer Slide Time:  27:19 ) 
 
Then coming to the grade of the waterway channel , a grade of approximately 5 per cent 
is usually recommended for gra ss water ways , and in no case, it should not exceed 10 per 
cent. The width depends on the flow rate slope and available land ; obvio usly, on small 
fields , the width could be 1 to 2 meters , and on large cultivated fields , it could be 20 to 
60 meters . So, it all depe nds on how m any a reas we have , and accordingly , depth will be 
governed . Depth  of waterway affects the field  operation that is a deeper  waterway poses 
a problem to carry  farm machiner y. So, a free board of 10 to 15 centimetre s. So, if wider 
width is t here, then, obviously, the deep can could be  kept lower . So, that field 
operations are not impacted , but otherwise if , site cond itions do not permit sufficient 
width , then; obviously, we have to in can increase the  depth of the waterway . (Refer Slide Time: 28:1 4) 
 
Then  if we tak e a typical case of designing  a grass waterway , where shape carrying 
capacity and bed slope  are known . So, in the design of channel parameters , we use the 
following steps ; number 1: Assume  the value of flow depth and calculate the  channel 
cross -sectional a rea, wetted  perimeter , hydraulic radius and top wi dth. These  we know 
that once we have decided the  shape trapezoidal . So, we can we straight formula we can 
use and decide all these  values . 
The second is to determine the mean velocit y of flow by using Manning's formula that is 
step-1 by  
v = (R2/3 × S1/2)/n 
We have calculated hydraulic radius ; we already know the bed slope , so velocity can be 
calculated . Then these are the number , these parameters we already understand . (Refer Slide Time: 29:07 ) 
 
The i mport ant thing is Manning 's n, Manning 's roughness coefficient for vegetated 
waterway typically  n equals 0.04, and Chow, 1959 reports a minimum value of 0.03 and  
maximum value of 0.5 for the vegetal lining . So, that these are the rang es, but the typical 
value w e take is n equal  to 0.04, step  3 is to determine the discharge rate through the 
channel Q = Av and step 4 check s if the velocity is safe and the carrying capacity of the 
channel is within the permissible range . So, we have to , and once we have calculated Q 
and v, we have to ensure that . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:52 ) 
 And then , step 5 is if the velocity i s unsafe , the carrying capacity  is not within the 
permissible range , then repeat the  process with  another set of  assumed value s the step 1 
till the carrying c apacity is found to be within the  permissible range . So, I mean we have 
to ensure that velocity is w ithin permissible velocity limit , but at the same time , the 
carrying capacity is sufficient  to carry the discharge . We have calculate d using the 10 
years, 24-hour frequency , using the rationale formula , and step 6 is a free board of 10 to 
15 centimet res is ad ded to assume d channel depth , and this is  this we have already seen . 
This is to, in order to  provide safety factor s against any kind of sedimentation . 
So, we have  seen the basic  design features , what are the requirements what are that is 
could be the site  conditions . What  are the recommendations , and what is the typical  steps 
that I involved in designing a grass waterway ? And in the next lecture , we will se e how 
to really use these concepts to design a grass waterway or the certain solve  problems  
dealing wit h the design of grass waterway . 
Thank you very much . 