Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 23 
Parabolic Grassed Waterway  
 
Friends , this is a Dr Mailapalli ; I am an Assistant Professor in Agriculture and Food 
Engineering Department , IIT Kharagpur . I am going to , I mean , teach this lec ture. This is 
lecture  number 23 of Soil and Water Conservation Engineering course , and mostly it  is 
on Parabolic Grass Waterways . Professor S ingh is unable t o take this lecture . And I think 
he has covered  six weeks of lectures . So, and the rest will be covered by  three  more  
professors , including , I mean , including me . 
So, four professors will be teaching the rest of  you know six weeks  lectures on  soil and 
wate r conservation  engineering  because he is  unable to take the  remaining lectures , ok. 
So, the parabolic grass ways . So, and week  lecture number 22 has explained , you know , 
the other  grass waterways . Now, in this lecture  so, basically , we are going to see how  to 
design parabolic  grass waterways , the step-wise procedure and followed by  some 
examples , ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:38 ) 
 
So, in this s o, the last I  mean there is the course content for week 5 if you  go through this 
lecture nu mber 23  that is a parabol ic grass ed water way.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:49 ) 
 
So, then so , next is the design . So, Morgan basically describe d the design procedure  of a 
parabolic shape d grass ed waterway , which is accomplished under the following  steps . 
So, some of the notes you can fol low from th e previous lecture , I mean the most of the 
parameter estimations are similar . So, the only thing the shape , in this case,  is the 
parabolic shape right . So, step number 1 in this design  is to determine  peak runoff rate 
because this is  what  is very important  and w hich did this determines the capacity of a 
particular , you know  the grasp of waterways  right , this represented the capacity  to be 
drained  through the waterway this is number 1.  
So, you can say the  capital Q  that is our  you know notation a nd the next is th e fix the  
grade has per  defined criteria . So, based on your criteria , usually  5 to 10 per cent of the 
slope is required . And then , step number 3 is to select the maximum  permissible  velocity , 
a flow velocity . So, this is a non -erosion right, and according  to the condition of 
vegetative cover and  soil of the waterway , ok. So, based on the two conditions , the first 
is what kind of soil it is and what kind of grass it  is being grown on the particular  you 
know the waterway . So, there is  a table  available . From the table , you can clearly get the 
maximum permissible  flow velocities right .  (Refer Slide Time: 03:37 ) 
 
For example, let us see here  in this table , if you see this , this is the maximum  permissible  
flow velocity  right . So,  in column numb er 1, if you s ee the material of waterways . So, 
the most  the soil type  like very light  silty sand , light, loose sand or coarse sand , sandy 
soil followed by hard cement , ok. So, then the maximum  velocity  is based on the cover  
expected after two seasons . So, that is the  in meter per second . This is the maximum  
velocity .  
So, for bare soil, point 3 in the case of very light silty sand . So, this is a  maximum  
permissible velocity , right . So, similarly , it follows hard concrete or hard cement . We get  
2.5 as the  maximum permissi ble velocity . So, similarly for medium grass cover , very 
good grass cover , the maximum permissible velocity values in meter per second or given 
in the table . So, we can use this table for  design . You know  the parameters . (Refer Slide Time: 0 4:56) 
 
And t hen so, the next step , number 4, is the select a suitable value  for M anning’s 
roughness coefficient n , right . So, one is the hydr ology or hydrologic design that  is Q the 
in step number 1, and now we are going towar ds the hydraulic design . So, that is the 
Manning’s. Anyway, we are going to determine  the in other  depth as well as the top 
width of the particular grass waterway . So, Manning’s roughness coefficient n  according 
to the vegetation  retardness class . So, it is given by  retard ance curve , curve index t hat is 
represented with  CI right  this is a curve index , retard ance curve index . 
CI = 2.5( h√M)1/3 
So, the retard ance curve index  is a function of the height of the plant and the stem  
density  of vegetation growth . So, this equation is given by  Temple  1982.  So, basically , 
here, the variables variable is M , right . So, in order to find out M  so, there is table  
number 2. So, from table number 2, we can  get the M  value . Once h and you know  M is 
known , you can find out CI , and once h and CI  can be esti mated , then table 3 will be 
used t o find out M anning’s roughness coefficient , ok.  
So, for M anning’s roughness coefficient , which is a function of right  CI right where CI is 
a function of  h and M, capital M . So, M, we can get it from table number 2  right , h is 
given right  for a particular  height of the gr ass, and you can find out  CI, once CI is 
estimated  and from the table , you can get n. So, let us see the table  from here , table 
number 2,  this is from table number 2 right , this M  whereas,  CI, this is table  number 3. So, let us go throug h table number 2, we are going in which we are goi ng to estimate 
capital  M. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:14 ) 
 
So, let us see . So, this table clearly shows the cover group in column number 1. So, like 
creeping grass  and sod-forming grasses  bunch grasses  legumes  annual grasses . So, all 
these kind of covers and estimated cover fac tor point 0.9  and 0.87 are given and cover  
tested or  Bermuda grass  right  centipede grass  buffalo grass . So, different grass varieties 
are given in column numb er 3, and the refere nce stem density M is estimated for a 
particular , you know , grass -covered . So, for B ermud a grass , for example, 5380 . Let us 
say s tem per meter square the similarly for other gr ass types . So, from table number 2, 
you get th ese M values  for a particular grass t ype. (Refer Slide Time: 08:11 ) 
 
And then  table  number  3. So, once  you know the capit al M and H,  you can find out CI. 
So, once you know the CI, then you can  find out the n  value from table number 3. So, 
these are the CI values and de scriptions very long de nse grass , long grass , now medium 
grass . So, in the short grass and very short grass , these are the heights  of grass heights 
250 to 600 mm, 150 to 200 mm, short grass means 50 to 150 mm and very short grass is 
less than  50 mm height , and the correspondin g Manning’s n values are given here . 
So, suppose  your values in between 50 and 150, the n  value is 0.03 - 0.06, suppose if 
your grass high d 60 mm, right . So, now, you have to find out the corr esponding  n 
values . So, that is simp ly by using interpolation , right . So, for the interpolation method , 
you can find out  for 60 mm grass height  what would be the n  value . (Refer Slide Time: 09:25 ) 
 
So, the next is step number  5; in step number 5, we are going to calculate the hydraulic 
radius  waterway , right . So, this is a  parabolic waterway , ok. So, if this is the top width  
capital T  and this is capital D , that is a depth , ok. So, hydraulic radius probably the water  
level is here . So, the hydraulic radius is from  here to here , ok. So, hydraulic r adius , 
which is equal  to if you remember the M anning’s and  Manning’s equ ation  so, that is  
V = 1/n R2/3 S1/2 
So, from this equation , we can find out  the R -value .  
R = [V.n/S1/2]1.5 
So, then step number 6 is once we know Q  and velocity , you can find out the area of 
cross -section of the particular  waterway that grass waterway .  
A = Q/V  
And step number 7, so, this is the determining the depth  of water way, this parabolic 
using the approximate equation  right . This is an approx imate equation  is; 
d = 1.5R  
There was  a table  if you remember , and the previous lecture probab ly. So, d small d is 
equal to 1.5 times the hydraulic radius , ok (Refer Slide Time: 10:51 ) 
 
So, the next is step number 8 is the  top width ok, calculating the top width of the  grass ed 
waterway .  
t = A/0.67d  
This is for  parabolic grass  waterway , and this is for parabolic or shape . So, once we 
know the top width and  area and velocity , step number 9, we will estimate the discharge 
using continuity  equat ion; 
Q = Av  
Q = 0.67td v 
So, this is just to ve rify your discharge Q with this equation . In step number 10, you have 
to add a  20 per cent design  depth as a freeboard , ok. So, the free board you need to add in 
order  accommodate , you know , silting and all other  problems . So, where dp this is the 
practical d, you can see the pr actical d , which is equal to 1.2 times  d because 20 per cent 
more  depth you are considering , ok (Refer Slide Time: 12:12)  
 
So, that is it so, there  is, you know ten steps involved in  designing the grass waterway . 
So, the fir st step  will know what the discharge Q is. So, then the n ext step is  to find out  
Manning’s roughness coefficient . So, that is based on , you know , the grass cover and 
grass height , right and the soil condition , the soil type . So, based on  this info rmation 
using some tabl es, you will  be able to find out  the roughness coefficie nt. So, once we 
know the roughness coefficient , you wi ll be able to find out a hydraulic radius , and from 
hydraulic radius , you get the hydraulic depth , and from hydraulic de pth top width and 
from top  width , you wil l be able to f ind out the practical depth , ok. That is, you know , 20 
per cent of the actual , I mean design depth . 
So, right you wi ll be able to accommodate  any; you know the consequence is due to 
silting , and you know the  extreme  flows , ok. So, for example, here, problem number 1, 
we follow the same  you know st eps that we explained  before . So, this is to design a 
parabolic  shape to the grass ed waterway  to convey  the pea k runoff rate  of 6-meter cube 
per second . This is c apital Q  which is given  here 6-meter cube per second on a 1 per cent 
land slope . So, 1 per cent is 0.01 infraction , the waterways  soil is sandy  because  that is 
sandy soil and  to be lined with Bermuda grass  medium  grass covers because this 
information , the grass information requi red to find out  you kn ow the  roughness 
coefficient  n, ok. The gra ss height  would be kept at 0.06 so this grass height H from the 
soil surface . So, with this information : how to  design a g rassed water way. So, in design parameters , 
what we are looking is wha t is the top width and what is the depth right and what is the 
hydraulic radius ? So, step number 1, as I explained . So, we need to select the maximum 
flow velocity according  to the  proposed  vegetation and  its condition . So, this is  v right . 
So, from table number 1 for sandy soil and medium grass cover and V is the  maximum 
permissible velocity under the soil  and under this grass cover ok , this is number  1 
because we know Q value and now V  value , right . You wi ll be able to find out  I mean 
the other , other thi ng is to find out n value . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:54 ) 
 
So, that is , I mean M anning’s roughness  coefficient . So, let us see how to find the n 
value . So,  since n is a  so, this is table number 1 to find out t he maximum grass cover . 
This is V  which  is V equal to 1.5 meter s per second right , the table number 1. And then  
let us go to  step number 2. (Refer Slide Time: 15:20 ) 
 
  
Step number 2 is we need to determine M anning’s n according t o vegetation class  
retardness  class . So, that is CI. So, as I said, CI is a f unction of a n h and M.  
CI = 2.5( h√M)1/3 
So, the h value is known ; the M  needs to be estimated , right . So, for M  says the table 
number 2 right from table number 2, if you go to the next slid e, you will be able to  see: 
what is M  value for  Bermuda grass and stem  for, for, for Bermuda grass  the stem density 
is 5380 . So, putting the value of h and M , you get  
CI = 2.5( 0.06√5380 )1/3 = 3.67 
Then using CI and table number 3 , the corresponding you know . So, let us CI is 3.67, 
which is close to 4.4 because the table there is a 4.4 and short grass  for short grass case . 
So, h is between 50 and 150 mm n ranges from 0.03 to 0.06,  ok. 
So, for h value  50 to 150 mm, the n value ranges from 0.03 to 0.06. So, in our case , the h  
value is 60 mm. So, for into  after interpolation  so, n value is  0.033  you will be getting  so. 
So, now, you wi ll be estimat ing the thing  n value . So, then this is table number 2, where  
you find out a  capital M value  for Bermuda grass you have seen in the previous slide  you 
know the M  values 5380  then we use this M value for  finding out the CI and once  
knowing the CI , you will be a ble to . So, CI was 4.4, which is  close , and for short grass , 
this is for a 50 -150 mm. You know  grass height  you will be , I mean using 0.03 to 0.06 n and after interpolation , 
you got  for required desired grass at 60 mm. So, the n val ue you estimate in th e previous 
slide. 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:05 ) 
 
So, the next  step is step number 3 , in which we are  going to estimate the hydraulic  
radius . So, this is from M anning’s equation . So, you wi ll be substituting the values  V, 
and this is the p ermissible velocity and  Manning’s n slope , and you wi ll be able to  find 
out 0.348  meter is the hydraulic  radius  
R = [V.n/S1/2]1.5 = [1.5×0.033 /(0.01 )1/2]1.5 = 0.34 8 m 
Step number 4 to calculate the cross -sectional area  of a grass wate rway  which is equal to   
A = Q/V  = 6/1.5  = 4 m2 
So, this is  an area of cross -section of the  grass ed water way; I mean  parabolic grass ed 
waterway , ok. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 18:50 )  
So, the next is  step number 5 . So, calculating the design depth  so, knowing the  hydraulic 
radius . So, we know the equation for a parabol ic section  
d = 1.5R  = 1.5 ×0.348 = 0.52 m  
And step number 6, you are goi ng to calculate top width . 
t = A/0.67d  = 4/(0.67×0.52)  = 11.48 m  
 and t he capacity you can cross -check .  
Q = A v = 0.67t .d.v = 0.67×11.48 ×0.52×1.5 = 6.0 m3/s 
That is  our 6-meter cube per second ; this is what is given . So, this is matching so ; that 
means  the calculat ions are ok . (Refer Slide Time: 19:44 ) 
 
So, the next is step number 8. So, you have to add 20 per cent as a freeboard of the  depth 
of flow . So, this 0.52 is the  depth  multiplied by 1.2 because  20 per cent. So, 0.62 meter 
right , when you add 20 per cent of this , and you get 0.62 m and top  width  of the 
water way that is a capital T  which is  equal to , 
T = t[D/d]1/2 = 11.48 × (0.62/0.52 )1/2 = 12.54 m.  
Hence, the final dimensions of the  waterway are the depth is  0.62 m and  top width is  
12.54  meter s right . So, this is this will be carrying a 6 m3/s flow rate . This is the design 
of a parabolic grass waterway . So, the basic s in thi s design  or final M is to calculate what 
is the top width and bottom width and the ca rrying capacity . (Refer Slide Time: 21:18 ) 
 
And s o, the next example of problem  two so, here the design of a parabolic shape d 
grassed water way to convey peak flow rate he re 2.6 m3/s is capital Q  right 2.6 m3/s on 
erodible sandy soil having  3 per cent land slope . So, S is equal to  3 per cent, which  is 
0.03, ok. So, the waterway has a good grass cover  and a permissible velocity  of 1.75 m/s. 
Assume  Manning’s coefficient  as 0.03. So, n is already given 0.03, and permissib le 
velocity  V is 1.75 m/s. 
So, we can  try a skip, you know 1 2 3 4, I mean first few steps  to calculating  the n value , 
right . So, we can skip those values , and we can start  from the nex t step , the design 
proced ure let us see   (Refer Slide Time: 22:2 5) 
 
So, the solution here  the given Q  is equal to 2.6 m3/s; S = 0.03;  v = 1.75;  n = 0.03. So, 
now, calculate the hydraulic radius . So, we skip the steps just before step 2 calculate the 
hydraulic  radius , 
R = [V.n/S1/2]1.5 = [1.75×0.03 /(0.03)1/2]1.5 = 0.17 m 
So, knowing hydraulic radius will be able to find out what is  small d  right . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:56 ) 
 That is  d = 1.5R  = 1.5 ×0.17 = 0.26 m and then Q = Av formula using that you wil l be 
finding out the what is the area of cross -section of grass waterway , A = Q/v   = 2.6/1.75 = 
1.48 m2. 
And step number 4, you calcu late the top width . So, this is the equation  for calculating  
the top width T = A/0.67d and substituting  area and depth values ; you get the top with 
8.50 meters . So, now, you are going to find out  the freeboard adding freebo ard to the 
depth an d finally  the top width . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:51 ) 
 
So, let us see those . So, here so and again the cross -check . So, whether the Q  value is 
coming  or not , Q = Av = 1.48×1.75 = 2.6 m3/s that, is the same as what  I mean the 
carrying capacity  of the problem is and step number 6, 20 per cent freeboard was added 
here. That is 0 .26+0.26×1.2 = 0.31 m. So, this is  waterway depth , including the 
freeboard . The top width of  the waterway  capital , 
T = t[D/d]1/2 = 8.5 × (0.31/0.26)1/2 = 9.3 m . 
So, the parabolic shape d grassed  waterway has a depth  of 0.31 meter s and top width  of 
9.3 meter s to carry the discharge  2.6 meter cube per secon d, ok 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:14 )  
So, here if yo u see , you might have the confusi on with you know the  small d , capital D  
and all those things . So, what we see here is . So, when the complete  discharge , which is 
Q is here is a 2.6 meter cube per second  when this is carrying , right . So, this much depth  
you are expecting  this is  called  a small d  ok, this is the small d , and the corresponding  T 
is the small t , but whereas, if you include the free board  right 20 per cent and this will be 
your design  depth , and this will be your  final top width , ok. So, then so, the who le shape 
can carry  2.6 meter cube per se cond even a little bit more ,  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:10 ) 
 
So, the next problem number 3 is to determine the discharge capacity of a  parabolic 
grass ed waterw ay with  a top width  of 7.5-meter  top width and depth  flow of 0.3 meters and bed  slope of 4 per cent. And the roughness co efficient  of grass is 0.04; with the 
passage of time , the rough ness coeffici ent of grass has changed to 0.05 because what 
happens  during the course of or it  is growth stage say the roughn ess coefficient definitely 
is going to increase . 
So, what would be the  percentage change in the discharge capacity  of the channel 
section ? So, this is a very important problem ; as you know , in 1 grow th stage , you expect 
Q1 and other grow th stage s. So, you may not be expectin g the same  Q 1 during the 
growth of the particular  you know grass cover . So, this is quite an interesting problem . 
There are 2 cases like parabolic grass waterway with top width  depth of flow  and bed 
slope is given . 
So, these are not cha nging  right , and these are not changing  only what happened if you 
know  if the grass cover is going to change , right . And then  so, that definitely influence s 
the change in Manning s's roughness coefficient . So, what would happen to the channel 
cross  capac ity discharge  capacity ? Let us see this .  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:46 ) 
 
So, the solution here is if you see the given  original roughnes s coefficient  n is equal to 
0.04 and change the roughness coefficient n is equal to 0.05. So, from co ntinuity 
equation  using M anning’s equation ; so,  
 Q = A ×1/n×R2/3×S1/2 
Origin al Q = 1/0.04×A×R2/3×S1/2 = 25K; where K = A×R2/3×S1/2 
Changed Q = 1/0.05×A×R2/3×S1/2 = 20K  
So, the percenta ge change  in Q is ,  
(Origin al Q - Changed  Q)/ Origin al Q = (25K-20K)/25K × 100 = 5/25 ×100 = 20%  
so, that means, so  chang ing so, how much  change in n . So, n’s changing from  0. 0.4 at 
0.04 to 0.05, right . So, for changing n from 0.04 to 0.05, there will be 20 per cent change 
in Q . So, what kind of  Q it changes original , original  minus 20 per cent is go ing to 
change , ok. So, definitely , 20 per cent increasing or decreasing change , this will be 
decreasing because n is going to increase  the ones n is increasing definitely the carrying 
capacity  is going to decrease . So, that is the 20 per cent decrease of  carryin g capacity can 
be observed , ok 
So, this is all  about this lecture . So, in this lecture , basically , we focused on the design of  
a parabolic grass waterway . So,  in this , there are , you know , basically ten steps ok . So, 
step number 1 is the Q carrying c apacity  if it is given Q  another way . If it is not given , 
you may have to use , you know t he rational method to find out Q  peak  right Q is equal to 
C I A by 360. So, using that , you wil l find out what is the Q  and then th e other , other 
values are n  ok; so, based on the gras s cover , you know the soil type ; you will be finding 
out the n value by using some tables ok . And th en knowing n value  so, right you wi ll be 
finding out  the depth of flow right , depth of flow is equal to 1.5 times  the hydraulic 
radius . So, the hydraulic radius  is ob tained from M anning’s n. 
So, knowing the depth of flow , you will find out the  top width of  flow right and then 
adding 20 per cent freeboard to the depth of flow , you get  the design depth of flow , a 
design depth of the channel and  the top width  there is a n equatio n for finding out the top 
width  by knowing the design depth and calculated depth , right . So, I think this  and also 
we explained some , we solved some problems , ok. So, yeah thank you  so much , fully we 
will cover the next le cture  with I think the great problems , ok 
Thank you  so much . 