Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 03 
Factors Affecting Soil Erosion and Effect of Soil Erosion  
 
Hello, friends . Welcome back to  NPTEL online certification course entitled  Soil and 
Water Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendra Singh, Professor in the Agriculture and 
Food Engineering Department of IIT K haragpur . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:47)  
 
We are i n lecture 3 of week 1; today 's topic will be Factors Affecting Soil Erosion and 
Effects of Soil Erosion . Just to remind you of the course c ontent of this week , in lecture 
1, we started the introduction ; in lecture  2, we covered causes and types of soil erosion . 
In today 's lecture , we will di scuss factors affecting soil erosion  and the effects of soil 
erosion . The following lecture will discuss  soil erosion mechanics , and in lecture 5 of 
this week , we will  go into the control measures that could be adopted  to tackle water 
erosion . (Refe r Slide  Time: 01:22)  
 
Let's begin with factors affecting soil erosion and the effects of soil erosion . The factors 
affecting soil erosion can be summarized  in a very simple affection  as follows .  
Soil erosion = f( C, T, V, S) 
Where C stands for climate , T for topography , V for vegetation and  S for soil .  
It is a very easy way of remembering the factors that affect soil erosion , and then in t he 
subsequent slides ,  we will see one after  the other how these factors affect  soil erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:29)  
 Let us start with  climatic factors , and the climatic factors that impact or affect soil 
erosion are rainfall , wind , humidity and solar radiation . These are the four climatic 
factors that affect soil erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:03) . 
 
We start with rainfal l; rainfall is the primary cause of splash erosion , and rain drops 
detach soil particles , while  runoff  transport s the detached  soil particles . Remember , in 
your previous class ; we saw that splash erosion is the first level of water erosion while 
classifying  the water erosion . We dis cussed that when rain drops occur , raindrop s hit the 
bare soil particles . Because of their velocity or kinetic energy, they disaggregate the soil 
particles , resulting  in soil particles get ting splashed. That splash means that there  will be 
detach soil particles al l around the surface, wherever rainfall occurs  or whe rever raindrop 
impact has taken place . 
We also discuss furth er that when rainfall occurs , it first satisfies the infiltration capacity 
of the soil , and after satisfying the infiltration capacity of the soil, if rainfall still 
continues , then it gets convert ed into the overland flow . That means  overland flow 
phenomena start , and that is nothing  but runoff, and once the loose or detach ed soil 
particles are th ere on the surfa ce, the runoff will transport the detach ed soil particles . 
That means  the entire soil erosion process will be there ; you re member , we define soil 
erosion as detachment and transport ation of soil particles . Here we see that  raindrops detach soil particles , and runoff transports the detach ed soil 
particles . The primary factor responsible for the detection and transportation of soil 
particles occur, which  is rainfall . The amount a nd rate of soil er osion primar ily depend  
on rainfall's amount, intensity, frequen cy, an d duration . As you can  logically think , if the 
intensity of rainfall is more , the rain storm event or rainfall event will satisfy soil 
infiltration capacity  much faster . Then,  excess rain will be converted  into the overland 
flow. 
Similarly , suppose t he amount of rainfall is more. In that cas e, the same phenomen a will 
occur  that the rainfall  infiltration capacity of the soil will be quickly satisfied , and the 
excess amount of rainfall will get  converted into  the overland flow . If the frequency of 
rainf all is more , for example , if today rain fall occurs , then the soil is moist  and suppose  
again , tomorro w rainfall occurs , then the infiltration capacity of the soil will not be 
reduced  much, and  the requirement will be very less to satisf y infiltration capac ity. When 
the frequency is more , the overland flow process will be much faster , and the same 
process is true with the duration of the rainfall . 
If rainfa ll continuous for a longer period , then the infiltration capacity  of the soil will be 
satisfied very qu ickly .  For the remainder of the duration period , whatever rainfall occurs 
will get converted into the runoff. T hat means that run off will transp ort the detach ed soil 
particles , and when both amount  and intensity are high , and in a given  storm , erosion 
will be se vere. 
We just now saw  independently how amount and intensity could result in  soil erosion . 
When in a g iven rainfall storm , both amount and intensity a re high, it will very quickly 
satisf y the infiltration capacity of the soil . That means  the amount of runoff will be 
converted to overland flow , and erosion capacity o r the capacity to transport the detach ed 
soil particles will also be v ery high . (Refer Slide Time: 07:47)  
 
Now, continue with the rainfall ; frequent rains  maintain a high soil moi sture co ntent and 
lower intake capacity , which  increases run off and thus  soil erosion . In the frequent 
rainfalls , the soil moisture content will be at a very high  capacity , and infiltration 
capacity or  the intake capacity of the soil will be very slow.  In such cases, the runoff 
will be very high, and that means  the erosion  capacity of the overland flow or the runoff  
will be much higher . Thus soil erosion will be  increasing , or it will increase , or it will be 
much higher .  
Soil topography , rainf all soil topographic  combination  also gov erns soil erosion which is 
quite logical . If you l ook at a kind of a hill where  rainfall occurs , on this portion ,  there  
will be more rocks or  stone s; that means  the soil quality will be poor , and the slope will 
be steeper .  In that ca se, because the soil quality is poor , the infiltr ation capa city will be 
much lower ; that means  very little rainfall will get infiltrated , and more rainfall will get 
converted into runoff . The top soil will be eroded  fast from th is portion .  
If we go down al ong the slope, we will reach a place where the soils are average and the 
slope becomes gentle, which simply means there will be some infiltration  in here . That 
means that the amount of runoff  generated from the rainfall  occurring over  this port ion 
will be much less , and thus  the erosion  of the top soil will be much lower . Suppose we 
reach the belly bott om of the slope. In that cas e, that is this portion  where we can see that 
lot of  plantation and glasses are  also there . That place which  is expected the soil will be good quality and the land is flat . The soil's infiltration capacity  will be more ; that means  
the soil will be more ; that means  there  be much lesser  overland flow much lesser run off 
getting also generated  because there is vegetation here . Whatever s oil gets eroded  and 
transported will be arrested by the vegetation cover here, which means most of the soil 
will get deposited at this point . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:06)  
 
Then next , wind  characteristics ; if you look at the wind characteristics , wind speed 
governs the extent  of soil erosion by wind . We saw in the previous class that when the 
wind  is light, it rol ls soil particles, but if the wind is more significant , then there is a dust 
storm . Wind speed governs the extent of soil erosion by  wind . Also, it affects the erosion 
by water because the wind  characteristics can influence the raindrop velocity and angle 
of impact . If a raindrop is falling vertically  on soil surfaces , but if there is a wind 
blowing, that will change the angle of impact and impact of t he rainfall; obviously, it will 
have a different raindrop, resulting in other  raindrop impact s another type  of erosion . (Refer Slide Time: 12:09)  
 
Wind also  influences evaporation and  transpiration and thus  affects the soil water regime  
of the area . Because the wind is more than evaporation and transpiration, the soil  water 
requirement to fill the soil reservoir or the soil moisture or infiltration capacity  will be 
more; that means, in that case,  the overland flow will be less  and erosion will be less . 
Depending upon wind sp eed on one side could  increase  the erosion . Still, on the other 
side because of the indirect effect on evaporation transpiration , it could also result in 
decreased erosion. Hence,  there is a trade -off or a palace o ne must  be and even has  to 
analyze . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:56)  
 Then, of course,  humidity in solar radiation also influence s temperature and thus 
indirectly affects  erosion . As we know that  India  is close to  the equator  somewhere  here, 
you can see . 
So obviously, radiation is hig h throughout the year . It is in the range of 150 -200 watts 
per square meter , and temperature , like wind , impacts evaporation and transpiration 
phenomena and affects the soil water regime of the area,  especially long dry spells . If 
they are long dry spells , then there  can be t wo possibilities ; one is the soil moisture will 
be less  or whenever rainfall occurs  the more amount of water will be requir ed to fill the 
soil water regime . Still,  on the other hand , if the soil is very dry , then also there could be 
loose soil particles on th e surface , so if the wind is there or even light  rain is there , that 
will tend to take away the lighter  soil particles or  loose soil particles that are lying on the 
surface . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:01)  
 
Then comes the soil properties like texture , structure , and organic matter content that 
influence the detachment and transp ortation of soil part icles. The  soil detachability 
increases  the size of particle s increases , but transportability decreases with the increase 
in soil particle size .  
That means that if the size of particles  is more , they can be  easily detach ed; for examp le, 
if there is sand, it can be easily  detached , but the sa me soil particle , because its size is 
more , so the transportation will be much difficult in this case . The soil c ontain s a high percentage of sand  and silt or more susceptible de tachment , so the detachability is  more 
due to the  lack of cohesive characteristics . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:15)  
 
If the clean organic matter content of soil increase s, the erodibility d ecreases becau se the 
organic matter s increase the binding  capacity of the soil. That means  soil aggregate is 
bound tightly , and that means  a much higher raindrop impact will be required for 
breaking down that kind of soil aggrega te, where  the organic matte r content is h igh. 
However , clay tends to resist erosion ; once detached , they are easily  transport ed because 
of its size. We have already seen that detachability is less for smaller particles, but 
transportability is more .  (Refer Slide Time: 16:13)  
 
The next factor is topography , and the degree and length of the slope are the main 
topographic factors that influence erosion . The degree of slope is the domin ant factor 
that affects erosion . If the slope i s more , the velocity of flow will be more , and that 
means the kinetic energy of the  flowing  water will be more . Then we  will have a much 
higher  erosion  capacity due to th e increase  in the kinetic energy and the carrying 
capacity of surface runoff . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:04)  
 Slope length influences the  volume  and the speed of run off, which  is also a factor . Not 
only the magnitude  but the slope  also affect  the er osion rate.  If the slope length is longer , 
then that means  more flow will get aggregated , and the runoff capacity  will be higher , 
which means  more soil will be transported . Similarly , for soil  erosion  initiation , a critical 
slope  length  (minimum slope length  is required for initiating the soil erosion ) is needed . 
That means  the combination of slope and length  are needed . The l ower the critical  
inclinatio n, the larger will be the critical slope  length . If we are talking about t wo soils , 
two slope lengths,  one is muc h flatter , and one is steeper . Here, in the case of steeper 
soil, a very smaller length will be required to initiate , whereas a much larger len gth will 
be required  for flat soils . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:47)  
 
Now, the next factor we are talking about is vegetation . As we know that a n excellent  
vegetative cover impact s soil erosion  in many ways  like plant canopies  influence 
interception , ground cov er absorbs the raindrop impact , and root system provides binding  
effects . We have  discuss ed that plant cano py is very important ; it absorbs the energy of 
the filled falling raindrop and  intersects the rainfall . If we talk about the ground cover 
here, it protects the soil  and interests  the kinetic energy . If we talk about the vegetation 
growing here, they help  maintain absorptive capacity and slow down velocity of flow, 
which means they will filter  catchment sediment . If we ta lk about grassroots , they protec t 
the surface soil; if we talk about the deep roots , they help stabilize the soil particles ; the 
same thing is through  the s hrub route s they hold th ese soil particles . That means  the soil aggregates are held together , and they are difficult to detach from the plant surface . Then 
the evapotranspiration take s place , which removes water from the soil . Due to this,  the 
soil reserve will be  empty , more amount of rainfall will be observed by this  soil resulting  
in less runoff . Then  the erosion capacity of water w ill be less  in this case. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:37)  
 
Now, coming to the ill effects of  soil erosion , we have seen that what are the factors that 
impact now what are the ill effects  of soil erosion . We los e the top fertile soil , which 
affects crop producti vity and  crop production . We have already seen that  after the 
raindrop impact , the sheet  erosion starts. They take away the top fertile soils . That will 
have an impact or  negative impact on crop production and  crop productivity .  
Then soil particles are ca rried down  and get deposited into the rivers and streams . Then  
the carrying capacity of these rivers and streams will be reduced . That means the re will 
be more  chance of flooding  because  of the reduced capacity . 
Similarly , suppose the silted water reaches the reservoirs and other storage facilities  (the 
tanks  or ponds ). Because of this silt  being carried with water , it will reduce the storage 
capacity of the reservoir or the pond and  obviously, it will reduce  the life of the struct ure. 
For example , if a res ervoir  was supposed to last for 50 years , it would last for much 
lower . Similarly , if a pond was designed to last for 10 years, then because of siltation, its 
capacity will go down , and it will not be able to store the required amount of water . (Refer Slid e Time: 22:26)  
 
Morgan  (2005 ), presented  the erosion  rates in different cou ntries in t ons per hectar e per  
year. We will focus on India . If you look at India , the geological erosion rate is 0.5 to 5 
tons per hect are per year . The cultivated soils result in  0.3 to 40 tons per hectare per year , 
and the b are soil result s in the highest that is 10 to 185  tons per hectare per year . That 
simply shows that we should be careful about  the b are soil . We should cover  by plant ing 
grasses  so that soil erosion  could be arrested. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:13)  
 Continuing  with the ill effect of soil erosion , land degradation due to soil erosion all  over 
the country is presented i n a recent work by Kumar (2017 ). We can see most of the 
yellow colour places , which represents low  to medium soil degradation. Red colo urs are 
there , which  means  these are  serious ly degraded soils . I mean  soil degradation is 
everywh ere, which means we have to be very careful about  soil erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:01)  
 
Then major land degradation problems due to soil erosion are erosion by wind  and water , 
water  logging , soil salinity and shifting cultivat ion. These are the major lan d degradation 
problems , and we will see each one by one. (Refer Slide Time: 24:24)  
 
In the case of e rosion by wind and water , we already saw  statistics of India ; out of the 
total geographical area o f 328 million hectares , around  147 millio n hectares is impacted 
by various forms of erosion . Out of these , 147 million hectares are  affected by  water  and 
wind erosion ; about 69 million hectares are critical and need  immediate attention .  In 
wind erosion , if you look , it is mainly restricted to the states of Rajasthan, Gujarat and 
Haryana . The severity of wind erosion is inversely related to the rainfa ll amount ; the 
lesser is the rainfall , the more wind erosion . If you see the states  Rajasthan , Gujarat , the 
amount of rainfall is little , and as a result , wind erosion is more prevalent in both states . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:03)  
 Suppose  we look at some of the data provided by some of  the researchers over a period  
of time. The soil loss by water erosion was given by Maji et al. ( 2008 ). From the figure, 
we can see the yellow and greenish color in most  parts of  India,  whic h represents 
moderate  (10 to 15 tones  per hectares per year) and moderately severe (15 to 20 tons per  
hectare per year ), respectively . In some places, it is extremely severe,  greater than 60 
tons per hectare per year , but those  red patches are minimal . Howe ver, most of the area 
falls under  yellow to green, which  is moder ate to moderate to severe . On the other hand , 
if you look at the wind erosion data given by the National Bureau of Soil Science  and 
Land Use Planning , 2008 , we find that most of the problems are in the state of Rajasthan  
and some portion of Gujarat.  
(Refe r Slide Time: 27:20)  
 
Now , coming to gullies and ravines , about  4 million hectares in the countries affected by 
the problems of gul lies in ravines . The gullies  are mainly found in the plateau region  of 
eastern India,  foothills of the Himalayas  and areas o f the Deccan  plateau . In cont rast, the 
ravines  are defined as a valley with steep  sides much larger than the gully . That means  a 
further erosion  advance is a stage of ravines , and when  that leve l comes , we call them 
almost waste land because no agricultural  activity can  be taken up ther e. The ravines  are 
mostly located in Uttar  Pradesh , Madhya  Pradesh , especially  Bundelkhand of Madhya  
Pradesh , Rajasthan  and Gujarat . (Refer Slide Time: 28:27)  
 
If we talk about water  logging , it is caused either by surface fl ooding or the rise of  the 
water table . Both possibilities are there ; surface flooding occurs if you irrigate  too much 
and there is no drainage facility . If you again irrigate too much and most of the water 
goes into  groundwater  reaches the  groundwater , and if there is no pumping , the 
groundwater table  itself will come up , and that causes water  logging .  
In India , around 8.53 million hectares  are affected by water loggi ng. Wat er logging due 
to surface flooding is  predominant in West Bengal , Assam , Bihar , Orissa, Andhra  
Pradesh , Uttar  Pradesh , Kerala , Punjab  and Haryana . That means  you can see almost all 
the major states of India  are having the ill effect of water logging . (Refer Slide Time: 29:41)  
 
Then if you talk about the soil salinity , saline soils are prevalent in inland and coastal 
areas . Because of the salt water intrusion , the coastal areas  are affecte d. Too much salt in 
the soil  due to poor irrigation management  may be a reason  in the i nland. Overall , about 
5.5 million hectare s area is affected by thi s problem , including  arid and semi -arid region s 
of Rajasthan  and Gujarat , black soil region s and coastal region s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:24)  
 
Lastly , we talk about the problem of shifting cultivation , this shifting cultivation w hich is 
also referred to as jhuming  is a traditional method of growing crop on hill s slopes by slash and burn method . There are three  different names of shifting cultivation , jhuming 
and slash and burn methods . This method in volves  selecti ng an appropriate site on hill 
slopes, cleani ng forest by cutting and burning, using the site for cultivation for a few 
years, and later  abandoning it and moving to a new locatio n. This problem is more 
prevalent or severe in the north eastern region and the states of Orissa and Andhra 
Pradesh; they ar e certain tribes that  resort to shifting cultivation of  jhuming  or slash and 
burn method s. 
In today 's class , we saw the factors that affect erosion: climate, topography, vegetation, 
and soil . These are the four factor s that affect that im pact soil erosion , and then they are  
several ill -effects of soil erosion that will be discussed , and in future lectures will see 
how to control  these ill effects . 
Thank you very much . 