Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr Poulomi Ganguli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 39 
Drop In let Spillway (Contd.)  
 
 Hello good afternoon , now we  are going to  cover the 2nd part of the Drop I nlet S pillway 
design .  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:24)  
 
Now,  where the how the spillway design takes place ? So, this is part I of the spillway 
design .  (Refer Slide Time: 00:33)  
 
So, the drop inlet  spillway design has a ll three component s; the hydrologic  design 
hydraulic  design and structural design . So, we mainly focus on the hydrologic and 
hydraulic part s. So, first, we are going to  discuss the hydrologic design and that will be  
followed by the hydraulic part . So, now, in hydrologic design what we  do here consists 
of determining  the peak runoff rate , which  is the expected peak runoff rate we design 
there . 
And then, the second one is the inflow  hydrograph  so, outflows wo uld not be the same as 
the inf low like in the drop structure or the  chute spillw ay structure . So, that is why we 
have to design both the expected run off the peak  runoff and the inflow hydrograph .  (Refer to Slide Time: 01:27)  
 
Now, coming to  hydraulic design , the hydraulic design consists of  the design of the 
earthen dam and the design of pipe spillway . So, maki ng a base of these  two design s our 
next steps will  go forward .  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:45)  
 
So, now coming  to the design of the earthen dam , consists of all design steps that is 
hydrologic design , hydraulic and structural desig n and any kind of hydrauli c structure . 
Now, coming to how we  can make a design of the earthen dam . So, the upstream and 
downstream side slope is commonly used in earth dam s at a 3 : 1 or 2 : 1 slope . And within general varies with the height , the minimum  top width should be equa l to 1.8 
metre s for around a height of 3.5 metre s, when the top width of the dam  is used as a 
road, then it sh ould be kept between 2.5 to 3 metre s. In additi on, there should also be 
added 30-centimetre additional top width for each  60-centimetre  dam height .  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:42)  
 
Now, to come back the safety against  overtopping  5 percent more height should be added 
as a settling  allow ance and which it should ke ep as 60 centimetre s as a free board . And 
the bottom width of  the da m is calculated based on  slide  side slopes  and it is height . 
The bottom wi dth should m atch the length of the conduit a nd the side slope of the dam 
should be protected against e rosion . So, protection against erosion is achieved by making 
a rip rap or using heavy gravel or roc ks, when  the upstream side slop e is eroded by wave  
action from the  downstream  water . The downstream side slope is n ot in general  affected 
by wave  action ; hence the visitation can  be grown  to protect this s ide.  (Refer Slide Time: 03:39)  
 
Now, coming to the design of the pipe spillway  in drop inlet spillway  a pipe spillway has 
a vertical section towards the upstream face of the dam . So, this vertical section is called 
a riser and this is  connected to a condui t passing through the dam. The top of the rise r 
may be rais ed up to the desired height for providing  grade to the conduit  and protecting 
the gully head . Now to follow the hydraulic design of the spillway the type of flow that 
occur s in the conduit  should also be considered .  
(Refer Sli de Time: 04:10)  
 So, now this is you can see  a typical discharge characteristic curve of drop inlet spillway  
so, here the first part comes  where flow  prevails  and the second flow the pi pe or orifice 
flow p revails . So, this is the weir flow and here , an in tersection point is located in 
between two .  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:46)  
 
Now, the design of the pipe spillway here , the type of spillway depends on the size of the 
watershed and the condition of the proposed site for construction . Now, the water it  the 
type of spillway depends upon the water shed area  the how l arge is the watershed . So, if it 
is the watershed area is less than 4 hectares  the generally vegetative spillways are 
provided , in case of a small spillway structure .  
But, in the case of a medium wate rshed like here, it is listed between 4 to 12 hectare s 
combina tion of the mechanical and vegetative spillway : be provided . And where the 
spillway structure is a little bit lar ger that is between more than 12 hectare s mechanical 
spillway structure : be provi ded to  withstand the load of the huge capacity of water .  (Refer Slide Time: 05:42)  
 
Now, coming to a hydraulic design , so, here we have to c onsider the friction loss  in the 
pipe and another kind of  loss. So,  this is  in general  it is taken from the flow-through  
conduit or the pipe flow. So, as you  know  when th e water  is flowing through the pipe it 
is in general governed by Darcy’s  law. 
And a loss of head due to friction is  computed can be  using Darcy’s  law. So, this is the 
head loss due to fricti on so,  
hf = 4 flv2/2gd  
where h f is the head loss due to friction , l is the length of the pipe , d is the diameter , v is 
the velocity of the flow and f is  the coefficient of friction .  (Refer Slide Time: 06:30)  
 
Now, coming to the friction  factor fo r different pip e structures  so, the different  factor is 
already tabulated . So, for the pipe material if it is aluminium material the friction factor 
is 0.34 when alumi nium is coated with still it is 0.25 and for the concr ete structure it is 
0.03 and for a steel pipe , it is again 0.23. So, as you can see from this t able for the  
concrete structure  the friction factor is quite a less ; however, for metal or  the aluminium 
struc ture the steel pipe structure the friction factor is quite high .  
(Refer Sli de Time: 0 7:10)  
 Now, coming to the neutral or the natural slope , it is a hydraulic slope in which head loss 
due to friction is equal to the hea t loss due to the elevation change in the conduit . So, it is 
given by cos sin of the  angle that conduit s make  with the ho rizontal . So, here so it is a 
function of  friction head los s over the length l . So, sin theta is the function  of hf divided 
by l.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:38)  
 
Now, as you know  the coefficient of  contractio n when the pipe flow prevails  so, hf is kc, 
where  kc is the coeffi cient of contrac tion v square by upo n 2 g l is the length of the pipe . 
So, now, the sin theta can be a function of  so, this one kc where  l and l  get is cancelled  
so, here the sin theta  is h f by l.  
So, now the equation for h f is (kcv2l/2g). So, where Kc is the coefficient of contr action  
when the pipe flow prevails l divided by l . So, here so, l and l  get is cancelled  so, sinϴ is 
nothing , but (kcv2/2g). Since theta is very small , we can a lso say that  Sn is a  function o f 
the tanϴ and Kc and then  1 minus (kcv2/2g). So, this equation  we can derive from this . 
So, after calculating the natural slope  the conduit capacity  for differe nt flow conditions 
can be computed .  (Refer Slide Time: 09:11)  
 
So, here so three different cond itions are plotted  so, here whe n S n is when the natural 
slope is less than the slope of the c hannel  so, the free outflow or the  pipe flow prevails . 
When the o pposite is true  so, when the slope is greater than the  natural slope  partly ful l 
free outfall orifice flow condition prevails an d when these slopes are equal . So, full 
outfall submerged by flow condition s prevails .  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:50)  
 
Now, coming to case 1, in drop inlet spillway , pipe flow will prevail and the outlet is 
under the submerged condition  when the slope of the pipe is l ess than  Sn. So, the discharge capacity , in that case,  is given by this equ ation , where it is a function of area 
and h and a couple of coefficients . 
So, where l is the length of the pipe K e is the c oefficient due  to he ad loss at the entrance 
and K c is a coe fficient due to frictional head loss in the pipe , where it is a function of 
pipe diameter and the res istance coefficie nt values of K c can be determined from 
standard graph s or tables .  
(Refer Slide  Time: 10:36)  
 
So, this is the coefficient of  head loss  for circular conduit , where  this is a function of the 
internal diameter of the conduit and at a different end of Manning’s roughness 
coefficient . So, this is the relationship between the head loss co efficient and  the internal 
diameter of the conduit .  (Refer Slide Ti me: 10:57)  
 
Case 2, if the pipe is laid at a greater  slope  than S n, so, this is the case to condition , where  
S is greater than  S n. So, the entrance condition will control the  discharge i n this case . 
And in this case , the discharge  through the inlet weir is given by the equation of weir the 
flow through the equation  weir. So, where a C d is the coe fficient of dis charge , L is the 
crest length of a straight weir , or the sum of the length of 3 sides of the box inlet and H  is 
nothing  but the energy head of water over the crest .  
(Refer to Slide Time: 11:42)  
 The discharge characteristics of the drop are then prepared  and the stag e versus storage 
capacity curves  are also prepared in  this case . So, using the inflow hydrograph storage 
capacity curve and the discharge characteristic s of the structure the outflow hydro graph 
of the structure is then developed  this is the fl ood routing steps . And lastly  for the 
designs storm  hydrograph is selected the storage capacity and the discharg e 
characteristics of the  structure  are then selected should be in such a way , that temporary 
storage will not exceed the design depth of the emb ankment .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:25)  
 
So, some of the m come to some  important f eatures , the outlet of the drops inlet spillway 
is placed slightly above the elevation of the grade establish ed below the structure . 
Second , the conduit pipe is extended above 2.5 metre s below the toe  of the dam and is 
supported by a concret e pier. The support is placed around  2 to 2.5 metre s from the end 
of the p ipe, to protec t it from the scour  hole that will for m. The straight apron type and 
the stilling basing type outlets  are in general adopted  in the case of drop inlet spillway s.  (Refer Slide Time: 1 3:09)  
 
Now, we are going to solve a small problem  based on the design  steps , I have  taken . So, 
to determine t he discharge capacity of an  underground concrete conduit of 15 
centimetre s diameter t he length of the pipeline is  kept a t 200 metres and  the diffe rence  of 
elevation between the water level at the inlet of  the structure a nd dow nstream of the 
structure is  2.5 metres. So, this information the last information will be  used fo r 
calculating the slo pe of the structure and take f is 0.009  for concrete pipe  for a given 
diameter .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:50)  
 So, here we  first calculate  the velocity of flow using  the formula . So, this formula  is 
already covered  at the beginning  of the velocity of the flow throu gh the pipe . So, this is 
Darcy’s  form ula as you can  see here so, using that we first calculate the velocity of flow 
in the unit of m etres per second . Now, once we know the velocity  of flow we calculate 
the cross -sectional area  of the pipe . So, since the  pipe is assumed as circular the cross -
sectional area will be a function o f the diameter of this pipe and  πD2/4.  
(Refer Slide Ti me: 14:47)  
 
So, here comes the cross -sectional area . And now, the discharge cap acity is nothing  but a 
function of the cross -sectional area and the velocity  which is  then we multiplied here and 
get the discharge capacity of the pipe  that is it. 
Thank y ou. 