Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr. Poulomi Ganguli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 38 
Drop Inlet Spillway  
 
Hello good morning , today we are going to study the week 9 lecture that  is Drop Inlet 
Spillway . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:23)  
. 
So, drop inlet spillway here we are  going to cover the introduction part of the Spillway 
Design , here some problem s will come and the  followed by solving of Numerical 
Problem then Drop Inlet Spillway Design II and then the design problem . So, these are 
the lectures we are going to cover in this particular chapter . (Refer Slide Time: 00:45)  
. 
So, what is a drop inlet  spillway ? So, a drop inlet  spillway is  a kind of spillway where  
the function is to conve y the po rtion of runoff through or under the embankment without 
any erosion .  
So, this is the portion of the run off that is carried  through or under the embankment  
without erosion and there are some other name s for this drop inlet spillw ay are shaft 
spillw ay, morning glory or glory hole spillway . So, here you can see  this is the portion of 
the dam  and here  a morning glory spillway is located . So, this is in a  small version and 
then if you go through inside  of this , so, you can see how the water spills throu gh he re 
and enter inside the morning  glory spillway . So, this is the kind of structure  in a drop 
inlet spillway .  (Refer Slide Time: 01:47)  
. 
So, there are three basic components of a drop inlet spillway ; one is an inlet, conduit and 
outlet. So, what happ ened here? The discharge  enters over a horizontal lip drops  through 
a vertical shaft and then discharge s through a horizontal or nearly horizontal conduit and 
tunnel . So, here three are basic component s of this  drop inlet  spillway . So, here the inlet  
is lo cated and then it flows through a conduit , a pipe conduit and then discharge is 
through  an outlet . So, here is the outlet point . So, these are the three basic component s of 
this spillway and in the following chapters , we are going to design each of th ese 
components . So, these are the basic components of this spillway structure . (Refer Slide Time: 02:41)  
. 
Now coming to  the design , the structural design include s that is the determination of the 
specific components as I described earlier . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:53)  
. 
So, this is a drop inlet spillway . So, here you  can on the left side you can see a morning 
glory service  spillway . So, this is in one of the structure s located in  Monticello  dam in 
California  and here you can see the reinforced concrete conveyanc e feature or the tunnel  
through  the right  abutment of the dam . So, from here the  morning glory spillway take s 
the water here and then it goes  here. So, here the flow of water tak es place and these are the reinforced concrete control structure or the mornin g glory structure s, where the water 
enters and then it s conveyance  through the pipe or tunnel .  
So, these are the three basic component s as I describe d in the earlier slide ; so, the inlet 
conduit and outlet part . So, drop in let the open -top, so this can be  of any shapes ; so, these 
are some basic  shape s, so, where the top is kept to be open . And if it is a cove red top , so, 
here the inlet cover top  and these are the culvert type inlet . So, here the water  enters so, 
hood , plain and a flared kind of structure . So, these  are three bas ic structure s for inlet 
design and then  the conduit . So, a conduit can be of  two kind s; so, one is a box conduit 
and another could be a pipe conduit . So, cross -sectional shapes are provided here  from 
the plan view . So, since it is a box entrance , this box is  created and the pipe structure , so, 
it is a circular structure . 
And in from the  cross -sectional view , you can see these are the  trapezoidal weir is 
located and this is the box conduit here you can see the conduit structure . So, this is the 
box conduit  struc ture over there and this is a pipe conduit  structure this is located also 
pipe. So, these are  some of the basic structure s and then going to the outlet  position . So, 
the outlet has  three different kind s, so it can be the SAF or stilling basin kind of outlet or 
the second  kind could be plain or apron kind of and third could be cantilever kind of . So, 
these are the three basic outlet structure s in the  drop inlet spillway . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05 :23) 
. So, what are the basic uses of t his spillway structure ? So, these are in general use d to 
drop low to medium volume s of water over a sharp incline  structure . So, you can see 
here that, this is  a kind of drop inlet spillway structure is design ed here over the lake 
Kandle dam in New Jersey . So, here this is a  drop of the medium volume of water and 
this is  located this is a n in cross -sectional  front view and this is the plain  or the  exceed  
view of  this structure and the incline height is normally greater than 1 meter with no 
upper limit . So, these a re the basic drop inlet structure . 
However , in the case of the morning glory type of structure , these  structures are  
considered when there is very limited space and there is an adequate rock foundation . So, 
this has the potential of small to moderat e discharge capacity and is used with conduit 
and tunnel conveyance features . So, these are  kind of  drop inlet spillway that is morning 
glory kind of structure that is only used when there is limited space and there is  some 
adequate rock foundation is avai lable .  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:41)  
. 
So, now coming t o the application of drop inlet spillway s in general ; so, there are many 
application s. So, first is the stabilization of gully grade second is the principal spillway 
for farm ponds or reservoir s and thir d is at the lower end of the water disposal  system . 
Principle spillways for  debris basins , fifth in combination with check dams can this can 
be used in combination of check dam for safe disposal of water into the reservoir  and 
sixth culvert in forest areas  and road structures , flood protection structures , surface water inlet for drain age or the irrigation structures . So, these are som e basic applications of 
drop inlet spillways .  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:33)  
. 
Now, coming to  discharge characteristics , dischar ge characteristics var y with the range 
of head , second as long as the outflow through the box remains less than the capacity  of 
the pipe example , at low heads . So, discharge is governed by the riser and the pipe flows 
only partially full . Third, when the o utflow at the box exceeds the capacity of the pipe 
the box inlet  fills and disc harge  is then governed by the pipe capacity . So, these are some 
the special  of the discharge characteristics .  (Refer Slide Time: 08:09)  
. 
And now  this particular figure shows the nature of flow and discharge characteristics of 
drop inlet spillway . So, here in the  flow of drop inlet spillway ; so, three condition s 
prevail . So, the first is condition 1 which  is a c rest control , when the water enters through  
the crest and the secon d is when it flows through the tube or the transition phase when 
tube or orifice  control takes place and the third is the full pipe flow conditions , so, which 
is the last part . 
 So, here so these  are the  reservoir water surface  elevation  versus the dischar ge 
characteristics curve of the drop inlet spillway . So, here, coordinate  starting from a to g 
the condition one  prevails , that is the cres t control prevails until the co ordinate a to g . 
Then coordinate g to h the tube or orifice  control prevails until the  coordinate g to h  and 
the third part or the last part the full pipe flow beg ins beyond h. So, what ever flow goes 
beyond the co ordinate h as you can see here , there  is an erratic  change  flow distribution 
at this range and beyond the co ordinate h, there is a full pipe flow condition that prevails . 
So, these are some  of the basic  discharge characteristics .  (Refer Slide Time: 09:51)  
. 
Now, in between the two cases is the riser or weir  flow and the pipe flow tube in that 
case the tube flow in transition also takes place . And Secondly, full pipe flow design for 
spillways except those with ex tremely low drops is not recommended and third , the 
control will shift  according to the  relative discharge capacity of the weir, the transition 
and the conduit or tunnel . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:17)  
. 
Now, for a large diameter crest , greater outflows can be d ischarge d over the weir  at low 
head s and the transition will fill up and tube control will occur  with a lesser head on the crest . Now, altering the size of the tube the po sition of curve C d will change , where c d 
is the coefficient of discharge indicating the head above which tube control will prevail .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:47)  
. 
Now,  what are the type of drop inlet spillway ? So, there are two types . So, the first is a 
drop pipe structure and the second one is slopped pipe structure . 
(Refer Slide Time : 10:57)  
. 
Now coming to the drop pipe structure ; so, here on the right side you can see the drop 
pipe structure . So,  this is one of the drop pipe structure s. So, here is a freeboard is maintained , here is a dam , this is spillway outlet this is the head water level and this is 
drop shaft  this is a kind of drop pipe structure . So, as you can see from this figure it 
consists of a vertical pipe and a horizontal pipe . So, this is the vertical pipe  and the 
horizontal pipe, the horizontal pipe is now installed a t the bottom side of the vertical 
pipe.  
So, as you  can see from the figure and the flow through this pipe is dependent on the 
head from the vertical pipe and the length and t he roughness  of the pipe material . Now, 
this horizontal pipe is in general smaller  in diameter than the  vertical pipe as this is also  
in the picture . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:57)  
. 
That you can say the diameter of this horizontal pipe is much less er in diame ter than the 
vertical pipe , why? Since the water running through it is  under high pressure and due to  
high since the water is flowing through it at high pressure . So,  increase d head  prevails  
so, the diameter of this is kept smaller than the  vertical pipe . (Refer Slide Time: 12:27)  
. 
Now coming to the second kind of structure the sloping pipe structure , this structure 
consists of one component and a. So, this component  that is a sloped pipe  only one 
component is available here and the capacity is normally d etermined by the length and 
internal roughness of the pipe . So, control of the capacity of this  slope d structure and the 
slope of the pipe has very little effect since under most circumstances the critical  slope is 
exceeded . So, as you can see here  the slo ped pipe  slope is kept a t 10 per cent. So, it has 
very littl e effect since in  most condition s it is kept as a steep s lope.  
Since the water is not forced i nto the pipe under a high head as this is the case earlier , 
this structure has a little bit lower cap acity as compared to  the pipe structure as I 
described earlier . (Refer Slide Time: 13:39)  
. 
Now coming to the main component ; so, here we are going to cover some of the main 
component s of this drop inlet spillway . So, the first one is anti seep collars . So, you can 
see, so here is the inlet structure here is the c omplete  conduit part  and this is an outlet . 
So, in the conduit structure or the conduit pipe  structure is anti seep collars are provided . 
So, you can see the small collars are provided here . 
So, these are in general constructed using concrete or mason ry. For control of ; why these  
are provided ? For control of seepage and prevention of failure due to piping and the total 
length of this seepage  collar should be nearly 30 per cent of the total length o f the 
seepage  and the last is to get the total length of the  seepage two or more seepage collars 
are provided . So, you can see to get rid of seepage there are the anti seep collars are 
provided , where  there should be multiple anti seep collars throughout t his conduit pipe .  (Refer Slide Time: 15:03)  
. 
The Anti Seep Collar shall be placed within the saturated zone . So, where this is a 
conduit structure as you can see . So, where is there is a saturated zone ? So, there these 
collars are provided the normal sa turation zone may be determined by projecting a line at 
a slope of 4 horizontal to 1 vertical from the point , where the normal water elevation 
touches the upstream slope of the field to a point , where this line intersects the invert of 
the pipe barrel and all soil fill  located below this line may be assumed as a saturated . So, 
these is some of the steps , where you can find  the position where  the saturation zone and 
based on this position  you can provide the anti seep collars throughout the  conduit of the 
drop inlet structure .  (Refer Slide Time: 15:59)  
. 
Now, cradle to the c onduit  to prevent uneven settlement and to develop hoop stress in the 
concrete pipe a cradle of masonry  or concrete is provided to the conduit . So, concrete 
pipes with stand more loads wh en hoop stress is developed th an otherwise . So, when the 
concrete pipes are provided when  the hoop stresses developed in the system . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:27)  
. 
Now, it also consists of an emergency spillway . So, if the runoff exceeds the design 
runoff , so, as here in this case  an emergency spillway is kept , whic h is located at an 
emba nkment at a convenient location . So, as you can see in this figure , so here emergency spillway structure is provided . So, 
where this  emergency spillway is located ? It is buil t around one end of the  dam to take 
care of very high flood flows and the  channel is protected with grass or stone pitching . 
So, that run off the effect of runoff can be reduced and dampen ed and the velocity of flow 
can be reduced . So, this is the channel i s protected with gr ass or stone pitching .  
(Refer Slide Time : 17:33)  
. 
Now, as you can see this is a n emergency spillway structure here and there is a  stone 
pitching is provided to reduce the flow of water or the velocity of flow . So, stone 
pitching is re commended on the upstream side of the embankment and the down stream 
side beyond the outlet to prevent soil erosion  because of  the high flow of the water . So, 
the stone pitching is provided . (Refer Slide Time: 18:03)  
. 
Next coming to the filter ; sand and g ravel filter s are provided to help drainage and 
prevent pi ping. So, as you can see here the sand and gravel filter s are  provided . So, this 
is a baffle plate an d steel rod and here the filter  is located . So, this is a filter structure 
here. So this end s up the introduction part of the drop inlet spillway . Now, we will move 
to the next chapter . 
Thank you . 