 
 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Amey Pathak  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 48 
Wind Eros ion and Control Basics  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:20)  
 
Hello friends , I welcome you all  in this  week -11 of this NPTEL  online course  on subject 
Soil and Water Conservation En gineering . So, my name is A mey Pathak . And in this  
module  we will be understanding  the we will be understanding and studying the wind 
erosion , and what are the different measures to control  wind erosion  ok. So,  let us start 
this class  ok.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:43)  
 
So, in this module of week 11, so as I said we will be studying  wind erosion and  
different measures to control  the wind erosion . So, this module is divided in to 5 lectures . 
So, we will be covering 5 lectures . So, first lecture that is today ’s lecture  it will be on 
wind  erosion  and its control basics . 
Similarly, on the second lecture  it will be on designing of windbreak , then desired  
designing of shelter belt s; lecture 4 will be on formation of sand dunes ; and lecture  5 will 
be on  stabilization of sand dunes  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:21 ) 
  
 So, let us see  ok. So, before going further bef ore understanding wind erosion , we need to 
understand what is wind  ok. So, wind is nothing  but it is an air mass  ok. So, wind  is wind  
is nothing  but it is a air which has some mass and  which has some  velocity ok . So, 
because  since , this air has some mass and velocity , it acquires  some kind of energy ok. 
And this energy moves  the soil during the process of wind erosion  ok. 
So, we can see this erosive ness of wind or we can say erosive  wind energy , it increases 
by a factor equal to  velocity cube  ok. So, it means  a small increase in wind velocity can 
result s into larger  increase in win d erosive energy  ok. So, it is of this erosiveness of wind  
is increases by  a factor equal to velocity cube . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:26)  
 
So, now let us see what is wind erosion  ok. So, wind erosion it  is a process .  
Student: (Refer Tim e: 02:3 4) 
Ok. 
Student: (Refer Time: 02:38)  
Ok. 
Student: (Refer Time: 02:40)   
 So the definition of wind erosion . So, it is a process of detachment  transportation and 
deposition of soil material by the wind . So, it is a combination of  three steps , first the 
detachment of lose  or fined grains  soil particle from  the surface , then the transportation  
of the  soil particles  from one place to another place  and the deposition  to a place which is 
far away  from the place where the  process of detachment has started  ok. 
So, in that sense wind er osion is actually is very dangerous  and you  can say comparative 
to water  erosion  also it is  similar . So, wind erosion is no way  less dangerous than the 
water  erosion . So, what happens when the high velocity wind  when it strikes over the 
bare lands  with inc reasing force . 
So, what happens then ? So with the wind with very high velocity  when its strike  over the 
bare land, so let us say  when there is no vegetation cover or the soil surface is compiled  
completely smooth and  baron  then in that case  the finer  particles or fine, loose , on you 
can see light soil particles  that are actually rich in nutrients or which make the soil more  
fertile  they are actually being lifted by this wind  and the y are  being transported to miles 
and miles away . 
So, in that sense  so wind e rosion actually is responsible for  causing great damage to crop 
productivity , because the most fertile layer is getting transport ed or is being  eroded by 
the wind  ok. So, in that sense the wind erosion is very dangerous . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:38)  
  
 So, if you see the  there are different factors  that affect the wind  erosions . We can group 
this factors  into a different categories ok . So, loose ly if we  can say there are two things 
first the factors that influence the climate over that region s and factors that affect  that 
affect s the soil sur face or that define the soil  or the su rface parameters ok . 
So, we can s ay the climatic  variable s so most of the time we know  whatever overall  what 
are the climate variable . So, like wind over a region  then wind  over a region , then 
precipitation  and temperature . So, all the se together all this climate variable  they actually 
define the  atmospheric conditions that make  file more prone to or more vulnerable  to the 
erosion . 
Then coming to the soil properties . So, soil properties s uch as the texture of the soil , 
composition of the soil , aggregation and the moisture content s. So, how much dry the 
soil is there , and what is the texture , whether it is well graded soil or poorly graded soil  
that that are all soil properties that defined  the that  that makes soil more vulnerable to the  
erosion . 
Then comes  to the land -surface characteristics  for example, topography  of a region  
whether it is smooth  or undulating hilly regions  then moisture present there , aerodynamic 
roughness  length , vegetat ion cover  or any of the  or presence of any non -erodible  element  
that can reduce the effect of  wind  erosion ok . 
And then finally,  how we use the land that is a land -use practice , example farming , 
grazing and mining . So, these are the different primary facto rs that that controls  or that 
affect the wind erosion . So, in a broader term we can say the wind erosion is  expected 
when the soil is very loose , when it is finely divided  when it is relatively  dry and the 
surface conditions are smooth and bare. And wind i s on the top of that wind is strong 
enough to start the wind erosion . So, all these factors are actually contributes to the wind 
erosion  ok.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 07:04 ) 
 
So, wind erosion it is commonly observed in mostly in a climate  like arid regions and 
semi-arid regions  where the precipitation  is very inadequate  which make  soils very dry . 
For example, in case of Indian subcontinent we can see the Thar  Desert  in India 
Rajasthan, and some part of G ujarat  and Haryana . And global ly if you can see there are 
some regions like Middle East  region s and over some  part of  some Northern A frica, 
Sahara Desert , so all these regions  all the se regions , the wind s erosion  wind erosion is 
more prominent . 
So, one of the most serious damage that is caused by this wind erosion is the change in 
soil texture  ok. So, what happens  this for smaller particles  of soil are more subjected to 
moment by wind . So, what happens  this silt , clay and organic matters are being 
transported or  are being removed from the surface , and they are  trans ported to some 
another places ok . So, what is left there  is actually  very coarse and lesser productive 
material behind  ok. 
So, in that sense the  wind erosion  is actually up is make s soil more sandier . So, most of 
the fertile lay er is being removed by this wind erosion . So, so that is why this wind  
erosion is  dangerous  is and we need to control it  ok.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 08:43)  
 
So, this is a  very good example  of wind erosion we can see here . So, in the first image , it 
is of both of these are like satellite  image . And the first image we can see  the extent of 
this phenomena  ok. So, you can see  this is act ually somewhere over the North Atlantic 
North A tlantic region and this is like a  Northern A frica. 
So, that this is a image of dust storm . So, you can see here. So, dust is being transported 
from the S ahara desert  to this over the North A tlantic  ocean s. So, you can see the  
distance it covers actually . So, once this soil  gets soil layer get lost , it is very difficult  to 
make favorable  condition over that regions  ok. So, see the distance the  extent of this 
phenomena  ok. 
In the second image you can see  this is also for S ahara desert and it can see  the dust  
storm over the  Sahara desert  and you can see the magnitude  ok. So, all this magnitude 
actually how  much quanti ty is being trans ported  and being disturbed from the  from its 
original location . So, this is the actually  very extreme case of wind erosion  which is 
observed in the satellite image  ok.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 10:06)  
 
So, now let  us see the mechanics of the mov ement of  wind erosion  ok. So, wind erosion 
as a process , it can be divided into three distinct phases . We can call it as initiation of 
movement or detachment of soil particle  from where the wind erosion actually starts , 
then the transportation , and finally  deposition over a distance  a far away from the  
original location of the soil particle .  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:36)  
 
So, now  let us see this  movement one by one  ok. So, in the mechanics of movement let  
us see how the initiation of movement takes place  ok. So, what happens this movement  
 of soil particle  is actually is caused by wind forces exerted against or parallel to the 
ground for  ground surface . 
What happens , when the wind with very high velocity , when it strikes over the surface  
soil surface. So, most of this  velocity force is observed by the  upper layer of soil 
particles . So, in the  in the absence of any  protective layer , so most of the force is bared 
by the soil particle ok . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:15)  
 
So, if the soil is in that case  so in that case , if the soil particles  if they are  happened to be 
very loose and lighter or finer , then wind may lift them from the surface  in the initiation 
process . So, the process of initiate  detachment starts here . So, first it targets  the finer 
particles  fine or mediu m size particle  ok.  
So, this  motion actually the initiation of this movement starts , when the  wind acquires 
some kind of velocity ok. So, if the velocity crosses that threshold limit , then wind has 
that potential to cause erosion  ok so that velocity is ca lled as the threshold velocity .  
So, threshold velocity is the minimum velocity . So, threshold velocity is the minimum 
velocity , which is needed to initiate the movement of soil particles  or which is required 
to detach  the finer  or medium size  soil particl e from the surface  ok. So,  but it depends on 
the characteristics of the  ground and the soil conditions. So, this threshold velocity is not 
a constant , but it changes with the surface condition  ok.  
 So, for example  for most erodible soil , which is of size ab out 0.1 mm the threshold 
velocity is in the range of  likes 15  to 16 kilometer per hour  at the height of  30 centimeter  
ok. So, when a soil surface that is rough or protected with non -erodible material  in that 
case, it will require  a very stronger wind  to initiate the particle movement  than compared 
to the smoother surface ok . 
So, soil surface that is very rough and protected with some  kind of  non-erodible material 
for them , the threshold velocity it will be very high. So,  to initiate  that movement very 
high threshold velocity is required  ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:40)  
 
 
Now, next is the transportation. So, once the detachment or initiation starts  of the process 
of wind erosion , so the soil particle  will being  will be transported from one place to 
another pl ace. So, the quantity of soil moved by the wind is actually influenced by the  
particle size , the characteristics of the  soil particle  that is particle size , gradation of the 
particles , wind velocity whether winds are very strong , and the distance along the  
eroding area .  
So, all this parameters that defines the quantity of soil , which is being moved by the 
wind . So, the quantity of soil since the wind is variable in velocity and direction , often it  
 produce eddies and that makes  that make soil get  that that is responsible  in detachment of 
soil from the surface and transportation  ok. 
So, the quantity of soil moved is actually again , we can it  is a dependent on two 
conditions  or two variables . One is related to the climate  that is a wind . And another is a 
particle that is a  soil surface ok . So, the quantity of soil moved is  directly proportional to 
the difference between  actual velocity is represented by V  minus theoretical velocity q , 
actually cube of that .  
So, quantity of soil moved  is actually directly propo rtional to the  quantity of soil moved 
is directly proportional to the cube of difference between these two velocity , actual 
velocity minus theoretical velocity . And it is also directly proportional to the  square root 
of particle diameter  ok. 
(Refer Slide T ime: 15:28)  
 
So, once the initiation starts and  for soil particles are being transported , then deposit over 
a distance , which is some distance away from the  from the originating  place . So, 
depositions occur  deposition occurs , when the gravitational force  is greater than the force 
holding the particle in the air  ok. So, what happens when the file particle , which is in air 
stream , when the gravitational force acting on that is actually greater than the force 
holding the particle in the air stream , then the p rocess of deposition starts .  
 So, this generally happens when there is a decrease in wind either by itself  or by  which is 
or caused by any barrier may be  it is kind of  solid barrier , vegetative barrier  or any 
barriers  like d itches and benches  ok. In additio n to that  this rain drop , they may also take 
the dust out of air  ok. So, this is the deposition step  ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:32)  
 
Now,  you are  seen the movement of the soil . So, let us see how the  now we send  the 
move  mechanics of movement . Now, let us see the soil particle movement here , so it 
depends on the particle size . 
So, after the movement of  wind after  the movement is initiated or soil particle is 
detached , the soil particles  are carried by the winds in three types of movement 
depending on their  size; depending on their size in the relation to the velocity and 
turbulence of the wind  ok. So, these  three  movements are like saltation , suspension , and 
surface cream . So, the wind erosion is a combination of these  three kinds of movement  
ok.   
 (Refer Sl ide Time: 17:22)  
 
So, this is a very good figure , which talks about the  particle movement soil particle 
movement. So, you can see here at initially , when there is a fine or medium grained soil 
particle  and wind is blowing in this direction . And when the w ind velocity it is it crosses 
the threshold velocity , so the process of saltation starts .  
So, what happens during this process , this soil particles makes some kind of abrupt  gems 
or some kind of bouncers over the surface ok . And this process and  so that i t got it gets 
lifted  or sometimes it gets trolled over the surface . So, this process is called as a 
saltation .  
So, saltation is a process during which the  soil particle  is being  is being  is being  jumped 
or like  it bounces from its position ok . So, what ha ppen because of this motion ; because 
of this motion this particle , when it collides with the surface or  with some other  others  
other grains it disintegrate into smaller particles ok .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 18:29)  
 
And this smaller particles in the presence o f wind ; is this smaller particles in the presence 
of wind , they care  they get carried away or they get lifted from the surface , and this 
process is called as a suspension  ok. 
And of and  meanwhile during the process of saltation itself , the larger  soil part icle this 
when this  when the finer particle , when it hits the ground or it  when it collide through the 
bigger  size particle ok. So, this bigger size particle it cannot be lifted , because of its 
mass .  
But, the energy is actually being transported  or energy  been energy is being used to make 
a movement along the direction  of the wind . So, over the surface , it start rolling. So, this 
is so and this movement is called as the  surface creep  ok.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 19:22)  
 
So, now  let us have a look  at these  three  types of movement one by one . So, in the 
process saltation , the saltation occurs , when the soil particles of size  of 0.1 to 0.5  mm 
move in a series of bounces  and jumps  and jumps . So, soil particle it make some initial 
bounces and jumps , so that process i s called as saltation process  that movement is called 
saltation .  
And it is dependent on pressure of the wind on the soil particles , and the  collision of 
particle with other particles . So, these  two process defines the saltation movement ok . 
And the height  of this  jump ; height of this jump varies with the size and density of soil 
particle , roughness of the soil surface and the velocity of the wind .  
So, it and it is important to know that that depending on the soil type around 50 to 75 
percent of the total weight of soil  are carried in the in the process of saltation  ok. So, here 
this in this figure it is shown that suppose the L is the length  of the  transport , so the soil 
particle is getting detached here  and it is being lifted. So, to  up to the length  one-fifth to 
one-fourth, it is in rising motion , and then there is process of deposition starts  ok.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 20:52)  
 
Now, now the suspension  we have seen the saltation  movements , now let  us see the 
suspension. So, suspension occurs , when the partic les lesser than size of  0.1 mm size are 
lifted  far above the surface  and carried to a greater distance  under the influence of wind 
velocity . So, sometimes the  distance of their  distance  by which they get transported , it is 
sometimes across the continents o r oceans  ok. 
So, movement of this fine particles is  usually initiated in the process of saltation , when 
the particles bounce back  over the surface and it get disintegrate into finals  particle or it 
lift the finer particle  the wind will lift the finer parti cle and may  and the process of 
suspension or  suspension movement starts . So, around 3 to 40  percent of the soil weights 
are carried by this suspension .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 21:42)  
 
Now, there is another movement , which is  applicable to the larger  size part icle of size 
0.5 to 2  mm. So, since this particles cannot be moved by the wind , they cannot be lifted 
by the wind,  but they can be  rolled along the surface. So, it is the  rolling or this surface 
creep  is a rolling or sliding of large soil particle along th e soil surface . And the particles 
moved  mainly by the impact of particles in the saltation .  
So, the  particles , which are already in the movement of  in the in the form of saltation , 
they start this  movement of  on a bigger and bigger or  like the on a partic le, which are 
generally of  more mass  ok. So, this movement is called as a  surface creep.  So, it is a 
rolling motion  along the surface  ok. So, around  5 to 25 percent of the total soil weights 
are carried away in this fashion . And, so localized erosion , because of the mass of the 
particles  ok.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:57)  
 
Now, let  us see the  different ways to control the erosion. So, we can control the erosion 
by two step the parameter , which are responsible for wind erosions . If we adopt some 
kind of prevent ive measures , we can reduce the effect of erosion by  adjusting  by 
adopting this wind  erosion control measures  ok. 
So, we can either reduce the surface wind velocity  or means  that means, we can reduce 
the erosive ness of wind or we can make soil surface  more  resistant to the force wind 
forces ok , so that can be achieved by conservation  of moisture and proper tillage 
operation .  
So, let  us see first  step to reduce the surface wind velocity . So, if you have to reduce the  
surface wind velocity , so there are diff erent ways or different measures  that can be used 
such as vegetative measures , tillage practices and mechanical methods .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 23:59)  
 
So, let  us see  this measures one by one  ok. So, first is the vegetative measure , so it is the 
most  effecti ve means of wind erosion control measures . So, if you are using inter tilled 
crops , close growing crops , shrubs  and trees , so they can they can reduce the erosive par  
they can reduce the effect of  wind , they can reduce the wind velocity . So, the effect of 
wind erosion  make it reduce . 
So, in general the close growing crops , such as  cereals c ereals, legumes , grasses  et cetera  
are more effective than the inter -tilled crops , because this close growing crops . Actually , 
they will held the  soil particles together  and also they will protect the upper layer of soil .  
Another measure is to  plant crop in a such a way that  the prevailing wind direction is 
perpendicular to that . So, for more effective operations , crop should be grown 
perpendicular to the direction of win d. And other practices like strip cropping , field on 
filed and control and stubble mulching  should be adopted to control the wind erosion  ok.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 25:06)  
 
Next is by a proper tillage operation. So, the  our aim of tillage operation should be  such 
that it should make a rough , cloddy surface with some plant residues expose on surface. 
So, the  effect of high velocity wind can be  can be minimized  ok.  
So, general ly lands are cultivated soon after rains  to get maximum roughness  ok. So, 
sometimes i f I have to if there is a chances of erosion wind erosion , so sometimes as a 
emergency measures , we use ripping as a ripping as a emergency measures to reduce the  
wind erosion in clay soils  ok. This is , this was the tillage operation .  
(Refer Slide Time: 2 5:50) 
  
 Now, now there are some measures like mechanical measures  ok, so that can be used. 
So, mechanical measures means  it can  we can plant some series of trees on shrubs  on the 
on the border of the field , so that the effect of high winds  can be reduced .  
So, they include mechanical barriers like windbreaks and shelter -belts.  So, windbreak by 
definition  is any kind of barrier ok , so any kind of barrier  for protection of wind 
generally  from  for protection of winds , and it is generally used for  farmsteads,  gardens, 
gardens and orchards  etcetera . 
And similarly , a shelterbelt is a longer barrier than the wind break  and it consists of 
combination various shrubs and  trees . So, these  wind breaks and shelter -belts they 
reduce the wind velocity near the ground by ex erting a drag on wind  and by deflecting 
the wind stream. So, this is a  example you can see the wind break . So, this  it is a wind 
break and this is a shelter -belts . So, we will be looking this thing  in a detail in the 
subsequent lectures .  
(Refer Slide Time : 27:02)  
 
So, now this is just for introduction I am giving some information here  ok. So, this is  so 
this is the example of wind erosion here. So, you can see here , you know in a open wind 
or open air steam suppose the wind velocity is around 35 miles per  hour. And by planting 
this windbreak , we can reduce the wind velocity over this location around  time min  10 
miles per 10  miles per hour .   
 So, there is a significant reduction  in wind speed on the windward side  sorry on the 
livered side  of the windbreak . Similarly , its distance  it can protect us to some particular 
distance  ok. So, let  us see here also the effect is visible . So, around  wind speed is around 
15 miles per hour here  ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:44)  
 
 
So, the distance of full production is can be  calculated by this equation , which is given 
by D  is equal to 17 times height of the barrier multiplied by ratio of two velocities . These 
velocities are like  first is a V m that is a threshold velocity .  
The maximum velocity at  15 meter height , which is re quired to initiate the movement . 
And for smooth and smooth and bare soil this threshold are maximum velocity is 9.6 
meter per second . And this V is actually the  actual velocity  at 15 meter height . And this 
theta  is angle of deviation of prevailing wind dir ection perpendicular to the wind break  
ok.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 28:36)  
 
So, now let  us see the example . So, we can have a  better understanding by the example 
here ok. So, this is the example . So, in this example we have to determine the  spacing 
between win d breaks that are  15 meter height  if the 5 -year, return periods of wind 
velocity at  15-meter height is 15.6  meter  and the wind direction deviates  10 degree from 
the perpendicular to the field stream . So, in the problem we have to assume a smooth , 
bare soil  surface and fully protected soil field .  
So, what is given here , so given here is like  we have to plan for windbreak of height 15 
meter , the actual velocity given here is  15.6 meter , the angle of deviation from the 
perpendicular  from a direction perpendic ular to the  wind break is 10 degree and the 
theoretical velocity for a smooth and a bare  surface is 9.6 meter , so if we substitute all 
this value here .  
So, height is 15 meter , V m is 9.6, V is 15.6,  and theta is 10  degree. So, we get d is equal 
to 154.54 mete r. So, what it means , so if we plant  now one row of wind break , so we w ill 
get a protection of this 154.54  meter , we can get protection from this windbreak. So, the 
another  windbreak layer of wind break should be planted  at the spacing 154.54 mm at a 
distance away from this first wind break ok .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 30:07)  
 
 
So, now  let us look at the another problem here . So, here we have to determine the full 
protection strip width  for a field strip cropping . If the crop in the adjacent field strip is  
wheat  of 0.9 meter tall , and wind velocities  wind velocity is  8.9 meter second  and winds 
are prevailing winds are  actually perpendicular to the field stream .  
So, the height of wheat crop is given as  0.9 meter , the actual wind speed at 15 meter is  
8.9 meter per second  and since the prevailing wind is perpendicular to the direction  to 
the to the  field stream  so the angle of deviation is 0  here. So, we need to find out the  
spacing width ok . 
So, so one strip how much  by planting one strip , how much distance w ill ge t protection 
that was we have to find  it out . So, by putting all the values here in this equation h is 
equal  sorry this is D ; D is equal to 17 h V m by V cos theta . So, if you substitute all this 
value here , we will get strip width of  15.3 meter . So, it me ans so one row of this field 
strip is protecting  15.3 meter . So, spacing should be  15.3 meter  ok.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 31:26)  
 
So, now we have seen a how to reduce wind . Now, let us see how to control  controlling 
the soil  controlling the wind erosion  by controlling the soil factors  ok. So, there are two 
ways . So, there are different ways first is by conserving the soil moisture . So, by 
conserving soil moisture means , it is helpful  to minimize the  by conserving soil moisture , 
we have two benefits . First, so effect of wind erosion can be minimized , and seco nd it 
can help us  it is in  so this measure conserving of soil moisture  is actually helpful for 
wind erosion control well as the crop production .  
So, the moisture  can be conserved in three ways by incr easing  infiltration , by reducing 
the evaporation , and preventing unnecessary plant growth . So, this  can be achieved by 
complete ; this can be achieved  by level terracing , contouring,  mulching and  selecting 
suitable crops  ok. So, these are the measures to co nserve  measures to conserve the soil 
moisture  ok.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 32:40)  
 
Another measure is to  took is the conditioning of topsoil . So, adopting a practices that 
makes upper layer more non -erosion  non-erosive . So, adopting a practices that produce 
non-erosion aggregates of size greater than 1  mm diameter  or which make larger cord 
that should be our goal , so that is another measure .  
(Refer Slide Time: 33:06)  
 
So, finally  to summarize this ; to summarize this wind  erosion control  method. So, these 
are these are the few  things you can do actually . So, first by keeping the soil covered 
with vegetation and crop residue maximum time possible . So, sometimes  in case of if the   
 there is unproductive or  unproductive cultivated soil , so you can think of adopting 
perman ent measures to control wind erosion .  
Then tilling the soil after the rains until vegetation cover is ready to provide the 
protection . And directly  avoid directly working on the dr y soils and maintained by 
maintaining a rough surface cover . And fina lly, so in case of any emergency , adopt 
emergency measures if requires .  
So, this is a way  so in this lecture we have seen  definition of wind erosion , different 
movements of soil  particles  under the wind erosion , what are the ways to control the 
wind erosi on by reducing the wind speed or by controlling the surface characteristics , so 
with that  I will stop here . So, we will see the designing part of this wind control 
measures in the next slide , in the next lecture  about windbreaks and shelter -belts ok . 
Thank  you. 