 
 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr Poulomi Ganguli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 40 
Drop Inlet Spillway (Contd.)  
 
Hello, good morning , just now we are going to cover  the next p art of the design of the 
Drop Inlet Spillway . So, we will be going to continue with more design problem s here in 
these slides . 
(Refer to Slide Time: 00:26)  
  
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:32)  
 
So, problem number 1; so, determine the size of concrete pipe needed in a  drop inlet 
spillway for a peak flow of 3 m3/s and a total head is assumed as 3 meters . So, determine 
the slope be given to the pipe to  flow full y. And the length of the pipe is kept a t 12 
meter s, the entrance loss coefficient is  0.5 and t he friction loss coefficient is  0.03. So, 
assume the downstream end of the pipe is kept around 30 centimetre s below the 
upstream end . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:13)  
  
 So, first we are going to  calculate the velocity of flow in a pipe . So, this equations was 
already covered in  slide number  in the earlier slide . So, here the velocity of flow is again 
a function of the coefficient of contraction and the coefficient at a head loss at the 
entrance of the pipe . And this is again  as you know this head the  velocity head is given  
by equat ion h equal to v2/2 g. So, it is nothing  but v equal  to 2 g h, but since it is a pipe 
flow, so we are this is the  losses due to pipe flow ; so this factor is  considered here . So, 
where Ke is the head loss at a n entrance , Kc is the head lo ss due to the coe fficient of 
contraction and L  is the total length of the pipe . So, using that we can calculate the direct  
velocity of flow through the pipe .  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:29)  
 
Now, as you know the area is a function of the cross -sectional area of the pipe is the 
function of the discharge and the velocity of flow that we calculated in the previous step , 
so, this one . So, from there we can directly calculate the pipe dia meters . So, since the 
pipe, the cross -sectional area of the pipe seems  circular . So, this is the ci rcular cross -
section . So, the dia meters  of the pipe are calculated using a  taking into care that is this is 
a circular cross -section . So, here it comes the  diameters  of the pipe as 0.82 meters , so 
which is nothing  but 85. So, since this is not a standard me asure , so we select  85 
centimetre s of the pipe dia meters .   
 Now, we are going to compute  the natural slope . So, the natural slope is again a function 
of the coefficient of contraction and the  head loss  of the velocity head . So, from that, we 
calculated the natural slope of the pipe . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:46)  
 
Now, as you have given  the downstream and  end of the pipe are kept 30 centimetre s 
below the upstream . So, from that information , we can directly compute the actual slope . 
So, here so this is in this way  the downstream end is located at this is the downstream 
end suppose and the upstream end . So, this is located at a height of  30 centimetre s. And 
this is your  the length of the pipe suppose . So, this is the pipe length which is gi ven a s 12 
metre s. So, from  this, you can directly calculate  the actual slope . So, thus actual slope is  
0.025. A nd as you can see from the earlier  slide , the natural slope is kept a t0.048. So, the 
natural slope is larger than the actual slope . So, this is t he cas e of condition 2 where the 
pipe will flow full y.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:06)  
 
Now, coming to the second problem ; a pipe of 1 diameter  of a drop inlet spillway ends in 
a river , which maintains a constant reduced level of 232 meters . Now, this is a grap hical 
kind of problem . Now, plot the discharge curve for the following data . So, the inlet size 
is 1.2 meters  in diameter  and 4 meters  deep . And the reduced level of the crest at the 
inlet is 241 meters , drop of the pipe is 6 meters  in 75 length s of pipe.  
So, assume necessa ry data . So, some of the data is given as the coefficient of discharge 
for pipe flow is  0.80 and the coefficient  of discharge at the entrance is 0.61. And also 
assume that the entrance coefficient at loss is 0.50, the K e; it is kept as  0.50.  
 (Refer Slide Time :06:05) 
 
Now, this is the  complete figure . So, this is kept as 241 meters  and the dia meter  of the  
here the entrance is 1.2 meters . So, this is at a pipe structure is here , the dia meters  are 
sorry  the pipe structure at  here the dia meter s is kept is reduced 1 meter and this is the 
here the depth is around  0.5 meters . So, this is  230 this is this height is a combination of 
8.5 and 232.5  meters . So, this end is here , it is located the dam and besides the dam , this 
spillway is kept . 
(Refer S lide Time: 06:58)  
  
 Now, how we can  the first part as you can see , so this is  the dia meters  at the inlet is 
given here . So, based on that first we calculate the flow through the inlet. So, this is the 
flow through  the inlet as you all know is governed by  weir flow. So, this is a weir flow 
equation . So, where , Cd is the coefficient of discharge and the length of the . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:24)  
 
So, the length of the pipe and H  is the velocity head . And the discharge C d is given the 
coefficient of discharge is  0.61. And L, how do we cal culate the L ? The length is 
calculated as the peri meters  of the tube  of the inlet. So, the peri meters  of the circular 
cross -section are nothing  but it is a function of the diameters  of the pipe multiplied by 
the pi . 
So, using tha t you can get a  Qi is a fun ction of H.  Now, for different values of H  that is a 
different  interval like at a n interval of 0.25, you can get the calculate  the value of  Qi that is  
Qi is nothing  but the flow at the inlet . Now, to maintain the principle of cont inuity the 
flow of the inle t is equal t o the flow of the outlet , the principle of  to kept constant  mass 
and momentum energy equation ; so, Qi, in this case,  Q at the outlet . So, the flow at the 
outlet is nothing  but the discharge is a function of area cross -sectional area which is we  
assumed as a circu lar cross -section of the pipe  multiplied by velocity  and to conserve the 
principle of mass , momentum and energy , so Q i is equal to Q 0. 
So, now,  this Q is calculated as  this one . And since the flow is very high , so we assume 
that this is  called as a coeff icient of discharge multiplied by cross -sectional area and  flow  
 at the velocity . Now, we can directly compute , so the discharge  coeffi cient of discharge 
is given by C d which is in the problem is  0.80. And n ow, it is since the pipe has circ ular 
cross secti on, so it is nothing  but pi by 4 d square and the n you get a value of H  dash. So, 
now,  Qi equal to Q 0 sorry . Now, so, you can equate the equation 1 that you already 
calculated in step 1 and equation 2 and then at v arious values of  Qi a tabl e value can b e 
prepared . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:49)  
 
So, that exactly was performed here . So, at different head value s and suppose  H equal to  
0, the value of  Qi and Q 0 was calculated  and then you can plo t it graphically for differ ent 
H values .  
 (Refer Slide  Time: 11:07 ) 
 
So, head over the crest . So, this is  head over the crest at  different interval . And what will 
be the value of  Qi and Q 0 in cumec it is plotted here . So, as you can see  the Qi here is the  
inflow  at inflow is giving a parabola shape more or l ess parab ola shape , where the 
outflow is generally a  straight line or it kept more or less constant , where the inflow is 
maintaining a parabola shape . So, this is a n inflow and outflow curve  of the drop inlet 
structure . So, with these two problem s going to  end this lecture . 
Thank you . 