Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Amey Pathak  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 49 
Design Of Wind Breaks  
 
So, hello friend s so, I welcome you  all to this  second lecture of  modul e of week  11 of 
Soil and Water C onservation  Engineering . And, in the last class we have seen about the 
wind erosion , its definition  and what are the different  control measures are there  to 
reduce the erosion due to wind . So, let us see the  so, this is a se cond lecture of this week  
11. So, in the first lecture  we have seen  the process of wind erosion , the definition of 
wind erosion , different  movement  of the soil particle . 
Or initiate  whether it is like detachment of the soil particle from the surface  in the  
process of initiation . Then, we have talked about transportation , deposition , we have  
talked about the soil particle transport through  various  and transport of soil  particle , soil 
particle movement through  like saltation , suspension and  surface  stream ; depending on 
the size of the particle and the grade of the soil particle  ok. 
So, in the we also see  we also seen  the various ways or various factors that influence , the 
various ways which influence  the erosiveness  of the wind , different factors that control s 
the wind erosion s ok. And we have identified the parameters which can be used , which 
can be modified  to in order to  which we have to modified  in order  to reduce the effect of 
wind erosion . So, such as  by reducing the wind speed and by  making the soil surf ace 
cover  more  resistant to the wind erosion  ok. So, in the present task  in today’s class  we 
will be understanding the  windbreaks which are mostly used to reduce the  effect of  to 
reduce the wind speed  ok. So, let us start this  class . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 02 :33)  
So, windbreak  it is a  can be defined as any barrier  that can be used to protect the  to any 
type of barrier which can be used , for protection  from the wind  ok. So, it is any type of 
barrier , which can be used for protection from wind and it is more c ommonly  associated 
with the mechanical or vegetative barriers  for buildings , gardens , orchards  and feedlots  
ok. So, what does they do ? So, this we will see that  in the next slide . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:01)  
 
So this is of , this slide  show s the function of  windbreak s ok. So, the wind break the y 
reduce the  surface wind , they slow down the wind  and they absorb the  higher magnitude 
of wind velocity and deflect  the higher erosive winds  to another direction . So, we can say 
that the y slow down the wind or  they reduce the wind speed  and they redirect the win d which will modify the micro climate and micro environment  that maybe favorable  for 
crop growth  ok. So, modification micro climate or environment may or may not be  
sometime it is favorable  or not favorable . But, we have to design the wind break in a 
such a way that  we get maximum benefit from this  ok.  
So, this modification in microclimate include such as it can improve the ecological 
aspects ok . It can enhance the biodiversity or it can  improve the ecological as pect,  or that 
region . Or sometimes when we use some  irrigative method ; irrigation methods  such as 
sprinkler which use  which  does not does not require a very high wind speed , ok. So, 
sometimes we use  we sprinkler  irrigation in which very high wind speeds ar e not 
desirable .  
So, the by placing a proper windbreak  we can reduce the  erosive power of  wind , we can 
reduce the wind  speed . And, the effectiveness of irrigation can be enhance  and sometime 
also such as  like in other irrigation methods , because of  the wi nd erosion , the wind or 
dust may get , soil particles may get  deposited over the irrigation channel or drainage 
lines. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:08)  
 
So, we need lot of maintenance ; maintenance operation is required . So, by placing a 
proper functioning windbr eak we can reduce the  maintenance cost  ok. So, let us see  the 
effectiveness of windbreak based on its structure ok . So, when I say structure , it means  
the density  of the wind break , then height of the windbreak , length of the wind break , its orientation  with respect to the prevailing wind s or dominating wind direction . Then, 
continuity whether it is  continuous or some gaps are there , then which kind of species  or 
sub combination  or species we are  choosing  for the win d break and, number of rows that 
is arran gement  which is used . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 06:04)  
 
So, this all factors that determines the overall effectiveness  of the windbreak ; so, we will 
be looking this parameters one by one  in the next slides , ok. So first, the height ; so, 
height of the windbreak is actually defined . So let us say , suppose  so, we are planting  
windbreak here  ok. 
So, the height is defined by height of tallest  row of trees , ok. So, in case of suppose you 
are call if you are planning for multiple row of wind  break s, ok. So, the functio nal height 
of that windbreak will be  height of tallest  row, ok. So, height of tallest row is actually the 
height of that  windbreak . So, that is the height  which can be  which is a design height  and 
it determines  this importance of height is like ; because  this height determines the 
down wind  length of protection s. 
So for example,  by placing of windbreak over a this region  ok. Suppose if you are 
placing  some windbreak here . So, the height of this windbreak  it determine s the length  or 
so, the height of the windb reak ok, determine s the length of protection downwind  to this 
windbreak  ok. So in that case , in that sense , height is very important parameter . So, the 
effect of height we can see here . (Refer Slide Time: 07:26)  
 
So, suppo se this is a some kind of  wind ba rrier one cross section of wind barrier and this 
is some  this is height H , let us say this is height  H here. So, the effect of  so purpose of 
wind  wind s break is to reduce the wind speed ok . So, our desired  area is this one  ok. So, 
we are planning for leewa rd side of the wind side ; leeward side of the wind break . So 
what we can see  if the height of this windbreak is H,  so, we can get  a maximum  
reduction of the wind  speed  till at a distance of  10 to 20 H. Means, 10 to 20 times  height 
of this  windbreak . 
So, the effect of wind reduction  are measurable , till a distance of  10-20 H from this 
windbreak  ok. So sometimes , if you place a proper arrangement or some  sometimes if 
you use proper combination of high density and  low spacing  species , you ca n achieve  
protectio n of around 30 H also. So, not only on the leeward side, but on the windward 
side also we can see there is reduction in the wind speed  and this reduction  is visible . 
This reduction can be visible till the height  till the length of  2-5 times  height of the 
windbreak , ok. 
So, both on  the windward side and leeward side we can see the effect  effective wind  
speed re duction . So, but we here we are planning for the leeward side ok. So similarly , in 
this in this figure also you can see which is taken from Schwab et al to 1971  suppo se this 
is the windbreak  ok, this is a  windbreak and  here this  number s actually  represent the percentage of normal wind . So, when I say the 50  here. So, what does 50 mean here? So 
wind speeds are here  like 50 percent  of the normal condition  wind speed . 
So, there is a 50 percent  reduction over  this region . Similarly , over this region  you can 
see there is a wind  speed is  around 50 to 60 percent  of the normal condition . So it means , 
there is a reduction of  40 to 50 percent  reduction . Here, the reduction is 30 to 40 percent  
similarly ; here red uction is  10 to 20 percent . So, what you can see ? So most of the 
protected , like effective production area , you can see  at the length of  10 to 20H. So, here 
we can see the most of the effectiveness is visibl e till around 17 H length . 
Once you go away from that you can still measure some kind of reduction , but the 
reductions are very less here around  only 10 percent  reduction . Similarly , this is the 
leeward side ok. This is the leeward side and this is the windward side ok . In windward 
side also you can see  there is a reduction in wind speed of around  10 percent  reduction 
here. Careful ly if you see here  over this region , this region and this region  which are 
actually at the very near or adjacent to the  end of t his wi nd break . So, you can see the 
velocities are here . Here are 110 to 120 percent  that means, the wind speeds are actually 
very high  compared to the open field. 
So, here the wind speeds are very high because what happens , when you construct  or 
when you design , when you  plan a windbreak here. When you  construct a  windbreaks 
here, so, the our objective is to  stop the wind or to reduce the wind speed , but it forms a 
low pressure area o ver this region . So, because of this low  area formation , so, wind from 
the neighboring  side will rush to fill that low  and the Wind speed will get increased o ver 
this region  ok. So, these are the regions , where we get maximum amount of  maximum 
speed . 
So, you need to be very careful while decidi ng the length of the windbreak . So, this we 
will be discussing in the next  subsequent slides  as well  ok. Now here , we are discussing 
about the height . So, most of the effect is visible till the height around  10 to 15 H . (Refer Slide Time: 11:45)  
 
Now, length ; length is also very important  parameters because it determine s the amount 
of area which will be under protection . So, suppose for this  for this  windbreak . So this 
will be the area . So, in the  last slide  we have  seen the area of protection of over that 
particular length  ok. So, length is very important parameters that determine s the amount 
of area  will be covered will be protected ok . The length  the length  should be  longer than 
the length of field . So, when you are designing a windbreak  the length of the field ok . So, 
the length of this  windbreak should be  longer than the length of  field. 
So ideally , you should there should be continuous long rows  should be preferred . The 
continuous lo ng rows  should be preferred because they provide greater area of 
protection , and generally this length  should be at least  10 times the height of maximum  
height of windbreak ok , but that depends on your requirement s again ok . So in case  if 
you are  if you are win d if the length is not enough you can pla ce you can increase the 
length  so that the area of protect ion can be increased  ok. (Refer Slide Time: 13:08)  
 
So as I said earlier , the length to height  ratio of the windbreak  should be 10 is to 1 
because  by maintaining  this ratio , you can reduce the influence of e nd turbulence on the 
total protected area . So in the last example , we was seeing that . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:33)  
 
So in this example , what  we are looking that effect of length we can see here . So, over 
this area , if you can see  if the lengt h is not sufficient , so the wind speeds are  very higher . 
So, if your if your length  is very short , then this erosive wind  can damage , then they ca n 
cause more damage to your f ield. So, the length  should be at least  10 times th an the height of  windbreak ok . So it means , for 1 meter of windbreak , height of wind  break , you 
need  at least  10 meter length of  windbreak  ok. 
So, here we can see the  so, here over the  ends this is the e nd effect actually  you can see . 
So, wind speed s are  increase around  end of the windbreak by  amount  1.1 to 1.3  times 
than the open area . So here, as I said earlier also  the winds  are very  high speed here . So, 
your effect, the length of  design length should be more than the  field length  for which 
you are going to give the protection  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:47)  
 
Now, continuity ; so this continuit y is actually very important because it determines the 
effectiveness or efficiency of your  effectiveness of your  windbreak  ok. So, this is  a 
example  this figure shows the effect of continuity . So suppo se this is a windbreak , and it 
has come break in between . So this is a some  gap in between . So because of this gap , 
there is a  increase in wind velocity . 
So, this numbers represent the percentage of  wind velocity compared to the open 
window field condition ok . So, here the wind speeds are  more than the actual win d speed 
in the open field . That is , 100 to 120 percent . So, if we  you would have construct  
windbreak a continuous wind  break th en we would have achieved  a greater reduction in 
wind speed over this region . But because  there is a gap here , so the winds are c oming in  winds are  approaching at 
very high speed here . And the effect of wind speed , effect of windbreaks are less or this 
region . So of so here also, you can see the effect is around like only  20 percent  reduction 
is there . Here you can see the reduction  is quite  well around 60 to 60 to 80 percent  
because the wind speeds are  around  10 to wind speed around  20 to 40 percent , but 
effectively because of this  gap, the over all prote ction area the effectiveness of windbreak  
has been reduced  ok. 
So, the care has to be taken that gap should be avoided , and suppose if it is unavoidable  
if you want to place  some kind of gaps in between to allow some access  lane. So in that 
case, you can think of choosing  multiple rows of windbreak , so that and the access length  
can b e provided at some angle to the  prevailing wind direction ok . So, the effect of  so, 
the effect of  gap can be minimized  and effectiveness can be still  can be still  can be 
achieved . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:56)  
\
  
The next  is the  Orientation . So first designing  windbreak , you should know the 
prevailing wind in your area ok . So, what is mean by prevailing wind ? So, by prevailing  
wind  mean  we mean  that, so, maximum  probable wind direction  for your field over a 
year. So once you know that predominant direction , you can plan your , you can plan 
your windbreak  in direction perpendicular to that  to that  direction . (Refer Slide Time: 17:29)  
 
So, in the next slide we will see that . So, orientation s of the wind break s are most 
effective , if they are placed perpendicular t o the prevailing wind . So, once you know the 
prevailing wind direction . So, the placement of windbreaks should be  perpendicular to 
the perpendicul ar direction of prevailing wind . So, you can get maximum amount of you 
can get  maximum amount of wind speed  reduction over the  downwind area or  leeward 
side. So sometimes when we say , when  you know the predominant area  but it is not 
always true that  wind  will only flow in that direction because wind  is a climate variable 
and it is a variable that often  change s its direction as well as magnitude s under the 
influence of  large scale  large  scale processes as well  local scale  disturbances . 
So, wind s actually winds  direction and magnitude changes , but predominant  direction 
will remain same . So, what  you can do? You can p lace one windbreak  over a direction 
which is more predominant across the direction which is more predominant , and another 
windbreak  to any other direction , where the effect of you may feel that the  wind 
direction may change . So, you can  so you can think of  multiple windbreaks . Multiple leg 
windbreaks  to increase the area protected . (Refer Slide Time: 19:00)  
 
Then another thing is th is kind of species  which we are choo sing for the windbreak and 
number of rows  ok. So, in order to select the windbreak we have  to choose the species  or 
combination of some species in a such a way that , they are more  adopt  like they are  
favorable  to that climate or they can sustain over that climate  and whatever our design 
objective is there . So whatever amount of reduction in wind speed or let us say , first 
know or prote ction forms  cold wind  we want . So that kind of thing can be decided  by 
selecting a proper  kind of windbreaks pieces , tree species . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 19:59)  
 And then the number of rows ok ; so, number of rows som etimes  depends on the 
requirement or space constraint  you have to decide on the number of rows  ok. Now, 
another important parameters are density of the wind break . It is a most important 
parameter which actually affects in combination with height and  lengt h it affects the 
overall protected area , the extent of protected area  ok. So, the den sity is nothing  but the 
percentage  solid  or it is a you can in  general use you  can say that it is a ratio of open 
portion  of the windbreak to its  total volume  ok. 
So as I said, the height together with density and  length determine s the overall 
effectiveness of wind speed reduction  and of course,  the length of protected area . So, 
density is the most important parameter here . We will be seeing  in the next slide as well  
ok, sorry. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:40)  
. 
So, before going further  let us see the wind speed  profile . So, we know that when there is  
a open  or bare surface . So, bare surface does  not have any roughness . So, the winds are  
wind speeds are increasing , by a factor of logarithm of  height s. 
So, wind speeds are  slowest here  but when you  go up , the wind speeds are increasing  by 
a factor of  proportional to the  logarithm of height  and, but if the some  roughness is 
present over the ground , then there will be some disturbance . There will be some 
turbulent flow and there will be some Eddy motion . Eddy motion means , there will be 
some deviation from the mean  flow ok.  (Refer Slide Time: 21:30)  
 
So, that cause some turbulent motion  ok. So, this is some  basic term  that I was tryin g 
mention here  ok. So, now  we will see the effect of density . So, let us say  for windbreak 
we are placing a solid barrier here  which actually has close  to 100 percent  density  ok. So, 
it is not allowing any  air to pass through it  ok. So, it is the porosity is very less ok . So, 
what happens when the very high wind  velocity is strikes here , so what happen s?  
So, very when very high wind speed  velocity strikes  here, so it is not able to pass through 
this solid barrier and  there is a formation of pressure eddy over this region . So, because 
of this formation of pressure area eddy o, we can see the some reduction in wind speed 
also here. So, this effect of pressure eddy can be visible , to the distance of 1 to 2 H on the 
windward side similarly , on the leeward side as well . If you see , because of this solid 
barrier  which is not allowing air to pass through it . (Refer Slide Time: 22:27)  
 
So, winds are very high in motion they are  getting deflected here and  because since  its 
there is no  there is no a ir movement  not air movement in  the sense , like air is not passing 
through this  solid barrier . So, there is a  very low pressure formation . Formation of  low 
pressure over this region  so, to fill th is low pressure , so the winds  rush over this region 
with very high wind  veloci ty. So this is , so this region is known as the Suction eddy  ok. 
So, this will  form a Suction eddy  whose  effect will be visible till  a distance of 1 to 3H 
ok. So, because of that there will be  lot of turbulence , and the this is a Turbulent wake  
zone  which c an be seen till the length of  6H. And after that , there will be resumption in 
open  field open field flow velocity  ok. 
So, what it means that because of this low pressure formation here , behind the solid 
barrier  the windbreaks pulls the air coming over the wind break  down ward  and creating 
turbulence , turbulence  and reducing  the protection down wind . So, the effectiveness of 
the windbreak will be  or effective  or extent of  area under protection  will be reduced . (Refer Slide Time: 23:54)  
 
Now let  us, let us replace that solid barrier with the  porous barrier ok. So, let us say we 
are planting  some porous barrier here . So, let us see what happens . So, since now this 
porous bar  barrier  is allowing some air to pass through it  ok. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 24:21)  
 
  
So, there is a moderation in the air flow here . So, the effect of  pressure eddy will reduce  
so, on the  windward side. Similarly , on the leeward side, similarly on the leeward side, 
because now air can pass through  it not like in case of solid barrier  there was v ery less 
flow but here actually air can pass through  it. Or in case solid  sorry it was the flow was not there actually  the it was non porous  but here, in case of porous barriers the winds can 
pass through it . 
So there is a modification in the  wind flow her e. So as a, here the density of this , now as 
the density of this porous barrier  is decreased  the amount of air passing through the wind 
break is increasing . So, it is allowing more air to pass  through it  and it moderates . So, by 
allowing  wind  by allowing m ore amount of air passing through wind break  it moderates 
the low pressure and turbulence  and increasing the length of dominant protect  area. So, 
the lower left of s uction eddy  so, the so what we can see here , so because of this porous 
media the length of down wind  protection can be increased ok . 
So here, the turbulent  wake is f arther downward , its compared to the solid barrier here  
ok, and resumption to the open field  open field flow condition are further shifted  to the 
farthest  away . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25: 45) 
 
Now, this diagrams  shows  the effect of wind speed reduction  if you are using different 
kind of  layers . Permeable  layers , moderately dense  layer , permeable layer  and very 
permeable layers  ok. 
So, let us say this is our , this is our the wind barrier or  wind  break i n the form of win d 
break  or shelterbelt let  us say  and on x axis we have wind velocity relative to the  to the 
open , open condition  and on x axis  we have distance  from the wind barrier . So, this is our wind barrier . So, this is our windward sid e and this is our  leeward side. So, what we 
can see when the layer is actually highly im permeable  that is , which is represented by the 
solid  line, sorry . So, this is a solid line  which  is represented by a  solid line here . So, 
when  the barrier is impermeabl e, that means, it is not allowing air to pass through it . 
So, we can see the till the  distance of let us say 5 to 7 H there is a some significant 
amount of reduction in wind speed , but you go when you go away from this distance  so 
there is not such  very mu ch reduction in wind speed  ok, then contrary  if you see  a very 
permeable . So, in permeable there is not significant change . So, at very near to the  wind 
break the wind flow condition was around like  90 percent  let us say 100 percent  here, 
that is  open flow  condition  and near to let  us say  for 7 H or 8 H, it is around  60 to 70 
percent . 
So, there is not much change . So, the effectiveness of this wind break is depending on  
the porosity or density of this  what kind of material  what kind of  species  we use as a  
wind break . So, if we use moderately dens e and permeable . So, we can achieve  
maximum length of protection here . So, this we will see  we will see in the next slide  as 
well ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:58)  
 
So, say here again this shows , this figure  or this sl ide shows a four cases  in which we are 
varying the density . So, in the first case, that is A, so we are using deciduous tree which 
is having 25 to 35 percent  density . In the case B  we are using 40 to 60 percent  density  of by placing conifer tree in the cas e C, we are using  if you want to suppose increase a 
multiple if you want to use multiple rows  ok. So let us say , our density is 60 to 80 
percent  here by placing multiple rows of conifer tree  and by placing a solid fence . So, let 
us say there is  100 percent  density . So, what is a effect on  wind speed reduction ? Let us 
see that  ok. So, in case of first case, when the  when we have placing deciduous tree with 
25 to 35 percent  density . 
So, we can see at a distance of  5H around 50 percent  reduction is observed  Whereas, at a 
distance of 15H we can see  the winds are at 80 percent  means 20 percent  reduction is 
observed . So, here at the  distance of 20H  the wind speeds are 85 percent compared to the 
open field . It means the 15 percent reduction . Whereas, at the d istanc e of 30H the winds 
are normal to the , or winds are  similar to the open field  ok. So, we can say the 
effectiveness of this wind , effect  effectiveness of  effectiveness of this wind break is in 
reducing the wind speed  can be observed till 20H ok. Similarly , in the case B  if you see , 
the density is 40 to 60 percent . 
So, the density is 40 to 60 percent here . So, in that case  so, it for a distance of  5H as you 
can see there is  70 percent  reduction  whereas , at a distance of  20H,  there is a  25 percent  
reduction . So, which is very high then this  less density  less density  windbreak  and we 
can also see over a distance of 30H we can also have some  5 percent  reduction in wind 
speed . Whereas, in case of  in case of multiple row ; multiple row with density multiple  
row of co nifer trees with  the density of  60 to 80 percent  we get we have  get almost 
similar to that , similar to  that of the case B , but slightly improved . But over the 30H we 
get almost similar reduction  ok. So, its effect is most visible near to  the windbreak  so, 
here 75 percent  reduction as compared to the  70 percent  reduc tion here . 
Whereas, in case of solid fence  there  is 100 percent density  we can see . So, maximum 
density we can achieve that 25 percent  near to the  windbreak , where as, when we move 
away from this  wind break . So, at the height at the distance of  20H we can only get  5 
percent  reduction . Whereas, in case of conifer tree it  was 25 percent  in case of 20H 25 
percent  deciduous tree it  was around  15 percent . So, here in case of solid fence  we can  
only get only 5 percent  reduction ok. So, the windbreak density of 40 to 60 percent  
provides a greater downwind  area of protection and  provide  excellent soil erosion control 
measure .  (Refer Slide Time: 31:15)  
 
So, now let us see , how it is modifying the  microclim ate ok . So, since the wind speeds 
are reduce d here. So,  it can modify the air temperature , soil temperature , relative 
humidity , day time air temperature , night time  air temperature , heat loss etcetera . These 
are the parameters that can be affected  by the  by modification of microclimate because 
of the  reduced wind speed  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:41)  
 
So, this is a very important figure . So, here we can see on the x axis , oh sorry , on the y 
axis we can see , percentage  of control . That means, percentage  so, by placing barrier  values by placing barrier multiplied by  100 divided by  values that are there in the open 
condition  ok. So, this is a again the up wind side , this is down wind  side and these are the 
different variables ; a crop field , soil moisture , air temperature at day , soil temperature  
day, relative humidity  air temperature , evaporation  and wind speed . And, along x axis  
what we can see here is the , measured length  of protection . 
So, what we can see here  so, we can see the height  high amount of temperatu re, high 
amount of temperature  and humidity  because of  placing this windbreak  and, there is 
reduction in evaporation  ok. So, we can conserve more moisture here, and plant water  
loss is also less . So, because this day time  air and soil  temperature s are more , but the 
increase d relative humidity actually  increase  in relative  humidity and soil moisture 
because we can conserve soil moisture here combined with decreased evaporation , it 
results into the higher amount of crop field  ok. So, this is how a particular windbreak 
with particular  density i t modif ies the overall microclimate over that region  ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 33:12)  
 
So, to summarize that , so our goal s for designing an y wind break , should be  so design 
consideration by considering  density and placement ; so, this should be based on different 
goals . So, our goals can be either t o be have  to increase the crop  production o r for crop 
production or  to reduce soil erosion , increase snow capture in the field or for farm s treet 
production  or a living snow fence  or sound barrier or for a  wildlife  for food cover . So, there are different objectives and accordingly  for different objective we need to 
modify the different density , different structural condition s. So with that I will stop here  
for this lecture and  in the next  class  we will be looking at the design of shelter belts . 
Thank you . 