Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr Poulomi Ganguli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 42 
Drop Inlet Spillway (Contd.)  
 
Hi, good afternoon . So, in the last lecture , we used we covere d the basic design principle 
of the spillway . Now we are going to solve a problem based on this , to see how the 
Spillway design  condition prevails .  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:35)  
 
So, this is the last  lecture for drop inlet spillway and here we are going to c over the 
design aspect .  (Refer Slide Time: 00:44)  
 
So, this is the problem statement . So, design an ungated drop inlet and here we are going 
to take morning glory spillway kind , that will operate under a maximum surcharge head  
H0 as 3 meter s, that can l imit a n overflow of  56 cumec s.  
Here you determine th at these are the set of question s. So, first, we will be going to 
determine the minimum radius of the overflow crest . Second  transition shaft radius and 
as you remember the minimum , we have to design a m inimum unifor m conduit diameter 
to consider the 75 percent of full flow , in order to allow the air to pass. So, why do we 
consider 70 percent of the flow ? To allow the losses and to allow the air pass from the 
conduit from the downstream portal to prevent the su b-atmospheric pressure in the 
conduit  and based upon this design calculation . So, develop a discharge water surface 
elevation relationship . So, this will be in the form of a table  and then we have  to assume 
some set of  conditions .  
 (Refer Slide Time : 02:06)   
So, what are these condition s? So, the horizontal length of the conduit is assumed that 76 
meter s and a crest elevation is given 30 meter s and an outlet invert elevation is 16 
meter s.  
So, this example design must minimize overflow crest radius and also sub -atmospheric 
pressure along the crest should be tolerated . The conduit portion of the spillway must not 
flow more than 75 percent full at the downstream end . So, this should consider this  
condition . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:45)  
 So, now this is t he basic  diagr am. So, here is the maximum elevation since, H 0 is 
assumed as 3 meter s, sorry . So, here it says the H0, the surcharge head is 3 meter s and 
the 30 meter s. So, 30 meter s is the head total head height . So, this leads to  the maximum 
elevation o f 33 meter s. So, the cr est elevation is given as 30 meter s and 3 meter s is the 
surcharge head . So, this is since this is a  pipe kind of structure . So, the horizontal 
diameter is more than lesser than that of the vertical diameter here and this pipe length is 
76 meter s and invert e levation is given as 16 meter s it is a circular conduit and on this 
site, it is the top portion of the dam . So, this is a profile of this example .  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:58)  
 
Now , so, first, we assume the radius and based on this the design problem will fol low, 
the radius of the crest to minimize the sub -atmospheric pressure that may be tolerated . 
So, assume the P by R s is greater than equal to 2. So now, the determination of R s so 
here, the radius is given . So, Rs is determined by  hit and trial procedure  and as suming the 
value s of Rs and computing the corresponding discharge . So, first, assume the R s value 
as 2 meter s, now if you assume 2 meter s the ratio between the  surcharge head and 
divided by R s is 1.5 meter s.  (Refer Slide Tim e: 04:46)  
 
So, for this ratio of 1.5 meter s and assuming the ratio P by R s as greater than 2, , if it is 
1.5 meter s, sorry ; so what is the corresponding value of this coordinate here ? So, is to 
determine the coefficient of discharge here , so, the C 0 value is 1.35 meter s. Since this  
graph is prepared in MK’ s unit. So, we multiply  using a correction factor  to convert it 
into SI  unit. So, the conversion factor is nothing  but 0.552  here. 
So, we multiply with this and then now the discharge  from this portion of the inlet is 
given by using  the weir equation . So, Co is the discharge coefficient since we assume the 
circular cross -section and the outside radius of this cross -section . So, this is the perimeter 
is given by  2πR and this is again head . So, the head is assumed as  the head is given as 
the surc harge head is 3 meter s. 
So, using this relation  so, we get the discharge the inlet discharge is 48.65.  So, here mean 
to say that P, P  is nothing  the pres sure and the ratio b etween the P by R s is the ratio 
between  pressure divided by the radius of the flow are we assume that , these curves are 
obtained at different  values of P by R s.  
Now our assumed flow  is less than. So, this one so, this is the design flow is given the 56 
cumecs, but our calculated,  it is less than this the 48 around 48 cumec s. So, this is less 
than the desired outflow . So, again we  assume that the radius of the inlet is 2.15 meter s. (Refer Slide Time: 07:10)  
 
Now assuming the radius is 2.15 meter s. Now,  again repeat the calculation . So, here if 
you assume the R s value , the head , so, surcharge head is already 3 meter s as given in the 
problem and now you r assumed radius is 2.15,  now the ratio between them is 1.40. 
Now, for a given value  is. So, this is divided  into 4 different interval s, so between  1.2 to 
1.6; so here if I go gradually from 1.2 to 1.3. So, this point will be nothing  but 1.4 and 
following 1.5 and 1.6. So, from this point  so now, I am prolonging this line and intersect 
point is locat ed here. 
So, now you can say , this is 1 and 1.4 and so and 1.8. So, each coordinate is divided into 
4 parts . So, how do you divide this point ? So to find out the intersection , you can divide 
it into different small interval s. So, now, you can assume that this particula r point is 1.46 
and now since you have to convert the unit into SI, so, you multiply this with th e 
conversion factor that is nothing  but 0.552. Now , your C 0 value comes out to be 0.806, 
this C0 value plug into the equation and discharge equation . So, now, you obtain the 
value of discharge is around 56.58  and your design  discharge was 56. Now you  this since 
it is a little higher side than the design discharge , so, this value of R s is acceptable  and 
you can take the radius of the inlet as 2.15 meter s. 
 
 (Refe r Slide Time: 09:16)   
So, this equat ion is the part you can solve now . Now the determination of th e crest 
profile ; now you have an assume d value of H0 is 3 and R s is now your  2.15 from earlier 
steps ; so, from this part of the  problem . Now and you assume t he ratio between the 
pressure and the ra dius of the Rs is greater than 2, now you have to get the value  of from 
this particular graph . So,  specifically saying , so, all th ese graphs are obtained from 
USBR , so, US department . So, all these design problems are given by them and then we 
are converti ng into  based on our design . So, all these graph s from thi s graph of H0 by 
Rs.  
And at a given pressure level , so, you have to take the calculate d value of H s by H0. So, 
how you can do that ? So here, suppose a value of again it is 1.3 and 1.4, so, for thi s 
values and the corresponding value here . So, you can see between 1 and 1.02, 1, 2, 3, 4 ; 
4 divisions are present . So, using interpolation you co nclude  that this Hs by H  0 is in 
between 1. This is this particular poi nt is , if you divide this between this point as 4 
equally spaced points , so, you fin d that Hs by H  0 is nothing  but around 1.0133.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 11:23)   
Now, you know the value of H 0. So, you multiply with that . So, now, H s value comes as 
3.04 and now.  
So, this is Hs value and you ha ve the value of H0, you know is which is 3 meters. So, this 
is H 0, 3 meter s. So, you know the H s value , which is 3.04 from the earlier calculation .  
So, this point between these two is Hs minus Ha is nothing  but 4.04 meters or 4 
centimeter s. Now , the X Y  coordinate of the crest profile for the portion above  the weir 
crest is  given in the table in the following table . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:20)  
 So, the value of Hs by R s is 1.41 now. So, for different value s of Hs by R s, this table is 
given , so between 1 and 2. 
So, 1.4 lies between 1 and 2 and for diff erent X. So, this is a differ ent P by Rs  the 
pressure between P  is for 2. So, we assume  our entire calculation was based on the ratio 
between P by R s as 2. So, for different  values of Hs by R s, we interpolate f or different 
crest profile s and then we plot this .  
(Refer to Slide Time: 13:01)  
 
So, at a crest elevation of 30 meters and at a different value of X and Y and R s, the 
radius at the inlet is 2.15 meter s was kept and we  can get the crest profile like this after 
interpolating this table values .  (Refer Slide Ti me: 13:19) . 
 
So, once we obtain the crest profile and now we determine the transition profile . So, this 
is a transition profile . So, the crest profile was this, the top point panel . So, this design 
was completed . Now the second part the transition profile , the transition shape required 
to pass the 56 cumec that was the design discharge with  an H 0 of 3 meter s above the 
crest . 
So, the water surface elevation was 30 meters and that surcharge head is 3 meters. So, 
the total comes to be 33 meter s and using this equation , which we already described in 
the design part . So, you plug the value of 56 cumec s here and us e this equation . So this 
equation , assume the total losses  through tran sition are 0.1 times the Ha.  
So using that ; so, once you  plug the 56 value here , you get the value of R as 1.527 
divided by H a. Equation 1 is obtained . (Refer Slide Time: 14:42)  
 
Now for different shape radi i, you can be computed for differe nt elevation s. So, the 
elevation of t he section if it is 30 meter s is given and for different value s of the head , you 
can obtain the different shape radius  like this  and a tabular value can be obtained .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:05)  
 
Now,  the next part is the determination of the minimum condui t diameter . So, first, we 
assume  a known conduit diameter , say 2.5 meters, which is standard  since the diameter is 
2.5 meter s, the radius is half of that . So, this is the 1.25 meter is obtain ed like this and 
this corres ponds to. So, we again plug into the basic equation .  So this equation here , so equation 1. So, in that way , we can get the value of H a where q 
was kept as 56 and this is using the assumed radius , which is the head is nothing , but 
2.22. N ow the throat loca tion is 33 minus  this 2.22.  So, this comes to be  30.78  meter s, 
which is nothing , but we round it to 31-meter elevation . So assume  the conduit length of 
76 meter s from throat transition to the outlet point .  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:30)  
 
Now, we will take int o care of the frictional losses , since the frictional losses are 
approximate it assum es the conduit flow 75 percent of the entire length . So here, so this 
part is considered . So, the discharge divided by since it is a 75 percent of the flow . So, 
this was plugged here , considering this 75 percent of the flow  and these are assumed 
diameter s. So, since the  cross -section is assumed as circular . So, this relation is nothing , 
but pi by 4 D square . So, in this way we calculate the velocity , once we obtain the 
velocity then , we will calculate the vel ocity head , which is nothing , but Hv is v square 
upon 2 g is the head l oss due to the velocity . 
So, this note, this is multiplication and this one comes  to the head loss due to the velocity 
head is comes out be 11.8 mete rs.  (Refer Slide Time: 17:35)  
 
Now , since the pipe is 75 percent full . So from this graph , so, this is the ratio between v 
by v full and for different depth s. So, 75 percent full . So, you can take the point here  and 
here. So, this is 75 percent full . 
So, the corresponding Q by Q0 is aroun d 0.7 0. So, this is the diameter at the inlet divided 
by the diameter at th e outlet portion . So, d by D  is a ratio is around 0.70 and your 
diameter is assumed  as the inlet  sorry this is the outlet by inlet diameter . So, the inlet 
diameter is the bigger di ameter or  smaller diameter . 
So, this one is kept as D and this one is a small d . As you remember , this is the complete 
cross -section . So, this diameter is bigger . So, this one is your capital D  and this diameter 
is the small d. So, this ratio is given by t his kind of graph . So now, so  small d that is the 
diameter at the transitio n point is a function of 0.702.  So, here the diameter is 2.5. N ow 
you assume the Mannings  roughness coefficient for naturali sed flow as 0.014.   (Refer Slide Time: 19:31)  
 
Now, this is this universal equation , the velocity of flow through the open channel . So 
using that  so, you can get the value of S ; so, V n square . 
So, this is done here and since  small d is the radius here. So, this is small r . So, this is the 
value of 1.75 by 2; so, this is 0.87. So, this slope is coming out to be 0.055  and now  this 
is the head l oss due to friction is the length of the pipe and the slope of the head  of the  
slope , this to friction and  this comes out to be 4.18,  this is the head loss due to friction .  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:36)  
 Now, we apply the conservation of energy  equation to c heck the outlet invert elevation . 
So, here the in elevation at the throat is positive and the pressure head at the throat . So, 
this has to be negative . So, we are deducting  this velocity head at the conduit assuming 
the pipe is 75 percent full . So, you will have to deduct  it, because this is a head loss , the 
frictional losses at the conduit . 
So, this is also you have to deduct the depth at the outlet . So, you assume that  this is a 
circular cross -section . So, the depth at the outlet is nothing  but that eq uation 1072 D.  So, 
the invert elevation . So, throat elevation was 31 meter s and a velocity head at the throat . 
So, this was the invert eleva tion minus the 31 here  and why we a re dividing it 1.1, is 
because the H a was assume d to be calc ulated  as 0.1 H  a.  
So, consid ering all losses  so, that is why you are dividing by 1.1 and this is the velocity 
head and this is a frictional head loss at the co nduit and this is the depth at the outlet 
given by this equation . So, this comes out to be 15.27.   
(Refer Slide Time: 22:05)  
 
Now, the invert elevation was given in the design problem is 16 meter s, which is very 
close to 15.27  meter s. 
So, in this case the  design was accepted . So, the calcu lated invert elevation is very close 
to the given invert elevation of 16 meter s. Now a w ater surface profile through the 
conduit should be computed . So, in case if the calculated outlet invert  elevation comes , lower than the established elevation . So, supp ose the , our invert calculated , invert 
elevation comes  in the problem is 15.27  meter , which is around 16 meter . 
We will consider the higher side is lower than the established elevation , that is given in 
the problem suppos e the established elevation is 20 feet or 18 meter s then the conduit 
diameter is to be increased . So, in that case , you ha ve to increase the diameter , say the 
assume d diameter was 2.5. N ow you increase the next higher diameter size like 2.8 
meter s and then  repeat the calculation steps until the desired invert elevation is achieved . 
So, in this way, the design problem goes .  
Thank you .  