Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 04 
Soil Erosion  - Mechanics  
 
Hello, friends . Welcome back  to this NPTEL  online certification c ourse and title Soil and 
Water Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendra Singh, professor in Agricultural and 
Food Engineering Department , IIT Kharagpur , and we are in lecture 4 of week 1. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:41)  
 
Today 's topic  is Soil Erosion Mecha nics. Just to remind you, t he course content of this 
week , we introduced soil and water conservation in the first lecture . In lecture 2, we 
talked about the causes and types of soil erosion . In lecture 3, we discuss the factors 
affecting soil erosion an d the effects of soil erosion , and today 's lecture will be devoted 
to soil erosion mechanics . In the last  lecture of the week , week  5, we will discuss the 
water control erosion measures . (Refer Slide Time: 01:16)  
 
We know that  there are two major agents of soil er osion ; water and wind . The soil 
erosion by water  is referred to as water erosion . We have been seeing this in previous 
classes also . Now, there are three processes  involved or th ree steps . The processes are  a 
detachment  of soil particles , transportation of  the detached  soil particles and deposition  
of the transport ed material . Soil erosion by water , referred to as water erosion, is a three -
step process; detachment, transportation,  and deposition . 
 (Refer Slid e Time: 02:31)  
 We start  with the detachment , then the driving forces behind water erosion process es 
(detachment  and transport ). The driving forces of detachment are raindrop  impact and 
flowing water , and it is flowing water for transportation .  
In lecture 1, when we started classifying  soil erosion , we began  with classifying  water 
erosio n. The first one was raindrop impact erosio n. We  said that  is the first level where 
erosion starts . When the raindrop hits the soil surface because of their velocity or kinetic 
energy,  they break the soil aggregates . Once these soil aggregates are broke n, the soil 
particles are  getting splashed  all around . During  the splash process , detachment of the 
soil particles takes place . Simultaneously  another phenomen on occurs  when the  rainfall 
is happen ing, the first process that  starts is infiltration . The rainfall will first satisfy the 
infiltration  requirement of the soil . Once the soil's infiltration capacity  is satisfied , then 
what ever rainfall occurs will flow horizontally , referred to as  overland flow or runoff 
generation . This flowin g water , whatever detached  soil particles available here , flowing  
water will carry that away . Also, whatever this flowing water because of its kinetic 
energy, it detaches soil particles  from the soil aggregates during the proces s. As we 
already mentioned , the flowing water will transport whatever loose materials or detach 
soil particles are available . In this  way,  there are two major driving forces  of detachment , 
raindrop impact and  flowing water .  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:32)  
 The third process is deposition . When the  carrying capacity of the flowing water reduces , 
it obviously  cannot  transport the soil particles , and thus  the soil particles get  a deposit . In 
detachment and transportation , the raindrop  impact and flowing water  are responsible . 
When the carrying capacity of the  flowing water  reduces  to a large extent , it cannot  carry 
the detached soil particles ; then, the soil  particles get deposited . 
If you look at a  slope again , imagine that  a single  raindrop is h itting the soil surface . 
Because of  this h it here , the soil particles are getting  splashed  everywhere . In the 
process , there will be loose soil particles available  on the surface all around . Once the 
infiltration capacity is satisfied , the overland flow proces s will take place . That will ta ke 
the detached  soil particles further away . At the same time , because this flowing water  has 
a high velocity due to the  slope , it will  further detach  the soil par ticles . That means  you 
can see that the detachment and transportation are occurring up to thi s point 
simultaneously . It is not only the raindrop impact  but also the flowing water that 
detaches  the soil particles , and the flowing water transports  soil particle s. That means  
simultaneously detachment and transportation phenomena are occurring .  
When we reach the belly bottom , the slope is drastically reduced , and the flow velocity 
decreas es. Then the carrying capacity  of the flowing water will be less , and because of 
that, soil particles  that are being transported from upstream  will get deposit ed here . So, 
that is where  deposition is taking place . These are  the entire mechanics of  water erosion .  
(Refer Slide Tim e: 07:55)  
 The severity of erosion depends on the quantity of material  detached  and the capacity of 
eroding  agents to transport it quite evident because these are the two processes involved . 
Based on this , erosion could be detachment  limited or  transpo rt limited . When the 
transport capacity exceeds the eroded material, then the detached is referred to as 
detachment limited. T hat means there are  not enough details soil particles for  what are  
the flowing water to transport along with it . 
On the o ther hand , when eroded material  exceeds the transportation  capacity of the 
flowing water , then it is referred to as  transport limited . That means  the seve rity of 
erosion depends on the quantity of detached material  and the capacity of eroding agents 
to transport it. Whether the  transport capacity is more or the eroded material more , it 
could be detachment limited or  transport limited .  
(Refer Slide Time: 09 :06) 
 
Now, coming to  the detachment process , we have seen this several times, but once again,  
let us repeat that raindrop  impact going to  kinetic energy is a primary cause  of particle 
detachment . That is  the major reason  we saw that  the flowing water  also detaches soil 
particles , but it is a raindrop impact does t he primary cause . The impact of raindrops 
shatters the surface  soil aggregates . That is the  first phenomen on that occurs , and one 
soil aggregate s are detached  and shattered , then the  soil particle s get detached from them .  
As you can  see in the picture , much more soil is there, but here you can see most  soil has 
been shattered , or soil aggregates have been shattered  and probably splash ed all around . Raindrop s can splash  soil particl es, moving them  up to one meter  away ; that depends on 
the kinetic energy , and is already we saw the wind and  sloping land could  also have  an 
impact on it . The ideal case i s that  when vertical rainfall is falling on a horizontal 
surface, you can see that this splash is uni form . There can be two more cases that rainfall 
is vertical , but the land is sloping . In that case , there will be much more splash on the 
down sleep  compared to  the upside . 
Similarly , the surface  could be horizontal , but the rainfall itself could be  inclined because 
of the wind impact  already s een in the previous class . Because of wind impact , the 
rainfall impacts the soil  surface at an angle , then depending upon  which side angle is 
being formed , the splash  will be more on that side and lesser on the o ther side. That will 
depend on  what is the wind velocity and what  angle  raindrop is hitting the soil surface .  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:25)  
 
This detachment  not only happens becau se of the raindrop impact  but also the soils could 
be broken by  weathering process  by alternate  wetting and drying . If the soil is such  that 
there is a rainfall , the alterna te wetting and drying  are there , then natural weathering 
phenomena will occur , and soil particles will get broken . If it is a  tillage operation , we 
take, or there is a  trampling  by people and livestock  that also soil gets disturb ed. 
We saw how human s impact soil erosion , and we saw the  primary  tillage  implements , 
then will keep a lot of loose soil particles on the soil surface , making the area prone to 
soil erosion . Similarly , if you see you might hav e seen the sidewalks on the bare  soil. That means  if it is a grass ar ea, people continuously  move , or animals move o r livestock 
move . You see t hat the ground  automatically  a particular passage becomes bare  and that 
is becaus e of the trampling by people or by livestock , the soil gets detached or gets  
eroded .  
We have already discussed that some of the loose particles will seal the soil surface and 
reduce the infiltration during this detachment process . And if the infiltration rate exceeds 
the infiltration, the soil excess water rate  will runoff in the form of overland flow  and; 
obviously, this w ater will carry away the loose  soil particles ; that is what happens in the  
case of  sheet erosion .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:19)  
 
In the case of  detachment , the kinetic energy of rainfall  can be estimated by a formula  
given by Wischmeier and Smith in 1978 .  
E = 0.119  + 0.0873 log 10I 
Where  E is the kinetic energy  in MJ/ha-mm,  I is rainfall i ntensity  in mm/h   
It is an empirical  formula ; if yo u want to use this , you must  remember  that E will always 
be in MJ/ha-mm, and I must  be used in mm/h .  We have also seen that soil detachability is directly proportional to soil particles; t hat 
simply means that sand is easily detached  compared  to clay beca use sand is larger . So, it 
can be easily separat ed.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:32)  
 
Coming to transport , the loose  soil particles are carried down  the slope by runoff  and 
overland flow  is the dominant transportation  agent . In one of the earliest slides, we sa w 
that both raindrop impact and  overland flow  could cause detachment . But in a previous 
slide , while talking detachment , we saw  the raindrop impact  is the primary force behind 
detachment . Similarly , we can sa y it is the overland flow  that is the  dominant  
transportation agent . 
Once the loose  soil particles are lying on the soil surface , the overland flow takes  these 
soil particles  away . Water flowing in rills  and gullies  is the next  impor tant agent . We 
also saw that rills , what are rills and gullies  while cl assifying the water erosion . Rill 
erosion  is a form where  we have finger -like structures , and water will tend to flow 
through th ese rills and cau se erosion . Similarly , gullies are  much larger in size . We also  
saw that they could be U-shaped or V-shaped in the previous class . Water flowing in 
these gullies  is also transport ing soil particles .  
The quantity of sediment and the  distance they are  carried  depends on the flow  velocity  
and runoff volume . That means  flow velocity  is high or runoff  volume is high , or both 
are high , the sediment  will get transport ed at a much  large r quantity , and they will be carried away  to a far of places . A smaller particle , clay, is readily taken  is compared to  
large particles or sand particle s. The d etachment of the sand is eas y, where as clay which  
is smaller in size that is easily transported . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:08)  
 
Now, if we look at the soil movement or soil particles  movement during transportation , 
then this is how I mean  this is a water body , and this is the direction of  flow already 
shown . Then obviously, on top of the  surface , there will be some dissolved sediment 
particles  floating . And, of course,  some particles  will be suspended . So, a major  
phenomen on that occurs  is Suspension . Then the smaller  soil particles  move b y 
bouncin g. They bounce , and then again , they are  taken away in the water and then again 
fall back . This happens with the sm aller particles , and th ose particles  are referred to as 
Saltation . If it is the largest soil  particles , they are bas ically pushed  or rolled  along the 
stream b ed as you can see here , very large particles that are being rolled along the stream 
bed, and that is referred to as t raction , and sometimes it is also  referred to as bed load 
movement . So, in the soil  water eros ion process , the so il particles transport takes place in 
three different forms ; Suspension , Saltation  and Traction  or Bed load movement ; these  
are the three processes involved .  (Refer Slide Time: 18:40)  
 
If we come to  deposition , then basically deposition  occurs  is the flo w velocity reduces  
the water loses the energy  needed to continue carrying  the detached suspended soil  
particles  and soil particles  are deposited  at a new location . So, wherever this flowing 
water  loses its capacity to transport  soil particles further , they are; obviously, whatever 
soil particle th ey hav e been transported . They will ge t deposited. And deposited  
deposition mostly occurs  in low  landscape positions  or at the downslope  end of the 
fields , which is quite obvious . Placing the  deposited material  back to its origin  can be a 
very costly affair . We know that soil is getting detached  at the upstream  place . It is being 
transported  and getting deposited  somewhere else . If you want to take this soil back to its 
original position,  it will be a  costly  phenome non.  (Refer Slide Time: 20:37)  
 
Continuing  with deposition , the deposition could  occur , we saw in the  downstream 
places . If the flow  continue s, the deposit  may also  happen  in downstream water bodies  
and cause pollution . So, if the transporter soil partic les reach a  stream  or river , a lot of 
loose particles and  sand and soil particles are being carried  so; obviously, the river water  
will get polluted .  
But there is a  plus side ; we know that sediment  can also be deposited in delta  along 
streams , where the r iver joins the  sea and loses its velocity . So, most of the soil partic les 
get deposited , forming  deltas . We also know that these deltas are very productive 
because they are  built from the productive soil; the top soil  has be en carried during the 
erosion pr ocess . The deltas  are very  producti ve, so that could  be a one  plus of the entire 
erosion process .  
If you look at the flow , the gravel -sized sediments  will be first deposited ; sand grains  
will be taken  a little far compared to the  gravel -sized  particles an d clay -sized  particles , 
which are  much final ; they will be  carried  further  down . Clay particles can be carried  a 
great distance  before the position . In contrast,  large larger  sand particles will be  carried 
only a shorter  distance , which is quite obvious. Y es, the flow gets  reduced , or the 
velocity reduces . First, the larger part will get deposited and slowly , the light lighter 
particles will get deposited .  (Refer Slide Time: 22:43)  
 
Now, this is a n efficie ncy of the form s of water erosion , and t his data is provided by  
Morgan (2005 ). It says  three different forms ; raindrops , overland flow  and rill flow. It 
assumes the mass  of raindrops is R and that 50 per cent of R contributes to runoff . That 
means  overland flow will be 0.5 R, and rill flow  will be 0.5 R. The typical velocity is 6  
m/s in case  of rain drops, 0.01  m/s in case overland flow , and 4 m/s in case of rill flow, 
which has been estimated using Manning's equation based on a  lot of  experimental  data. 
Look at the raindrop's kinetic energy ; kinetic energy  will be 18R (very high), rill flow 
will be next, and overland flow will be much lower  compared to rain drops of kinetic 
energy . As a result , if you look at the observed sediment  energy for ero sion, we will be 
higher here. It assumes 0.2 percent of the kine tic ener gy of raindrops and 3 percent of the 
kinetic energy of runoff  utilized  in erosion . Because of that , the rill flow will have  a 
much  higher  energy of ero sion. As a result , the observed sediment transport  in g/cc is 
much higher in the rill erosion  followed by  overland flow and lastly by  raindrops . The 
data is based on the  experiments conducted  in sandy soil over 900 days.  (Refer Slide Tim e: 24:43)  
 
Until now , we have been discussing one of the erosion agent  - water, but we have 
already seen that wate r and wind are  the two major erosion agents . So, now we come to 
wind erosion , and soil erosion by  wind is referred t o as wind erosion , a three -step 
process . In this case , initiation of  a movement is caused by wind forces  exerted against or 
parallel led to the ground surface . Then we have transportation  of the detached  particles , 
which occurs i n three  distinct movements  here also , and finally, the deposition  of the 
transported materials  when the wind energy  subsid ies. In this case , also there are three 
proces ses. We called detachment , transportation and deposition in case of water erosion . 
Here we are calling initiation of movement , transportation and deposition . (Refer Slide Time: 25:50)  
 
If we talk about the initiation of movement , it is caused by wind forc es exerted agains t or 
parallel led to the ground surface . Very similar to  the raindrops , if the angle such that 
wind  hits the  soil surface , it causes any initiation  movemen t. If it is parallel to the ground 
surface , then also as we saw that even the  light w ind could roll the soil particles . The 
rolling of soil particle s on initiation  movement takes place . The wind  velocity  is the 
lowest close  to the ground ; it may lift  lighter and loose soil  particles . I mean , even  when 
it is a very low velocity , the light a nd loose soil particles can also  be moved, or initiation  
movement  can take place . The minimum  wind velocity  is required to initiate  the 
movement of soil particles is referred to as threshold velocity  that varies with soil 
conditions  and the nature of the ground surface . For most erodible  soils of particles size  
0.1 mm , the threshold velocity is  approximately 16 km/h at the height of 30 cm above 
the ground .  (Refer Slide Time: 27:27)  
 
Then we come to th e second  phenomen on, which  is a process of transportati on; here, like 
in the case of water erosion , depending upon the size of the soil  particles , they are three 
distinct  types of soil particle movements ; Suspension , Saltation  and Surface creep . Here 
you remember , in the case of water also , we called Suspensio n and Saltation  and, 
Traction or Bed load  movement , but in this case , we call that surface creep . So that  is the 
only one name change  in one of the  phenomena .  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:07)  
 If we define each of them , Suspension is the most  spectacular and ea siest to recognize  
among the t hree forms of movement . It occurs when very fine  dirt and dust particles  are 
lifted into  the atmosphere , and most of the dust storm consists of suspended particles  as 
lighter soil particles .  
Suspended particles can travel  hundreds of miles  depending upon the wind velocity and 
the size of the soil particle s. They can be take n far off from the place where the initiation 
has started . Soil particles o f less than  0.1 mm are subjected to Suspension, which  is a 
much lighter side or  smallest si ze particle , and it accounts for  3 to 40 per cent  of the soil 
transport . The Suspension accounts for  3 to 40  per cent of the soil transport as for as  
wind eros ion is concerned .  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:21)  
 
The next process is Saltation , where it is the movement of particles  by a series of short  
bounce s along the ground's surface . The soil particles  will move something like that; 
particles travel approximately four times longer than the distance  in height . So, this is  
four times higher than the hei ght of the travel . And when they strike the  surface again , 
they bounce back  or knock  other soil particles  into the air . So, both phenomena could 
happen that they fall  and bounce back , or they  fall on soil particles and then make that 
particular soil partic le bounce . It accounts  for a maximum of soil transport  under wind 
erosion  that is around  50 to 75 per cent of the  soil transport in the wind erosion  and take s 
place due to Saltation .  (Refer Slide Time: 30:26)  
 
Then, we come to the last  process movement p rocess  that is referred to a surface creep , 
and it is the movement of larger  soil particles by rolling  and sliding  along the ground 
surface . So, this is where they  either  role or this slide  along this further . The particles are 
rolled  across the surface af ter coming  into contact with the soil particles  in Saltation . 
They can roll because of the  kinetic energy transferred by water , or even th e saltation 
soil particle s can heat  and make the roll around . The typical particles with diameters 
between  0.5 to 2 mm are subject to surface cre ep and account for about  5 to 20 per cent 
of 25 per cent of soil particles .  
We close this chapter  where we have seen the soil or w ater and wind erosion  mechanic s. 
We will continue furthe r and see what can be done further to cont rol this erosion . 
Thank you very much . 