 
 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Dr. Poulomi Ganguli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 41 
Drop Inlet Spillway (Contd.)  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:22) 
 
Hello , good afternoon all . So, this is the 4th lecture o n Drop Inlet S pillway . So, here we 
are going to cover the basic spillway design . And in the last lecture , we are going to 
solve a problem based on this design aspect . So, these  are the  two points  to be cover ed.   
 (Refer Slide Time: 00:36) 
 
So, first I different  we going to cover the different component s of the  design ; so, the first 
one is the crest discharge . So, crest  discharge is the design head and suppose the 
discharge , so this graphical representation is given here . So, the firs t part, so this part  
until this the weir or entrance or as you remember in a couple of slides ago , we discussed 
when the control one prevails . So, weir or control flow prevails . 
And in the second condition t wo, as you remember in the discharge characte ristic s curve 
of the drop inlet spillway structure . So, here orifice the second part the orifice  control 
prevails . And so this was in that graph , so a to g was the weir or entrance control , and 
then g to h was orifice control , and the last part is pipe  or exit c ontrol , where  the full pipe 
flow prevails . 
So, for small head s, the flow over the drop inlet spillway is generally  governed by 
characteristics of the crest . So, the vertical transition  beyond  the crest will flow full 
either  fully or the part and the flow will cling  to the side of the shaft . So, it can cling to 
the side of the shaft . And however, with increasing  discharge , the annular nap pe 
becomes t hicker and it eventually converges  into a solid jet. So, this way here, it can 
show  particularly , how the flow can takes place in the crest design .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 02:38)  
 
So, these are the principal elements of the nap pe shape d profile or the circular weir. The 
point where the annu lar nappe , so this part is the annu lar nappe joins  the solid j et. So, 
here is the point where the  annu lar nappe joins  the soli d jet here  so, this point a t the 
bottom  is called  the crotch . So, this particular point is called crotch  ok. 
And after the solid jet form s, so once the solid jet form s here. So, it can create a s tructure 
called boil, so which will occupy  the region  above the crotch . So, the crotch is formed at 
the bottom and the solid jet, because of the flow of continuous flow of water , and the 
water  solid  jet forms at the top . So, this part is called a boil. And the crotch a nd the top of 
the boil become progressively higher with larger discharge . So, once  the discharge is 
higher . So, both crotch and boil  become  higher here . And for high head , the crotch and 
boil will almost flood out . So, these are the principal elemen ts of t he structure here .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 04:11)  
 
Now, the vortex  action in the flow can be minimiz ed to maintain the converging flow 
into the drop inlet. So, to minimiz e the vortex  action  generally , a guide  piers or 
antibiotics plate are provided  along the crest .  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:36)  
 
If the profile and transition conform  to the shape of the lower nappe of the jet , then the 
discharge is  generally governed by the equation of  flow of water through the weir. So, 
disch arge is a function of C  and L, where  C is the coefficient , L is the length . Here length   
 is nothing  but a perimeter  or the periphery in case of the circular shape of the weir and H 
is the head measured .  
(Refer Slide Time: 5:12)  
 
Now, L is in general taken at the outset periphery of the crest and if H is measured  to the 
apex of the  overflow shape , then the equation become s so since it is a circular periphery . 
So, here we measure the perimeter of the circular pipe  R is the radius of that pipe and H0 
since it is the overflow shape  at the outlet . And it is H 0 and 3 by 2,  so this is nothing  but 
flow through the weir.  
(Refer Slide Time: 5:51)  
  
 Now, the coefficient of discharge of the circular crest differs from that of the straight 
crest . So, here in this case the effect of submergence and back pressure  incident to the 
joining of the converging flows . Thus, C 0 must be related  to both H0 and R s. So, this 
coefficient  is expressed in terms of the function of H0 by R  s.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:22)  
 
So, there is differ ent graphs are given at vari ous values of  P divided by R  s. So, there  is a 
graph of  Hs by H0 versus H0 by R s is provided . So, at different point s, so you can 
determine based upon the  H value of  H0 by R  s, for an assumed value of P by Rs, the H s 
by H 0 value . So, this is the actu al point , and the dotted lines are shows the  extrapolated  
lines  of the plot .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 7:17)  
 
So, these coefficients  are only valid  if the crest profile and the transition shape conform 
to that of the jet flowing over a sharp -crested circular weir at H0 head. And if aeration  is 
provided , so that sub-atmospheric pressure  does not exist along  with the lower nappe 
surface contact . So, the discharge coefficient C0, are all in the English unit . And so to 
convert it into the metric unit , the coefficie nt should  be multiplied by a conve rsion factor  
of 0.552.   
(Refer Slide Time: 07:52)  
  
 So, free flow in the weir prevails for H0 by R s ratios up to approximately 0.45 and a 
weir control governs  in this case , so beyond that , the flow become s turbulent . And H0 by 
R s ratio increases above 0.45, the weir is now part ly submerge d and the flow showing 
characteristics of the submerge d weir is now un control condition . So, when the H0 by R 
s ratio approaches 1, the water surface above the weir is now completely submerged . For 
this, the higher H0 by Rs the flow phenomena now becomes  an orifice flow . So, based on 
the ratio between H 0 by R s different flow conditions prevails .  
(Refer Slide Time: 8:48)  
 
Now, crest profile how you plot the crest profile , the val ues of the c o-ordinate to define 
the shape of the lower surface of the nappe flowing over an aerated  sharp -crested circular 
weir for  the various cond ition of P by  Rs and H 0 by R s. Hs by Rs can be obtained from 
tables , so these values are given . Then H0 by R  is now c an be in terpolated  from th ese 
given values .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 09:17)  
 
So, now you can see the X and Y  are the lower nappe  surface for different values of  Hs 
by R s. So, you can see the extra different values of  H s by R s are given at t he bottom of 
the table, and for  different P by  Rs value , so when the P by  R s is 2. A nd so, different 
values of  H s by R s is given  and from t his, suppose you have a value of P by  R s as 2. 
And your value of  H s by R s is lying between 1 and 2, then you c an get the X and Y  
coordina tes of this nappe from interpolating these tables , so this is when the condition is 
P by Rs is 2. 
(Refer Slide Time: 1 0:07) 
  
 Now, when this is a point 3,  then different table  coordinates of the lower nappe surface 
for different  tables are provided . So, when it is the  value is a little less . 
(Refer Slide Time: 1 0:17) 
 
And this is again if the value is still less , so this is a for different values of H s by R s that 
X and Y  coordinates are given .  
(Refer Slide Time: 1 0:28) 
 
Now, the crest profile ; typical upper and lower nappe profile for circular weir for various 
values of H s by R s are plotted  in terms of the x and y co -ordinate . And this is for 
different P by R s this can be  plotted for different assumed values of x and y .  
 (Refer Slide Time: 1 0:53) 
 
The comparison of lower nappe  shapes for a circular weir for different values for  Hs for 
a given value  of Rs is given . The profile become s increasingly suppressed for larger 
values . As you can see for lower  values these are  starting here , but it is suppressed , when 
the values of  H s by R s are increasing .  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:2 0) 
 
The relationship of again the relat ionship between the circular crest coefficient . So, these 
are the  circular crest coefficient  to different  Hs by Rs and diffe rent Hs by H 0 is provided 
for different value of P  by R s i n the case of the aerated nappe . And again here the dash  
 lines are extrapolated lines . And from this you can  derive the coefficient circular crest 
coefficient .  
(Refer Slide Time: 11 :35) 
 
Now, the approximat e increas e in the radius required to minimize the sub -atmospheric 
pressure of the crest  is again determine d from this graph . So, at different values of H0 by 
R s, you can get the approximate increas e in radius , where  R s is the a ctual radius and R 
dash s  is the increase d radius . So, this is the point of intersection . So, if this is a value of 
your H0 by R  s, so you can get this valve in here . And based  on this fraction , you c an 
take into account  an approxima te increase in radius to minimiz e the sub -atmospheric 
pressure inside the flow of the drop inlet spillway .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 12:4 0) 
 
Now, coming to transition design ; the diameter of a jet issuing  from a horizontal  orifice 
can be determined for any point below the water surf ace if it is assumed that a cont inuity 
equation is still valid . So,  in this case , all the frictional  and other losses are neglected , 
only it is assume d that the continuity of the equation is valid in this case . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:11)  
 
So, in most of cases the circular jet area is assumed , so that is why , so discharge is a 
function of area and velocity . So, this is the velocity of the head . So, solving for different 
values of R, this empirical equation follows ok . So, where H a is nothing  but the  
 dischar ge between  so if you solv e this , whic h will roughly or approximately will take 
that form , you can get this equation . So, H a here is the distance between the water 
surface and the elevation under consideration .  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:35)  
 
So, now  you assu me that the diameter of the jet in this decreases with the distance of the 
free vertical fall for normal design application . If an assume d total head  loss like means 
includ es jet contraction losses , frictional losses , and velocity losses from the direction  
changes , then you take that is equal  to the 0.1 H a. Then the equation is modified and 
determin es required for the shaft radius . Now, the shaft radius can be approximated using 
this equation , so after taking Ha. So, this equation is particularly valid , if H a is taken  as 
0.1 of H a, so includ ing all kind s of losses like a contraction , losses frictional losses , 
velocity lo sses from direction changes etc etera .   
 (Refer Slide Time: 15:4 0) 
 
So, this equation is for the shape of the jet . So, if it is used for determining the s hape of 
the shaft , then it will give the minimum size that will accommodate the flow without 
restriction and without developing any pressure along the side of the shaft .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:59)  
 
Now, coming to  conduit  design ; the requi red size of the s haft and outlet leg wo uld vary 
according to the available net head along with its length . If the slope of the hydraulic 
gradient is flatter  than the slope of the conduit , the flow will accelerate and the required 
size of the conduct will d ecrease . When the  conduit slope is flatter than the slope of the  
 hydraulic gradient , the flow will decelerate and the required size of the conduit  will 
increase . So, these two  cases are opposite  and vice versa to each other.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:34)  
 
Now, in our  design , we also take care of the bulking  and surging , etcetera . So, to allow 
air bulking , surging , this kind of los s the conduit  size should be selected , so that it will 
not flow more than 75 per cent full at  the downstream end  at the maximum dis charge 
point . So, we only consider 75 per cent of the flow pipe flow full pipe flow . 
So, under this limitation , air will be able to pass from the conduit at the downstream 
portal . To prevent the formation of sub-atmospheric pressure along the conduit lengt h 
also this 75 percent flow condition i s assumed . Now, an ideal design has crest  control 
throughout a different range of the discharge . So, this ends the basic design principle . 
And in the next  lecture , we are going to solve  a problem based on this design . 
Thank you . 