Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Amey Pathak  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 51 
Formation of Sand Dunes  
 
Hello friends welcome to this week 11 and lecture 4 of this course of Soil and Water 
Conservation and Engineering. And we were studying in this week 11 about the wind erosion 
and different control measures ok. So, in the in this lecture will be understanding the process 
and different kinds of sand dunes and formation of s and dunes.  
So, like so far now we have covered we have seen we have studied the 4 lectures. We have 
studied what is wind erosion? What are the different factors that are associated or that can 
triggers the wind erosion? And different types of sand movemen ts, initiation detachment, 
initiation then transport and deportation, different types of soil particle movement depending 
on their size and grade so that we have seen.  
We have also seen the different different kind of wind erosion control measures to redu ce the 
effect of wind speed. So, we have seen the some measures to reduce the velocity of the wind 
and some measures to make soil surface more make soil surface more resistant to the wind 
erosion.  
And then we have seen the design of some structure which c an reduce the wind speed. So, for 
example wind break design of wind break we have seen and we have also seen the design of 
shelter belt ok.  
So, in this lecture so today we will be understanding the sand dunes, their formation and there 
different different  types of sand dunes sand dunes and how they formed? So, let us start this 
lecture.  (Refer Slide Time: 02:01)
 
So, before that this thing also we already discussed that to this initiation of soil particle from 
this initiation of this wind erosion, when it  starts . So, the wind velocity should be a n actually 
greater than threshold velocity, some minimum threshold velocity. But, we can see not only 
the threshold velocity that defines the amount of sand transport, but it the wind should be above 
some threshold , wind should be above some threshold with some with some certain drift 
potential. So, that kind of wind will prevent vegetation growth and we will prevent the 
stabilization or the (Refer Time: 02:42) ok.  
So, the wind should be above the threshold with so me certain drift potential that prevents 
vegetation growth and stabilizing it. So, we know that this quantity of sand flux or quantity of 
sand moved is actually directly proportional to the velocity cube ok. So, we can approximate 
that quantity by this equ ation so, here q is a rate of sand drift in one particular direction.  
So, q is equal to some constant K multiplied by u stars square into difference between the 
threshold and the frictional velocity. So, here u star represents  the frictional velocity that is not 
the actual velocity. So, it is actual frictional velocity u star and ut star is the threshold frictional 
velocity and the difference between them when multiplied with the square of frictional velocity 
and with some constant and the constant that dep ends on the soil parameters like grain size 
sand sorting and density of air.  
So, related to the surface and surface condition so, we can get the rate of sand drift ok. So, here 
this frictional velocity is we know that frictional velocity is actually the s quare root of shear 
stress divided by density of the fluid ok. So, here q is the rate of sand drift, u star is the frictional 
velocity u t star is equal to is actually the threshold frictional velocity.  
And this rho is a fluid density, and k is any consta nt that depends on variable such as grain size 
and sand sorting and air density and talks a shear stress ok. So, this we can approximate this 
we can approximate a drift sand drift in one particular direction by this equation which is given 
by Lettau which is given by Lettau and Lettau ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:36)  
 
So, we can approximate the sand drift by this equation which is given by Lettau  1978 ok. So, 
here we can say that the quantity of sand drift in one particular direction is given by u square 
multiplied by u minus u t divided by 100. So, here u is the wind velocity which is measured at 
a 10 meter height, let us say 10 meter height and which is given by this equation, u can be 
calculated like this.  
Frictional velocity divided by k in to natural log of ratio between Z and Z 0. So, Z is any height, 
Z 0 is a roughness height and here t here is actually the amount of time the wind is above the 
threshold so, percentage it is actually percentage. So, percentage amount of time during with 
the wind is above the threshold ok. So, as we said this wind above this drift potential can 
prevent the vegetation growth and can and stabilizing it ok.  
So, this is the this equation gives us the simple drift potential it is actually sum of all drift 
potential in all direction so, this will be needing in the subsequent slide. So, we will move to 
the next slide ok so this directional variability of wind if you want to estimate, so this was 
technique was given by Fryberger and Dean technique.  
So, this technique can be used to estimate the potential sand drift on loose dry sand and minimal 
vegetation ok. So, these are the assumption loose and dry and quartz sand w ith minimal 
vegetation ok. So, what we can do actually? So, if we have a wind data at one particular height. 
So, we can find the frequency of the sand drift in particular direction is specifically 16 direction, 
16 identical sorry 16 directions ok.  
So, and  we can plot it in the form of this diagram. So, this diagram is known as the annual sand 
flow regimes or also known as these are the sand roses ok. So, here this individual arrow this 
individual arm that represents the relative magnitudes of sand drift fr om each direction category 
ok. So, we need to calculate the sand drift in each direction given by the equation q ok, so that 
represent the relative magnitude of sand drift in that particular direction category ok. So, 
accordingly that we will plot all the arms and next is we need to calculate the drift potential ok.  
So, drift potential is actually sum of annual rates of sand drift from all winds alls from all wind 
speed direction ok. So, if you sum all this annual rates of sand drift from all direction we will 
get drift potential. So, it is a sum of annual rate of sand drift from all wind speed direction ok.  
Then the result and drift we need to calculate result and drift potential ok. So, this resultant 
drift potentials are actually the representative vect ors that represent the net sediment transport, 
net resultant sediment transport ok. Suppose these are all the winds vector wind vector in 
different direction and this is the vector represent the net sediment transport ok.  
So, this figure show us the diffe rent types of different locations resultant drift directions ok. 
So, this is the resultant direction here, here the resultant direction this is a resultant direction. 
And this ratio is the ratio of between resultant drift potential divided by drift potenti al so, this 
is ratio of RDP by DP this is also known as the directional variability index ok.  
So let us let see here so, in this case in the first case there are very less variability. So, the winds 
are mostly in this direction and this direction and the in other direction the winds are very less 
in the first case I am talking about. So, there are very less winds or drift there are very less 
amount of sand drift in other direction there are two more prominent direction and this is 
resultant direction.  So, if you take a ratio of this RDP by DP. So, this ratio is actually is coming as 0.86 which is 
close to 1, so what it means that it is a unidirectional or narrow unimodal flow ok. So, flow is 
mostly in one direction ok, similarly here the flow is spread in different direction drifts are 
there in different direction, so resultant and resultant in this direction.  
So, actually this ratio RDP by DP it tells us about the direction in which sand drift is taking 
place ok. So, this DP by RDP values, if they are clo se to 1 it indicates that narrow unidirectional 
drift potential and if they are close to 0; if they are close to 0 then it indicates multidirectional 
drift potentials. So, here we have a multidirectional drift potential so, in the first case it was 
unidire ctional, it is multi directional here ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:18)  
 
So, as I said this drift potential this index out directional variability that is DP by RDP 
directional variability index. If their values are close to 1; it means that the flow is they  have it 
indicates the narrow unidirectional drift potential. And if this ratio is close to 0, it is it indicates 
the possibility of multidirectional drift potential ok so, let see one example here.  
So, if the low if the this ratio RDP by DP if it is low o k. If the ratio of RDP by DP if it is low 
that then it will indicates the wind energy is disturbed distributed on more than one slope of 
the dune and the energy exerted on each slope is lower ok. So, what it means? So, if the this 
RDP by DP is less, it mea ns so the wind energy is only not evenly it wind energy is distributed 
in different directions.  
So, the there is a drift in all in different directions. So, it indicates that the wind energy is 
distributed on more than one slope of the dune and energy exe rted on each slope on each slope 
is lower ok. So, that results in to the lower RDP by DP ratio, similarly high directional 
variability index ok. So, if this index values are high it means sand dunes are covered by 
vegetation  on their slopes.  
So, this veget ation they actually reduce the erosion of wind they can reduce the erosion. So, 
the high this ratio RDP by DP indicates the sand dunes are covered by vegetation. So, if this 
drift potentially same it means quantity of sand some of sand drift in all particu lar direction if 
it is remains same. And still we get this low rate direction of variability, then it indicates the 
dunes are dunes are bare of vegetation so, there is minimal vegetation on that surface ok.  
So, with that using this technique we can find o ut the directional variability of sand drift ok. 
And we can decide whether the vegetation in the current form then current nature of soil surface 
over that region ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:46)  
 
Now, this figures show this actually a curve which represent the wind threshold speed curve 
for sand transport ok. So, if we see here so on the x axis we have grains; grain diameter of 
different size square route scale. And on the y axis we have frictional velocity for quartz grains 
of different diameters ok.  
So, we can see here if thus size of the grain is let say is in the range of 0.062 if it is range of 
0.062 let us around 2 mm diameter. So, most of the erosion is done by a wind erosion is done 
by soil erosion process. So, this and this is a threshold velocity above which the detachment or 
initiation start this is the threshold velocity, frictional threshold velocity ok.  
So, grains of between 0.062 and 2 mm in diameter there actually not very much cohesive and 
they can be easily eroded or they can be easily car ried by the wind ok and they can form they 
can responsible in to sand dunes. But, if you see the size is lesser than if the grain size is lesser 
than this value like clay or silt or very fine sand. Then in that case most of the erosion process 
is done by s uspension movement ok so, this is a lowest limit of suspension ok.  
So, here the mostly suspension is taking place or suspension is acting on very final grains soil 
particle. And siltation is acting on grain of size between 0.062 and 2 mm diameter and that  are 
responsible for omission of sand dunes ok so, the accumulation of this sand blown by the wind 
it creates  the sand dune ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:58)  
 
Now, let us see the Aeolian process ok. So, Aeolian process Aeolian is a word a Greek word 
which is  related to the wind, so Aeolian process it can be defined as those which involve wind 
action that wind action that is erosion transported transport or deposition arising from 
movement of air over the earth surface ok.  
So, this Aeolian process or transpor t of wind transport of soil by wind. Aeolian process can be 
defined as those which involve wind action that is the erosion, transport and deposition arising 
from the movement of air above the over the earth surface. And we have seen the different 
mechanism  by which sand particle or sand grains or transfer from one place to another place.  
So, the moment can be by creep by rolling over the surface. Suspension final particles 
suspended in the air and the saltation the vibration or jumping and bouncing nature of the 
bouncing motion of the sand ok. So, this figure represents the movement of sand grains, so this 
is up wind side and this is slip face or leeward side ok. So, sand is being transported from one 
place to here this is also known as the windward side or  source side ok. So, this will be seeing 
the next slides ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:29)  
 
Now, Aeolian sand dune can be defined the sand dune can be defined simply as a mount or rich 
that are formed by wind deposition on loose sand. So, it can be defined simply as a mound or 
ridge that are formed by wind deposition of loose sand ok.  
So, the their size can be the size of sand dune can be of variable size they can be either around 
1 meter or can be spread across several kilometers as well ok. They mainly occ ur either as a 
isolated ridges or they can be grouped together ok.  
This and the classification and sand dunes are classified according to their geographical 
occurrences either as a inland dunes or continental dunes or coastal or sea shore dunes or in 
case of river bank we can call it as riverbank dune or lake shore dunes ok. So, these are the 
classification based on their geographical location and there occurrence or that region ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:34)  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 17:44)  
 
And the modes of sand movements can be either by natural sand drifting or by dune migration. 
So, dunes we have seen the it can be classified they can be also classified based on different 
ways like size and shape of the dunes, their occurrence. And the environmental condit ion as I 
said the inland sea shore coastal dunes or river bank dune there their growth stage ok; their 
growth stage depending on the maturity level, then the wind direction which is responsible for 
their formations.  
So, these are the different ways by whic h we can classify or we can name of particular dune. 
So, mostly based on the size their occurrence, the environmental and environment in which 
their present, their growth stage and wind direction which is responsible for their formation ok.  
(Refer Slide Ti me: 18:35)  
 
So, this is very simplistic way to represent types of dune. This is a very simple geogram 
geomorphologic classification. So, dunes are mostly form in the presence of let us say when 
there is enough availability of sand, sand supply wind magnit ude, presence of vegetation and 
presence of dry climate. So, this is a very simple geomorphologic classification of dunes ok.  
So, broadly they can be classified such as transverse dune or barchans crescent dune, and 
longitudinal dunes and parabolic dunes ok. So, depending on the percentage availability of 
sand supply, then wind magnitude over that region and the presence of vegetation they can be 
called as either transverse dunes or barchans or crescent dunes. So, we will be looking this will 
be understand ing this dunes one by one in the subsequence slides. They can be also name as 
longitude name depending on the variability of different parameters ok.  
So, let us say if for example of transfers dunes so, we have very less vegetation and sand 
supplies around  abundance sand supplies there. Whereas, in parabolic dunes we have enough 
or sufficient vegetation and the action of wind we have earn thus winds are also kind of 
abundant ok. So, these are the different simple geomorphological classification which can be  
used to define or to categorize the dunes. So, we will be looking this classification or each 
category one by one in the next slides.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:16)  
 
So, this is again the same image the forms of dunes. So, here actually is same like here the  
frequency in this direction vegetation is increasing, here the wind strength is increasing here 
sand availability is increasing ok. So, there are different type such as longitudinal dunes when 
the winds when the winds are wind speed is more wind sand is m ore vegetation is less. So, this 
is linear or longitudinal dunes.  
So, in case of barchan in case of barchan we have the scars and supply and the vegetation is 
also less. Then the then comes the transverse dunes when the sand suppliers enough trans sand 
supplies enough, but the vegetation is less. And winds are also kind of less here kind of less or 
moderate in moderate form. Then comes the star dunes which have study and direction for 
changing here. So, here the wind directions are subjected to change here  in this region ok.  
So, we are so in that reason we get the sand dunes and the sand is also kind of scars, or moderate 
availability ok. So, this sand dunes can be so these are the different shapes of this dune this is 
barchan dunes which has some crescent  or some C shaped, C shaped crest. Then we have a star 
dunes where the wind from different directions are equally responsible are ok.  
Then transverse dunes which forms in the which acts on the one particular ridge ok. Then we 
have parabolic which is exact ly which is kind of opposite to the barchan dunes which inverted 
U, inverted C here or U shaped. Then the longitudinal dunes which floor is actually where the 
flow is along the ridge ok, so these are parallel to the sand dunes.  
The flow is parallel to the sand dunes here ok. So, here we are categorized the dunes based on 
the wind and sand availability ok. So, in barchan dunes we mostly get steady wind in mostly 
in one direction. In star we get study steady flow, but mostly steady direction, but changed 
steady wind, but changing it is direction ok. Then transverse dunes steady and moderate in one 
direction, parabolic steady wind with strong magnitude in one direction, longitudinal the steady 
and strong wind in one direction ok. So, let us see these different types of dunes in the next 
slides ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:07)  
 
So, this is actually first let say that barchan dunes are they are also known as the crescent dune. 
So, this types of dunes actually mostly observed in the sandy desert across the globe ok.  So, 
the shape of this dunes are actually kind of C shaped crescent shaped dunes with their tips 
pointing downwards. So, this is the tips are pointing down wards ok.  
And here there is a less availability of or no vegetation availability. The sand supply i s limited 
here the sand supply is limited and the flow is mostly steady here. The winds migrating winds 
are migrating according to unidirectional wind mechanism.  
So, wind flow is mostly is unidirectional, but they migrate ok. So, this dunes are migrating 
according to the unidirectional wind mechanism, occurrences these are actually mostly isolated 
dunes located are different place over that region. And it they can migrate up to 100s of meters 
each year ok. And they can grow up to 30 meter in height and the y can be spread around 30 
meter in distance ok so, this is a barchan dunes ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:27)  
 
So this is example of barchan dune, this is a image of barchan dune. So, here we can see 
movement of barchan dune by erosion of windward face and dep osition on slip face. So, slip 
face there is a deposition and on windward side the erosion is taking place ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:46)  
 
Now, next type is a transverse dune. So, these are these are actually the very much similar to 
barchan dunes, but th e when the sand supply in the barchan dunes when it increases then they 
convert into the merge in to transverse dunes. So, barchan dunes merge into transverse dunes 
if the supply of the sand increases ok. So, these are the transverse dunes, so these are th e 
transverse ridges and flow is in mostly in unidirectional flow so, we get series of dunes ok.  
 So, shape dunes are aligned perpendicular to the prevailing wind as you can see the dunes are 
actually perpendicular to the prevailing wind direction. Vegetati ons are vegetation is less and 
sand supply is mostly abundant, winds are actually steady and mostly one directional ok. This 
transverse dunes represent around 40 percent of the dunes found in the sand sea across the 
found in the sand sea worldwide ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:01)  
 
Now, next is the star dune ok so, this is found in high desert latitudes where their marked 
seasonal changes i n wind direction. So, wind directional is changing vocationally here. So, we 
have different wind directions. So the moment of sand, or sand drift is in different direction. 
The shape is mostly pyramidal shape and this kind of dunes are mostly found in a de sert 
latitudes ok.  
These are dunes with several arms and variable slip face directions. So, slip face directions also 
different and the arms are there are many arms you can see here. Sand supply is abundant here, 
the wind is multidirectional and variable in nature and they can grow up to 500 meters of height. 
Star dunes are formed by a wind regime with high directional variability that is a ratio of RDP 
by DP; if it less than 0.4 ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:01)  
\  
So, next type is a parabolic dune; so, this is a inverted U kind of dune so, these are mostly 
found in humid and cold areas. So, the shape of this dunes are U shaped or crescent shaped 
dunes, but in the opposite direction. In case of barchan it was C shaped, it is inverted C or you 
can call it as U;  U shape. Vegetation is partly vegetated here, sand supply is limited and the 
wind is mostly unidirectional wind and they can grow up to 10 to 20 meters of height.  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:34)  
 
The next is the longitudinal dunes; so, you can see in the long itudinal as it name suggest. So, 
the wind is actually passing is parallel to the. So, this crests are actually parallel to the wind 
directions. So, winds is flowing along the around a parallel to the this ridges.  
So, shape of this longitudinal dunes are sh ape long dunes are crests or elongated parallel to the 
direction of wind flow. So, when I said this winds are parallel to the as I said the winds are 
parallel to the crest ok, so these are parallel to the dunes. Sand supply; sand supply is a limited 
here a nd winds are mostly strong and steady.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:24)  
 
Now, let us see some of the important mechanism by with sand dunes form. So, this is the like 
we have obvious talking about the costal sand dunes. Let us talk about the costal sand dunes 
so, let us say this is a coast here let us first we see that the this image ok. So, this is the coast 
and this is approximate strand line and from there you can see the development of vegetation, 
and the dunes here ok.  
So, the first face is the embryo or th e fore dunes here the fore embryo and fore dunes form 
where the alkalinity or salt contents are very high at with very less vegetation. So, any small 
abstraction if it is present in the form of raw called debris they start accumulating they start 
accumulat ing sand over them. And in the subsequent time if the wind speed along with the 
wind they can be they can forms small embryo dunes ok.  
So, and after that so here there is actually very less or no vegetation, but when you move when 
this sand dunes move here  in directions. So these are actually moves these two dunes are mostly 
the mobile dunes ok. So, embryo dunes, fore dunes and yellow dunes they are comprise of 
mobile dunes. So, they changed their place ok, means like sand dunes they can migrate here. 
So, these are the yellow dunes these are relatively very young dunes ok.  
So, we can see some kind of vegetation here in case of yellow dunes where as when you see us 
when you further move away on the sea shore you can see some kind of permanent vegetation 
cove r here. So, and thus we can see some kind of soil formation also over this region ok, you 
can see some kind of permanent vegetation and soil formation permanent vegetation and soil 
formation. So, these are mostly known as the grade dunes.  
So, grade dune a nd grade dune this is also this also sometimes comprises of dunes likes which 
has high moisture content and these are mostly the fixed dunes. And after that if you can see 
there is mature vegetation which has sufficient availability of vegetation as well a s soil ok. So, 
what happens? So the over this regions initial stages these are actually the pioneer species ok. 
So, this here actually the species are mostly the pioneers ok.  
So, when this pioneers the species when they die they form humus that humus which  will be 
which can be use by subsequent species. So, here the species are mostly pioneer and as we 
move from X to Y the maturity increases and we will get more mature vegetation as well as 
the soil here ok. So, to summarized this we can see if you moves fr om this pioneer from this 
place X to Y.  
So, let us say we are the X is the pioneer species the species are mostly pioneer. And here the 
steady or equilibrium is established here in the climate stage. So, you can see pH is actually 
declines and alkalinity d ecreases as you move from one place to from along this direction. So, 
pH increases decreases and it becomes more acidic here it was more alkaline and here it is more 
acidic or you can find balance.  
So, it becomes stable here the salinity also decreases whe n we move from this to the from X to 
Y. Similarly, the age of dunes increases so, these dunes are mostly mobile dunes the change 
there shape and the direction depending on the wind speed and this thing.  
So, the shape gets change, but here the dunes are mo stly stable. Then the available nutrition 
contents increases because the pioneer species they make favorable conditions. The pioneers species from previous stage and humus to the sand that makes condition more favorable for the 
subsequent stages of species . Then the available water content increases here, then humus 
content also increases see, the humus if you can see here it was around 1 percent, here let us 
say it was around 2. 5 percent, here it was in the great dune area it was around 20 percent.  
And f rom the mature side are the heat or wood length region it is around 40 percent humus 
content. Soil depth also if you can see the soil depth also increases as you move from X to Y. 
The shelters also increasing and the height of the dunes are also you can se e they are increasing 
as you move from X to Y ok. So here you can see around we can found around 15 to 20 meter 
height ok so, these are mostly the migration of how the sand dunes forms.  
(Refer Slide Time: 33:36)  
 
This is another image we represent the formation of dunes ok. This is a let us a beach you can 
see the height is increasing as you move in more inland, you must contents also increasing. 
Percentage sand and moisture is also increasing here and vegetation is becoming more 
permanent, here it was mostly sand and couch or lyme grass which can be sub merge in to the 
salt water. But here vegetation is more stable here and here also the vegetation here you can 
see some kind of marram or cotton grass are as there.  
And pH is obviously, is actually less h ere compare to here say here the pH was the soil was 
mostly alkaline here it is more acidic or less alkaline. So, with that I will stop here for this 
lecture so, in this lecture we have seen various kinds of sand dunes, their formation and the 
process that  was involved in the formation of sand dune.  
And we have also see in the drift potential in different directions. And we have seen the; we 
have seen the formation of sand dune, coastal sand dunes how they form? And how the 
alkalinity and how the previous species they helps in they favors the formation of new species 
so that the equilibrium can be reached ok. So, with that we will stop here for this class.  