 Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Damodar R. Mailapalli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 55 
Sediment and its Transportation  
 
Hi, this is a week 12 lecture number  3; we wi ll be  focusing on Sediment and its 
Transportation in this lecture . So, as the course content here in 12 we are at 3. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:23)  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:29)  
 So, sediments ; so what are the sediments ? Basically the sediments  any sediment which 
has a source like it eroded  and then transported to or deposited by flowing water . 
So, water is basically the driving force to  you know you know displace the sediment  
from one place to another place . And this is the responsible for transporting a significant 
proportion of many nutrients and contaminants . So, since the sediments  which has  both 
solid as well as a mineral part ; so, the mineral part ; that means, there i s a nutrients . So, 
when that sediment is transporting ; that means, the nutrients also will be tr ansported 
along with these sediments . 
So, and so basically the sediments comprise of a mineral component  which is arising 
from the ; erosion or bedrock . So, if you see this ; so this is  during weathering what 
happened these  small rock fragments are g oing to break down . And then  it is going to 
divide into you know solid as well as mineral fractions and the other one is organic 
component  which is rising  during soil formation processes . So, because  the soil  has you 
know inbuilt  microbes ; as well as you know any dead animals on the plant material . 
So, anything which will be  packed by soil and over a period of time ; so that will be 
converted  into that will be decomposed  into yo u know organic material . So, that is why 
the soil also contains the organic compounds alo ng the mineral as well as the solids . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:21)  
 So, then; so the next is the sedimentation process . So, the sedimentation process 
basically ; so first thing is the erosion then o r transportation the other  third process is the 
deposition .  
So, the erosion is basicall y the wearing away of the  earth  surface by surface water runoff . 
So, once the defragmented particles which are staying on our neighbor area ; so, because 
of the rainfall or any other you know  the flooding  flooded flows , so, the lo ose particles 
will be transported from one place to another place . So that is the transportation , so 
movement of eroded particles throw s stream channels to the point  of deposition . 
So, here mostly  so due to the rain  so the, this kind of a flash erosion ; so, it takes away the 
particles along with the flow  then, they and then the transportation of particles because 
the flow will have enough transport capacity  and they wi ll take away the particles from 
one place to another place . But you know due to  the capaci ty the flow or maybe due to 
the infiltration  right  and then or if there is some depression where the sediment is going 
to you know trap down . 
So, then the flow capacity is not going to be enough to transport the particles and there is 
a deposition  of the p articles are going to take s place at the , at some place . So,  so it 
contain  consists of both  erosion  to acquire or to or result  the particles and then 
transportation to displace the particles and the deposition  to deposit the particle . So, so 
deposition of eroded particles in the stream channels floodplains reservoirs can als 
etcetera , where there is  not enough the flow where the flow has not enough transport 
capacity  to carry out . (Refer Slide Time: 04:25)  
 
So, and then the source s of sediment  basically  one is the land clearing . So, there is a 
direct relationship between the increase  erosion and the  sedimentation . 
So, once the erosion is increasing definitely the sedimentation will increase . So, land 
clearing , in areas where catchments have been cleared  because it has de position of 
sediments  and the riverbanks and  consistently grazed  sediment loads are often high . So, 
when the river banks are grazed  what happened , the; when the vegetation which is intact 
with soil will be loosened off . 
So, then this once the soil is lo osen, so the definitely where  the when the rainfall  
definitely the runoff  due to rainfall will take about the loose  sediments and that  so, the 
land clearing  will be the source of sediments . And the grazing along  river banks can  strip 
vegetation d isturb the soil and banks of course,  higher flows increase erosion of the 
stream channel leading to creation of deep gullies . 
So, when the flow is  tremendous . So, what happens it has  it definitely will you know 
result in eroding these stream banks and the taking of f the bed load . So, all other things 
are going to happen s and forms finally, the g ullies . So the land clearing is one of the 
sources  and the road  building . (Refer Slide Time: 06:03)  
 
So, nowadays if you see  the construction of the r oads or constr uction of the houses  leave 
lot of sediments  out at the site  and when there i s a rainfall  so definitely the particles or 
the sand or any building material that will be transported to the , I mean the  drainage 
ditches . 
So, the unsealed roads can contribute si gnificant sediment loads of course, so  unsealed 
which is exposed to  water definitely will erode and the compacted road surfaces are 
subjected to erosion which generate the sediment . So, unsealed and compacted ; so 
without  putting any you know  the impermeabl e layer . So, definitely a simple compaction 
definitely  may not  you know helpful in  protecting these  I mean  you know protecting the  
sedimentation . 
So, the points where roads cross  streams are particularly damaged . So, the if you see 
during flooding the road s which are across the stream flow definitely going to damage 
first. And the roads can become long term sources of sediment if they are not properly 
maintained . So,  I mean the, this is the regular practice if you see in summer season the 
all roads will be  you know  laid off like the maintained very well  and then the re are next 
rainy season  I mean because of the poor maintenance . 
So, the roads will be damaged  due to the heavy rain and  the flow flooding and that 
definitely causes  you know they removing  the con crete material or removing the fine 
particles from the roadside .  (Refer Slide Time: 07:53)  
 
And then the in stream disturbances this is another source of  sediment in stream 
disturbances . So, when the dams and reservoirs are  under construction ; so disturb ances 
to the stream bank can generate large quantity of sediment . So, under (Refer Time: 
08:06)  condition ; you may not be seeing you know sedimentation  transport to the you 
know downstream , but  while constru cting the  dams or while  doing any in  stream 
opera tions ; definitely that disturbs the  you know bad sediments and definitely that causes 
the and because the flow ; so, the disturb ed sediments will  you know pass from one place 
to another place . 
So, other activities like a mining ; so the mining is  another you  know  terrible event  in 
removing the  sediments . And the dredging this is another operation some industrial 
processes;  so like which contains  like sediment  using  you know dirty . For example, 
waste treatment plants and all those things and cleaning w eirs and other field deposit 
sediment . So, weir; weir cleaning also because w eir can has lot of deposits . So, once you 
clear that then definitely that will be mixed in the water and causes sediment  
transportation  in that. (Refer Slide Time: 09:17)  
 
So, the classi fications  of sediments  we are talking about  you know the ; what  I mean 
river . So, the classification basically the deposited sediments and suspended sediments . 
So, deposited sediments also known as the bed load and it definitely  will be staying  you 
know her e in the bed and the suspended sediments  will be staying you know  I mean here . 
So, the mostly the suspended sediments will be  suspended in the water . So, is the found 
in water column where it is being transported by water mo vement . So, mostly  the 
suspended  sediment will be transported from one place to another place ; whereas,  bed 
deposited sediment  unless there is a you know the heavier flow which can take away or 
which can affect  the bottom of the river ; so the bed load will be staying in place . (Refer Sli de Time: 10:15)  
 
So, the and then suspended sediments ; so the basically the suspended it contains contain 
suspended matter  is also called as particulate matter  or suspended solids . 
So the, it has different names suspended matter , particulate  matter and su spended  solids 
ok. The suspended s olids refers to  both mineral as well as organic solids ; so since  it is 
dissolved or suspended inside . So the mineral portion as well as organic solids , they are 
also attached to the  suspended solids  that is why the suspend  solids refers to both mineral 
as well as organ ic solids . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:55)  
 So, then sorry ; so if you  the types of  I mean theory of sediment transport ation  if you see  
so, basically it is a  contact load  that is mineral that rolls or slides along t he bed stream . 
So, this is called this is called contact loads contacts to the surface and suspended load 
this is also another  type of the suspend loads the material that moves along the stream 
and suspension just I mentioned and  saltation load . 
So, this s altation load  is the bouncing  I mean some  particles or  some  solid  or eroded 
particles they bounce . So, just like here ; so they simply  bounce from you know one place 
to another place  that that is called and the streambed , contact to the bo uncing particles 
which may  force other particles upwards in short period of time . 
So, once if there is a particle here and this particle comes in bo unce here and impacts and 
this you know goes up for short period of time . So, that is that the saltation ; so, the bed 
load wh ich is equal to the coarse material moving near the bed right . So, the contact load 
and saltation load and other particles that cannot be  sampled with suspended load sample 
this is also . 
So, the coarse material which is  not sampled by suspension or suspend ed device 
expended  sediments  that is called a bed load . So, the bed load contains  the both contact 
load and saltation load  and in the next  is the sediment transport . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:45)  
 So, the basically the direct function of for water movement ; so if you increase the water 
from definitely the sediment transport will increase ; so, during transport in a water body 
the sediment particles become separated into  three categories ; the suspended  material 
that which includes silt , sand, clay and coarser ma terial ; so, relatively  inactive  bed load 
and then saltation load ok . So, the suspended load this is  I mean the  sediment particles 
basically  of three kinds . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:23)  
 
One is the sand silt clay ; mostly this will be under suspension  and a little coarser 
particles they wi ll be inactive you know the bed load . So, they will be staying nearer to 
the bed and saltation load ; so, they wi ll be you know bouncing and rolling is taking place  
here. (Refer Slide Time: 13:43)  
 
So, the suspended load basic ally comprises of as  I said sand , silt, clay sized particles . So, 
this is  all suspended in water right and then it divided into wash load ; which is generally  
considered to be silt clay sized particle which is less than  62 micron  or 60 micron in 
particle di ameter . The wash load is mainly controlled by  supply of this  material ; so the 
basically the wash load is suspended load ; suspended load which contains you know  
mostly  the particle size which is less than  62 microns . 
So,; that means, if you do sieve analysi s ; so the last like if you have like  62 micron sieve 
at the bottom . So, the pan which collects the sediments  that is called you know 
suspended load whatever . And the amount of sand which is if suppose more than  62 
microns ; so, that is called sand ; in the suspended load directly proportional to the 
turbulence and mainly  originates from erosion of the bed load and banks of the  river . 
So the most ly the coarser particles which are not part of the suspension ; so that that 
means,  more than  62 microns will be  you know depositing here  as the coarser particles 
and staying in the  bed of the  river . So the, and the mineral fraction forms most of the 
transported load ; so the mineral fraction of for suspended load  will be mostly transported  
from one place to an other plac e ok. (Refer Slide Time: 15:27)  
 
And there is the bed load ; so the bed load it is a stony material such as gravel  and 
cobbles  most by rolling along the bed of the river . So, if you see this is mostly  all these 
things have bigger particles  and they bounce  that is  I mean the bouncing is the saltation 
and also the roll from you know one place to another place;  so too heavy to be lifted  by 
suspension  by current of the water ; current of the river  important during the period of 
extremely high discharge in the la ndscapes of the lost topographic relief . 
So, if you have you know steep slopes and you have a higher flow rate ; so definitely the 
bed load is going to move or  they are definitely there is an importance of bed load . So, 
rarely important  in low lying areas ; so this we even in hydrology we will be not focusing 
on bed load , but rather the sediment  I mean suspended load is more important . (Refer Slide Time: 16:35)  
 
So, then a saltation load ; so the saltation means the bouncing as  I mentioned before ; so it 
refer s to, so it basically refers to particles that are light  enough to be picked off the 
riverbed by turbulence , but too heavy to remain suspension and therefore, sink back to 
the riverbed . 
So, what happens ? So, the turbulence ; so turbulence  is I mean causing , but it is a heavier 
to lift . So,  that is the reason it will be staying in the ground;  staying on the ground and 
just moves  just rolls . So, the transition betw een bed load and suspended load ; so, this is  
in between bed load  and suspended load . So, suppose if you too much turbulation  this 
will be lifted up , but because of heavy heaviness ; so it will again come down . So, never 
measured in you know hydrology this thing . (Refer Slide Time: 17:35)  
 
So, the problems  due to sedimentation - so reservoirs  if you see , so loss of potential  or 
water storage  because when there is a de position here, so definitely the capacity of water  
will be reduced . So, only this  is the capacity now  compared to the actual capacity . So, 
that is the; so, definitely loss of potential  water  storage . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:03)  
 
And storage reduction due to increase in evapo ration not only that because it  is; now it is 
a shallow  right . So, this is a sediment de position  now it is shallow and it is easier to evaporate  ok; if it is s hallow  and th en and it is easier to heat ed up and then evaporate 
same operation will be more . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:23)  
 
And irrigation canals irrigation can als a scour and sediment deposition can occur due to 
erodible construction of material . So, if you construct yo u know irrigation  related you 
know structures right ; so, definitely  that will  scour and deposit the sediments  in the 
irrigation canals . 
So, again the  canal you know capacity will be reduced and degradation  below dams . So, 
potential dam failure  definitely  influences  the quality of water you know downstream the 
dam and it  is a low lying a bed stream level . And power station turbines  the sediment can 
damage the blades and bearings . So, when you compare the clean water versus you know  
the water with sediments ; so, definitely that  you know scour  the blade  of an impeller or 
blade or for  and also the bearings  of the ; you know turbines . So, because the turbi nes are 
intact with you know water which is coming in .  (Refer Slide Time: 19:37)  
 
So, then in reverse ; the s ediment transport in reverse is associated with a wide variety  of 
amount and in  the engineering issues . So, if you see here this river ; so it has a lot of you 
know driblets ; if you s ee here , so it is supposed a single river , but because of the in the 
sedim entation . So, the river  the capacities or width effective weight  is been reduced and  
the depth of river is  going to be reduced and definitely if there is  large flows and there i s 
a chance of you know flooding nearby areas . 
One of the most serious environme ntal problems is erosion and the consequent loss of 
topsoil;  the rate of  soil loss is generally or greatly increased by poor agricultural 
practices . So, nearby areas if there is a poor agricultural practices  and lo t of tillage is 
taking place . So, definite ly that will influence the water quality of  the runoff water which 
is taking from the ; agricultural fields to the rivers . (Refer Slide Time: 20:47)  
 
And soil loss and ; so the solutions if you see , so the loss of topsoil results in economic 
loss to the far mers of course,  because the loss the top soil is fertile soil . And once the 
topsoil is  been removed from the fields  eroded from the fields definitely the fertility of 
the land will be  you know decreased and that affects the crop yield . 
In the equivalent to  hundreds of millions of US dollars  annually ; so, that is because a loss 
of soil productivity  and the good environmental practice in agriculture  like contour and  
terracing in; you know  the steepy  landforms and protects against soil loss . So, if you 
have so me measurements or the conservation  measures  against is erosion controls that 
really protects the soil loss and protects against contamination of surface waters . The 
land use  a land management  this has an impact on water quality . (Refer Slide Time: 21:55)  
 
So, issues in sediments ; so here this table will definitely  show some and the problem 
number 1; sediment size ; so, we have silts and clays and sand and gravel if these 
sediments . 
So, environmental issues with silts  and clays or definitely erosion especia lly loss of 
topsoil agricultural  and g ullies  so, and sand yeah basically in the riverbed and bank 
erosion . So, river channel de position  navigation problems and instability of river cross 
sections . So, cross section  maybe not stable if it is sand and the gr avels channel  
instability when dredged for aggregates  instability of river channel beds; so problem in 
navigation and flood control . 
So, similarly we can go through this table for different  sediment types and the 
environmental issues can be caused due to p articular se diment type and associated  
engineering issues also can be seen  in column number three . So, with this  the lecture 
number 3 on sediment transport ation . So, the basically in the river ; so three processes  
one is the erosion . 
So, the first thing is the because of the rain event or any soil disturbances ; so the particles 
will be loosen ed off then  and then if there is a enough you know stream  flow or runoff 
from the surfaces  so, that will carry the particles . And it has since it has enough transport 
capacity ; so it will carry  further long and when there is not enough transport capacity of 
that particular sediment node a nd the sediments are going to be deposited there  right . So, here erosion , transportation , deposition ; so these three processors are impo rtant here 
and there are lot of each there are there are several sources of sediments  and the 
problems which are causing due to sediments . And then  how to tackle this se diment  I 
mean load in the r ivers,  as well as  the banks right , as well as in agricultura l fields  so. 
Thank you  so much . 