Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Amey Pathak  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, K haragpur  
 
Lecture – 50 
Design of Shelterbelts  
 
Hello friends , in the last class ; we have  we have seen the  desig n of w ind breaks  and in 
the, this class will be looking at the Design of S helterbelts . So, this is the third lecture  of 
this module of  wind erosion control measure . So,  prior to that we have seen we have 
studied the wind erosion definition of wind erosion , diffe rent measures to control wind 
erosion , what are the different factor that effect  that can trigger the process of wind 
erosion and different ways the that can be used to reduce the w ind erosion . 
So, in the in this in , so, sequence of that we can see that  in the last class we have seen the 
how to reduce the wind velocity  by designing a proper wind break  depending on our 
criteria , design requirement . So, in then in this class , we will be understanding the design 
of shelterbelts ok . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 01:14)  
 
So, shelterbelts are , is actually  agroforestry  practice  that contain  a linear planting of trees 
and shrubs  with an objective with a multi multiple  objective . So,  our objective with a 
shelterbelt is to achieve obliviously  to reduce the wind speed that is t he first criteria  that into protect soil . Then to improve the water quality , water and air quality over that region 
because this shelterbelts are actually  we are designing for the bigger area . 
So, length s are bigger . So, so we have we have talking about la rge scale here compare to 
the, for pro tection for firm state ok. Improving air and water quality , enhancing wildlife 
habitat or  improving the biodiversity  or that region  and obviously, beautifying the 
landscape . So, these are the different objectives  but main objective is to reduce the  wind 
speed and protect the soil . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:18 ) 
 
So, there are different types of shelterbelts and  these shelterbelts are  can be name after 
different names the  depending on their objectives . So, like farmyard , so, like farm 
farmyard , field shelterbelts , roadside shelterbelts , livestock , wildlife and riparian 
shelterbelts ; so, all of them have different objectives and  depending on their objective 
there designed  are there  designed parameter changes . (Refer Slide Time : 02:56)  
 
Now, before planning of shelterbelts  we need to  understand , we need to see the 
following  points actually we need to  understand different things  before planning any 
shelterbelts . So, we need to select most effective location which will be effecti ve for 
planting a shelterbelt ok . So, the design must  take into account of proper spacing to allow 
optimum tree growth and the use of maintenance equipment ok . So, sometimes  so, our 
all though our objective is to reduce the wind speed and  protect the , our structure . 
But you need to consider other factors also. Y ou need to provide  sufficient space as well 
for optimum  tree growth as well as  to perform some kind of maintenance activity . So, we 
need some access  length as well ok . So, the design must take into a ccount of these 
parameters  like a proper spa cing to allow  optimum tree growth and the use of  
maintenance equipment . 
Then select the select  tree species  or shrub species or combination of  that that are very 
well adapted to the current climate condition of t hat region ok . So, we it is not like we 
can plant  any tree or any (Refer Time: 04:10) or any shrub , but though only those trees 
or shrub s which are which can provide a better protec tion to us or which are most 
adapted to the , that current climate or that r egion . 
So, that kind of  species and or combination of  species of trees and shrub should be 
selected  ok. Now, after that  prepare a planting site and fence areas to exclude the 
livestock ok . So, when you are preparing the shelterbelts , so, while preparing a planting  site fence it because for sometime actually you should  you should have some protection  
from the wild animals or livestock ok . 
So, when they  while they  acquire some kind of  some  level of height or some growth  till 
that time you need some kind of pr otection . Then provide  you need to provide  some care 
and protection to arrange  young  seedlings ; means it means , till the time it develops or it 
matures , you need to  provide protection to the to the designed or to a planted shelterbelts 
and you need to cont rol weeds  over that region to have better growth in the shelterbelts 
ok. 
So, the controls of weeds after shelterbelt establishment that should be in your planning  
step ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:37) 
 
Now, then the selection of trees and shrubs ok ; so, this is the one of the most important  
part of shelterbelt selection because  by selecting a particular species , you are not only  
selecting a particular species , but you are selecting a combination which has some kind 
of height , density and which can protect we can which can give your protection to a 
some particular distance  ok. 
So, all these factors are depend on proper selection of trees and shrubs ok . So, the denser 
the shelterbelt is the greater the wind protection you will get , but again that dependence on y our design requirement or design need  ok. The shrubs provide ex cellent snow 
trapping and wind protection over short distance due to th e density and limited height .  
So, suppose if you are interested in  addition to the wind protection you also want 
protecti on from snow also , so, you can also think of planting some smaller  shrubs which 
can provide an excellent  protection  protecting cover  against the snow cover snow ok . 
The shrubs provide excellent snow  trapping and wind protection over a short distance 
due to  their ability , due to their density and limited height ok . 
So, the combination of different trees and shrubs should be selected based on  what is 
required or what is designed  are designed  requirements are there ok . Then trees  that are 
actually upright and with which have narrow growth habit at, they provide most effective 
protection . So, while selecting the tree as  species , you need to understand you need to be 
very careful about selecting a proper tree species which will be effective for your area 
and which  can serve your purpose  ok.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:32 ) 
 
Similarly, to that while selecting the  trees , the species should be herbicide  herbicide 
tolerant the. So, herbicide tolerance is important and is a major factor limiting the 
suitability of some of th e tree species for field shelter  purposes ok. So, there are different 
factors as I said. You need to consider before selecting a proper species proper  species 
ok. So, such for example, in reduced till or zero till agricultural fields with adequate 
moisture , you can adopt tall and narrow trees that are more effective  in that scenario . 
And also the mixture of trees and shrub species that will provide  height and density is a  
mixture of  you can also think of planting  mixture of  trees and shrubs species to get t o 
achieve maximum height to achieve  good  enough height and density  to get maximum 
amount of protection length  ok. So, these are the different  selection criteria  which can be 
used which can be  thought of  before selecting any par ticular species for shelterbe lt ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:46)  
 
Now, these  characteristics of shelterbelts are depend on various parameters . So,  like 
height of the shelterbelt , the density  of the shelterbelt . So, densit ies actually dependent 
on what kind of tree specifies you are sele cting whether conifer , deciduous  or shrubs  are 
combination of that . Orientation of that shelterbelts in relation to the prevailing wind 
direction  that is also important  criteria . Then length of the shelterbelt  which is  which we 
you want  to a design  ok; then modification and microclimate condition . So, all this 
things are  when the characteristics of shelterbelt . (Refer Slide Time: 09:32 ) 
 
So, first let us see height . So, so, shelterbelt height is  actually determining factor for a 
area of the protected downw ind zone and it is controlled by the tallest tree or shrub row 
in the shelterbelt . So, as I said wind is actually most important  sorry height is the most  
important  parameter here which  decides the length of  downwind protection ok . 
So, let us say this is th e shelterbelts  so, which combination of some kind of  shrubs  some 
kind of deciduous or some kind of  medium  density trees and high density trees conifer 
trees . So, we can see some  we can see the protection from this can be seen can be 
effectively seen  at a d istance of  let us say 2 to 5 times H, H is height of this shelterbelt  
ok. 
So this suppose  you are you want to protect your this  structure farm structure , so, to 
protect this f arm structure ; so, the distance should be  distance of this shelterbelt should 
be at least  a within  or the or the location of your firm structure should be at a distance of  
2 to 5 H from the shelterbelt  ok. 
So, the height of the shelterb elts varies  from shelterbelt  and it increases as the shelterbelt 
matures . So, so all this thing you n eed to be understand before  designing . So, all this 
thing need s to be taken care of while designing the any shelterbelt  ok. So, the here we have seen  so, this shelterbelts actually is used for to protect from the 
wind current as well as it is trapping the snow ok . So, it is protecting this area from snow 
and as well as  wind  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:28)  
 
Now, next important  parameter is the density ok . So, a den se shelterbelt will have less 
wind passing through it . So, the air pressure is reduced on the le eward side ok . So, the air  
pressure will be  reduce on the leeward side that will make  ok. So, the air pressure will be 
reduce on leeward side of the den se shelterbelt . This low pressure areas  will pull air 
coming over the shelte rbelt downward and will create a down ward  will create a 
turbulence over that region .  
So, suppose this is your shelterbelt , this is on one section if we see . So, you can see the  
effectiveness of this  reduction in wind speed is can be visible  at a at a  length of  2 to 5 H 
here and on t he windward side and here we can see  10 to 20 H side, but you can see here 
as the air  rushes through it  thus the low pressure which is there will pull this air here a nd 
in the absence of very high density  sorry  in the absence of porous  barrier here , so there 
will be lot of turbulence here . So, the effective distance effective distance of protection 
will be reduced  ok. 
So, what we said? A dense shelterbelt will have less wind passing through it and it will 
reduce the  pressure on the leeward side and  which wi ll cost the , which will reduce the  
length of  protection ok . So, the zone of protection  is somewhat similar behind this . So, zone of . So, we can see 
become  because of this  zone of protection is somewhat smaller behind the den 
shelterbelts . So, if the shelte rbelts is very dense  so, zone of  protection will be relatively 
smaller as compare  to the  porous  shelterbelt  ok. 
So, for less  than shelterbelt , the density of shelterbelt is less or  porous ; more air can pass 
through it  and resulting into reduce turbulence a nd greater length of downwind protected 
area ok . So, this is the effect of density  on the on the shelterbelt  on reduction on 
reduction  of wind speed . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:46 ) 
 
And other things like  density factors  controlling a shelterbelt densities . There are  
different factors that all together controls the density  of shelterbelts . So, for example, 
number of rows which are being used, the distance between trees and this species 
composition . So, what combinations we are using as a  for a shelterbelt ok? So, 
obliviously the number of  rows , how many number of rows we have used , the spacing 
between them , the distance between the tree that is the spacing  and different combination 
of species that like shrubs residues trees or  medium den medium density trees or h igh 
density trees . Also the selected species composition will determined the height , density 
or overall structure of your shelterbelt . 
So, depending on the species you select for this shelterbelt , the height of this structure 
high density and the length of  protection will be determined . (Refer Slide Time: 14:56)  
 
So, this example show ; so, this is another  image which explain the  density . In case  so, 
there are s o, is our goal is to reduce the soil erosion and even ly distribut e the snow . So, 
in that case a s maller density would be favorable for the field shelterbelts . As I said there 
are different  shelterbelt s. So, in case of field shelterbelts , we have our objective is to 
reduce soil erosion and even distribution of snow . In that case we need low to medium ; 
we need low to  medium density  shelterbelts . 
So, these are the different  density of  different range  different kinds of tree width different 
density . So, this is actually low density  of shelterbelt tree  species , this is medium high 
and high . So, you can see here when you are choosing a very low  very low density  very 
low density  tree species as a shelterbelt then it allows moreover to pass  through it ; so, it 
dependence on your requirement . 
So, so the although the effect . So, the effect of downwind reduction wi ll be more here , 
but, but  the suppose if  your requirement is to trap snow also and to reduce the  and also to 
reduce the  effect of  temperature wind temperature then in that case this will not be the  
effective ok . 
So, in case of medium high , it can allow som e part of air to pass through it , so, with 
some  relatively higher density compare to the  shelterbelts . So, it can serve your purpose , 
but it should be planted in combination with  some different  combination of trees  with different de nsities  and similar this  is a conifer  which will be most effective to traps  to 
trap snow and to protect from the  temperature effect of wind  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:06 ) 
 
Now, orientation as we discussed ; so, though  once you  finalize you your location , so, 
you should know the pr evailing wind direction . So,  once you know the prevailing wind 
direction you can go for multiple leg  shelterbelts . So, in a region which is having 
variable winds ; variable in terms of magnitude as well as direction . 
So, in that case you can say multiple le g shelterbelts . So, most effective the effectiveness 
of shelterbelts are most  or you can say shelterbelts are most effective when the , they are 
orientated at right angles to the prevailing wind ok . So, field’s  crops such as  field’s  crops 
usually need prote ction from hot and dry summer wind s abrasive windblown  and soil 
particle . Whereas, farmyards and feedlots they need protection from  more t han one 
direction . 
So, this like a like  based on your requirement ok . So, and the  variation of wind in 
different direc tion over a year you can  you can select the orientation of your field 
shelterbelt  ok. So, as I said in case of farmyards or feedlots the protection is required 
from more than one direction . So, in that case you need to think of multiple leg 
shelterbelts  ok. Whereas , in case of field crops if you know the  prevailing wind is only in one direction 
and it is mostly from one direction and you have whole purpose is to reduce the  effect of  
wind  effect of soil erosion and reduce the  wind speed , then you can go for from most 
dominant  orientation . But again if the wind speed s are changing , then you have to think 
of different leg of  multi multiple leg of shelterbelts . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:02 ) 
 
Then the next parameter  is a length ok . The shelterbelt  the shelterbelt le ngth determines 
the amount of  determines the amount of protected area  ok. So, for this shelterbelt , so, this 
will be the  let us say amount of protected area . 
So, length of shelterbelt determines the amount of protected area  downwind of the  wind 
barrier ok . So, in order to reduce the influence of end turbulence , so, as I was said the L 
by H ratio in the previous class also , L by  H ratio should be  10 is to 1. So, also the  there 
is the shelterbelts should be continues and there should not be any gap ok. 
Becaus e gap can cause  can become funnels a nd that  concentrate wind flow . So, that wind 
speed is accelerated over the end ok , over the end or where where ver the gap is present . 
So, suppose  this is our shelterbelt if you are planning and there is some gap and 
prevailing  wind direction is in this direction ok , so, the air  the wind speed will be 
moreover this region ok . So, the effectiveness of your shelterbelt or the effective protected area will get reduced 
ok. So, gap should be avoided , but in case if you want som e lengths ; so, you can , so in 
shelter belts  we are actually  planning multiple rows . So, you can  stagger actually  ok. 
So, you can give access  suppose prevailing wind direction is  like this is  you can stagger 
the different rows and provide the access . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:37)  
 
Then modification in micro climate conditions ; so, because of this shelterbelts , the 
temperature different  metrological or different  micro climate variables will get effected . 
So, most  important will be air temperature and humidity wil l raise ok . There will be 
reduction in soil moisture  soil moisture  evaporation  and plant water loss ok . So, 
evaporation will be reduce and  there will be increase in soil moisture , but the loss 
because of a evaporation will be reduce . At a distance of  10 H from this shelterbelt  that 
is on leeward side of the belt , you can see daily air temperature s are warmer then the  
open field condition ok , also there will be increase in soil temperature . 
So, if you compare  2 cases  like bare soil ; compare to the bare soil , the soil which are 
covered with vegetation they have they will have low soil temperature . So, most of more 
soil temperature will be observed over the bare soil ok . Then increase in relative 
humidity and soil moisture ok . So, sometime this increased in rel ative humidity  it should not be as  I said the selection of 
species ; the selection of species  such that  some sometime s the relative humidity is too 
high. Suppose , if relative humidity is too high then there are chances of  attacks from the 
pesticide  pest and  disease  ok. 
So, these are the thing these are the conditions these are the microclimate variable  that 
are effected  that are  that are modified because of the placement of  shelterbelt . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:24)  
 
Now,  will see the different type s of shelter belts ; so, first this is the farm farmyard 
shelterbelt which is generally used to protect the farm structure may be temperature 
structure or permanent structure or combination of  different things  to mostly protect the 
farms farmyard  from structure . We use these  farmyard shelterbelts  ok. . (Refer Slide Time: 22:46 ) 
 
So, to design that  the farm structure should be located at least  should be located within 
the distance of  2 to 7 times  H of the  H here is the  height of shelterbelts . So, building 
should be a structure should be located  within a  maximum speed reduction zone that is  2 
to 7 H ok, 2 to 7 H ok. 
So, these are the different  thing s which we need to consider while designing farmyard 
shelterbelts . So, location and shape of the shelterbelts  at what location  we are planning 
then why we need a protection where whether we need protection for  winter conditions 
like protection form  wind temperature  or do we need protection from summer like dry 
and dustbins ok . So, depending on that we have to design the farms far myard shelterbelts 
ok. 
Similarly , avoid access opening in the shelterbelts into direction of prevailing wind . So, 
this is the wrong way here to provide access  here ok . So, if the prevailing wind direction 
is like this  sorry . So, this is the wrong way to pr ovide  to provide access  to the to the 
shelterbelts ok . 
So, the correct way is to have a , some kind of  to have some kind of  buffer or  stagger the 
row actually . So, that  effect  of this  opening can be reduce ok . So, there is some angle is 
there . So, that kin d of measures  can be adopted . (Refer Slide Time: 24:29 ) 
 
Now, the farmyard shelterbelt s should consist of combination of different species and 
trees of shrub which have different properties . Such as they should be tall , they should be 
fast growing , they s hould be long lived and they should provide sufficient density  they 
should at sufficient density  ok. So, these are the different  this example shows the  typical  
5 row shelterbelt which is the combination of multiple rows  which is the  combination of 
multiple  rows  ok. 
So, the first row which is of very low density  very low height ok . So, here the row 1 is 
mostly shrubs ok . So, row 2 is also  relatively lesser dens ity then the  coniferous trees . So, 
this is row  2 and row 3. So, these  2 are the deciduous  trees and  then row  4 and row  5, 2 
rows of  coniferous are high density  shelterbelts ok . 
So, if you have the some design , if you have the  area constraints , in that case also you 
can see select  different combination of these  shelterbelt different rows of shelterbelts . So, 
shelterbelts fewer than  5 rows can also be think of ; so, the combination of rows 1 or 2, 1 
or 2 or 1 or 3 or 2 or 3. So, for 3 row shelterbelts also you can think of combination of 
row number 1, 2, 3 or different combination  ok. 
So, different these ar e different combination that should be selected based on your design 
requirement and the constraints  area constraint . (Refer Slide Time: 26:17 ) 
 
Similar this is a actually the spacing  requirement for different  combination actually . So, 
for shrubs mostly t he spacing should be around 0.3, 0.3 to 1 meters . For deciduous , the 
spacing should be around  2 to 2.5, whereas, for highly dense coniferous tree there were 
spacing can be  3.5 meter . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:46 ) 
 
Now, next is the field shelterbelts ok . So, in field shelterbelts are combination of 
different rows and trees . Field shelterbelt s are rows of trees and shrubs that are planted 
on agriculture land with an objective to protect the crops  from soil and wind erosion  to protect the soil  to protect the crop  and soil from wind erosion and also to provide  
protection against this snow and to improve the microclimate condition . 
So, field, so, these  field shelterbelt s are nothing  but the combination  of some trees and 
rows with an object to protect crop or agricul tural land . So, this protection can be against 
either against  the wind erosion or snow or with an objective to improve the microclimate . 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:38 ) 
 
So, this is this is one example of design of field shelterbelt ok . So, the first shelterbel t 
suppose this is your  main row and the first shelterbelt should be on the extreme side of 
the, of the field . So, suppose the prevailing winds  are here actually . So, it should be at 
least around 45 meter from the road . 
So, it should be place  it should plac ed at the extreme wind side of  extreme wind side of 
the field . So, this is your field this is of  let us say 64 hectare ok. So, the first  shelterbelt 
first row of this shelterbelt is placed at a distance of  45 meter which is  let us say extreme 
west side of this field and remaining rows can be  can be place depend  depending on the 
area available ok . So, the remaining shelterbelts divided  can be placed dividing  based on 
the area available  ok. 
Now, spacing ; so, the spacing between these  2 shelterbelts  can be kep t as 200 to 250 
meters  and number of rows  let us say suppose here the field size was 64 hectare , so, for 
this 64 hectare , you can think of  4 rows ok . So, and these row should be the perpendicular to the prevailing  wind . So, that is the one thing and  so, in incase if you 
want to provide some excess line or to  move your farm equipments  for one place to 
another place . So, what you can do ? 
You can  you can you can put some staggered row . So, this placement can be  some kind 
of staggered manner ok . So, that will g et some  adequate room at the row and for 
equipment access and reduce the effect of wind  funnel . So, this was designed for 
shelterbelts of field shelterbelt . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:34 ) 
 
So, next is roads roadside shelterbelts . So, I am explaining this in br iefly. So, purpose of 
roadside shelterbelts is to protect  to protect the field from dust and to trap snow from the 
roadsides  ok. So, suppose this is this was your field  ok. So, and this is the highway . So, 
the proposed roadside belt should be at least  30 meter away  max ideally it should be 
around 90 meter , but ideally  at least it should be 30 meter away from the high way ok . 
So, and there are different  measures actually different designed styles , but since  our 
objective is not to design for road sides shelt erbelts , I am just  explain ing briefly here . (Refer Slide Time: 30:25 ) 
 
Similarly,  livestock shelterbelts : so, the primary here also the primary goal of this kind of 
shelterbelt is to protect livestock  from wind  both, the speed as well as  temperature  and 
lower animal stress improve animal health and increase feeding efficiency ok . 
So, the purpose of this  livestock  shelterbelt is to  protect the animal  ok. So, in this case 
actually we will mostly use the high density  very high density of  shelterbelts , tress w ith 
very high density  ok, so to reduce the temperature effect of wind . 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:09 ) 
 Now, similarly the next is the  wildlife shelterbelts . So, it is on the purpose of wildlife 
shelterbelt is to promote greater bio diversity . So, wildlife habi tat that provides food , 
nesting and shelterbelts required varieties variety of combination of trees and shrubs and 
other plants  ok. 
So, our purpose here is to protect the wildlife habitat here . So, in that case we can think 
of multiple row shelterbelts . Multiple row shelterbelts can be design an establish to 
provide superior wind reduction and to create a better habitat for  wildlife . So, so, this is 
objective here is to promote the bio diversity . 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:51)  
 
So, this is one example of wildli fe shelterbelts . Here we are using different combination 
of tree species . So, on the windward side , the starting from the  shrubs with the low er 
height and low er density ; lower density  trees and shrub s. At the middle , the coniferous 
tree with vary coniferou s tree with very high density  and again towards the  leeward side  
you can follow the similar pa ttern ok. 
So, this is the overall  is one example of wildlife shelterbelt . So, it is a combination of 
multiple trees and trees and shrub to make a better wildlife habitat for improving the 
wildlife habitat  ok. (Refer Slide Time: 32:46 ) 
 
Now, next is the  riparian shelterbelts . So, the purpose of riparian shelterbelt is to create a 
buffer zone ok . So, the purpose of this  a riparian  shelterbelts is to create a  buffer zone 
between the agriculture land  and bodies and water  bodies  including floodplain and 
wetlands . So, these are most  effective  soil and water conservation measure actually  
which can be use as a large scale  along the along the  along the side of the  river act ually  
ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 33:19 ) 
 So, the repair as the , what is the benefit of this riparian shelterbelt ? So, riparian buffer or 
riparian shelterbelt they can provide or they can  stabilize the bank which is under 
erosion , they can stabilize the erodin g bank  or shorelines of adjacent water bodies . They 
can protect the water quality by acting a organic filter ; they can protect the water body 
by acting a organic filter by trapping sediments and harmful chemicals  going to the  
going directly to the  directly  to the water body ok . 
It can be a source to sources of food for divers of  upland wildlife  and it can also improve 
the aquatic and terrestrial habitats for fish , wildlife and organism  ok. So, the if  so, these 
are the different  these are the different benef its of riparian buffer . First; so, we can get a 
protection from the erosion then we can trap the excessive harmful  sediments  going to 
the water body and it can improve the aquatic life and terrestrial habitats over that re gion 
and also it can provides source to the  wildlife  habitat which are  applying to the  to the this  
to the riparian shelterbelts ok . 
So, so, in this class actually we have seen  different we have  we have seen the 
shelterbelts , definition of shelterbelts , what are the different type s, differe nt factors that 
effects the shelterbelts , what are the different parameter  parameters  that effect the effect  
effectiveness of shelterbelt  or they can provide which can be  governed which can hav e a 
governing role in providing the effective protection area ; that is  density , height , then 
combination of different trees and species and length . 
And we also seen the different  types of shelterbelts with different objectives ok ; so, like 
of farmyard shelterbelts , field shelterbelt , livestock shelterbelt , roadside sh elterbelt and 
riparian or wildlife shelterbelts . So, with that  I will stop here in this class  for this class . 
So, in the next class we will be discussing more about the  about the sands  sand transpose 
and how to control it  ok. 
Thank you .  