Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Damodar R. Mailapalli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 54 
Improvi ng Land Capability  
 
Hi so, this is again the second lecture of  week 12 . Mostl y we will be talking about 
improving land capability. So, in the first lecture we talked about land capability 
classification . So, once you  classify the lands so, some lands are you know if you see  
arable lands non -arable lands.  
So, and also first class i s the class number 1. And if you go for class number 2 3 4  you 
may have to you know start using the  soil conservation measures.  So, and how do you 
improve  the land capability  using you know some  measures we are going to discuss this  
in this lecture . 
(Refer  Slide Time: 00:59)  
 
So, I said  maybe let us let us go here. So, the whole  the course continue in week 12 again 
repeated repeating this that the first one land capability classification we finished. And  
this is lecture number 2 of week 12 ; we are going to  talk about improving land capability  
and the followed by the other  lectures , we will be seeing in the next  few classes.  (Refer Slide Time: 01:21)  
 
So here the  collection of imp  information  for land capability classification.  So, what kind 
of information really we required to classify the land  so that  we can you know put the 
particular land on the class 1, class 2, class 3 or something like that. So,  here the 
information we required  here is the soil survey  basically this is very important  soil 
survey map. So, that provides information for land capability  classification; such as you 
know soil series , this is also you can get from a soil survey . And soil taxonomy  and then  
texture effective soil depth, land slope  infiltration characteristics of the particular land 
and then hydraulic conductivity, erode ability and wetness . 
So, how  I mean whether this soil will be capable of holding the soil moisture  or not and 
water logging condition where is the soil has a problem with you know what logging. 
And the salinity h as the problem of the land or not  and the climate and other details. So, 
see all these things  once you get the you know information you can you know classify 
the main class and then the subclasses . So, the soil  survey map is very important , and 
you can get  all the information  from the using the soil map as well as  some other  survey 
maps . (Refer Slide Time: 02:51)  
 
So, then the next is so, what is land capability, and how can it be improved ? So, land 
capability we  defined in  the previous lecture.  So, the ba sically the land capability is 
whether the particular land is  you know  capable for growing crops or not . So, basically 
so how can it be improved the class 2, 3, 4 or even  (Refer Time: 03:16) classes ; mostly I 
am talking about arable lands here . So, how can  we improve  the you know  land 
condition for crop  grow I mean crop growth. So, basically the 4 common practices ; the 
Irrigation, Erosion Control, Drainage and Forming so, the irrigation so basically helps in 
so, irrigation in the sense the giving water to t he plant  artificially.  
So, that is for beneficial use of crop growth basically. So, once you give irrigation or 
irrigating a crop. So, definitely you are  wetting the you know the soil root zone right, and 
that definitely  will improve the soil condition, an d also improve the  macro or  you know  
micro nutrients  availability, and also the biological  you know condition or biological  you 
know biota, we can say the soil biota will improve . 
So, then the definitely the erosion control measures  will control the soil m oment from the 
surface . And the drainage will help in you know free drain of water from the top to you 
know the root zone , and the forming definitely will help in making the , but you know 
nice grade of  land, because that is very important that will  give th e efficiency of 
irrigation.  And improve the  not only  I mean water available  to the crop, but also nutrient 
availability will improve, if you can  maintain a good grade of the land . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:09)  
 
So, then next is we are going to see one by one.  So, the erosion control  here so, basically 
this is the excessive erosion may result in land, that is no longer  fertile . The longer term 
product , the long term productivity of land can be assured by  controlling soil erosion. So, 
you will be using  definitel y the soil control  soil conservation  measure. So, in case of  
gulley control  structures and then  or terracing or you know , burns right all these things 
definitely will help in reducing the soil moment from the  for I mean, fertile lands to the  
to the outset of the land . (Refer Slide Time: 05:55)  
 
So, the next is the land drainage so, land drainage  vertical basically the surface drainage  
removing water from the surface of the land. Generally, ditches and terraces are most 
often used for this purpose . And then  there is a internal drainage. So, this is the surface 
and this is all subsurface drainage we can say , it is removal of water within the soil 
profile .  
Basically the  tiles or tubes installed below normal plowing will be used  in this case of 
subsurface drai nage or internal drainage we can say . So, surface drainage removes the 
surface water whereas, subsurface drainage removes water from I mean root zone. Or 
definitely this will be helpful in removing the salts from the root zone . (Refer Slide Time: 06:45)  
 
So, the next is the land forming. So, land forming is very important. This is basically 
smoothing or reshaping of the land to  enhance the use of the land for cultivation. So, 
here a small dips  are filled with a high places  or taken down because if you have  like you 
know  small depressions here . So, the shaping will definitely  refill the depressions . And 
so, that definitely helps in so, what happens if there is a depression here  so, more  you 
know water (Refer Time: 07:14) so, here  the moisture content will be  more here and the 
less here . So, that kind of non -uniformity can be avoided  in case of you know properly  
graded lands . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:31)  
 So, the typically the land forming involves using a laser  guided equipment to  assure the 
good surface so her e if you see  laser  guided equipment. So, this is a tractor  so, which 
shapes the land . And here  this is the laser guide so, it guides the tractor where to you 
know remove the soil excess oil and where to add that excess soil so that  the desired you 
know gra de can be achieved . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:03)  
 
And then capability factors if you see the capability factors or the characteristics  of the 
land the determined  it is best crop or alternative use. So, the capability factors are for 
example, surface characte ristics; the surface structure, erosion, slope  and surface runoff. 
So, these are all the factors which defines the land capability. And this is all surface 
characteristics like, textures and erosion , all these things  subsurface characteristics or 
such as i nternal drainage subsurface drainage  and then soil depth.  (Refer Slide Time: 08:43)  
 
So, you are going to see these capability factors  and then first if you see the soil texture  
is the proportion of sand silt and clay in the soil  in a horizon, because si nce we are 
talking about the crop production. So, mostly  we will be you know concentrating on a 
horizon, because that is  fertile land and used for crop production. And soil can be 
classified as  either coarse sand  and moderately coarse for example, sand and  loam mix  
and medium .  
So, that is a loam and moderately fine, that is a clay and loam mix , and fines  or like a  
clay particles.  So, here the based on soil texture, the soil  can be classified as coarser, 
coarse, moderately coarse, medium, moderately fine an d fine  based on the different  soil, 
you know, textures . (Refer Slide Time: 09:37)  
 
And then internal  permeability so, internal permeability this is also called as internal 
drainage . And soil permeability is the movement of air and water through the soil . So, 
soil permeability is the property of a media. So, it represents the easiness of a particular 
you know like air and water passed through  soil matrix . So, it determined  by the texture 
and structure of the soil and it can be  classified as very slow, a slo w moderate and rapid.  
So, the permeability the internal permeability so, based on the internal permeability soils 
are classified as very slow soils  and slow soils a moderate  soils and rapid , rapid flow 
soils. Because the flow is rapid  if the flow is rapid , and we can say the soils are you 
know rapid moderately rapid or very slow  so, the  based on the permeability . (Refer Slide Time: 10:43)  
 
So, the next is  permeability classes or like permeability class very rapid . So, mostly the 
rate of water flow in this  class is greater than  10 inches per hour . So, similarly very slow 
it will be less than 0.05 inches per hour . So, you can go through these numbers , these 
numbers are very helpful when you talk about the particular, you know, the land class  
based on the per meability . So, if you knowing the particular permeability  range you can  
put them in a particular class . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:23)  
 And then the next is the soil horizon.  So, soil horizon  abc so, something like that  o 
horizon . So, all classes  based on that  the soil depth is  basically here , soil depth is the 
thickness of the soil layers that are important for  crop production. So, for example, the 
classifications based on the soil depth is a very shallow or shallow and moderately deep 
and a deep  and very deep  soils. So, here  in the previous lecture we already talked about 
the soil  classes based on this . 
So, the symbol d1 is  for example, land  capability classification 5 . So, the shallow it is it 
is seems the very deep  class. So, this is the class number 1 is a very deep , and then deep 
soil moderately deep shallow  shallow and very shallow. So, the classes are here, and the 
symbols  all we mentioned in the previous lecture . So, the depths  basically we are talking 
about you know less than 7.5 all these things. So, k nowing the particular  depth we can 
put them in a particular class here . 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:39)  
 
 And then soil erosion; soil erosion  is another factor you can see. So, soil erosion is the 
loss of topsoil by water  or wind. Or with any other forces  you k now so much of the 
fertility of land is  in the topsoil . So, since we are talking about fertility so, we focus on 
topsoil. So, that is important for cultivation. And  your 4 categories of erosion we use. 
The first one is very severe erosion .  
So, mostly the gullies so, I mean very severe erosion means the  soils or steep  I mean, the 
lands are very steep, and mostly you see in the class, you know, the last class 7 8 , and severe erosion and moderate erosion , and non or non to slight erosions . Under these 
classes  we can put based on the particular erosion  factor . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:41)  
 
Sorry, so the next . So, next is the erosion categories if you see . So, non to slight erosion 
generally is 0.0 to 25 percent  original top soil is removed . So, if the original to p soil is 
removed , like 0 to 25 percent of original top soil is removed, then we can put them under 
none to slight erosion  category . And if it is a moderate erosion, if the moderate erosion 
so, that is 26 to 75 percent  and the severe erosion. So, that is 7 6 percent and very severe 
erosion so, more than  one un crossable  gully  present. Suppose  if there is a gully here  so, 
this is that means, one gulley you can say so, this is a difficult to cross right . 
So, I mean in order to cross  so, if this is the gulley i t is a difficult to cross . So, at least if 
it is a more than 1  crossable gulley presents right , more than one gullies . Then it is a very 
severe erosion . (Refer Slide Time: 14:41)  
 
So, or if it is 76 percentage of the original topsoil removed, or one cross able gulley 
present , one uncrossable  gulley present then it is a severe erosion.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:55)  
 
So, like that  we can  you know describe the erosions into different classes and then next is 
the slope. So, slope is the  rise and fall in the elevat ion of the land . So, the  slope is  I mean 
depression and elevation so, measured in percentage  and the number of feet rise  and fall 
in 100 feet . Suppose in 100 feet  so, what is the  rise, maybe the x rise  or maybe the fall , y fall. So, x 
by 100  in percentage you get  the slope . So, the 6 classes of the land slope are commonly 
use. Very steep slope , steep slope, strongly sloping  and moderately sloping, generally 
sloping and nearly  level slope . So, based on this  the based on the slope the land can be 
classified . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:45)  
 
Let us see the  many different  numbers here. So, nearly leveled  0 up to 1 foot of the slope 
in 100 feet so, 1 foot divided by 100. So, there will be  0 point you know  you know 0 1. 
So, that is  0.01. So, that will be about 1 percen t slope right . So, this is a 1 percent slope . 
So, similarly the gentle slope  1 to 3 feet  slope in 100 feet . Moderate slope over 3  feet of 
slope  up to  5 feet in 100 feet so, then a strong slope over 5  to 8 feet in 100 feet . Very 
steep slope greater than  15 feet in 100 feet so, that means, in  over 100 feet all right there 
is a 15 feet  rise you can see  in case of very steep slopes  so this classification . (Refer Slide Time: 16:55)  
 
And then so, next is a surface runoff  so, surface runoff  is the water from  rain snow  other 
precipitation that does not soak into the ground . 
So, whatever abstractions is done  so, the amount of water which is running off from the 
field, and which is the part of precipitation is called the runoff. And the amount of runoff 
depends on th e soil texture definitely. So, this  the sandy soils definitely the abstraction 
will be more ; that means, infiltration will be more, and you will you will see the less 
runoff  and the slope of the land increasing slope definitely increases the water flow and  
then increases the run off . 
So, the categories of surface  runoff are very slow,  slow and moderate  and a rapid so, 
based on the runoff class  based on the runoff that soils can be classified. So, very slow 
these soils are having very slow runoff, and slow t he soils are having slow runoff and 
moderate the soils are having moderate runoff , so like that . (Refer Slide Time: 18:03)  
 
So, let us see  the categories based on surface runoff so very slow . So, that is about 0 to 1 
feet of slope , on coarse soil, the coa rse soil what happens there is the inter  stitious 4, I 
mean, the  spaces, interstitial spaces are larger. So, definitely the water will pass through 
the soil very easily. And so, that is why though the down  very easily it will go whereas, 
the runoff will be  very slow because of that . That is why we called  varies  these soils  
definitely , I mean the runoff in case of  coarse soils is very slow.  
And various in other texture soils  which has slope from 0 to 1 , that is called slow and 1 
to 3 feet slope  in any textu re we call moderate , and over 3 feet of slope on any texture  we 
call a rapid. So, you see the rapid runoff in case of the soils having more than 3  feet of 
slope, that mean  more than 3 percent slope we can say or any other texture.  
So, irrespective of any t exture so, the slope is  basically the good player in deciding there  
runoff. So, in this  lecture  mainly we focused on the  land capability  what is the land 
capability, and then  how to you know improve the land capability using you know 
irrigation, and using the drainage and then  and also the land forming right land forming 
so it is very important . 
And then so  based on that there are some factors we discussed on land capability, and 
then based on the permeability, based on  you know the slope, based on the runo ff texture  
and the soil depth. So, we decided or  discussed the how the land  classes can be called . So, thank you so much for  you know lecture 1 and lecture 2 of this most of the land 
capability classifications . 
And the following lectures we will be talking  about  sediment  transportation . And then 
the measurements , the devices used to measure you know  sedimentation and then  I mean 
erosion, I mean, soil sampling you know other stuff . 
Thank you so much.  