Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Amey Pathak  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur  
 
Lecture – 52 
Stabiliz ation of Sand Dunes  
 
Hello friends , welcome to this  week fif th lecture of  week  11, of Soil  and Water 
Conservation E ngineering course . So, in this  module actually we will we were discussing 
about the wind erosion ok . So, we have seen in these  5 classes that  what is wind erosion , 
what are the different factors that affect the wind erosions  or the y can trigger the wind 
erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:43)  
 
So, and we have seen t he mechanics of the movement , we have seen  how the initiation 
start, the wind erosion is a like , mechanism of m ovement in terms of  initiation of the 
movement , detachment of t he soil particle from the surface than , in terms of transport  we 
have seen how it is being transported from one place to another place . We have seen the  
next step  is deposition ; and we have also seen the various transpor t mechanism . 
So, we have seen  the saltation , we have seen the  suspension . What  is mean by 
suspension ? We have you seen what is mean by surface  creep different mode of transport  
we have seen actually . And after that we have seen that to control wind erosion  we 
actually need two things  we eith er we have  control  or we have to reduce  the erosiveness  of wind by constructing some kind of barrier ; or we can make a soil sur face more  
resistant to the wind erosion . 
So, we have seen a  different types of measures , to prevent the wind erosion , through to 
prevent the mo vement of soil from the surface . So, and then the  next class  we have seen  
mechanical barriers like , design of windbreaks  and what can be the optimum spacing . 
And what are the different design  requirements  we have also seen , the shelter belts . Then 
in the next class we have seen  what are the sand dunes , wind variability’s , wind 
variability directions , classification of sand dunes and how sand dunes  forms  over a 
costal regions . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 02:37)  
 
So, in this present class , will be  focusing on stabilization of  stabilization of sand dunes  
ok. How to stabilize the  sand dunes ? So, the sand dunes they are commonly found in 
shoreline and the mostly in a desert  environment . Mostly they are found in the coastal 
regions or  in the desert environm ent. 
So, naturally  they are  essential , because they can be a natural  defen se mechanism b y 
nature ok . So, they can protect , they protect the beaches from  erosion and recruit new 
sand to the eroded  beaches ; formation of new  sand ok. So, and this , but, becaus e of the  if 
the wind velocit ies are  very high . So,  the s and which are under influence of strong 
winds , can they can be  drifted  to down wind  direction , downwind direction to more 
inward  and it can be deposited to  more inward depositional  location s. So, it can be that . So, that can result in to the inward expansion of old dunes . So, some 
times  this is this can happen because of the natural process or  sometimes it can happen 
because of the anthropogenic activities . Sometimes like if you can see , if you know 
(Refer Time: 03:45) reason or  reasons  which has  sand dunes and which are more prone 
to wind erosion . So, because of the faulty  agricultural prac tices if you are clearing or we 
are cutting the natural vegetation  cover  from the surface . 
So, that the dunes ; the older dunes may  shift more in wards  and new dunes may  form . So, 
we will be having . So, there will be  expansion of dune area . So, we need to adopt 
different measures to control this kind of  expansion  of dunes  or expansion of dunes or 
we can say that transpor t of sands , transport of sand  from one place to another place . So, 
sand. So, what we have to do ? So we have to  stabilize the existing sand dune  so, that the  
sand drifting  can be prevented  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:35)  
 
So, in the sand  movement  mode and ra te of mo vement  actually  depends on the differ ent 
criteria , first the type of d une and then the wind velocit y, strength o f wind , direction of 
the wind , then the sand  grain  property of the sand grain , the moisture content , humidity 
of sands  dune  sand and rel ative density of sand layer s within  the dune  system ok . Then, 
so, this stabilization is needed to protect the area downwind . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:11)   
So, let us see what ar e the different measures . So, as I discussed earlier also, that to 
control wind erosion what we have to do . So, either we have to reduce the  wind velocity 
or we have  to slow down the w ind velocity at  some particular location . Or we can make 
soil surface more resistant to the wind erosion . In case , there are some measures . So, 
suppose if you  are planning for long term solutions . 
So, for long term solution means , the permanent s control s measures ; so, permanent 
control measurement means , you can go for afforestation  to plant more trees , but 
normally it takes lot of time and investment . So, before that you can go for some 
temporary  sand control system ok . So, basically this temporary control systems can be a 
initial step for a permanent solution or there can be a temporary solution to the existing  
problem . 
So, the temporary sand  control sys tems are actually  can be  in the form of shielding 
surface or  covering the surface with a st able material s or by establis h establishing or 
constructing  the sand fences . Which can be  which can trap the  sand ok , and they c an stop 
the further  movement of sa nd ok. (Refer Slide Time: 06:24)  
 
So, this as I said, this stabilization it can be achieved by  either  reducing the wind speed 
by different measures or by using vegetation  cover over the surface . So, different 
measures include , the chemical measures , spraying  of chemicals  then mechanical 
measures for like , construction of barriers , windbreaks  that kind of thing  or biological 
measures . Biological measure means  plantation of  plantation of trees and shrubs  that 
regions which are  more suitable to that region . 
And also by maintaining a proper soil plant  and water  balance  so that the  movement of 
sand or detachment of sa nd can be stopped  ok. So, the purpose of sand temperatur e sand 
control is actually to control moving  further moving  dune or sand d rifting , during the 
initial period  of in permanent sand control system . And also to enhance the condition 
which can be suitable , which can favor  the plant growth in future  ok. And then there is a  
permanent control system . (Refer Slide Time: 07:33)  
 
So, let us see the  first type of temporary  control led measures . So, the  first in the sand 
shielding ; so, in sand shielding  it includes by  use of stone mulch  or by wetting the 
surface , either  by water or in some case , in some areas  where the petroleum waste are 
available . So, we can  apply some kind of  some oil to limited area a lso the waste  product 
actually I am talking about . Then uses o f some chemicals  stabilizer  we can , which  can 
favors  the bonding between the soil  grain grains particle . Then biological  crusting then 
or by coverin g the  upper layer of  soil by different cover such as , plastic , nets and 
geotextiles  ok. Let us see what is sand  shield  stone  mulch. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:21)  
 So, accordin g to US-Highway Research B oard 1973,  so they advise or the recommend 
the use of grav el or stone or  crush  rock blankets to control the erosion  during the process 
of highway construction . So, sometimes  in suppose , the when the vegetative measures 
are almost impossible . So, in that case , this kind of measure can be used . So, they also 
this US-HRB  US-Highway Research B oard the y specified that , if the blank  the forming a 
blanket of gravel smaller than  half inch in diameter . We can with stand  of the velocity up 
to  137 kilo meter per hour ok. 
So, or we can say , we can use , a round one  inch of la yer of aggregate of gravel , which is 
normal ly adequate for areas  that are not subjected to the traffic . So, this is in terms of  
roads  ok. So, (Refer Time: 09:20)  grading  include that, that there should be a  100 percent  
passing in one and half in sieve , then the 60  to 90 percent  passing in 1  in sieve then  
passing  one-forth  is around  20 percent . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 09:35)  
 
So, this kind of grading can be used . Then also according to this is Egyptian Desert 
Institute , so recommend  the recommended to use grave l of size greater than 2  mm. So,  
and then we specif ied the quantit ies also so the fine gravel s can of around  the quantity of  
20 tons per acre  can be used. And the medium gravel of quantity around  50 tons per acre  
can also be used and then crushed or crushe d rock or clay can be used  around 100  tons 
per acre . (Refer Slide Time: 10:03)  
 
So, this is that  stone  mulch , then comes to the water an other  popular  water ; another 
popular  temporary  control system is the  water or application of water or  brine wetting . 
So, water  can be used , water can be spread on the surface . So, to increase the cohesion  
between grain s, so we can spr ay it  to increase the percentage of fine particle between 
sand grain s. 
So, presence of water can promote  a vegetation  growth and it also redu ce the harmful 
salt cont ent in  the soil ; which can further relate to the growth of vegetation ok. Also in 
brine wetting ; in the brines  which are normally r ich in carbonates and sulphate s 
precipitate salt s. That tends to cement  the s and grains and resist th e wind erosion ok . So, 
brines wetting  can also be used here . (Refer Slide Time: 11:00)  
 
Then use s chemical stabilizers ; so, some  kind of chemic als which are available and  
which are cost effective , it can be used  to prevent the  sand movement . So, these che mical  
stabilizers  are normally applied on the sa nd; to control the sand movement and 
advancement of dune s. 
So, this chemical stabilizer s acts as a adhesive  binder  for the sand and some chemicals 
they form a film on the sand grains , that increases the speci fic gravity  and therefore, the 
consequently decrease at the rate of erosion . So, they form  a some kind of  thin film over 
the surface . So, which can prevent  the erosion  soil erosion . (Refer Slide Time: 11:46)  
 
So, this is according to Kaul 1996,  they have mention ed, so in the contexts of Thar 
deserts , in India . So, they have mentioned  different major chemical products that are 
available in market , which can be used to control  the, which can be used as a  chemicals  
stabilizer to prevent  sand movement ok. So, they are in the form of powders like , sand 
top are some of them are in the form of liquids or som e of them in the form of , mesh, 
some of them are in the form of ; some of them are in the form of mes h of very fine  
strands ok. 
So, the application can include by spraying or spraying  on the surface and they have 
different , under  application doses are mentioned here . So, this kind of chemical stabilize r 
can be  selected by proper considering  the different ; by proper  considering the 
requirement of the of the reason s. (Refer Slide Time: 12:54)  
 
So, this chemical stabilizer  can be the effectiveness of this chemical stabilizer  can be 
decided based on  by assessing its  solubility in water ; by calculating the by knowing the 
optimum dilution  ratio. T hen optimum applicatio n rate what is optimum application rate . 
So, that it can be cost effective , then bonding strength of the material , then rate of surface 
erosion . So, to what exten t the erosion is happening over that re gion, then effect ive life 
of the  chemical , which is bei ng applied over the field . 
So, that it can sustain , the natural field conditions which it can sustain  the heat , humidity , 
rainfall and ultraviolet rays then effect of chemical on seed germination on  seed 
germination  so, it should not affect the growth of p lant also . So, our purpose is to , our 
purpose is to maintain  a proper plant the cover also . So, this by  the chemical  which you 
are using it should not harm the plants . So, this care  has to be taken , while selecting any 
chemical stabilizer . 
 (Refer Slide Ti me: 14:04)   
Then b iological crusting . So, in the re gions  where  frequent  dewfall is observed . So, this 
frequent dewfall can contribute to the stabilization  of sand dunes . So, this available 
moisture from this frequent dewfall can be a source of moisture for formation of 
formation of biological cr ust over region . So, this clust  are actually formed by biologic al 
activity of blue -algae , which can pr omote s the stability over  the dune ok . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:37)  
 
Then this is most common and most popular  temp orary measures to control  the sa nd to 
control the sand mo vements . So, that is the sand fences  or construction of ba rriers in the 
form of fences . So, the idea i s here they will trap the s and, and they can stop the further  
movement of sand . Or they can stabi lize the sand dune  or they can form , an artificial sand dune s ok so, that the  further  movement of sand  to the inward direction can be 
stopped . 
So, the sand fences  they are widely used  for beach  preservation , dune restoration 
typically it is consist of ligh tweight wood strips , wires or perforated plastic sheets  
attached to regularly space takes . So,  they are actually based on different kinds of 
material s, so  it which is actually locally available like wood s or plastic nets or we can 
use also the residual of plants ; or we can use the plastic cover  wire mesh , the different 
kind of material that can be used collectively to  establish of sand fence  so, that the 
movement of sand can be stop  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:51)  
 
So, these are the major prerequisites  for sand fences. I n the structure , the structure which 
we are selecte d or sand fences  which we which are selected or design  for a particular 
area they should reduce the wind speed , but that this that does not complete  they should 
not completely blocked the wind . So, in case of windbreaks actually we have seen that , 
windbreaks actually , the windbreaks or  any kind of barrier , it should actually allow  some 
kind of air airflow within the  porous media . So, the barrier should not be complete solid ; 
because  the porosit y is less of it has more solid , then there is a possibility of formation of 
vortex ok . So, we need to be we need  take care of that also . 
So, it is recommended that around 40 to 50 percent  porosity  is good ; which can provide a 
greater extent of protection  ok. So, on also in addition to that we need to do some kind of  initial study t o understand the material ok . So, how this material reacts  with the wind , 
and we also should know the wind profile  over a height  so that we can incr ease the 
extent of  production  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:08)  
 
Then  this is the typical  example , this is a  different example of sa nd fencing . So, different 
types of sand fencings  are norma lly used , to protect and encourage  accretion  of sa nd on 
coastal beaches and dunes . So, this is first case, in the first case here you can see , yeah 
can we  stop here? 
Student : You explain sir . 
No this icons are  not visible  ok. So, these are the different  so we can use different types 
of fencing . Different  types of fencing can be used  to help and protect a nd encourage  the 
accretion of sand on the coastal beaches on sa nd on coastal beaches on dunes . Now, this 
is one example , here we can see , the use of  the coconut leaves and fences are made 
because of  fences  are made from the coconut leaves in Brazil area an d there are  different 
types actually . 
So, here we can see the , different types of wooden planks  are used as a sand fences  here, 
we can see some kind of  development of some plants , growth of plant over the dunes. 
Here they have used some kind of wire mesh . So, different types of materials can be us ed 
to construct the sand fences . (Refer Slide Time: 19:20)  
 
So, this sand fences  are can be like , Checkerboard fences or they can be are Fore dune 
fences  can be again , impounding type or diversion types and s and f ences . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:39)  
 
So, this is a typical checkerboard fences . So, here we  can see , there  is a series of  
rectangles  which are actually made up of  plant residue s or plastic nets  ok. So, these are 
actually the re made up of plant residue s. So, approxi mate height is around 50 to 70 
centimeters  and we can form a me sh of this rectangle ’s of size  around 3 by 3 meter . So, 
idea is here , that they can with stand  weather  condition for few years  so, that they can make a  favorable  condition for future grow th of a plant s or they can they can withstand  
weather condition for few years , which is long enough  to implement or to incorporate the 
permanent solution . So, this is just  one example  of check erboard fence . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:41)  
 
Then, if you see  ok so, this is a nother  example of  a check erboard system where straws  
like, other side the plant residue s are used  here ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:56 ) 
 
So, then comes to the fo re dune fences . So,  first we wi ll discuss abou t the imp ounding  
sand fences . So, idea here is  to trap more sand  so to stop further  movement of ; to trap more sand s so that we can we can  we can stop the movement of sand dunes  ok. So, these 
are similar to vegetation , these are similar to vegetation belt , but they are made up of 
palm leaves woo ds fibers  glass or sometimes concrete  ok. So,  as in the  case of 
windbreaks and other  measures we have seen  that the , the construction of barrier should 
be normal to the wind direction s. So, here also they should be, they can be normal to 
wind  direction . So, design should be base and the design should be based on the l ocal 
environmental conditions.  
So, first we have  to study the local environment ; what is the required our , what are the 
different  materials which are available there . Then we  can consider using  of multiple 
rows  as compared to the single row. So, and then the height  also we can see, it can be  
normally range  about 0.5 to 1.2 meter s. Another  important thing is th at fences should  
erected  of 50 meter downwind of the erosion area or approximately 30 to 60 times the 
fence height  from the area to be protected  ok. Then this porosity of f ence should be as I 
discuss ed all before also  that porosity of  the med ia should be por ous enough  so around  
30 to 40 percent or sometime 50 percent  is can be used . Then fence they should extend 
around 10 to 20 times  its height  beyond the area that needs pro tection  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:41)  
 
So, this is  one example of impounding san d fences . So, idea is here . So, we are 
constructing series of ; we have to construct s eries  of this traps . So, this fence  they eventually they will be bu ried by the  trapped sands ; so new fences must be erected on the 
accumulating mould  ok. 
So, we can form a bigger  sand dune , which can stop the further mo vement of sand to the 
more to the inward  land ok. So, the fences  should be located in the area s, so the 
important condition is that the fences this kind of fences should be located in area s, 
where the creation of large artificial dune will not pose any probl em to the  local 
condition . 
(Refer Slide  Time:  23:29) 
 
So, this is one another example  of impounding type  sand fences . So, this kind of fences  
they need a regular maintenance and sometimes renewal to avoid deterioration . Or 
sometimes we can  we can it can be constructed from b etter material . So, this was the  
actual impo unding  types sand fences . (Refer Slide Time: 23:51)  
 
Then let  us see the diversion sand fences . So, idea here is to divert of deflect the sand 
movement , or deflect the wind ok. So, they trap the sand . So, the purposes of these 
diversion sand fences are  so that the trap the sand as well as deflect  the sand away from 
the area that needs to be protection . That needs to be protected ok. So, the effectiveness 
and the lifespan of divergence fences depending on the material of construction  height in 
porosity . 
So, this the effectiven ess of this  structure , it actually depends upon the material of 
construction and the height  which we have  selected and the also the porosity of the 
barrier ok. So, sometimes they are erected either as a single fe nce which are actually 45 
degree  from the wi nd direction or in the form of V  shaped fences  pointing  in a up wind 
direction  so that the we  can d eflect the  quantity of sand , away from the region which 
needs the protection  ok. (Refer Slide Time: 25:01)  
 
So, now as we have seen  the different types of temporary measures to control the sand 
movement  so, idea of using temporary system is to make  region to make  condition more 
favorable  for; more favorable  for adopting a temporary or permanent control . So, the  
perm anent control system we means  afforestation , means establishment of proper  tree 
cover or  vegetation cover over the surface  ok. 
So, the idea here , idea of permanent or permanent sand control system is to decrease the 
wind speed by ; decrease the wind speed a nd to also to protect the ground from the 
scouring, then if the if  there is a proper affor estation  happening  or means  establishment 
of tree covers , then it can modify the micro cli mate in that area . So, also to  enhance  the 
soil conditions for future plan t growth . So, these are the actually goal s of the permanent 
sand control system . First to decrease the wind speed , then to protect the gro und from 
scouring, then to modify the microclimate area ; to modify the m icro climatic condition 
over that  area and then to enhance the soil conditions for future growth of plant  ok. 
 (Refer Slide Time: 26:34)   
And also sometimes it can be used to create a recreational area ok . These are actually  
these are actually the goals of permanent sand control system . So, this exampl e show the 
different types so we can see , so if there is a proper vegetation cover is present . So, it can 
help in  forming the or it  can help in stabilizing the dunes over that re gions . So, it can 
further , which can prevent actually the further mo vement of sand ok. So, they can bind 
the soil particle  together  so that the  drifting of sand can be stopped . 
So, it is a most appealing way to mitigate the dune migration hazard . So, this example is 
actually over the desert region this is in the coastal regions . So,  you can see , wherever  
there is a vegetation present we can see , the soil particle can be done together . So, it can 
stabilize  the surface condition over that region ok. (Refer Slide Time: 27:29)  
 
  
So, the different factors that are critical  for affor estation application . So, the key factors 
that include s the availability of water  if you are going for  affor estation  so you should 
check whether the enough water is available . Or in the absence of water you should 
know what are the different  you should identifi ed different source of water ok . Then 
vegetation the plant s, the proper selection of plant should is more important actually , the 
plant should be  tolerant to that  environment al condition or that region or that climate ok . 
And then of course,  the site maint enance  so once you ado pt any kind of  permanent 
control system measures you should be  you should maintain that  that site . 
So, by any for , so the effectiveness of  permanent control system can be  visual  can be 
observed  ok. So, site maintenance means considera tion of all unlawful activities , so or 
stopping of  tree passing or any , you can say any human induce d activity which can  lead 
further  expansion  of expansion of wind erosion area . (Refer Slide Time: 28:48)  
 
So, so  of the first components  we have seen the w ater. So, we need to identify the source 
of water . So, if the water is not available  so you need to identify the  potential sources ok . 
So, in some cases  ground water can be used  for a limited application s, then rain water 
harvesting , dew water harvesting  can be can be  thought of f, can be  think of f. Then water 
harvesting from sabkha  and waste water also it can be used  they are  different 
possibilities . So, we need to identify  the source of water .  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:23)  
 Then selection of plant , so this i s fences most important  component of  affor estation  or 
permanent control measures  that we need to identify a variety of plant , which is more 
suitable for that  that region  ok. So, the plant growth should be  optimum in that region 
and they should not , there should be  actually tolerant to the  actually to the climatic 
condition  or region . So, what the sand dunes suppo se they should be sand bury resistance  
and they can sustain the erosions of wind ok . So, wind erosion resistance , the root system 
should well devel oped ok. So, the root should be develop ed strongly then they should be 
resistance to the drought and barren  conditions . And they should strongly favor the 
exposure  of sunlight ok . 
And other measures are like the  depending on the other soil moisture , the salinity  over 
that region  soil salinity  over that region , then quantity and quality of available water  
depending on that you can select  typical plant species ; which can be used as a permanent 
control system . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:36)  
 
Then comes to slight  maintenance ; so, once you are decided that you are going for this 
permanent control system by application of by using a particular method by using a 
buyer application of plant cover over that region . So, you need a regular maintenance ok . 
So, the side shoul d be protected against all possible  unlawful (Refer Time: 30:58)  in 
activity  and side should be protected against possible traversing and fire wood cutting . 
So, human and physical activities like , cutting of trees for our vegetation for fuels and fodder or  maybe any kind of activities  which can deteriorate  the condition over  that 
reason  so, all this kind of activity should be should be prevented . 
So, with that actually will stop here . So, in this module actually we have seen  what is 
wind erosion and what ar e the different factors that triggers the wind erosion s and 
different ways in w hich we can prevent wind erosion  we have seen the  process of wind 
erosion . We have seen the how the  wind erosion  start the initiation step the transport , the 
deposition  then the  transport in the form of in the suspension , saltation , deposition  and 
we have seen  the different types , different kinds of measures that can be used to prevent 
the wind er osion . We have  seen the application of using th e application of vegetation  we 
have  seen the application of different measures actually which can prevent the wind 
erosion . So, idea here is  to effectively to control wind  erosion . We need to consider two 
things either to  reduce the wind speed or to make for and to make the surface condition , 
more resistant to the wind erosion . 
So, this can be achieved by planting or by establishment of some kind of mechanical 
barriers in the form of windbreaks , shelter brakes  or in some kind of in case of sand 
dunes we ca n see establishment of sand fences  so that the dangers due to wind erosion  
can be prevented ok . So, with that will stop here ok . 
Thank  you very much . 