Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Damodar R. Mailapalli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture - 53 
Land Ca pability Classification  
 
Hi, so, this is week 12 of the course  Soil and Water  Conservation Engineering. So, in this 
course  what we are going to  learn is the first the Land Capability Classification . And 
then sedimentation, sediment transportation  erosion and then  I mean transportation 
mechanism so, all these things and how to measu re sedimentation and how to measure 
erosion, I mean the sample collection.  
So, different ways of for collecting sediment samples, I mean at different depths. So, all 
these things we are going to discuss in the week number 12  so, here the lecture number 1 
specifically for land capability classification .  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:05)  
 
And the lecture number 2 will be  focusing on improving  how to improve the land  I mean 
capability.  Especially, if you are talking about land capability so, that means, we are 
talking about how it can be used efficiently for  crop production .  So, then the lecture number 3, we are going to talk about the sediment and it is 
transportation . And lecture number 4 will be sediment sampling,  5 measurement of 
suspended  sediment .  
(Refer Slid e Time: 01:34)  
 
So, the first one is the land capability classification  so, as I said  our intention of using the 
term capability. So,  definitely that refers to the  production of a crop production. So, how 
well we can use the land for producing another cro p and then here so, basically the what 
is land capability?  
So, it is a system of grouping soils  so, basically it is a system of grouping soils  ok. So, 
primarily on the basis of the capability to produce you know the  common cultivated 
crops  and pasture plan ts without  deteriorating the cover  over a long period of time. So, 
this is basically the  what the land capability classification means? So  basically what we 
do? So, we are going to classify the lands based on  whether we will be able to you know,  
use the la nd for crop production or not or degree of wellness you can say .  
So, and the suppose  basically the common cultivated crops ok and also the pasture land  
when we are talking about  you know  the fodder, crops and all other things . And the land 
capability clas sification is subdivided into  you know capability class  and capability 
subclasses. So, we are going to see  how we can divide these classification  divide these 
capabilities into  main classes and subclasses  ok. So,  if you see  basically the overall  you 
know  land divisions if you see .  (Refer Slide Time: 03:27)  
 
So, in 1950 and 51  so, the overall the whole the lands available  in the  world has been 
classified like, a forest  about a 14 percent is the forest  and fallow 10 percent and the 
grass crops area is 42 pe rcent . And the land which is not available cultific  for cultivation 
is the 34 percent . So, the mostly here the grass crop area the 42 percent , I will use for 
cultivation and then in 2010 and 11 the scenario is much improved if you compare the 
not available  for cultivation .  
So, this is 34 percent where it is now it is  23 percent . So, it is reduced; that means, some  
not available for cultivation land is being used for you know afforestation . And then 
some fallow land also  used for used  in case of forest as w ell as you know  the crop areas 
that is 46 percent so, 42 to 46 percent.  So, mostly the cropland  we called arable land and 
non-crop land is non arable lands  ok so, let us see the classification now  ok. (Refer Slide Time: 04:58)  
 
So, land capability classif ication so, it is basically  in 2 groups; so, that is arable land  and 
then non arable land . So, that means, the land used for cultivation and land used for  non 
cultivation crops like  you know the perennial forage crops something like there is arable 
class  land class I, class II, class III and class IV . So, there are total 8 classes so, these are 
4 classes here  right and then 4 classes here . So, these non -arable land classes are 
classified as class V VI VII and VIII ok so, V and VI are used for perennial  forage crops, 
that is a non -arable land but  so, these classes of lands are being used for perennial forage 
cops.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:53)  
 And then so, let us discuss one by one  the land classification or lands.  So, the first one is 
arable land they or the broader you know classification, under that class I. So, the class 1 
as I said this is a very good land so, very fertile land, right and the slope is almost it is 
like a flat slope, 0 to 1 percent if you see here . So, this is the  class I here so mostly thi s is 
the green color. So, dark green  color so, that represents  you know the class 1 .  
So, it is a  I mean  relatively flat  and has deep soil. So, deep root zone, it has and the good 
the internal and good  surface drainages so, the amount of water you just  put on top. So, 
that drains very well  so and that will be useful for the crop production . And then the land 
can be cropped every year  without  special practices to control erosion. So, you do not 
need to  use any engineering practices for  you know controlling e rosion in this kind of 
lands . And this is best suitable for all agricultural crops.  
So, since it is on a fertile land and flat land so, a well -drained land. So, this can be used 
for most of the crops  to be grown  and also deep soil depth definitely there w ill help  in 
protecting the fertile land  and also you know  the crops which are in deep root  they will 
be getting the  you know fertile  getting the nutrients from the deeper zones . And the this 
is not affected by any appreciable erosion, wetness and salinity.  So, this is  this kind of 
lands are not  you know  affected with salinity and drainage, I mean,  water logging 
conditions . So, this is the class I is the good  I mean very fertile land for crop production .  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:59)  
 And then the next class II is this is called a good land that is very good land and now it is 
class II is a good land. So, and the slope of the land varies between 1 to 3 percent. So, the 
class II land you can see here  and that requires moderate attention to  conservation 
practices . So, since it has a slope so, there is a possibility that  the soil may you know  
runoff from the field.  
So, you need  at least  some attention to control erosion and the generally the contour 
plowing and other easy to use practices  will be used  to reduce or  control the erosion . And 
it has  moderate soil depth  in the light or heavy texture, gentle slope  moderate soil 
fertility . And this is basically these lands are basically suitable for a permanent 
cultivation with some soil and water conservation practices. Since it is a slope  it has 
some slope  so, you need to  I mean practice some conservation practices to control 
erosion in class II.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:10)  
 
So, then class III under arable land ; so, this is moderately good  land the slope  will go 
between 3 to 5 percent . If you see here so, the class 3  so, land is here  ok. And it has 3 to 
5 percent  slope and mostly it is found on gentle sloping hills right. So, the mostly this 
can be seen on it is not you know  steep slope hills it is a gentle slope hills .  
And the crops must be more careful be  selected so, the plant cover should be  maintained 
so, if you do not maintain the plant cover, because it is a sloppy. So, what happen there is 
a chance of you know  soil erode  from the fields. So, an increased attention  must be given to conservation practices because of the slope  and mostly the terraces and strip cropping , 
and contour bunding and graded bunding will be practiced to control erosion .  
And it can be productive  with proper management  by a producer. So,  it wi ll be if the 
producer has  you know properly  using the conservation practices on these kind of lands 
and even the I mean this could be a good arable land . And then  the next class  IV of this 
is the last class of this arable land  so, there is a class number  IV.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:36)  
 
So, in this class  so, the mostly this is a fairly a good land and slope varies from 5 to 10 
percent  so, hilly lands mostly these lands are located on hills . And lowest performance  
for cultivated  cultivation  and requires spec ial conservation management practices  since it 
is lying on hills . And frequently subjected to erosion; so, gullies can be formed or gullies 
can be seen in these lands  very easily.  
Because so, if you see the class  IV, the class IV is here so, the mostly no w this is a  hilly 
areas . And this is suitable only for occasional or limited cultivation ok. So, sometimes  I 
mean if you see the hilly areas so, there you know oftenly you can see some cultivation 
be going on, because of the you know some moderate slopes o r fairly good slopes. And 
definitely engineering measures are recommended here to control erosion .  (Refer Slide Time: 11:39)  
 
And then so, the next is non arable land so, other class  I mean other group  you can show 
so, the class V so, the class V this is  unsuitable  suitable for cultivation. So, I said this is 
non arable land so; definitely the slope  will be you know wearing from 15 to 25 percent . 
So, class V can be seen  here right so these  classes or  this is unsuitable for  cultivation and 
used for pasture  crops. The mostly  for cattle grazing  you know hay crops or you know  
tree farmings all those things  will be done on these lands  and this is often used for 
wildlife and recreational areas .  
So, since  so, this is you know less important for cultivation. So, those lands are being 
used for grazing you know cattle or you can establish or recreational purposes like the 
wildlife  recreation area. So, the soil typically has good tilth and fertility , the soil has 
good tilth  and also the fertility , but the thing is  since it is sloppy area. So, the cultivation 
crops  because requires lot of you know farming operations. So, that may lead to  losing 
the soils and definitely  that will increase the erosoil erosion. So, that is why and then 
have the potential to become  class I, since it is a fertile and you know land  it can be class 
1, but due to  particular problem  like hazard .  
They cannot be fulfill the characteristics of class I, because of the slope right. So, and 
also the shallow depths  so, shallow  depths so, definitely  though the land top surface is 
fertile, this is not suitable for growing  you know the  regular cultivation crops . So, then 
class VI so, the class VI is definitely not suitable for row crops .  (Refer Slide Time: 13:44)  
 
And slope can vary from 25 to 33 percen t so the class VI land is located here. So, mostly 
this is suitable for horticultural crops like mango , coffee and guava , cashew nut , etcetera. 
So, mostly the horticultural crops can be grown in this  the grazing  should be regulated  
preserve the plant cover . So, plant cover needs to be  I mean preserved  otherwise, if you 
allow you know free grazing , what happens the top surface will be open and that  because 
of the high slope  definitely that leads to  erosion .  
So, the soil may have  fair productivity , if it has  not been damaged by  erosion so, just like 
in class as  you know V. So, the class VI also it is a very good fertile land, but because of 
the shallow depth. And  so and also the steep slope  the definitely a  I mean it is not 
suitable for  you know regular crop  cultivation. So, the gullies often quickly form  if not 
carefully managed. So, the slopes here the steep slopes can definitely  your result  in 
forming gullies very easily .  (Refer Slide Time: 15:07)  
 
And then the next class is the class number  VII so, here the class number VII has slope 
between 33 to 50 percent . So, the class number VII is located here, if you see and highly 
unsuitable for cultivation, because the steep slope  and best uses or  permanent pasture or 
forestry and wildlife.  So, the most of the la nd is being used for you know forestry , wild 
love wildlife  and recreational purposes.  
And generally lands are  droughty and swampy having very deep slope, rough stony or 
very severely eroded or invested with gullies . So, this is kind of this lands are roug h and 
you can see lot of undulations and lot of you know depressions lot of gullies, but can be 
used for you know pasture and forestry and wild lives  and also this is  generally  seen in 
you know dry lands .  (Refer Slide Time: 16:11)  
 
So, the other category  is class number VII, this is the last class of the land  capability 
classification and the slopes are more than 50 percent . So, this is definitely unsuitable for  
plant production so, this is the  class number VII here. And the soil may be  wet and high 
in sa nd or clay , often used for you know waterfowl habitat . So, the most  waterfowl have 
habitats those are the birds and I mean  in this so, I mean since it is wet and that the soil 
type is a clay soils .  
So, the water can be retained in you know small ponds and  then the water fowl habit it 
can be  maintained there. So, very rough and not suitable for  woodland or grazing so, 
these  this particular lands  because the steep slope.  So, this cannot be use suitable for  
woodland or grazing side. So, it is only  like a roug h land  with some, you know, water  I 
mean water storages and that can be used for waterfowl habitats  ok. (Refer Slide Time: 17:24)  
 
Land capability classification classes so, these  we can also use some colors here. So, the 
deep green and the look at this t he green color is been  changing from deep to light and 
yellow. And then this is  I mean yellow also  and the red and then finally, you get the pink 
color . So, the arable lands here  so, the mostly the green color  so, because  you can you 
know grow cultivation,  you can start  using it for cultivation purposes.  
So, in the class I here have no significant limitations in using for  cultivation. So, this is a 
good fertile land and  I mean  relatively flat slopes  and deep soil depths . So, definitely no 
significant limita tions for crop course so, this is very good . And then and followed by so, 
the limitations will increase  if you go down from class I to you know class VIII these 
moderate limitations  restrict the range of crops or require moderate conservation 
practices .  
So, the conservation practices will increase when you go down from class I to class VII 
class VIII. And this is  like non arable  land will start from class V to class VIII and 
definitely class VIII is unsuitable for plant production. So,  if you go from you k now the 
top to bottom  so, the  limitations will increase.  So, definitely in order to you know 
improve  the land for cultivation in especially in case of arable land. You may have to use  
engineering you know soil conservation  measures .  (Refer Slide Time: 19: 19) 
 
And then  so, the next is again the suitability of different land capability classes for land 
uses. So, if you see the land capability classes here  I to VIII and very intense cultivation 
see this only class 1  is for very intense cultivation here  and o ther classes are not 
supporting for very  intense cultivation. And the second is intense cultivations only  1 and 
2 classes are used for intense cultivation . And moderate cultivation  you can go  you can 
also the IIIrd class also supports  and limited cultivati on up to VI classes and intensive 
grazing .  
So, up to  you know V classes a moderate grazing so, grazing will start here from you 
know class number V to, because these are all you know  non arable lands . And moderate 
grazing  you can go up to VI class, limite d grazing  you know class  7 and forestry  class 
VIII and wildlife also supports  almost all classes wildlife . So, this way you can interpret 
this table and then the next is  ok. (Refer Slide Time: 20:37)  
 
Land classes is also based on  soil texture  so, soil cl asses textural classes like sandy , 
loamy sand , sandy loam. So, symbol generally for sandy  you will use small s, loamy 
sand small ls and sandy loam sl . And land capability class  so, this is the you know IVth 
class, sandy soils of IVth class .  
And then IInd class  loamy sand  and Ist class look at this from here to here . So, the 
mostly the Ist class or  from sandy loam to clay loam so, these are all  very good for 
cultivation . And similarly sandy clay  this is the IInd grade and silty clay IInd and clay 
IIIrd grade. So, this way based on the soil texture you can also put this different soil soils  
into land capability classification .  
Similarly, in the next  table if you see land classes based on the soil depth  so, see the soil 
depths here . So, this is this deep  you know deep soil depth or deep depths you can say . 
So, d 5  will put the d 5, but class I supports d 5 because the soil  this is the deeper  depths 
compared to the Vth class  which has you know less than 7.5 centimeter . So, that is the 
soil depth which  land capa bility classification of class V supports this . And we will use 
the these symbols so, thus definitely represents the  different soil depths .  (Refer Slide Time: 22:19)  
 
So, the next is a  land classification based on  land slope. So, here the symbols we use A B 
C D E F  G H I , these are all capital symbols . And then land slopes 0 to 1 percent the 
class I, because you can see the flatness will increase  or sorry the flatness or the slope 
will increase from class I to class VIII and the slopes are here  the mentio n here. So, but 
different slopes  we already mentioned in the previous  you know discussion, but only 
thing for different slopes we will give  symbol along with the class .  
So, I A  we will give class I and then land slope is 0 1  or 0 to 1 . So, similarly 
ident ification of classes based on  erosion status. So,  here erosion status e1 to e4  so, e1 
represents a negligible erosion , where up to 25 percent is of a horizon  lost ok or it is a 
negligible erosion or 25 percent so, class I and class II can be  I mean represe nted. And 
then e4 which is very severe erosion  about 25 percent to 75 percent of B horizon  lost, 
may include narrow and deep gullies  so, this is the  you know the last class  VIth and VII 
classes are supporting this  classification .  (Refer Slide Time: 23:50)  
 
So, in addition to that  you also have subclasses . So, the subclasses basically the 
capability subclasses is the second category in the land capability classification system . 
And basically represent the soils physical chemical and atmospheric limitation due to 
which  the land use is further  restricted .  
So, the previously we are only looking for a restriction of crop  growth. But here the soil  
you know quality soil physical and chemical also the atmospheric limitations if you 
include   and you can also clear ly there. So, these things the limitations if you add that 
will be subclasses . So, c  this is the adverse climate  so, denotes a significant adverse 
climate for crop production as  median climate.  
So, if you put c as subclass this is a median and the d undesi rable soil  structure or low 
permeability . E for erosion right, f for low fertility , i for inundation  and m for moisture  
limitation similarly , so, we can go through the description  of individual you know sub 
classes .  (Refer Slide Time: 25:03)  
 
And then  if you see I mean it will continue  so, that like n for salinity  and p for stoniness , 
r for consolidated bedrock, s root zone limitation, t for typography and w excess water , x 
for you know. So, this sub class is comprised of soil having limitation resulted f rom the 
cumulative  effects of two or more of the adverse  characteristics. So, come if you put like 
n and p (Refer Time: 25:30) salinity and  stoniness  and you may have to put x . So, one or 
two I mean the combination of these two if you can represent with x.   
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 25:43)  
 And then  so, the mapping unit is very important  in order to or represent a land capability 
classification. For example, this mapping unit the information is collected  for land 
capability classification is recorded and map  unit as. So, the mapping unit is represented 
as soil series minus texture of the soil , minus effective soil depth  divided by lands  slope 
minus erosion hazard . So, how to get this you know number? So, that  sub for example, 
here is example there is a parameter  on column number one . For example, L for so, this 
is a small l , l loam  right and d 5 is equal soil depth .  
So, that represent  greater than 90 centimeter  and capital A land slopes are 0 to 1 percent, 
and e1 erosion hazard and c climate limitation this is s ubclass . So, if this is the parameter  
right and land capability class this is all you are talking about class I.  
And mapping unit can be estimated like 1 as this is 1, because land  capability class. So, 
soil series this is 1and the and then d 5 is the soi l depth  right. So, effective soil depth is d 
5 ok and then A is land slope so, this is A and e this is erosion hazard e1 right this is 
erosion hazard e1  ok. And then the land capability class with subclass lc  so, l is for loam 
and c is for climate  limitati on ok .  
So, with this so, definitely we can represent the mapping unit  in this form and then  the 
land capability you know class with subclass can be represented with lc. L is for  loam 
and c is for climating limitations . So, this way  we can  represent the wh ole land  class I 
mean capability classification  in using a mapping unit .  
So, in this lecture  we started with you know  the broad classification of lands. So, arable 
land and non -arable land, again arable land is being classified into 4 classes  and then non  
arable land is classified into  I mean continuously other 4 classes.  
You know so, the class number I to VIII this is the  whole class that represents the land 
capability, classification is the capability we are talking about whether the particular land 
is used for you know,  the cultivation or cultivating crops or not. And also there are other 
classes based on you know you know the erose I mean erosion, the slope and then  and 
then soil texture ok and soil depth .  
So, all different you know  classes also we can  get and then  not only that there is a sub 
classes. So, based on the limitations or restrictions we can say based on the restrictions if 
you have restriction on you know, climatic condition restriction on soil physical and chemical properties. So, definite ly you need to add  that subclass . So, and finally, the 
whole land capability classification is represented with a mapping unit so, the mapping 
we have seen an example on how to present  the land capability classification using a map 
unit.  
Thank you.  
 