Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 05 
Water Erosion Control Measures  
 
Hello friends . Welcome back to NPTEL  online certification c ourse entitled Soil and 
Water Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendra Singh, Professor in Agricultural and 
Food Engineering  Department , IIT Kharagpur . We are in lecture 5 of week 1, and the 
topic is Water Erosion Control Measures . Just to remind you of the  course content of this 
week, we started in lecture 1 by introducing soil and water conservation, erosion,  
etcetera . In lecture 2, we went through the causes and types of s oil erosion ; in lecture 3, 
we saw  factors affecting soil erosion and the effects of soil erosion . In lecture 4, we went 
through soil erosion mechanics , and in today lecture , we will see some of the control 
measures that can be ad opted to control water erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:15)  
 
Now, we want to  control erosion , or in other words , we want to conserve soil . Soil 
conservation aim s to obtain the maximum sustain ed level of  produc tion from a given 
area of land . When we discussed sheet erosion , we saw that it is the top fertile soil  
primar ily carried away  that is  transported during the e rosion  process . Once the fertili sed soil is lost , then obviously, the level of production will be affected , and to get the 
maximum sustained  level  of production , we must conserve our top fertile  soil. 
Of course,  the second aim is to maintain the soil loss below a threshold level . Also, the 
third  one is to permit the natural  rate of soil formation to keep pace with the rate of soil 
erosion . The ideal c ase is the case of geological erosion , where the rate of soil formation 
and the rate of soil erosion  are nat urally balanced . In the case of accelerated or man -
made erosion, we know that the rate of so il erosion will always surpass the rate of soil 
formation because th e rate for soil formation is a very slow process that we have already 
seen. We want to keep the rate of soil erosion to be a s close a s possible to the ra te of soil 
erosion , and that is why we want to maintain the soil loss below a threshold level  so, that 
so, that the soil formation page could  be as close as possible to  so, soil erosion  bright . 
(Refe r Slide Time: 03:29)  
 
Now, coming to soil loss tolerance , theoretically , soil erosion should be ma intained a t a 
rate that equals to or is  below the  natural rate at which new soil forms . That is what 
happens . There is a balance between the soil formation  and the soil erosion rate in t he 
geological erosion , and th at is why we say that  is a very slow process . We cannot notice 
that with our naked eyes . On the  other hand , when the soil erosion rate is much higher 
than the soil formation rate, it is quite natura lly noticeable. T hat is where we call it 
accelerated erosion or man -made erosion . Now, it is difficult to know whether th is balance exist s or not , and the  reason is very 
simple  that though  the rate of soil  loss can be measured , the rate of soil formation i s so 
slow that it  cannot be easily  determined . It is not possible to determine one of them , so it 
is very difficult for us to know whether there is a balance between the soil forma tion rate 
and soil  loss rate or not . The a verage rate of soil formation  is 0.1 mm per year . From this , 
you can visuali se that it i s very difficult to measure or know the rate at which soil is  
formed . Now, soil loss tolerance is why we finally defined soil terms called soil loss 
tolerance. Then, soil loss tolerance is defined as th e maximum permissible rate of erosion 
at which soil fertility can be mainta ined over 20 to 25 years . Basically, we want to k eep 
the soil loss within a permissi ble limit that we call soil loss tolerance so that  soil fertility 
is maintained . Based on the stu dies, a mean that involves soil loss of 11 tones  per hecta re 
is generally accepted as per as soil loss tolerance is concerned . That means  that if you 
can maintain annual soil loss below 11 tons per hect are for a given area , then it will be  
possible  to main tain the soil  fertility for  a few coming years (may be 20-25 years ).  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:25)  
 
This table now describes criteria that could be used to set the level of soil loss tolerance, 
which has be en taken from Morgan 2005.  According  to this  table , the soil loss is divided 
into 7 different classes and 7 codes  are given  from  1 to 7. Code 1 is referred to as very 
slight where the erosion  rate is less than 2 tons per hectare , and code 7 is refe rred as 
catastrophic , where the erosion rate  is greater than  500 tons per hectare . As we can see , 
for most purposes, the level should be maintained within code 1, 2, 3; that means  this is the acceptable  course . That means  the class should be between very slight to moderate , 
and the erosion rate  should be less than 10 tones per hectare . This probably will give an 
idea why the soil tolerance rate  in the previous slides we saw that was taken a s 11 tons 
per hectare because  that simply means that we will be able to keep our soil loss within  
moderate levels . That means  that it will help us in maintaining keeping the  soil 
productivity maintained for a long period  of time . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:02)  
 
Now, coming to erosion control , the strategies that could be adopted for conserving soil 
should be based on certain factors . There are 4 major factors , and the first one is 
covering the soil to protect it fro m raindrop impact . The s econd is increasing the 
infiltration and capacity of soil to reduce runoff . The third is improving the aggregate 
stability of the soil, and the fourth  is increas ing surface roughness to reduce  the velocity 
of runoff . 
In our previous class , when we discus sed the water erosion mechanics , we saw three  
processes involved : detachment , transportation and deposition . When we discussed 
detachmen t, we saw that i t is the raindrop impact effect or the flowing water responsible 
for the  detachment process . On the other hand , runoff or the  overland flow  is responsible  
for transportation . That means if you want to check erosion , we have to check  
detachment a nd transpor tation pro cesses . That simply means that two agents responsible 
for these two processes, raindrop impact and flowing water, have  to be checked . That is  the concept behind the strategies which are adopted for erosion cont rol. If you look here , 
cover  the soi l to protect it from raindrop impact . Suppose we cover the soil . In that case , 
we know we have seen the rain drop impact erosion that when the raindrop hits with its 
kinetic energy to the base soil surface , it breaks down the soil aggregates and  causes 
detachment of soil particles . 
If some plantation or grass covers the soil, that cover will obviously  absorb  the kinetic 
energy of raindrop impact . That means  disaggrega tion of the soil mass will not be there 
that mean detachment will be limited . Similarly, if the soil cover is there , then water will 
be held for a longer period on the soil surface, which will allow more of infiltration to 
occur . That simply means , as a result , the total run off that could be generated  will be 
reduced . Then the third is  improving the aggregate stability of the soil, and for that , we 
have to add some organic matter into our soil . And for that , what are the steps , the what  
is done will see little later when we talk about the conservation measures . Lastly , if we 
increase the surface r oughness by covering the soil , runoff velocity  will be  conserved . 
That means  the kin etic energy of the flowing water will be less , which  means  the erosi ve 
capacity will b e less , which implie s erosion  could be contro lled. These are the sum of the 
strategies  which are adopted for controlling erosion . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:33)  
 Now, coming to erosion  control measures , water erosion  control measures ; are broadly 
classified into two groups : agronomical and biological measures and engineering 
measures . 
(Refer Sl ide Time: 13:35)  
 
And we will discuss first the agro nomical and biolo gical control measures , and 
obviously, is the name itself suggest er osion is controlled through crop or vegetation . So, 
agronomical  and biological , the name it self indicate s that the cro ps or vegetation are 
basically used to control  erosion . And b asically  in that means that we need to do our 
cultivation in such a way  that shall minimi se erosion . And obviously, it aims at  providing 
a suitable crop cover for as long a period  as possible dur ing the rainy season . Whenever 
rain rainy is taking place if our soil surfaces are  covered , so obviously,  is the several 
lectures we have seen now , that that simply means that will observe the kinetic energy of 
the falling rain drops or it will of fer resist ance to the flo wing water . 
As a result , the erosi ve capacity of either the raindrop or  the flowing water will be  less, 
which means  the detachment in transportation  processes wil l be under control . And the 
measures  typically which are  adopted under agronomi cal and biological control 
measures are crop rotation , crop covering , contour farming , strip cropping and mulch 
tillage  or stubble  mulching . These are the 5 different types of measures  normally adopted 
under agr onomical and biological  control measures . (Refer Slide Time: 15:21)  
 
Now, let us start with crop rotation . Crop rotation is defined as the regular succession of 
different crops  grown on the same piece of land . And this is do ne because ; rotation of 
crops reduces erosion and  increase s the fertility of  the soil. That simp ly means that , as 
you can see here , there is a plot with  four different fields . In year 1,  the crops are chosen 
canola , wheat , field peas and oats , and when we go into year  2, the same  crops are being 
grown , but there are other fields that are change d. Oats have come from  this plot to this 
plot, field peas have come from here to here , canola has gone from here to here , and 
wheat has so ; that means  there is a circular rotation . Similarly, in years 3 and 4 also. 
Crop rotation  is the regula r succession of different crops being grown on the same piece 
of land. This helps in  two ways;  the other  crops have different  root growth pattern s. 
Because the root growth pattern is different, each plant or  harvest  tends to  take nutrients 
from a particula r zone of the soil . 
If you keep on changing the crop , that means the entire  root zone of the soil can be 
utilised, and nutrients are extracted from different places . If we grow  the same crop year 
after year , that means that crops utilise  the same portion o f the root zone . That means  the 
remainder of the portion , whatever nutrients are there they remain unutili sed. This is  one 
advantage of crop rotation . It varies with the land because all crops can not be 
everywhere . The e conomic  condition of farmers is that  if you have to change the crop, 
you should have some cash in hand and a cropping system prevalent in the area. This is a 
very important point because , for exampl e, in  Bengal , the farmers here have a tendency to grow paddy during the  Kharif season , follow ed by p addy  in Rabi season . You can see 
that it is against the principles of crop rotation . If you mostly go to North India, you will 
find that paddy or rice is grown during the Kharif season, followed by wheat in the 
winter or Rabi season . Then som e kind of legume crops is taken in the zaid or summer 
season . That means  farmers are following a natural rotation  in Northern India, and 
suitable crops  used in rotation are legumes and gr asses . Because these a re nitrogen -fixing 
crops  that represent , they add nutr ients or  organic matter to the soil . They strengthen the 
soil from a nutrient point of view , and that means  the productivity or production will be  
much higher from such soils , which are healthy in nature . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:04)  
 
The next measure is  cover cropping . In the cover cropping , cover crops are grown ei ther 
during the off-season or in -between rows and for ground protection under trees . So, in 
your previous class , when we talked about the ill effects of  erosion, we saw faulty  
agricultural  pads in  between rows . If we all ow bare soil, then obviously, when raindrops 
hit, there will be detachment and because  there will be flow velocity here without any 
resistance  so that  the erosion will be  much higher . So, when we say cover cropping , then 
in between rows , certain cr ops are grow n, which  means that  the soil area or  the land 
between the crop rows  is protected . 
Then common  crops are used for its cover crop are rye , oats, beans , peas, alfalfa and 
grass because for two reasons , one is there pro vide g ood cov er against erosion . So, they spread on the surface ; they provide the cover with the soil surface , and also they furnish 
hay or fodder and serve as soil-building crops . If you grow  alfalfa an d grass  so 
obviously, you're not only covering, but you're  also ge tting some hay or  fodder  animals 
in the area . If you  go for beans , peas or legum inous crops , then obviously, as I 
mentioned, they are nitrogen fixing crops, adding  organic matter to  the soil . 
Of course,  these cover crops are also grown under tall trees lik e rubber to protect the soil 
from raindrop impacts . So obviously, if the  surface below  the tall tree is , if you  can 
imagine in that from a tall tree if whatever water  is intercepted it that falls the kinetic 
energy will be much much higher . Soil erosion wi ll be minimised if the soil surface is 
protected with some cover .  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:24)  
 
The third  agronomical  measure  adopted is contour  farming . Contour farming  is define d 
as the tillage practice of applying all treatments on contour . The contours are points 
having  the same elevation . We perform all the field operations like ploughing, planting, 
cultivation, and  harvesting across the slope  rather than up and down the slope .  All the 
agricultural  operation s we do across th is slope , not along the slop e. So obviously, in that 
case, what happens is that the flow path is broken , and the velocity of flow will be 
checked to a large r extent . It is generally reported that contour farming reduces so il loss 
up to 50 per cent while enhancing the crop yield  by 10 per cent. Because  we do  not allow 
water to flow away here , so obviously, more soil more water is conserved in the soil ; that means  more water  is available for crop production , which is why crop yield is also  
enhanced . Then contour cultivation saves power , and its eff ectiveness depends on slope 
steep ness and slope length . It saves farm power because if you do cultivation  practices 
along the slope , you can obviously imagine that while tra versing up the slope, the energy 
consumed by farm implements is  much mu ch higher . 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:16)  
 
The allowable contour length s are 180 meters at 1 degree , 30 meters at 5.5 degree s and 
20 meters at 8.5 degree s and so on. So,  the larger the slope  small er will be the slope 
length which is quite obvious . Then there a re certain specific cases like , for example, on 
steep slopes or under conditions of high rainfall intensity , and soil erodibility  contour 
forming alone may  increase gulling  because  row breaks may  release store water . There is  
always a danger  because there is a slope ; if any  one of the rows break s, the  stored water 
will flow with a much hi gher velocity and much  greater impact . That means  it might 
result in row breakage  and may cause gulling that is gully  generation it might start. So, 
under such circumstance s, they are usually  supplemented by strip croppin g, which we 
will see next. (Refer Slide Time: 24:36)  
 
Strip cropping is a practice of growing alternate strips of ro w crops across  the slope of 
the land . So, as you can see here , for example,  they are strip s this was one strip , this is  
another stri p, this gets another  strip. Generally , close -growing crops such as hay , wheat 
or other forages a re alternated with strips of row crops such as corn , soybean , cotton , 
sugar beets . That means that if you grow corn  first, then next  close -growing  crops , say, if 
season permits,  hay or wheat could be  grown depending upon the seasons . Again you 
could have another  row crop that means , say, for example,  soybean . You have a row crop  
followed by a close -growing crop and then again a row crop  and what happens is it 
reduces runoff flowing through the crops rows . It also increases the soil's infiltration rate 
under  cover conditions because  soil water is ge t arrested here. So obviously, this will 
have a tendency to check the e rosio n; obviously, more water could be  filtered into the  
soil because of these  regions . (Refer Slide Time: 26:40)  
 
Then strip cropping could be  of 3 different types : buffer strip cropping , contour  strip 
croppin g and field strip cropping . There are 3 types of  strip cropping  that are possible . 
Let us see one of one after the other ; buffer strip cro pping means the  strips are  grass or  
legume  crops laid ou t between contour  strips of crops in regular rotation . So, whenever 
we have the regu lar crops grown in between t hat them , the grass or legume crops are laid 
out. The next is contour  strip cropping , where crops have arranged the strips or bands on 
contours  at right angles to the land's natural slope . Here as you can see , the contour  lines 
are being followed for culti vation . So, there  are row crops , and in between the se row 
crops , some  alternat e crops will be grow n. So, grass or legume could be grown , and the 
third  one is the field strip cropping , where the crops are laid out in strips across the slope , 
but only approx imately on the contour . The only thing is tha t in this case , the contour 
lines  are followed in (Refer Time: 28:12).  Here contour  lines are followed as close as 
possible , where as in this case , contour  lines are not  so strictly followed . So, buffer strip 
cropping , contour  strip cropping or field strip cropping . So, here the buffer the grass or  
legume  use as  buffer crop wherein , in these cases, the crops  are being used for  
alternating . (Refer Slide Time: 28:45)  
 
Then the last measure  is mulch t illage or stubb le mulching , and obviously, it is a crop in 
soil management practices tha t utili ses the residual mulches  of preceding crops . As you 
can see , when you harvest a crop,  the stubble is left in the field itself , which  is used as 
mulch . That means,  in between th e rows that that stubble is used to cover the soil and 
two m ajor benefits these mulch break the fall of the  raindrops and , thus, dissipate kinetic 
energy  and reduce the surface flow . 
Very similar to  cover cropping , we are using the stubble of previous crop  instead of 
grow ing another  crop. That means that they will be of no -tillage or  very mi nimum tillage 
that will be required  for this cover cropping kind of things . In the case of mulch tillage,  
that is the advantage , but very similar to the cover cropping t hese mulch; mulch a stubble  
use is used as mulch very identical  to the concept  of cover cropping . (Refer Slide Time: 29:58)  
 
Then we come to engineering measures , and four types of engineering measures  are 
normally are adopted bunds , terraces , vegetative waterways and gully control structures . 
And in on each one of them  will be spending at least a minimum of 1 week . So, that is 
why I am not g oing to give you much detail today , but just a brief introduction about  
these  topics . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:28)  
 
Bunds are earthen embankments built across the slope of the l and, so that is very 
important across these slops . And of course,  bund s could be of different types and typically there also  along  with all field boundaries ; you will find bonds where  they are 
referred to as peripheral bu nds. Two types of b unds that are commonly used  for soil 
erosion purpose s or water erosion purpose s are referred to as contour  bund and graded 
bund . In week num ber 3, we will spend  the entire we ek on the bunds, discussing w hat 
are bunds, designin g them,  and things like that . 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:05)  
 
The next engineer ing measure  is terracing or terrace , which means  cutting flat area s out 
of a hilly or mountainous landscape to  grow crops . Wherever you go to any hilly 
terraces, you wi ll find a hill with steep slopes, so cultivation canno t occur . To facilitate 
cultivation, the flat areas are cut , and so,  some steps kind of structures are there  so that  
the cultivation could take place . The types  two type s of terraces that are commonly  
adopted are  broad base terraces and bench terraces . So, again week number 4 will be 
spent on the terracing and design  of terraces . (Refer Slide Time: 31:54)  
 
The n ext measure  is vegetative waterways  which are natural or construc ted waterways 
shape d to requi red dimensions  and vegetated for safe disposal of runoff from a field , 
diversion , terrace or other structure . So, they are nothing  but natural or  constructed 
waterways or  channels where  some vegetation is allowed to gr ow, and the water could be 
taken away  at a safe velocity or  without causing any kind of e rosion . Week number 5, 
will be spent on vegetative waterways , and then we will see the details of how water  
there and how to design them . 
(Refer Slide Time: 32: 37) 
 The last engineering measure  is gully c ontrol structures , and gully control structures are 
adopted to control gully  erosion . We have seen gully e rosion  already over this is the 
most s evere  type of erosion . The me asures which could be adopted are vegetative 
measures , temporary gully co ntrol stru ctures and permanent  gully control structures . 
Again we will spend several weeks  seeing what the gully control structures are  and how 
to design them  in greater detail ; if you remember , that is what we have seen . This was all 
about the water erosion  control  matter in brief . We spend more time on agricultural and 
biological measures , a little less on engineering measures  because we will be spending a 
lot of time on engineering measures in the coming week s. 
Thank you very much . 