Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Damodar R. Mailapalli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 56 
Sediment Sampling  
 
So, this is a lecture number 4 of week 12. So, mostly in this lec ture we wi ll be talking 
about Sediment Sampling . So, the previous lecture we were talking about  sediment 
transportation . So, once you have sediments in the river or any water body , so, how to 
sample that  so, that we wi ll be discussing here . 
(Refer Slide Ti me: 00:34 ) 
 
And, then so, the sediment measurement  so, sediment transport is a dynamic 
phenomenon . So, because it changes with time  and a lso it changes with space . So, it is a 
dynamic . So,  you may not be  so, suppose you have collected the sample today  so, the 
concentration of sediment it may not be same as tomorrow or  it may not be or yesterday . 
So, it may not be same as  location 1 and location 2. 
So, the measurement techniques  cannot be registered the  ever changing conditions that 
exist in river bodies . So, measurements techniques we will vary  I mean different 
measurement techniques . So, one single measurement technique may not be enough  to 
tackle these dynamics of  sediment  dynamics , ok. So, let us  see some of the  you know the 
devices  we will be using to  measure . (Refer Slide Time: 01:36 ) 
 
So, before measuring you know sediment load  so, if you see the  over the particle size is 
very important . The particle size  is generally measured or particle size is estimated using  
sieve analysis . So, the knowledge about  particle size is prerequisite  for understanding the 
source , transportation and  some cases environmental impact of the sediments . So,  
knowing this segment  size it is very important . So, what is the source  and where exactly 
the sediment has come from . So, basically here we wi ll be using set of  sieves  in 
ascending order  let us  see. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:24 ) 
 So, if you see the  sediment the particle size  is determined basically passing a simple  
sample of sediment through a series of sieves . So, the mesh sizes  could range from 1.25 
mm to 63 microns or less . So, 63 microns we have seen  it is less than if this is less than 
and as will be silt and clay . So, mostly we a re talking of the sand here . So, series of 
sieves ; so, here I mean sieve number 1, sieve number 2, sieve  number 3, sieve number 4 
so, here 1.25 mm you know size. 
The size of the opening in 1.25 and maybe this is 1 mm and this will be maybe you know 
0.1 mm and this will be 0.062 or 63 mm or 63 microns and the last you have a pa n. So, 
you put the materi al and  sieve it and it will you know  segregate or divide the sizes into 
different ranges size ranges . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:34 ) 
 
Then, so, knowing the particle size  so, you can  decide  what the particular  size refers to . 
So, suppose if the particle size is  256 to 64 mm we call  cobble and 64 to 2 mm is called 
gravel  and 2 to 1 mm very coarse sand and similarly for clay  and s ilts and fine sands  are 
denoted with the different sizes . 
So, the mostly the cohesive sediments or the silt and clay  and non coercive se diments  it 
is like mostly the coarse sand and cobble , so, the bigger size d particles . (Refer Slide Time: 04:17 ) 
 
So, sediment measurements there is no universal acceptor scale for the classification of 
particles according to the their sizes . So, there are  USDA  size then ASTM and BIS, s o, 
there are several you know  what you call these  standards available to decide the sizes . In 
North America  so, the Wentworth  Grade Scale is commonly used  elsewhere the 
International Grade Scale is preferred . So, it depends o n you know different  you know 
organizations the standardization with decided by different organization . 
There are minor differences between the two scales . So, the size ranges  you know may 
not be varying too much , but minor  variations . So, therefore, impor tant to note that scale 
has been selected and to use constant consistently . So, once you use a particular system  
so, go out with that system can  throughout your study . (Refer Slide Time: 05:18 ) 
 
So, sediment measurement here this is this figure variations  in concentrations of 
suspended sediment  with water depth  for sand silt clay as measured in one of field sites . 
So, in one field site if you see  the this is a riverbed and th is is the river surface  so, that is  
why it is a 0 to 10 meter top and then from th is is the location where you collected , I 
mean this is one low fields or location  and from there this is a distance .  
So, the coarse sand if you see  so the silty  will be residing on top right , silty and clay 
because  it is suspended and fine sand and the ne xt and medium sand and the coarse sand 
in the last , ok. So, initially  so, the heavier particles will be you know  heavier particles 
will be it I mean nearer to the bed and then  lighter particles will be nearer to the surface . (Refer Slide Time: 06:24 ) 
 
The sediment  measurement here if you see this as an hysteresis . So, hysteresis effect 
observed in suspended sediments  so, the because  if you  I mean this is the  4, this is the 
hydrograph  you see . So, the fourth is the peak right . So, since it is a peak you get  
maximum  sediment concentration here  because the discharge is maximum and you get a 
maximum  sediment concentration . 
So, since it has  peaks like  you know rising limb and falling limb ; so, the rising limb 
during the rising limb  so, you get most of the sedime nts out and since the water is 
accumulating and increasing the wash load . That will increase the wash load you get a 
maximum concentration , but during the  reseeding phase or falling limb the suspended 
sediments  so, the sediment concen tration will be less . But, it would not  you know follow 
the same path  as it before right . So, A to B, if you see B and A so, A is a starting point  B 
ends somewhere . So, that is  why, so, the hysteresis of the sediment  suspended sediment 
is due to the I mean hydrograph  characteri stics against . (Refer Slide Time: 07:55 ) 
 
The sampling methods here mostly  for sampling you know sediments you have a 
dredgers grab samplers and core samplers . So, dredgers or like  you know the drag unit 
which has which has a net  and at the end and the gr ab samples  so, it grabs you know it 
has a heavier the box which falls into the ground and  when it when it falls down it opens 
up and then  I mean there is a  I mean there is a hook on top or the mechanism and top you 
can close it , so that it automatically cl oses the bottom and you take all the sample out . 
And, the cores are like it goes  this is the vertical rods  and using that  rods we it has a 
sampling  you know the sampling spaces in between . So, once the holes  once you take 
out the sample out  cores sample ou t you can take out  the particular  and the sample at a 
different depths . (Refer Slide Time: 09:11 ) 
 
So, dredge  samples are like I said so, it has a  the fine mess at the cod -end ok; so, hemi  
spherical mouth  aperture with height of 56 centimeter and w idth of  75 centimeter . So, if 
you see this is kind of  you know the this is going to use to collect the bed load basically 
75 diagonal mesh . So, 75 mm diagonal mesh . So, the mostly the bed load can be  taken 
out. 
So, the dr edge device that is dragged across the bot tom of the surface being  sampled and 
this type of sampler  used primarily for collecting indigenous  benthic fauna , rather than 
samples for chemical analysis . So, this is simple because it collects the bottom . So, the 
bottom  so, we wi ll be looking at the  benthic fauna like you know  like some  aquatic you 
know animals , so, aquatic life . So, that can be or  aquatic  you know creatures can be 
collected  so, along with the sediments here , ok. (Refer Slide Time: 10:38 ) 
 
So, the next is  the types of dredges  if you see . So, it could be rectangular  like opening is 
rectangular or triangular  so, it is the opening is triangular  or bucket type . So, here if you 
see so, this from here  so, the they did you know  particles will be taken away . So, let 
dredging  right . So, this is a bucket type . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:06 ) 
 
And, then grab samples . So, this is the grab samples or this have  a set of jaws  that shut or 
bucket that rotates into a sediment . So, if you see working principle of grab samples 
initially  so these two buckets are open right initially when you when it is going down  it will open this is the you know  the sediment you need to collect . So, once at the bottom  
so, because of the  weight what happened ; so, here there is a hook when you take it out , 
right  so, this hook will be taken out . So, then the chain will be released . So, once the 
chain is released  so, because there is no support here  and this will be fall en down and 
this will be closed  because of a heavy weight . So, once it is closed  and you can take out 
the sample  to the top . So, are easy to handle and maintain and use , provide access for 
subsamples  ok. 
(Refer Slide Time: 12:11 ) 
 
So, the grab samples are different types . If you see here this is called Ponar Grab. So, 
ponar grab samples  the similar to that . So, it has a two buckets here , right once it  hits the 
ground the buckets are going to close . So, similarly the Peterson grab sample just we  I 
have seen in the previous slide and the orange peel grab . So, this has  you know this is a 
three  bucket . So, this is 1 2 3 and they a re going to the similar principle once they  have  
gone down and the chain will be you know released and due to the weight it collects the  
you know collects the  sample sediments and when you take it out  the all three  buckets 
are going to close  and you  can take a s ample out . 
And this is Van Veen Grab this is another kind of  graph and this is a Smith Mcintyre . So, 
Smith Mcintyre grab sample . So, this is little complicated , but it is I mean will be used  in 
the deep waters .  (Refer Slide Time: 13:22 ) 
 
So, the core sampler s the other  category is the core samplers . So, the core samplers are 
basically tubes or augers that are inserted into a sediment or soil , but various means to 
obtain cylinder or box sample of material known depth s. So, the advantage with t he core 
samplers are you can  get samples vertically you know down from the top to bottom  at 
different  design depth s. So, for example, here the core handler here  so, this is the core 
sampler and this is the core to I mean this will be  the core cutter , this is kind of a  core 
teeth . So, this will make you know it will make easy access to the ground , ok. 
So, once the sampling is done if you take out  you can know exactly what depth of 
sample has been taken and corers can be simple  hand operated devices or they c an be 
large costly and motor driven mechanisms , so that can collect samples from great depth s. 
So, if you are  going to collect sample from you know deeper  waters then even in that 
case the cores are helpful right , but you need to use heavier you know kind of a rigs so 
that you can get the  cores sample from deeper  you know deep waters.  (Refer Slide Time: 14:46 ) 
 
So, the core sample rs could be  elect ric vibracore . So, it is basically  so, the vibrations 
which are generated  will be used to you know loosen the s oil here , right loosen  the soil 
and that will be collected in the cores . And,  Lamont  box corer . So, this is another similar 
to your what you call the box type sample r we have seen just . 
And the piston corer , so, this will be a to and fro  motion kind of thi ng. So, with this  so, 
because the piston mo vement it goes down and  in that way it goes down  it is a freefall 
wire, ok. So,  a it works on the principle of in to and fro or like a piston mo vement and 
collect the sample at the desired depth  and a Phleger corer this is another kind , a gravity  
corer . So, due to  gravity it goes and collect the  because of the weight of the sample it 
goes wei ght of the core it goes and hit  the hit the ground and collect the samples here . (Refer Slide Time: 16:10 ) 
 
And, the other o ne is homemade suspended sediment sampler . So, this is very easy . So, 
this is a bottle if you see he this is the bottle and then  it has two tubes ; one is the air  
outlet tube and then intake nozzle here . So, mostly this is used for getting the suspended 
sediments . This is a rubber stopper here  right . So, this is inlet , so, suspended  sediments 
will go in and trap ped here right  and then clear water  will or a ir whatever it may be  so, 
that will be  passed out . So, that way  so, and here this will be  tied to a vert ical pole. So, 
that it would not  float from one p lace to another  plate place  and this is very easy  used for  
suspended  sediment  collection . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:07 ) 
 So, then so, the considerations  and cautions should be applied  to sediment sampling 
basic ally. So, the soil sampling equipment is generally not applicable to sediments 
because of  the low cohesion  of the medium . So, here soil samples for example, soil cores 
and other things or augers  so, they may not be applicable here  in case of  collecting 
sediments because the sediments  or like a cohesive soil is most  is silts and  clays  so, will 
be much careful . So, better use  sediment sampler rather than soil samples . 
Direct collection with the appropriate s sample container may be appropriate  in very 
shallow w ater where sediment is exposed . So, shallow waters if you have shallow water  I 
mean sediments  so, data collection will be easier  and also  it is a appropriate  compared to 
the deep water and you may get accurate or accurate depths you can  collect the  samples  
here. Use dredgers or hard  for hard rocky substances . So, dredgers are  very useful  which 
can collect the you know rocky samples . They are heavy enough to  use heavy velocity 
streams . 
Use core devices in quiescent waters . So, the qu iescent waters means  you are not having 
turbulence in waters , unless water depth precludes effective sample collection . So, unless 
there is a deep water or anything there is a difficulty in reaching the ground  so, the core 
samplers can be used in quiescent condition . Samples must be preserved according to the 
CFR 40 . So, the CFR 40 is the this is the Title 40 of Code of Federal Regulations of 
United States. So, the sample holding  times according to CFR 40; CFR 40  has code of 
conduct for  collecting sample  preservation and all other things . So, we need to you know  
you need to follow the recommendations while taking the samples and while preserving 
the samples and analyzing samples  ok. 
So, this is all about  the sediment sample collection . So, as I said basically we will be 
collecting s ediment  suspended sediment as well as  bed load . So, there are several  devices 
will be used to collect the  samples ; it could be you know  dredgers , soil cores , I mean 
core samplers and the  graphs or simple hand made you know suspended  sample 
collectors . So, and in order to collect the sample , in order to you know preserve the 
sample we need to you know use the CFR 40 or you know the 40 I mean the stand  this is 
the standard  mostly the United States are being used  for collecting and  preserving the 
sediment sampl es, ok. 
Thank you . 