Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 06 
Soil Loss Estimation  
 
Hello friends , welcome back to NPTEL  online certification course entitled Soil and 
Water Conservation Engineering . I am Rajendr a Singh, Professor in Agriculture and 
Food Engineering Department, IIT Kharagpur . We are st arting week 2 today tha t is we 
are in lecture number  6, and the topic is  Soil Loss Estimation . 
(Refer Slide  Time: 00:43)  
 
This week , this will be our course content ; today will start with soil loss estimation . In 
lecture 2 of this week , lecture 7 will go into erosive and erodibility, and lecture 3 of this 
week, that means, overall lecture 8 will cover  modifica tions in uni versal soil loss 
equation part 1. Lecture 4, cumulative lecture number 9 will cover  modification in 
universal soil loss equation part 2. This week's last lecture, which will be lecture number 
10 of this course,  will see how to measure soil loss  in field conditions . (Refer Slide Time: 01:32)  
 
We start today with the soil loss estimation . We cover the most widely accepted method 
for estimat ing the average annual soil loss, which is referred to as the Universal Soil 
Loss Equation, which is  very po pularly known as USLE . The USLE  is a very popular 
component of soil and water conservation , and as it says , it is the most widely  accepted 
method . The i mportant thing to note here is that it is used for estimating the average 
annual soil l oss that in a lon g-term soil loss it gives, it means that this method cannot be 
used for estimating the soil loss for a sing le event . It provid es us with average  annual soil 
loss. It also helps in determining the adequacy  of conservation measures . Obviously,  
suppose we kno w the soil losses. In that case, we will estimate soil loss when no 
conservation measure is taken using USL E. We will use the USLE for another field 
condition, whe re certain  conservation practices have been taken . So, by comparing these 
two estimates, we c an determine  how effective these  soil conservation measures are . 
This USLE  was initially proposed by Wischmeier  and Smith  in 1958; Wischmeier Smith 
modified this equation to it s present form in 1978. The definition of  USLE  is like this  – 
the USLE  is an ero sion prediction model  for estimating  long term averages  of soil 
erosion  from sheet  and rill erosion s from a specified land  under a specified condition . 
There is an important terminology here: the erosion prediction model for the long -term 
average of soil e rosion that we already mentioned . It only considers  sheet and rill 
erosion s; that means the gully erosion process is  not considered as far as a  USLE  is concerned . It estimate s soil loss from a specified type of land , where a partic ular type of 
crop is bein g grown  and a specified condition or under  if any  conservation measure had  
been taken or not . So, under these specific conditions, we use universal soil loss equation 
to measure soil loss or estimate soil loss . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:22)  
 
Now, continuing  USLE, you remember that we were discussing the factors affecting 
erosion in one of the classes discussing the factors affecting erosion. I gave the equation 
that erosion is a function of climate, topography, vegetation and soil . So, the same 
equation is wri tten here also that erosion is a function of climate , topography , vegetation 
or land use and  soil. But, ultimately , these are the factors responsible for erosion, which 
means that the  universal soil loss equation also consider s only these components . 
If you look at the Universal Soil Loss Equation , 
A = R K LS C P  
Where A =Average annual soil loss, metric ton/ha or t/ha  
R = Rainfall erosivity factor or index, MJ×mm/ha×h  
K = Soil erodibility factor or index, t×ha×h/ha×MJ×mm  
LS = Topographic factor  
C = Crop ma nagement factor  
P = Conservation practice factor  Let me remind you  that they are certain essential  things are certain fun damental things of 
a subject . The USLE  is that kind of a fundamental thing  of soil and water conservation 
engineering . It is expected t hat if you say to somebody that you have read this course , 
you at least will know the  universal soil loss equation . So, that is why I will request  that 
you please do  remember and do understand this universal soil loss equation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:53)  
 
Let us  see these terms  one by one . Let us  see the first term , which is  Rainfall  Erosivity 
Index  or Rainfall E rosivity  Factor , which is  designated by letter capital  R. Rainfall 
erosivity  refers to the intrinsic capacity  of rainfall to cause soil  erosion , and it is the 
function of kinetic energy and intensity  of rainstorm . From lecture number 1, when we 
started classifying soil erosion, we always saw water erosion start  with raindrops splash 
erosion . We also saw  it is the raindrop impact  which is the major fa ctor behind the 
detachment process . That intrinsic  capacity of the  rainfall to  cause soil erosion means 
starting the detachment process which; obviously, depends on the kinetic energy and 
intensity of the rainstorm  referred to in terms of  rainfall erosivit y. 
It is expressed as a product of the kinetic energy  of the storm  and maximum  30 minute  
intensity of the storm .  
R = EI 30 = KE × I 30 
Rainfall Erosivity  Index R is also referred  to as  EI30, where E is the kinetic energy , and 
I30 is the maximum  30-minute ra infall  intensity during the storm .  In a given sto rm for which we want to estimate  from ; which we want to estimate the  soil 
loss, and tha t simply means first we have to estimate the  rainfall  erosivity . During that 
particu lar storm , we have to find the 30 -minute duration where the rainfall intensity is 
maximum . We will  see how to calculate  and estimate all these  terms when we come to  
the later part of this particular class . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:22)  
 
The equation is basically  based on  the fact that the product of kinetic energy of the storm 
and 30 -minute  maximum rainfall intensity  gives  the best estimation of soil loss . That was 
given by Wischmeier in 1965 based on a large number of experimen ts. The 30 minutes 
maximum rainfall intensity  either value is estim ated from  rain gauge charts . We shall 
discuss the procedure to find  I30 probably  the next class . (Refer Slide Time: 11:32)  
 
The next term is  soil erodibility factor  K and erodibility . Remember  erosivity is the 
characteristic of rainfall , and erodibility  is related to soil . So, erodibility is  the resistance 
of the soil to both detachment  and transportation . If any particular soil  can resist 
detachment and transportation, the erosion will be less , so erodibility  is the measure of  
erosion . It can be determine d through the measurement of soil  loss from a  standard 
runoff  plot. If you have to do some kind of  experimentation  to find out the value of the  
applicable value of s oil erodibility factor . When we say standard runoff  plot is also 
referred to as standard  USLE plot, and there are specific  standards . That is  a single plot 
having 9 per cent slope , or in d egrees , it is 5.16 degrees , and the length of the  plot is 
22.13 meters  or 72.6 feet. This plot is kept fallow  with periodic  tillage up and  
downslope . So, that means that  it is a plot standard plot  with a slope of  9 per cent. 
Then i t is referred to as a standard USLE  plot, and that is a plot that is measured  for soil 
loss estimation or  estimating the  soil erodibility  factor . Then the topographic factor , crop 
management factor and conservation practice factor  are all taken is 1 , and you remember 
equation R K LS C P. So, these 3 terms are gone . We are  only left with R and K, so, that 
means soil loss or A is a function of  R and K. If we are using  a standard USLE p lot the 
soil loss becomes a function of R and K and because  for conducting experiments , we can 
always use the rainfall simulator s. We will always know the rainfall intens ity or rainfall 
pattern under which we measure  the soil loss . That means it will be poss ible for us to 
estimate  the value of the rainfall erosivity in dex. So, if R is known and A is measured that soil loss is measured from the standard plot, we can obviously  find out or estimate  
the value of applicable  K for a  given condition . That is how the soil loss erodibility  
factor  for a given soil  can be estimated using the standard  runoff  plots. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:35)  
 
Based on the runoff  plot studies , certain values of erodibility factor  have been 
recommended  for different soils of I ndia (Subraman ya, 2008). In the different state  
stations , you can see A gra, Dehradun , Hyderabad , Kharagpur , Kota , Ootakamund and  
Vasad, and these are the different types  of soil s. The K value var ies from  0.07 so, the 
minimum  is 0.04 both in K haragpur  and Ootakamund , where the soils are lateritic  or 
sand sandy loam  basically .  The highest  value here we find is 0.1 5 that is  how silt loam  
was reported from D ehradun . These are the experimental values that have been reported 
which can be used for different  kinds of soil type s. (Refer Slide Time: 16:34)  
 
Then we come to the next factor , a topographic factor, which  include s a factor for slope 
length  (L) and slope steepness  (S).  L and S are taken toge ther and written as  LS. It 
represents a soil loss ratio  under given condition s to that at a site  with standard slope 
steepness  of 9 per cent and slope  length  of 22.13  m. Basically , here also  is the USLE  
standard plot is used as a reference . So, there  you measure the soil loss , and then you 
measure soil loss for another field where  the slope length  and slope steepness are  
different . Then you can find out  the applicant value of the LS, as we saw in the case of 
K. The steeper and longer the slope, the higher the risk of erosion. So obviously, if the 
slope is more , then the flow velocit y will increase, which means the kinetic energy of the 
flowing water will increas e. That means  erosive capacity will be  more , and more  erosion 
will take place . If that kind of slope  continu es for a longer length, more erosion will 
occur . Topographic  factor  can be estimated using this equ ation: 
LS = (L/22.13)m[65.41 Sin2θ + 4.58 Sinθ + 0.0651]  
 Where L is the slope length  in meters   
θ is the angle of slope .  
m is the exponent depend ing on the slope . 
The exponent, m , is taken as  0.5 for slope 5 per cent or more ,  0.4 for slope range 3.5 to 
4.5 per cent, 0.3 for 1 to 3 per cent, and 0.2 for less than  1 per cent. As you can  see, if m 
is more , this factor will be more; that means the soil loss will be more so obviously . (Refer Slide Time: 19:01)  
 
Topography factor values can also be obtained from standard tables . Here I have 
mentioned the reference for  tables  where LS factor has been tab ulated for different slope 
lengths  and different slope percentages , and the rec ommended value . If slope length is 
30.5 meters  or 100  feet, then the values are different slopes starting from 0 to  10 per  
cent. So, if the  length is 30.5 meters  and the slope is 0, that  means horizontal, then the  LS 
value will be 0.07. Where in if it s slope is 10 per cent, then this  value will be  1.38. So, 
depending upon  where  the slope increases , the value of  the LS factor  also increases . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:59)  
 Similarly , this site  produces  tables for  different  slope length s 61 meters , 122 meters  and 
then 244 meters  and 488 meter s. So, values  can be the LS values  can be referred from  
these  table s. 
(Refer Slide Ti me: 20:17)  
 
The next factor  is the crop management  factor . It is the soil loss ratio  from a land  
cropped under specified conditions  to corresponding loss  from  clean tilled  continuous 
fallow land . So, again  the soil loss  is measured  from  a standard USLE  plot, where  it is 
fallow land , but clean t illed up and down slope some tilled is operation has take n place . 
Then if you meas ure soil loss from any other area which has been  crop differently , the 
ratio of both soil los ses will define the value of  C. It include s the effects of  various crops 
factors  like crop cover , crop sequence , tillage practices  and residue management . All this 
will impact the value of C can also be  obtained  from standard tables . (Refer Slide Time: 21:23)  
 
This is a table based on reports fro m different ICAR research cent res that  the values of C 
are there . For example, in Kharagpur , Kota and V asad research centre s, these are the 
values  for maize, paddy, cow pea, et c. So, that is how you can  refer to the values  of C 
from the standard literature . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:03)  
 
The last factor  is so, conservation practice factor , P, which represents  the ratio of soil 
loss from a land  where conservation practices like contouring  strip cropping  and 
terracing , etc. , are adopted  to that where they are no t. So, in the standard USLE  plot, we know that no such  practices are adopted . So, if you take the soil loss value from a  field, 
say, contouring has taken place then; obviously, with reference to USLE  plot what is the 
soil loss that will define  the value of  P. So, the value of P is taken is 1  for no  
conservation practice . Similarly , the value of C is taken as 1 , if no crop is  there and  land 
is fallow and continuously being t illed. Like LS and C, for P also, standard tables are 
available , which can be referre d, 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:01)  
 
For example, this is a n example table for different slopes  and different kinds  of 
conservation practices : contouring , contour  strip cropping , terracing and  contouring 
together . If the slope is between 2.1 to 7 per cent, the value is 0.5 for contouring , for 
contour s trip cropping , the value is 0. 2, and for terracing and contouring , the value is 1. 
From the equation ,  A is directly  proportional to  P, so, larger P's value,  the greater will be 
A. From this relationship , we can see  that if we adopt a combination of terracing and 
contouring  over 2.1 to 7 per cent. Then obviously , the soil  loss will be less as compared 
to when we  only adopt cont ouring .  (Refer Slide Time: 23:59)  
 
Let us try to solve a problem . The problem says that g iving the following data , calculate 
the average  annual soil loss . 
Rainfall erosivity factor (R ) = 200 MJ×mm/ha×h  
Soil erodibility  factor  (K) = 0.35 t×ha×h/ha×MJ×mm   
Slope length (L) = 61 m  
Average s lope steepness  (S) = 8%,  
Crop management factor (C) = 0.2 
Conservation  practice fact or (P) = 1 (which means  that no conservation practice is  taken ) 
To see  if we say  A equal s R K LS C P, we must  use a universal soil loss equation  to 
estimate  the average annual soil loss . 
Here R, K, C and P value s are given . For the LS factor , we have  L and S known . So, 
either we have  to use the relationship  or use the standard tables to obtain the  LS. We 
have to determine  the value of the LS factor , knowing L and S; if we can obtain that , we 
will be able  to solve this problem . (Refer Slide Time: 25:43)  
 
Coming to the solution , we can  find LS factor  for L equal s 61 meters and an average 
steepness  slope of  8 per cent; we have gone to the standard table  just now we saw earlier . 
We have to refer  to the slope length  equal to  61 meter s or 200 feet, and we have to refer  
to the slope  8 per cent. From the table , we can read  the value o f LS as 1.41. So that 
means, LS factor  applicable in this particular problem will be  1.41. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:24)  
 
We have been given R equal s 200 MJ×mm /ha×h ,  K is 0.3 4 t×ha×h/ha×MJ×mm , C is 
0.2, P is 0.1 , and we already have estimated LS equal to  1.41. We now know  the values of all these factors  and does putting  in th e equation and 
calculate .  
A = 200×0.34×1.41×0.2×1 
A = 19.18  t/ha/yr  
The e stimated  average annual soil loss (A) is 19.18 t/ha/y . 
That means if you want to use the universal soil loss equation for estimating  soil loss  
from given conditions , then we have to  obtain the values of all these factors R K LS C 
and P. 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:29)  
 
For soil loss estimation, we obviously apply USLE and what it means t o provide a 
specific reliable guide for selecting appropriate erosion control practices for farmlands 
and construction the areas that are  the application of USLE . For example, we already 
know  that if we adopt a particular crop management factor, if we adopt a particular 
conser vation practice factor, what should be the soil loss  value ? Using this , we can know  
what kind of cropping pattern we should adopt  and w hat conservation practice we adopt . 
The USLE  could be applied to provide reliable  guides for selecting appropriate  erosion 
control  practices for  farm lands and construction  areas. That means  we have to first  know 
how much erosion for a given area on an annual basis, and  based on that, we can  decide  what kind of erosion control practice  should  be adopted . Determine  upland erosion for 
reservoir  sedimentation in -stream  loading  control of  pollution from crop land and 
alternative land  use treatment combination s. 
Obviously, we know one of the ill ef fects of erosion is that it fills the reservoirs or 
storage structures or stream beds . Because  ultimately , whatever soil is eroded that 
reaches the streams or the storage structures like a reservoir . If you want to maintain the 
life of the reservoir or if you want to keep the  reversed cross -section free from 
sedimentation . So obviously  have to control erosion on the upside of  the catchment from 
where the water is reaching a particular reservoir at a  particular stream . We can control 
that by using  suitable  land use  treatment combination s. These are the important 
applications . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:45)  
 
In India, soil loss rates have been classified into six categories  based on 21 observation s, 
64 estimated erosion values  by USLE  at different  location s sprea d across the country . 
The erosion classes are slight , moderate , high, very high, severe , very severe . The 
erosion rates are slight means  0 to 5 t/ha/y; moderate is  5 to 10 t/ha/y; very severe is 
greater than 80  t/ha/y. The moderate erosion  is allowed up  to what level we can allow . 
If there  are 14,05,640 km2 of the area,  that falls under  the moderate erosion class . Where  
in 8,01,350 km2 falls under the slight erosion . We must keep soil lo ss within the 
moderate limit . That means  these  many levels  are unaccept able, so we have to take various kinds of soil erosion measures  to control  the high er loss of soil erosion wherever 
it is occurring . 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:08)  
 
Then obviously, USLE  has certain  limitations  as well . It is empirical in nature  that means 
all coefficients  are empirical . The value s of R or K or LS or C or P are applicable only 
for the areas for which  we have estimated those values . Then next is the prediction of  
average annual  soil loss ; it only predicts  average annual soil loss . 
If you want to  determine  the soil loss from a particular event , then USLE  cannot be used . 
Then, obviously, when we define  USLE , we s ee that i t is only limited to sheet and rill 
erosion . That means Gully erosion  is one of the primary or major erosion concerns  that is 
not taken into account , then non-consideration  of sediment deposition . So, here it only 
talks about sediment  loss. There is no conside ration of  soil deposition  in USLE . So, that 
is one of the  major limitations of  USLE . 
With this , we have seen  USLE  that how to use  USLE , the factors involved in the USLE, 
and the applications  and the limita tions of USLE . That we have seen in this  first lecture 
of this week , that is  week  lecture number 6. And in  the following  lectures , we will see 
how to estimate erosiv ity, erodibility , the various modifications available for USLE  and 
how to apply that  in the coming weeks . 
Thank you very much . 