Soil and Water Conservat ion Eng ineer ing 
Prof. Rajendra S ingh 
Department of Agr icultural and Food Eng ineer ing 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 07 
Erosivity and Erod ibility 
 
Hello fr iends. Welcome back to NPTEL  online cert ification course  entitled Soil and 
Water Conservat ion Engineering. I am Rajendra Singh, Professor  in Agricultur al and 
Food Engineering Department of  IIT, Kharagpur . We are  in lecture 7, week number 2 
and the top ic today  is Erosivity and Erodibility.  
(Refer Slide Time : 00:39) 
 
Just to g ive you a background up of what we are cover ing th is week , we saw how to 
estimate soil loss in the previous lecturer . During the process , we went through the 
Universal Soil Loss Equation . We saw that rainfall erosivity index and soil erodib ility 
index are two important factors. I n lecture 7 today , we will be cover ing eros ivity and 
erodibility. In lecture 8, we will see mod ifications in the Universal Soil Loss Equation 
that w ill be part 1 of the lecture . In lecture 9, we will continue w ith th at same 
modification in the Universal Soil Loss Equation that is part 2 and in las t lecture of the 
week, lectur e 10, we will go through  soil loss measurement . (Refer Slide Time : 01:27)  
 
Coming to eros ivity and erod ibility now, to rem ind you , I would l ike to wr ite the 
equat ion wh ich we saw for Universal Soil Loss Equation  that is: 
A = R K LS C P  
We def ined R as rainfall  erosivity index , and K is soil erod ibility index , and that is what 
erosivity and  erodibility is our top ic today . If you remember  the proces s of a soil erosion, 
we know that there are three  processes : detachment , transportat ion and depos ition. 
The first one  is detachment , of course,  and we also s aw that it is the ra indrop  impact  that 
is respons ible for detachment . So, that ab ility of ra in to d etach  the soil particles is 
referred to as eros ivity, where on the other hand , the suscept ibility of so il to withstand 
the ra indrop  impact is referred to as erod ibility. That makes  it clear that  erosivity is a 
rainfall characteristi c, and  that is wh y R is defined as the rainfall eros ivity index . Where 
erodibility is a so il character istic, and that  is why we def ine K as soil erod ibility index or 
soil erod ibility factor . Soil eros ion occurs when ra infall eros ivity exceeds the so il 
erodibility. Whenever erosivity is greater than the erod ibility, soil eros ion w ill take place . (Refer Slide Time : 03:26)  
 
Now, erosivity is the potent ial ab ility of ra in to cause eros ion. It depends on  several 
rainfall character istics: rainfall intens ity, drop s ize distribution, terminal veloc ity, wind 
velocity  and direction of the slope.  We know that  kinetic energy  is respons ible for 
raindrop  impact . So obviously, if the  drop s ize is larger , then the impact w ill be much 
higher. Terminal veloc ity, which aga in depends on the drop s ize, the higher the veloc ity 
more w ill increase  the k inetic energy . Wind vel ocity, when we saw the  impact of wind, 
we saw the w ind change the d irection in which the  raindrops  hit the so il surface . That 
could make a n angle  that might make the erosion process o r detachment process more 
severe . The slope direction  will have the  same  impact . If the slope directio n, we saw  if 
the so il is like th is if rainfall is vert ical, then soil particles w ill move much larger d own 
the slope  than in the upward  directions. So, these are some of the factors on wh ich 
erosivity primarily depends . (Refer Slide Time : 04:46)  
 
Now, estimation of erosivity from rainfall data  could be done by 2 methods; EI 30 index 
method or KE greater than the 25 index method and we will see these methods  one by 
one. 
Coming to  the EI30 index method , this method was given by Wishmeier  in 1965 . You 
remember  Wishmeier  and Smith;  they were respons ible for provid ing the Universal Soil  
Loss Equation , and it was Wishmeier  who gave the  EI30 index method . As the na me 
itself suggest , it is computed by the product of k inetic energy of storm  (E) and 30-minute 
maximum ra infall intens ity (I30).  I30 is the ra infall intens ity suff ix 30 represent s the 30 
minutes durat ion during the storm  where t he ra infall intens ity is max imum . So, it is 
referred to as or defined as  30-minute maximum ra infall intens ity. (Refer Slide Time : 06:32)  
 
Now, the relation between E and I is given by Wischme ir and Smith in 1958 .  
E = 0.119  + 0.0873 log 10I 
Where E is the kinetic energy  in MJ/ha-mm, and I is the ra infall intens ity in mm/h. 
Like any other e mpirical equat ion, dimens ion, we have to be careful about the un its if we 
want to use the equat ion in present  form  or given for m because the coeff icients or 
constants are there because of the units  used for variables. That means, if you want to use 
this Wischme ir and  Smith quest ion, I has to be put  in mm/h,  and E will alway s be the 
output in MJ/ha-mm. Now ra infall eros ivity index , R is given by  EI30 equals to E times 
I30.  (Refer Slide Time : 08:11)  
 
Both E and I30 are obta ined for rainfall events  because of the ra infall character istics that 
we have to obta in for a part icular ra infall event . For identifying a specific  rainfall event , 
we use the ra in gauge char t. This rain gauge char t comes from a recor ding type 
raingauge used to find out the  E and I30. 
This example here, you see , is a typ ical ra in gauge chart that is obta ined from s iphon or 
float type of record ing ra in gauge . I am sure that you have read various k inds of ra in 
gauges : non-record ing and record ing. Within the record ing, you probably have heard a 
tipping bucket, weighing bucket, and  float or s iphon  type of ra in gauge . So, this is the 
siphon  or float type of ra in gauge that  is the standard record ing type ra in gauge adopted  
in India , and that  is why  I am show ing the chat here . 
In this case , as you can guess , that is float or siphon type . The term inology is used 
because there  is a float chamber  inside  rainfall guess  collected , and as  in the chamber  
itself, it is a cyl indrical chamber . As the wat er level goes up , there  is a float here that 
float r ises and th is float  is connected to some kind of record ing mechan ism here . In this 
record ing magnes ium, there  is a chart place . That is why  you see  that the maximum 10 
mm of rainfall  is the float chamber' s capacity . Here th is chart show s, it starts at 8 o'clock 
because typ ically  in India , 8 AM is the t ime where the ra infall is recorded . It is supposed 
to be recorded as per  IMD. So, that is wh y this chat also start s at 8 o'clock . Suppose  this 
line shows tha t the  rainfall event starts at 8 o'clock and continuous up to around 12 o'clock . The  total ra infall is becom ing 10 mm. This is becom ing 10 mm; that means  the 
float chamber's capacity  is completely f illed, and then the  siphon ing takes place and ; that 
means  this record ing mech anism comes back , or float come s back to 0 level and then 
again record ing starts . That s imply means here you can see that here s iphon ing has taken 
place , but immed iately there  is a cont inuous record that shows that ther e is a ra infall 
event over th is per iod of time. So, from  8:00 hours to 14:30  hours , that is continuous 
rainfall, and then from th is rain gauge chart , we can also read the magn itude of ra infall. 
The previous  10 mm and here as we see th is is 6 mm, which  means  that 16 mm of 
rainfall occurs during this period . That is one ra infall event .  
Then after 14:30  hours till 24 hours , we see a horizontal l ine which shows that there  is no 
rainfall occurr ing. Then aga in, this pen is starting rising or  the floa t rising. From 24 
hours t ill 5, it reaches  the total capac ity that is 10 mm. That means  it represents  4 mm 
(10-6) of rainfall  and then siphon ing occurs  in this period . Then aga in, the pen  is starting 
up and goes  here, which means the second event continues  till 6 AM. That m eans the 
total durat ion of the storm here  is 6 hours , and the total ra infall wh ich is occurr ing here is 
8 mm (4+4) of rainfall. 
On this part icular day for wh ich this chart  is taken , there are two rainfall ev ents; one is 
continuing from  8 o'clock in the morn ing till 2:30 in the afternoon and hav ing 16 mm of 
rainfall when the  second event  is start ing at 12 midnight, continuing till 6 o'clock in the 
morn ing with a  total ra infall of 8 mm. So, this is how we can  identify a part icular ra infall 
event , and th is is how we can calculate both E as well I30 from a g iven rain gauge chart . (Refer Slide Time : 13:37)  
 
From the ra in gauge chart , we identify the event . So, we isolat e the event, and then E and 
I30 are estimated . So, here you see , while estimating the E, the ent ire rainfall event  is 
being use d. The entire rainfall event  is being used here for calculat ing the E. Wherein for  
estimating the  I30, the name  itself suggest s, we have to look into the ent ire storm and look 
for the 30-minute durat ion where  the rainfall intens ity is maximum . That is why  it is 
defined as maximum 30-minute intens ity due  in the event . 
(Refer Slide Time : 14:28)  
 Let us take an  example . Follow ing rainfall event  is isolated from a ra in gauge chart , 
calculate the ra infall eros ivity index .  
Here you  see a pa rticular date  is given. Starting times and shifting times are given; time 
interval  is given; reading at the start  is given; reading at shifting time is given; and 
rainfall magn itude for d ifferent  intervals . So, basically  this data  has come from a 
raingauge  chart . 
(Refer Slide Time : 15:03)  
 
Using th is data , we can go an d estimate the  EI30 or ra infall eros ivity index . As you can 
see that  we have  rainfall in mm and  durat ion of rainfall. So, we can calculate rainfall 
intens ity for each durat ion. That is column  2; that is the ra infall d ivided by co lumn 1, the 
durat ion of 20 minutes mult iplied by  60. We can get in the desired unit of mm/h , and 
once we  know the intensity,  we can use the Wischme ir and Smith equat ion. 
So, using th is equation, we can calculate the E in MJ/ha-mm quite eas ily. That is what 
we have  done here. For each  I, this is the  E in MJ/ha-mm, but in this equat ion, you 
remember the  EI30 unit is MJ-mm/ha-h, which  simply means  E is being used  in MJ/ha 
and I30 is in mm/h . That means merely  the E, which is there  in MJ/ha-mm, that has to be 
converted  into MJ/ha. So, we mult iply column  4 with column 2; column 2 is nothing  but 
the magnitude of the rainfall in different durations to get the E of rainfall in the  desired 
unit, that is, MJ/ha for d ifferent  intervals. Then the total sum  is obta ined by add ing the se 
values, which is 4.59.  In this case, which has to be used in this equation and then , that 
means, E we have calculated,  the next  import ant th ing is to calculate the  I30. (Refer Slide Time : 16:54)  
 
For I30, the first th ing is that we have to  identify 30-minute durat ions. So, here if we 
analyz e one by one , we see that there are  three d ifferent events , we can  identify of  30-
minute durat ion; 22 plus 8 is 30; 8 + 10 + 12 is 30, and in each of these  30 minutes , we 
can calculate ; what  is the total rainfall: 3.3 mm, 12.2 mm and 10 mm. From these 30-
minute durations , we can identify where the intensity will be maximum ; that is , the 
maximum 30-minute durat ion ra infall is 12.2 mm. That means  the max imum  intens ity is 
continuous , and I30 is two times of 30-minute durat ion; that is 24.4 mm. So,  the 
maximum  I30 for th is part icular problem  is 24.4mm/h .  
Once we know  E and I30, the mul tiplication of this sum value will  give us the total  
rainfall erosivity index  or EI30 for this particular  event . So, that is how we estimate the  
EI30 for a given event . (Refer Slide Time : 18:06)  
 
We can take  its get another problem . For example, the follow ing mass curve read ing was 
taken from a record ing type ra in gauge  to analyze  the ra infall time. Since the beginning 
of the storm  is given in here, that is 4 to 5:20 PM. T he duration and cumulative rainfall 
values are given here ; that means  the rainfall event starts , and the total rainfall is 33 
during this period. W e have to calculate the  rainfall eros ivity index . So, just follow ing 
the procedure we saw earl ier in the earl ier example , we can do that . 
(Refer Slide Time : 19:02)  
 So, obviou sly, we know the cumulative rainfall values for different times and time 
interval s. So, for different durat ions, so, here 4 to 4:20; that means, 20 minutes, the 
magn itude of ra infall is 1 mm. So, for d ifferent durat ions, we can f ind out ; what  the total 
amount of rainfall is. Thus,  we c an calculate the  intens ity of ra infall. Once we know the  
intens ity of ra infall, we can calculate E in MJ/ha-mm by us ing the  Wischme ir and Smith 
equat ion. Then aga in, by mult iplying th is with the total magn itude of rainfall , we can get  
in the E in MJ/ha. We have to find out different continuous 30 -minute durations again,  
and her e again, we se e three d ifferent events . 
So, three  different events are there ; that means  rainfall in these  30 minutes : 9 mm, 27 
mm and 23 mm. So, a 30-minute durat ion where the  intens ity is max imum  when the total 
magn itude of ra infall is 27 mm. That means  the intens ity I30 is maximum , i.e. 54 mm/h . 
Once we know  the sum of E or KE  and I30, multiplication of these two will give us th e 
EI30 or rainfall eros ivity index  in MJ-mm/ha-h. So, that is the answer  which we are 
looking for th is part icular problem . 
(Refer Sli de Time : 20:54)  
 
Now,  we will continue w ith erosivity further , and here we are go ing into the following  
KE>25 index method . So, the EI30 method , just now we saw how to calculate the ra infall 
erosivity. But this  method  was bas ically developed under America n cond itions, which 
may not be su itable for trop ical and sub tropical zone s. So, that is the drawback of  EI30 
method , as far as its development cond itions are concerned . So, to overcome that drawba ck, Hudson  in 1981  developed  KE>25 index  method , which  was meant for 
comput ing the ra infall erosivity of tropical storm s.  
The first method , which Wischmeir and Smith gave,  was based on  American data . It may 
not be suitable or suitable for tropical and subtropical zones. T hat is how this new 
method came  KE>25 came , and in this method , erosion takes place only a t a threshold  
value of ra infall intens ity. 
(Refer Slide Time : 22:24)  
 
The log ic is given as follow s: the threshold value first , which is the use of rainfall 
intensity, is 25 mm/h , determ ined based on exper iments. 
Based on many large  exper iments , the threshold value of ra infall intens ity is obta ined 25 
mm/h , which  is wh y the name of the method  is KE>25 index method . That is assume d 
that ra infall intens ity is less than 25 mm/h does not yield a significant soil e rosion; 
hence, this method is called the  KE>25 index method . In the exper iment wh ich w as 
conducted  in trop ical cond itions, they showed that  if the ra infall intens ity is less than 25 
mm/h , then the  soil eros ion was not s ignificant.  
The est imation procedure  of th is method  is very s imilar to EI30. The only difference is 
that in the EI 30 method, we calculate kinetic energy for all rainfall intensities . In this 
case, KE is calculated only  if I is greater than 25 mm per hour . So, any ra infall intens ity in any duration weather ra infall intens ity is less than 25 mm/h  that is neglected basically  
in this particular method . 
(Refer Slide Time : 24:04)  
 
So, let us take the problem through to  see how to use th is. It is the same problem that was 
used for apply ing the  EI30 method . So, now, in the  same problem  where is the follow ing 
mass curve read ing was t aken from a record ing type ra ingauge chart to analyze  the 
rainfall. The ra infall beg ins at 4 o'clock continues to still 5:20 and the cumu lative ra infall 
during the  event  is 33 mm. The same event  is being used , and we have to calc ulate the 
rainfall erosiovity index us ing the  KE>25 index method . Earlier, we used EI30 method . 
So, now, we are us ing KE>25 index method . (Refer Slide Time : 24:49)  
 
Here is the solut ion. So, here a gain, the time since beg inning and cumulat ive rainfall w ill 
be wr itten as  it is, and the durat ion rema ins the same . There is no change there  is 4 to 
4:20, 20 minutes , then ra infall is 0 to 1; that is 1 mm, then in 20-27; 7 minutes ra infall is 
2 mm and  so on. So, all those calculat ions rema in the same th e data extract ion from the 
raingauge chart or ra ingauge data wh ich is given in tabular form rema ins the same  
intens ity value calculat ion is also same . 
We calculate rainfall intens ity, the procedure rema ins th e same as  it was  in EI30 metho d. 
But this difference start s from here  in any durat ion, if I is less than 25 mm/h , then KE is 
not calculated . That means  KE is calculated only  if I is greater than  25 mm/h . Similarly, 
here it is 17.14 ; it is less than 25 mm p er hour . So, we are not  calculat ing the kinetic 
energy . So, only those  events or  those dura tions where the  intens ity is more than  25; so, 
only three  durat ions where  intens ity is greater than  25, we are calculat ing rest of the 
places we are not  calculat ing. So, that is how you see only 3 values  of E that is  in 
MJ/ha-mm which comes from the Wischme ir and Smith equat ion. Then it will be 
express  in MJ/ha  also only for these durat ions. So, that means that only  this event  E will 
be mult iplied by the ra infall amo unt, and that  is how these values w ill come . 
So, the total sum w ill be 7.428 ; remember , in the EI30 method , we calculate d E for each 
of these durat ions, so obviously, this sum was larger .  I30 calculat ions rema in the same . So, that is why , in this case , also w ill get I30 as 54 mm/h  and; obviously,  EI30 value w ill 
be then  multiplication of these two. 
(Refer Slide Time : 27:32)  
 
In this case , the d ifference  is that  the sum of the E was 8.698 ; here, it is 7.428 . That is 
why EI30 is 470 MJ-mm/ha-h, which  is now  getting reduced to  401 MJ-mm/ha-h because 
we are only cons idering I greater than 25 mm/h  for calculat ing the  E. So, that is the only 
difference here . So, two methods ; one is this method  say that it is more suitable for 
tropical storms or  tropical reg ions. Here we neglect the ra infall intens ity is the durat ions 
with ra infall intens ity is less than  25 mm/h  for calculat ing the  rainfall eros ivity that  is 
only d ifference otherw ise. So, the process ing, we saw more or less  the same in  both 
method s in a similar fa shion. (Refer Slide Time : 28:28)  
 
The next th ing is erod ibility which is the so il’s inherent suscept ibility to erosion, and this 
can be est imated us ing run off plots or so il propert ies. 
(Refer Slide Time : 28:38)  
 
So, as per the runoff plot , runoff from ru noff plots  is collected  in a tank , and its volume  
is measured . For est imating the so il loss , the water  in the tank is churned thorough ly. So, 
that the so il water m ix is complete and then from th is tank we take out a sample of  500 to 
1000  cc that  is a half-litre to one -litre sample  is taken . (Refer Slide Time : 29:10)  
 
Then th is sample  is taken to a laboratory  where wh ich we find out the amount of so il in 
the in the sample  in grams per litre. So, how m any grams of so il was the re. That g ives us 
the total  soil loss in grams per litre. 
Soil loss = soil loss (g/l ) × runo ff volum e (l) × 10-6 tonne  
The soil loss from the plo t in grams per litre is obtained from  the laboratory ; the total 
runoff  volume we have  already calculator  in litres. So, this will give us soil loss in grams 
to convert that  in tonne , which is normally  unit we mult iply th at with 10-6.  
In this way , we get so il loss  in ton nes and then so il loss per hectare , which is usual ly unit 
transfer hectare so il loss in ton nes divided by area of the plot  in hectare that  is from 
where the sa mple has  come ;  
Soil loss per ha (tonnes/ha) = Soil loss in tonne  / Area of plot in ha  
That w ill give us so il loss per hectare  in tones per hectare , and that  is how  erodibility can 
be found out  exper imentally  using the n ew plots. (Refer Slide Ti me: 30:14)  
 
We have to determine  the adjusted soil loss for new plots  because we might have use d a 
non-standard plot . So, we convert that to a standard USLE  plot where  we know that the 
slope  9 per cent and length of 22.13  meter s are used, and th is plot  is cont inuously fallow 
tilled up and down . So, we adjust a soil loss,  which is soil loss per hectare , which we 
calculated earl ier divided by the LS factor . 
Adjusted Soil Loss = Soil lo ss per ha  / (LS factor)  
The soil erodibility  factor (K) can be calculated by : 
K = Adjusted Soil L oss / Rainfall Eeosivity Index (R)  
So, from  using th ese soil loss values and the ra infall eros ivity values , we can determine  
the so il erod ibility for a g iven exper imental data. (Refer Slide Time : 31:16)  
 
Alternat ively, we can also use  the so il propert ies for est imating the  erodibility. We use 
the soil propert ies likes percent sand , percent slit, percent clay and  organ ic matter . This 
empirical equat ion is use d here to determine the soil erodibility .  
K = 2.8 ×10-7 M1.14 (1.2 - a) + 4.3 × 10-3 (b - 2) + 3.3 × 10-3 (c - 3) 
Where M = particle s ize parameters that  is percent  (%silt + %very f ine sand × (100 - 
%clay); b is the so il structure code (very f ine granular - 1; fine granular - 2 medium or 
coarse granular  - 3; block platy and mass ive – 4); c =  profile permeab ility class  (if the 
permeab ility is rap id -1; medium to rap id – 2; moderate  – 3; slow to moderate  – 4; slow  
– 5; very slow  – 6)  
Using b and c code  and know ing the per  cent sand , silt, clay and organ ic matter which 
can be obta ined from an exper iment from the lab oratory , we can also determ ine K using 
this emp irical equat ion. 
So, erodibility can be est imated using a design runoff plot for experiments and  soil 
propert ies us ing the emp irical relat ionsh ip. Similarly, we saw for rainfall eros ivity, we 
have two methods : EI 30 method and  K > 25 index method . So, with this, we come to  the 
end of this class where we have seen how to estimate rainfall erosivity and  soil 
erodibility. 
Thank you very much .  