Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 08 
Modifications in Universal Soil Loss Equation  
 
Welcome back , friends . Welcome to this  NPTEL  online certification course  and title  is 
Soil and Water Conservation Engineering . I am  Rajendra Singh, Professor Agricul tural 
Food Engineering  Department,  IIT, Kharagpur . We are in lecture  8, week  2. The topic  is 
Modifications in  Universal Soil Loss Equation. This is part 1 of the lecture . We will 
continue this lecture also in  the next clas s. 
(Refer Slide Time : 00:49)  
 
In this week course content , in lecture  6, we covered the Universal Soil Loss Equation  
(USLE)  or method for finding out the soil loss . In lecture  7, which  is the previous 
lecture , we saw how to estimate  two major  components of  USLE  that is rainfall erosivity  
and soil erodibility . 
In today’s lecture , we will see mo difications in the USLE , and this will be part 1 of the 
lecture , and we will co ntinue with this in the next lectur e, also where we will see part 2 
of modifications in  the USLE . And finally, in lecture  10, which  is the last lect ure of this 
week , we will see soil loss measurement . (Refer Slide Time : 01:35)  
 
Now, coming to  modification s, the modified  form of USLE , the name also is Modified 
Universal Soil Loss Equation . Why modifications were  needed . Because , USLE as we 
saw, is unable to predict sediment yield from a single  rainstorm event , and when  we 
define  USLE , we say that  it gives a  long term average  estimation of soil loss . That is why 
the unity in  USLE is for sediment  yield is  metric tons per hectare per year . 
To overcome this problem  that we cannot estimate sediment yield from a single event 
using USLE, Williams in 1975 modified the USLE. T he name is  given as Modified  
Universal Soil Loss Equation or MUSLE . This modification is  based on the fact  that 
runoff  is a superior  indicator of  sediment yield  than rainfall , which simply means  which 
is logical because no runoff  will yield  no se diment. However,  there can be  rainfall with 
little or no runoff . That means that because you remember that once again , we go  to the 
basics , there are  two major components : detachment and transportation . Now, 
detachment is primarily because of rain drop impa ct, where as transport ation  is because of 
the overland flow or the runoff . So, it means  that even if there is a rainfall  there , there is 
a rainfall event , there might be detachment . Suppose the entire rainfall volume is 
absorbed by the soil or  is not allowe d to flow because of this cover on the soil surface  
then, obviously, there will be no  runoff. That means  there will be no transportation , so 
there will be no sediment yi eld from the given area . Based on this very fact, Williams proposes that runoff is a su perior indicator of sediment 
yield. T hat is why  he modified  USL E by replacing the rainfall  erosivity  index or rainfall 
erosivity factor  with a runoff factor . So, that is the major modification . One of the major 
component s is the rainfall erosivity  index  or rainfall  erosivity factor  R. In the previous 
class , we saw how to estimate that that is replaced in modified universal soil  loss 
equation by a  runoff  factor . 
(Refer Slide Time : 04:32)  
 
This is how the MUSLE  looks , and it is given by this  formula : 
A = 11.8(VQ.QP)0.56 K.LS.C.P  
Where R was the rainfall erosivity index ; That has been replaced by this  term 
11.8( VQ.QP)0.56. That is being called as  runof f factor instead of the  rainfall erosivity 
factor . The r est of the terminology , as you can see , is the same ; K, LS, C and P repre sents 
soil erodibility  factor , topographic factor , crop management factor , and conservation 
practices factor . 
Here, two new ter ms are coming:  VQ, which is the volume  of runoff and  QP, which is the 
peak flow  rate or peak rate of runoff . The units  are cubic meter  and cubic meter  per 
second , respectively. F or estimating  these  two components , that is , the volume of runoff 
and peak flow rate , two standard  methods are used . So, runoff volume is estimated using 
the SCS curve number  method  and pe ak flow is estimated using the rational  method . I am sure that these  two methods  you might have studied  in hydrology , but to take the 
course forwa rd, we will repeat this here , and if for the benefit of those who were not 
read, they will be getting it for t he first time . 
(Refer Slide Time : 06:20)  
 
We start with  the SCS Curve Number  method (SCS-CN) and metho ). It was developed 
by the Soil Conservation Service , United States, Department  of Agriculture  in 196 9. Tha t 
is why the first term of this method . SCS come from the Soil Conservation  Service, 
which is a USDA  organization , but just to let you know that  the nam e soil conservation 
service . Now, it has been changed to Natural  Resource Conservation Service  (NRCS ), 
but the method is still known as the SCS-CN met hod only , and this method is based on 
two fundamental hypothese s. The first one says  that runoff starts  after the initial 
abstraction  (Ia) has been satisfied . This abstraction  consists of interception , surface 
storage  and infiltration . This hypothesis is v ery true in  nature also  because when we 
know when from  our hydrologic cycle knowledge , we know  whether  rainfall occurs  a 
part of that gets intercepted  either by  any kinds of the abstract object may be  plant  
canopy maybe  there a re some bushes on the surface  or buildings and roads or whatever . 
Some interception takes place  because o f the undulating  topography on the surface , a 
subpart of the  water gets stored on the surface . Obviously,  a part of this get s infiltrated , 
and then the remain der of that basically  flows  is runoff . So, that means  a runoff will  start 
only after the interception , surfa ce storage , and infiltration process  are completed , or the initial  abstraction  Ia which is the combined term to represent all these obstructions , has 
been satisfied that is the  first hypothesis . 
(Refer Slide Time : 08:24)  
 
The second  hypothesis  says that  the ratio of actual  retention of rainfall  to the potential  
maximum retention  (S). S is equal to the ratio  of direct runoff to  rainfal l minus initial 
abstraction , and mathe matically this is represe nted like: 
(P - Ia - VQ)/S = V Q/(P - Ia) 
Where Ia is an initial abstraction; VQ is surface runoff ; P is the p recipitation . 
Suppose initial abstraction and the runoff from the total rainfall is taken away. In that 
case,  the actual r etention is the volume of water that is retained  in the basin . This is 
actual retention , and its ratio is divi ded by maximum potential maximum retention  on the 
left-hand side . On the right -hand s ide, we have a direct runoff that is a total flow that  is 
taking place  divided by the rainfall  minus initial abstraction . So, mathematically , this is 
the second hypothesis that this  ratio of actual  retention to maximum re tention  is equal to 
the ratio of direct  runoff  to rainfall minus initial abstraction . By some mathematical  
rearrangements , we can also write this equation  in this form : 
VQ = (P - Ia)2/(P - Ia + S) We have already seen  S as the potential maximum retention by drainage basin , and VQ is 
the runoff volume  we want to determine . P is the mean precipitation  over the drainage 
basin. 
(Refer Slide Time : 10:26)  
 
Now, this quantity  Ia can be expressed as a function of  S that is  the hypothesis given by  
SCS. They said that  Ia is equal  to 0.2S. For a given storm , 20 per cent of the potential 
maximum retention  is the  initial abstraction  before runoff begins . So, initial abstraction 
is 20 per cent of the potential maximum re tention , that is , the physical meaning of this  
expression . (Refer Slide Time : 11:19)  
 
For Indian condi tions , the value of  Ia could be 0.3S. Howeve r, still we in India also be 
used typically use 0.2 S. Therefore, in our original equation , in (P - Ia), we replace Ia by 
0.2S.  So, this is the form of equation we get: 
VQ = (P – 0.2S)2/(P – 0.8S) 
If we again make some kind of rearrangement , this is  the fo rm of equation we get : 
VQ = P – S(1.2 – S / (P + 0.8S)) 
As you can see here , this is a  one-parameter model  containing  S only as a  parameter . The 
S is the only parameter in the model  because  P is the input we want  to find out  the VQ or 
volume of surface run off. So, S is the only parameter that needs to be determined , and 
then th is SCS relationship can also be expressed gr aphical ly in this form  that is the 
relationship between  P, VQ, Ia and F, where F is the actu al retention capacity of the soil. 
If we  plot p recipitation  versus time , then thi s is what we get basically , and here , that 
means the initial period of  time will b e an initial abstraction , and then  the flow will  start, 
but a part of  that will be first retained here . So, this is  F gives  the actual reten tion of a 
part that will be retained  and then whatever  remain s is there that will flow a s surface 
runoff . The mass curve  of the same can be represented  here that P verses  VQ if he plots 
then; obviously, this is a 45-degree  line where  P equal s VQ.  (Refer S lide Time : 13:34)  
 
Now the  most important thing is  estimating  S that is  because it is a  single parameter 
model . So, obviously , the focus will be on estimating S; if you can estimate S properly, 
then knowing the precipitation, we can determine  the runoff . Estimation of the 
watersheds  potential maximum retention  S is the  difficul t part of applying  the SCS -CN 
method to watershed because it is very difficult  to know the potential maximum retention  
of a given area . 
In order to overcome this problem , SCS develop ed the concept of  dimensionless  curve  
number (CN) to aid in the estimation of S. CN is dimensionless number which  can be 
which can help us estimate  the potential  maximum retention . Thus they g ave a 
relationship between curve number  and S, which is given he re:  
S = (1000 / CN ) - 10 
Where the unit of  S is in inches . (Refer Slide Time : 14:59)  
 
If we want  S to be in millimet res, 
S = (25400  / CN) - 254 
So, this will help you find S in millimetres, which  means that we can replace  S in terms 
of CN in our origina l equation .  
Here you remember  we are using the previous form that is  S in inches , and if we replace  
S in terms of curve  number , this is a form of the equation : 
VQ = {P - (200/CN)  + 2}2 / {P + (800/CN ) - 8} 
So, now in the entire equation , CN is the only pa rameter  to be determined , which  means 
it is still a single parameter model , but the parameter now is curve  number . To determine 
the curve number of an area, we need to know the soil  and surface cover characteristics . (Refer Slide Time : 16:31)  
 
If you know  the soil characteristic s and surface characteristics, we can find out  the curve 
number  applicable for that particular  area.  For determining curve  number ,  SCS 
classified  around  8500  soils into four hydrological  groups , and these groups  are 
designated as  A, B, C, and D. Based on their infiltration  characteristics , SCS classified  
all the soils  into four categories . So, the categories are group s A, B, C, and  D.  
Group A is composed of soil s considered to have a low runoff  potentia l. So, these soils 
have  a high infiltration rate  even when  thoroughly wetted . So that means  the in filtration 
rate range for  such soil is  7.62,  11.43  mm/h . Suppose you know the infiltration capacity 
of the soil of your area in this range. In that case,  you can say that  my soil belongs  to 
hydrological  soil group  A. Similarly, group  B soils of a  moderate infiltratio n rate when 
thoroughly wetted , and the range is  3.81 2 to 7.62 mm/h . The group  C soils have a slow 
infiltration  rate, and the values are  1.27 to 3.81 mm/h.  For group  D, the va lue of 
infiltration  rate lies between 0 to 1.27 mm/h . So, knowing the infiltration characteristics , 
we can determine  which soil  hydrology group  A, B , C or D our soil  belongs  to. (Refer  Slide Time : 18:33)  
 
And once  that is known , then using the cover condi tions or cover description  and per  
cent imperviousness , we can find the curve number  applicable for a given area or  for a 
given  watershed . Now, there is not yet another very important compone nt: the initial 
condition  or Antecedent Moisture  Condition  2 (AMC  II). So, that standard runoff  table  
was given by soil conservation service  for AMC II conditions . 
From the tabl e, you can see that if we take the impervious area, which is a parking lot 
that is 100 per cent per impervious , then based on the soil groups  or irrespective of soil 
groups . In fact, in this case , the value is 98, which means that whatever rainfall occurs , it 
is almost gets  translated  into the runoff ; there is no  loss in filtration or in abstraction s. In 
this case , everything is almost getting  translated , which is quite obvious because of the 
impervious area, but if you come to agricultural area and take the example of  pasture or  
grassland  or range land. Then our values vary from  39 to 80 depending upon  whether if 
soil belongs  to group A or group  D higher . The higher  the value of curve number , the 
higher the run off, and you see that  group  D soils are poor  infiltration . That means  more 
runoff will be gene rated from there, which  is why the curve  number valu es are high. 
We can also say  that the higher  the curve number , the mor e runoff generation  for a given 
area. Knowing  the soil hydrological  soil group  and cover conditions , we can use the 
standard table provided by  SCS for finding out the CN. These are  for AMC  II conditions , 
as already mentioned .  (Refer  Slide Time : 20:46)  
 
Now,  as I already mentioned that  3 AMC conditions  are use d: AMC I, AMC II, and 
AMC III . This AMC  is defined  based on 5-day antecedent rainfall  in inches that is  
previous  five days. The SCS is also said  the values w ill differ for the dormant season  and 
growing season . 
If we take the  AMC  II, the rainfall has to be between 0.5 to 1.1 inches in the dormant 
season , and in the growing season , it has to be between  1.4 to 2.1 inches . So obviously, 
based on this  table , we can find out which  AMC  condition  we are working  on. If you are 
working in  AMC II, then the standard table  value you have obtained from the table  can 
be utilized . (Refer Slide Time : 21:57)  
 
Otherwise , we have to  manipulate our value , and for that also  SCS is provided with a 
table. In the adjustment table ,  these are the  curve number value for  AMC II, which we 
read from the table . Based on  whether we are working in  AMC II or AMC III, we can 
find out the corresponding values;  for example,  from  our table , we read the value of 
curve  number is 75. If we are  working  AMC I, then our  value will be 57, and if AMC III, 
it is 88, so, obviously,  AMC I lesser rainfall ; that means  lesser runoff ; that means,  the 
curve number  value will be  is be lower than  AMC II condition . Where in  AMC III 
rainfall magnitude is higher , that means  more runoff  could be expected , and that is why 
the curve  number is high compared to AMC II so; that means, again we see that higher 
curve number means higher magnitude  runoff . (Refer Slide Time : 23:02)  
 
People have als o generated  certain kind s of nomograph s to help estimate  CN easily . So, 
as you  can see that  this is a plot between  direct ru noff value , Q and the rainfall , P in 
inches . These are d ifferent CNs nomograph of different curve  number s; So, if the total 
rainfall  at a particular place i s 5 inches , and if  you know that the applicable curve 
number is 70, then f rom here  roughly , we can say that  the direct  runoff will be  2 inches . 
So, if you know your rainfall on the curve numb er, you can directly read the expected 
value of  direct runoff  from this curve instead of  using  an equation  used for developing 
this nomograph . 
(Refer Slide Time : 24:09)  
 After knowing the entire background , let us take a problem  on how to estimate  the direct  
runoff volume using the  SCS-CN meth od. 
A 71-hectare urban watershed includes 60 ha  of open area with 80% grass cover  and 11 
ha of industrial  development that is 72% impervious . The soil in the  SCS Group B. 
Estimate  the total runoff volume for a 24-hour rainfall  where P = 4.0 cm for AMC -III 
conditions .  
(Refer Slide Time : 25:00)  
 
We need to follow the following steps . Basicall y, we have first to  find out the  area-
weighted average CN for AMC II, which is the baseline condition , and then we have to  
adjust CN for soil moisture condition . The prob lem says  AMC III. So, that is why we 
have to adjust . Then we have to compute the value of  S that is  potential maximum 
retention , and we have to confirm that the initial  abstraction , which is 0.2S, is les s than  
precipitation  for runoff to occur . If it is mo re than that , then, obviously, the runoff will 
not occur . And then, we have to  calculate the surface  runoff volume using the SCS CN 
equation .  
Here data are given : the tot al area is 75 ha which has  two components A1 and A2 (A1 = 
60 ha open area  with 80% grass cover : A2 = 15 hectares  with 72% of the impervious  
industrial area ); the soil hydrology group is  B;  rainfall is  4 cm; AMC condition  is 3. (Refer Slide Time : 26:04)  
 
The f irst thing  will be  to calculate the  average  CN for AMC  II baseline condition . So, 
our total area is 75 hectares . So, we have to reach  CN table for an open area with  80% 
grass cover , and the  area is 60 hectares , and 72% impervious industrial  area, the area is 
54; 15 hectares . So, if you look at the table , we have to be in soil group  B. 
(Refer Slide Time : 26:33)  
 
1. CN es timation;  
For open space good condition , grass cover  > 75%; CN =  61 (A1 = 60 ha);   
For 72% industrial , the CN =  88 (A2 = 15 ha ); 
Average Curve Number = (61×60+88 ×15)/(60+15) = 64.66 = 65  The applicable  weighted curve numbe r for this area is 65 for AMC II condition .  
(Refer Slide Time : 27:25)  
 
2. We have to obtain t he corresponding value for  AMC III and the straight away , we can 
read from the table  that CN for AMC III is  82, corresponding to AMC II. 
(Refer Slide Time : 27:53)  
 
3. Once we know the curve  number , we can use this equation . So, this will give us  S 
value : 
S = (25400  / CN) – 254 = (25400  / 82) – 254 = 55.75 mm = 5.575 cm.   
4. Initial  abstraction , we already know , is 0.2S.  
Ia = 0.2S  = 0.2×5.575 = 1.115 cm which is less than  P is 4 cm.  
So, ah; obviously, because the initial abstraction is less than P, there will be a runoff.  
5. Finally,  
VQ = (P – 0.2S)2/(P – 0.8S) = (4 – 1.115 )2/(4 – 0.8×5.575 ) = 0.9 8 cm. 
So, that means for the given conditions in a given area , out of the  4 cm of precipitation , 
we can get the direct surface runoff volume  is 0.98 cm. 
(Refer Slide Time : 29:18)  
 
We can also take another problem  on the SCS curve number . 
Determine  the runoff from  a watershed  of 60 h. The following  data is given : 
Depth o f rainfall  = 100 mm  
Antecedent Moisture Condition = AMC I 
Soil group = C  
Crop cover : Row crop , good  condition , 40 ha 
        Woodland , good condition ; 20 ha (Refer Slide Time : 29:44)  
 
So, obviously, we have to f ollow the same steps  so; that means  we hav e to find out the  
weighted  area average CN for bas eline condition , which is  AMC II , from the table . The 
soil group given in this case is  C. 
(Refer Slide Time : 29:53)  
 
So, we have to read this col umn corresponding to  hydrological soil group  C,  
For row cro p, good condition , CN =  82(A = 40 ha) ; 
For woodland, good condition  CN = 70 (A = 20 ha) ; Average  CN = (82 ×40+70 ×20)/60 = 78 for AMC II condition.  
(Refer  Slide Time : 30:36)  
 
We have  to find out the corresponding value for  AMC I, and here in the table , we s ee 
that we have 75 and 80. So;, for 78, we have to interpolate  that value , and that  is what we 
are doing here ; 
CN for AMC I = 57+(6/5) ×3 = 60.6  
We say that 57 corresponds to 75, and then for the next 3, we are interpolating  between 
75 and 80 where the  value ranges from  56. Now 57 to 63, and thus , we get the value is 
60.6 that is corresponding to  AMC II CN of  78. The curve number for  AMC I is 60.6. (Refer Slide Time : 31:17)  
 
And thus  now, we can estimate  the value of  S by putting CN =  60.6  
S = (25400  / CN) – 254 = (25400  / 60.6) – 254 = 165.14 mm. 
The initial obstruction , Ia = 0.2S = 0.2 ×165.14 = 33 mm (wh ich is l ess than P) 
So, the total  surface volume;  
VQ = (P – 0.2S)2/(P – Ia +S) = (100 – 33)2/(100 – 33 + 165.14 ) = 19.34 mm.  
That means, for this  given ar ea and conditions , out of 100 mm of rainfall, 19.34 mm is  
converted into the  surface runoff volume . 
So, we have seen  a modified universal soil loss equation  where rainfall erosivity  index is  
replaced by run off factor. For estimating runoff  factor , we have to estimate surface 
runoff volume for which the SCS-CN technique is used that we saw in this lecture . In the 
next lecture , we will take up the other term that is QP the peak rate of runoff for runoff  
which  we use the rational  method . So, we will  see how to  use a n rational  method  to 
estimate and go further . 
Thank you very much . 