Soil and Water Conservation Engineering  
Prof. Rajendra Singh  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture  - 09 
Modification s in Universal soil loss  Equation – Part II  
 
Welcome friends . Welcome back to NPTEL  online certification course  entitled Soil and 
Water Conservation  Engineering . I am Rajendra Singh, professor in the Agricultural and 
Food Engineering Department , IIT, Kharagpur . We are in week number 2. It is lecture 
number  9, and the topic is Modific ations in Universal soil loss, equation part 2 that 
simply means that it is a continuation of the  previous lecture .  
In the previous lecture also, we saw  modification s in the Universal Soil Loss  Equation 
that was part 1 and today , we continue  onwards  to go to part 2 to give you an idea about 
the course cont ent for this week . Once again , in lecture  6, we start ed with soil loss 
estimation and there, we saw the use of one of the most famous  equations  known as the 
Universal Soil Loss  Equation for estimating the  soil loss .  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:19)  
 
Lecture 7 we spent on determini ng two important components of the Universal Soil Loss 
Equation : erosivity  and erodibility . And in lecture  8, we saw that the Universal Soil Loss  
Equation has been modified to  modif y the Universal Soil Loss  Equation and just to remind you  in modification , is that rainfall erosivity  index or rainfall erosivity  factor  
which is a part of universal soil loss  equation that is replaced by a ru noff factor .  
In the runoff factor , there are two unknowns:  VQ., which is surface runoff volume 
normally determined using the SCS curve number. I n lecture  8, in part 1, we covered th e 
Modifi ed Universal Soil Loss  Equation . The second  unknown is  QP or peak rate of 
runoff , and in today lecture , lecture  9, we will go t hrough the modifications inve rse of 
soil loss equation part 2, and we will start with the how -to find  QP And then, we will 
further go ahead , and in the last lecture of this week , we will cove r soil loss 
measurements . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:3 1) 
 
So, let us begin with  today 's lecture  to give you once again an idea about the modified 
form of Universal Soil Loss  Equation . So, the modified form  of universal soil loss  
equation is given by  William 's in 1975 . It is given by the following equation : 
A = 11 .8(V Q.QP)0.56K.LS.C.P  
You remember the universal soil loss  equation original form is A = R.K.LS.C.P 
So, basically , this R is the rainfall erosivity  index replaced by runoff factor here and here 
just now I mentioned that VQ is runoff volume . And this runoff  volume is estimated using 
the SCS curve number method , and the other unknown is  QP, which is peak flow 
estimated using the rational method . (Refer Slide Time: 03:36)  
 
Let us start with the rational method  proposed by Mulvaney,  an Irish engineer  way back 
in 1851 , and this relationship gives as: 
Q = C .i.A/36  
Where Q is the peak runoff rate in m3/s or  cumec , C is a dime nsion less runoff 
coefficient , i is the average rainfall intensity for a duration equal to the time of 
concentration and  at the desired freque ncy or return period  (cm/h) , and A is the 
catchment area in hectares . 
So, once again , because we are using this  empirical equation , if we have to use this 
constant 36, we must always remember that unit of i is in cm/h  and unit of A is hectares ; 
that we hav e to remember . And like while discussing the Universal Soil Loss  Equation a 
few lecture s back , I told you that there are certain things , as a student , you are always 
expected to remember . And the rational formula is one such thing that if you have read 
hydrology , if you say  that you  are an agricultural engineer , then it is  expected  that you 
will never forget  the rational formula a nd its variables . (Refer Slide Time: 05:56)  
 
Now, there are certain assumptions  of rational formu la. These are the assumptions o f the 
rational formula that is rainfall is uniformly distributed over the catchment. The  second 
assumption is rainfall is uniformly distributed over the storm duration . The third 
assumption reads  that the rainfall rate resulting from a ny rainfall ev ent is maximum 
when the rainfall  lasts for a duration equal to or greater than the  time of  concentration . 
The fourth assumption is that the return period of a peak  runoff is the same as that of 
rainfall intensity. T he last one says that the  fraction of rainfall t hat becomes runoff  is 
independent of r ainfall intensity or volume .  
Let us take th ese assumption s one by one , and basic ally, you can see here the first one 
says that whatever be the area of your catchment rainfall is assumed  to be uniform 
throughout . So, be they  area of 10 hectare s or 10 square kilomet res, the assumption s say 
that rainfall  uniformly distributed over the entire catchment second is about the storm 
duration , the again the assu mption say s that the storm duration could be of 1 hour or 5-
hour dur ation . Still,  rainfall intensity remain s. It is the assumption t hat rainfall intensity 
remains uniform over the entire duration . The third one is the basic reason behind the 
definition of  the intensity of rainfall you remember . In the rational formula, we define 
rainfall intensity a s ever rainfall intensity having a duration equal to the time of 
concentration . That comes because of the assumption that it is assumed that the run off 
rate will be maximum when the rain fall lasts for a duration equal to or g reater than  the 
time of concentrati on. So, if a rainfall event occurs for a duration equal to the time of concentration  or longer 
duration , then the runoff rate will be maximum . That is, a peak rat e of runoff will be 
generated , and the next one is that the ret urn period  of peak runoff  is the same as that of 
that is there is a n equivalence between the rainfall and  runoff that is the assumption . So, 
these are the assumption s, and as you can very well imagine , if you just concentrate on 
the first 2, we know that t here are hardly any rainfall or other in other words , we see 
many rainfall events where  it rains at one part of the area town  campus  whatever you 
call, and it does  not rain  next, or maybe 500 meters away you will find that there is no 
rain. 
It is difficult  to get a rai nfall event where the rainfall is uniformly  distributed over the 
entire  area of interest same thing  is true with the distribution of rainfall over th e storm 
duration . We know that in any given rainfall event , the intensity of rainfall goes up  and 
down ; the rain is  very heavily for some duration , then becomes milder  and then  might 
become very heavy . So, hardly  there is any rainfall event where the  rainfall is uniformly 
distributed over the storm duration s. 
So, these are the assumptions that bring question mark s to the rational method . Still,  
practically it is seen  that it gives a pretty good estimation of the peak  rate of runo ff and 
that is why it is quite  properly use d in spite of  these limitation s as for  as the assumptio n 
are concerned . 
(Refer Slide Tim e: 09:34)  
 Now, for estimation of peak runoff using the rational  method , these are the steps we need 
to follow . We have to choose t he runoff coefficient C. We have to estimate the time of 
concentration . We  have to select a frequency or return per iod for defining the rainfall 
intens ity. We have to obtain the region's intensity duration frequency curve or IDF curve . 
We have to determine the average rainfall intensity from  the IDF curve , which is i in the  
C.i.A/36 and the n finally, use the rational f ormula to estimate  QP or peak rate of runoff . 
So, these are the steps we need to follow . Let us see how to do these or take these steps 
one by one . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:23)  
 
So, the first thing is runoff coefficient  C, which represents the fraction of ru noff to 
rainfall that is a part of rainfall that gets converted into runoff  characteris ed by  C. It 
mean s integrated effects of infiltration , storage , evaporation , natural retention and 
interception. So, there are many abstractions that we consider in the h ydrological cycle 
before  rainfall occurs . There are specific  abstraction s before rainfall ge ts convert ed into a 
runoff . The integrated effect of all those abstraction s are represented by this runoff  
coefficient  C. Because each of these proces ses is quite c omplex to determine  the precise 
value of  C, the designer m ust use  their experience and  judgment  in choosing its values . (Refer Slide Time: 11:26)  
 
So, it is a bit subjective  matter , and there are standard tables available for obtaining the 
value of C for that drainage area . For example, if you see streets  that are supposed to be 
quite impervious in nature, that means that  no absorption of rainfall takes place there , 
and the value of  C is 0.7 to 0.95.  This means that  because absorption i s less , almost 70 to 
95 per cent o f the rainfall gets  converted into the runoff , then if you lo ok at the 
agricultural area , say the flat agric ultural area , and if you look at the sandy loam soil 
which is cultivated the value of  C is 0.2. That simply means that only 20 per cent of 
rainfall is getting converted into runoff. So, depending upon whether we are in  the urban 
area or agriculture area depending upon various kinds of uses , the value of  C can be re ad 
and also there is a range . So, that is where  the modular or user experi ence comes into the  
picture . (Refer Slide Time: 12:50)  
 
Many times , when w e work in a catchment, there is a possible  like w e saw in the case  of 
when we we re discussing  SCS curve  number , then also we saw that because  of the land -
use change , curve number ch anges . And then, we have to use the weighted curve 
number s. The same concept is use d here : we have to use a weighted runoff coefficient; 
that means we in a given area if land supposes different land uses over two l and areas . 
So, for corresponding to the se land uses , we have to get the value of  the runoff  
coefficient  from the table . Then we have to get the weighted runoff coefficient for the 
area by first multiplying the corresponding values of  C, and A summing up for all land 
uses that will be the numerator  and denominator will be the total  area of the catchment 
under consideration . So, this is how the weighted  runoff coefficient is obtained . (Refer Slide Time: 13:56)  
 
Then the next important thing is the time of concentration we have to find . So, in the 
rational  method , Tc or time of concentration  is used to determine rainfall intensity 
because remember we define i for a duration equal t o the time of concentration . The time 
of concentration is the time required f or water to flow from the hydrau lically most 
remote point of  the basin to the outlet . 
So, that means, for defining  Tc or finding  the Tc, we first have to find out hydraulically  
the most remote point in the watershed and ; obviously, it dep ends on th e shape of the 
watershed  also. So, if it could be a f an-shaped watershed, it could be elongat ed. So, 
depending upon that , if it is elongated, it will obviously be longitudly placed with respect 
to outlet wherein, if it is a fan shape,  then it may be little down  either on left or right 
depend ing upon the fan shape basically . So, here basically , the time of concentration 
means that time required for a drop of water root travel following the stream path to the 
outlet . (Refer Slide Time: 15:19)  
 
So, the time of concentration is estimated using a famous formula k nown as Kirpich  
formula , which was given by Kirpich  in 1940.  
Tc = 0.0195 L0.77 S-0.385 
Where Tc is the time of concentration  in minutes , L is the maximum flow  length 
measured along the drainage  line in meters , and S is basin slop e.  
So, that simply means t hat to use the Kirpich  formula , we shoul d know the maximum 
flow length a nd the basin slop e. So, these two components we have to know , and then we 
can use the Kirpich  formula to find the  time of concentration . (Refer Slide Time: 16:13)  
 
And i is defined fo r a time equal to the time of concentration and a for a given frequency . 
So that means  we have to decide  on a frequency or return period , also referred to as  
recurrence interval or return period . Choice  of frequency or return period depends on the 
nature o f the project how risky the structure we are going to design. Standard tables are 
availabl e for referring to these values . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:47)  
 
For example , we can see this  table where  the guideline for the selection of return period  
is the title . So, depen ding upon the structure , say, for example, if you have  simple  road drainage , then the return period could be 25 to 50 years w ere in . If you see  a serious 
structure , we are going to design . For example, suppose you are going to design a 
emergency sp illway for a dam where the risk to life of people is too high. In that case,  
we take a 100 to 10,000  years return period , and PMP  means probable maximum 
precipitation . So,  it depends on what ki nd of structure we are design ing based on that  
recurrence inter val or return period is chosen . 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:34)  
 
Then once the rainfall duration , Tc and frequency are obtained , we can find the rainfall 
intensity . We use the intensity duration frequency curve , IDF curve, which is popularly 
known and  relates i that is rainfall intensity  in mm/h to storm  duration  T in hours . 
So, here this i is plotted against  T for the differen t return period s. So, for example, if our  
T of interest is , say 3 hours some where here and our  T value is 50, we can obviously find 
out u sing this relationship : the intensity which we are interested in  or intensity for the 
duration  equal to the time of concentration  and of desired frequencies . So, this is how we 
use the IDF curve to find out the intensity duration frequency curve , and once everything 
is decided , we have to use the rational formula simply . (Refer Slide Time: 18:39)  
 
So, let us take a problem and see how to solve using rational formula . So, to problem 
states that our catchment has a total area of 5 square kilomet res, the slope of the land i s 
0.006 , and the maximum length of travel is 1.95 kilometres. A principal  spillway  has to 
be designed to handle a flow  having a 25 year return period  the maximum depth of 
rainfall in the catchment with 25 year return period  is given below .  
That means  IDF characteristics are tabula ted he re there is . For different durations , the 
depth of rainfall for 25 year return  period is given here  consider ing that the 2 km2 area 
has a cultivated sandy loam and 3 km2 has cultivated tight clay  and estimate the peak 
flow rate for de signing this spillway . So, almost all data or information is given , and we 
have to design  the peak flow rat e using the rational formula . (Refer Slide Time: 19:48)  
 
Remember that we have been given drainage area A to the solution . So, the area is given 
5 km2, but remember , the unit here is a hectare . So, we have to ; obviously, convert slope 
is given at  0.006 , length of travel i s given a s 1950  meter s, return period is gi ven 25 years. 
Remember , in 5 km2of the total catchment area , and we have two land uses; 2 km2 of 
cultivated sandy loam and 3 km2of cultivated tight clay. So obviously, we have to rea d 
the runoff coeffici ent table , and we find that for cultivated tight c lay, the value  is 0.5, and 
for cultivated sandy loam , the value is 0.2. 
Weighted runoff coefficient = (2×0.2+3 ×0.5)/5 = 0.38  (Refer Slide Time: 21:14)  
 
Then, obviously, we h ave to use the  Kirpich  formula for obtaining  the time of 
concentration .  
Tc = 0.0195 L0.77 S-0.385  = 0.0195 (1950 )0.77 (0.006 )-0.385  = 47.7 min  
Then we have to interpolat e the table data . So, if we  want to go back to our table , then 
we have to obtain the values  so, obviously, from this 47.7-minute duration , depth of 
rainfall which will come out to be 62.31  mm and then rainfall intensity , we have to  
calculate which comes out to be 78.38  mm/h  or 7.838  cm/h . 
So, i is known to us , C already we have  found out , A is already given .  
Q =C .i.A/36  = (0.38)( 7.838 )(5×10)/36 = 41.37 m3/s (Refer Slide Time: 22:46)  
 
Let us take another problem to see how to use the r ational method once again . So, an 
agriculture a rea has a runoff coefficient o f 0.2 and an area of 0.75 km2. The slope of the 
catchment is 0.5 per cent, the maximum length of travel of water is 1 km. The maxi mum 
depth of rainfall with 50 year return period  is given here ; for different durations , the 
depth  of rainfall is  given . If the bund is to be designed for drainage at  the outlet for this 
area for a return period of 50 years , estimate  the peak flow rate that is  the problem . 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:32)  
 So, coming to a solution , the value of  C is given , drainage area is given , the slope is 
given , the maximum l ength of travel is given , the return period  of 50 years is given . So 
obviously, we can use the Kirpich  formula  to obtain the time of concentration : 
Tc = 0.0195 L0.77 S-0.385  = 0.0195 (1000)0.77 (0.005)-0.385  = 30.6 min 
Then again , given the 50 year return period table data , we have to interp olate the value 
correspond ing to 30.6 min, and if you do , then the maximum depth of rainfall  for 30.6-
minute  durati ons we obtain 53.42  mm. And that means  the rainfall intensity  we have t o 
convert for  an hour is only 30.6 minutes . So, we get the rainfall intensity of  104.75  mm/h  
or 10.475  cm/h. Then you can use  the rational formula : 
Q =C.i.A/36  = (0. 2)(10.475 )(0.75×100)/36 = 4.36 m3/s 
 So, that is what  our interest was that we needed to estimate the peak flow  rate using the 
rational method , and that is how  we saw the  rational method and application  in 
estimating the  peak flow rate . 
(Refer Slide Tim e: 25:15)  
 
We can take  a problem straightway on the  Modified Universal Soil Loss  Equation 
because now we  know how to determine various component parameters or  variable s. 
So, the problem is determin ing the sediment yield from a storm with a total runoff  
volume of 120 cubic meter s and a peak discharge of 5 cubic meters per second use K equals 0.33, LS equals  0.697 , C equal to  0.04 and P equals to 0.5. MUSLE  or Modified 
Universal Soil Loss  Equation a is given by this formula .  
A = 11.8(V Q.QP)0.56K.LS.C.P  
(VQ.QP)0.56 = (120×5)0.56 = 35.96  
A = 11.8( 35.96 )0.56 0.33×0.697 ×0.04×0.5 = 1.95 Mg o r Tonnes  
So, that is how we can use the Modified Universal Soil Loss  Equation  once we know all 
the variables or  the components of the equation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:57)  
 
One more variation of the universal soil loss equation is available,  referred to as the 
revised universal soil loss  equation . So, this is the third one ; we had Universal Soil Loss  
Equation , we had Modified Universal Soil Loss  Equation , now we have Revised 
Universal Soil Loss  Equati on which Renard and others proposed  in 1991 . 
So, basically , Revised  USLE is a cooperative effort  between scie ntists and users to 
update USLE . So, USLE has been updated , and we will see what the various new thin gs 
have been brought into this updated version , which is referred to as  a Revised  USLE or 
RUSLE . So, we saw  USLE, MUSLE , and now we have RUSLE . The most important 
thing change is  that RUSLE  is implemented using a computer program with an inbuilt 
database which is more suitable for application to the  USA. So, basically , there is a compu ter program now at a database, but the  only problem 
limitation is that this database has been generated primar ily for the United States of 
America . So, that is the only limitation , but the good thing is that all comput ations can be 
done using a computer program . 
(Refer Slide Time: 28:27)  
 
And the changes offered in the RUSLE  are, obviously, computeri sing the algorithm to 
assist  the calculation . So, the user does  not have to bother , then R factor w as developed 
using rai nfall data bases from across the US So, all the database that was available across 
we does have been used for getting the  R factor value , and that  simply means that new 
Isoerodent  maps have been generated and used and just for your  reminding you  for 
reminding you, Isoerodent s are the lines joining th e places of equal erosivity . 
So, equal  erosivity  maps have been genera ted and used in the case of  RUSLE  and; 
obviously, the next change  is that seasonally variable soil erodibility  term K which 
includes all soils fo und in the web soil survey , has been developed  that is now  K has 
been developed for all kinds of soils  number one and number t wo the  because from one 
season to other the crops type could change . So, soil erodibility of the soil characteristics 
could be aff ected . So, seasonally variables soil erodibility term has been generated for 
use in the case of  RUSLE.   (Refer Slide Time: 29:49)  
 
And just to give an idea , this is the Isoerodent  map example , and this one the older one 
was used by Wischmeier and Smith in  1965  and a new one was developed by EPA  that is 
envir onmental protection agency in 2001  and if we  just June in the same that is Gulf of 
Mexico  area. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:26)  
 
So, you can see here the isoerodent  maps are the values are much finer  and highest value 
has gone even up  to 700 as compared to the 600 that was the limit in case of earlier map. 
So, a much finer  value of erosivity  index can be obtained using  the new isoerodent  maps , and other changes are the new slope length and st eepness algorith m reflecting rill  to 
interrill erosion has been  incorpor ated the LS factor may include multiples slope segment  
calculations that are slope could change , and it also allow s for the depositional feature . 
In the case of  USLE , we were not allowing any solve de position . Still,  RUSLE allows 
deposition, and there is a new approach for calcu lating  crop management terms  C with 
sub-factors representing prior  land use crop canopy surfa ce covered . And surface runoff  
that was the much better value of  C is now available , and also , there is a new 
conservation practice value  P for rangeland s strip crop rotation contour  factor values and 
subsurface d rainage. 
(Refer Slide Time: 31:36)  
 
So that means  new conservation practices have also been  incorporated in the Revised 
Univers al Soil Loss  Equation . Still,  the issue is that even thoug h it offers several 
modification s to USLE to better estimate  soil loss , it is not . So, popular because of the 
simple reason , not very popular because the inbuilt database in the computer program is 
US-centric, limiting  its applicability in other regions  of the world .  
So, there are 7 modification s done in RUSLE , but its application has  remained limited to 
the United States because the database inbuilt in the program  is more US-centric . So, this 
is on e of the significant  limitations that is why the revised simplex method  revised 
universal soil loss  equation is not very popular , and with this , we come to the end of thi s 
class . So, we saw how to use a rational method for estimating QP in the Modified Universal 
Soil Loss  Equation . And then, we saw the ap plication of the Rational method and 
Modified Universal Soil Loss Equation. F inally, we saw the latest revision  that is revised 
universal soil loss  equations . So, all 2 versions ; we have covered  in the last three lectures 
also. 
Thank you very much . 