Aquaculture is the production of aquatic organisms under controlled conditions throughout part or all their lifecycle. Its development can help meet future food needs and ease burdens on natural resources.
USDA is providing leadership to ensure that a healthy, competitive, and sustainable aquaculture sector can produce an abundant, safe, and affordable supply of seafood products. USDA scientists support and conduct research that develop new aquaculture technologies and systems that maintain healthy ecosystems, evaluate aquatic animal health, and inform consumers on the healthfulness and sustainability of responsible aquaculture production. Our aquaculture research, education, and extension activities also create jobs and train a skilled workforce in rural communities.
The National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) Subcommittee on Agriculture coordinates aquaculture activities with USDA and across the Federal Government. USDA coordinates activities within the Department through its Working Group on Aquaculture to:
Continually Improve USDA Customer Service to Aquaculture Community; and
Provide USDA Support for a Federal Economic Development Initiative on Aquaculture.
Aquaculture is Agriculture: USDA’s Role in Supporting Farmers of Fish, Shellfish, and Aquatic Plants
In the fall of 2020, the Research, Education, and Economics (REE) mission area, including the Office of the Chief Scientist (OCS), and the USDA Working Group on Aquaculture provided an opportunity for the domestic aquaculture industry to tell USDA how we can best serve this farming community. The USDA Aquaculture is Agriculture Colloquium drew over 300 participants from industry, academia, state agencies, tribal agencies, and federal agencies. A summary of the priorities identified in the Colloquium by aquaculture stakeholders, federal program managers, the research community, natural resource regulators, and others to help guide future program directions and potential investments may be found in this white paper (PDF, 546 KB).
Seventeen USDA Agencies fall under eight Mission Areas to support aquaculture through their leadership in the following programs. USDA primarily supports aquaculture through the programs administered in the following Mission Areas and Agencies.
Mission Area: Food Safety
Mission Area: Marketing and Regulatory Programs (MRP)


Mission Area: Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services
Mission Area: Farm Production and Conservation (FPAC)


Mission Area: Trade and Foreign Agricultural Affairs (TFAA)
Mission Area: Research, Education, and Economics (REE)


Mission Area: Rural Development (RD)