New to farming? Want to learn how to start a farm? USDA offers dedicated help to beginning farmers and ranchers. USDA considers anyone who has operated a farm or ranch for less than ten years to be a beginning farmer or rancher.
USDA can help you get started or grow your operation through a variety of programs and services, from farm loans to crop insurance, and conservation programs to disaster assistance.
On This Page
How to Start a Farm Operation
USDA Support for Beginning Farmers
Get Involved
Additional Resources
How to Start a Farm Operation
Plan Your Farm Operation
1. Start here! Think about your operation from the ground up and start planning for your business.
PLAN YOUR FARM
Visit Your Service Center
2. Get in touch with your local Service Center to find programs to support your operation.
VISIT A SERVICE CENTER
Fund Your Farm Operation
3. USDA has spent decades helping new producers find land and money for their businesses.
FUND YOUR FARM
Build Your Business
4. Lean on USDA to help you build your operation with sound business and financial knowledge.
BUILD YOUR BUSINESS
Sell Your Farm Products
5. Explore everything about producing, marketing and actually selling your final product.
SELL YOUR PRODUCTS
Maintain Your Farm
6. Take care of your farm operation, and it will take care of you. USDA can help.
MAINTAIN YOUR FARM
USDA Support for Beginning Farmers
From farm loans to crop insurance, and conservation programs to disaster assistance, USDA is here to support you and your operation.
Farmer Coordinators
Beginning Farmer and Rancher Coordinators are USDA team members in each state that can help you understand the USDA process and find the right assistance as you are starting out. Reach out to your state's coordinator for one-on-one technical assistance and guidance. They can also connect you with organizations that specifically serve beginning farmers and ranchers.
View Beginning Farmer and Rancher Coordinators
Service Centers
Your local USDA Service Center has staff who can meet with you one-on-one to help you identify USDA programs that meet the needs of your operation, including farm loans and conservation assistance. Service center staff can guide you through the process of preparing and submitting required paperwork, with no need to hire a paid preparer. 
If you need information in a language other than English, we offer free translation services.
Find Your Local USDA Service Center
Self-Service Options
After you've registered your farm and set up an individual customer record with your local USDA Service Center, you can sign up for a secure farmers.gov account to access a number of self-service features. For example, you can:
View loan information, history, and payments.
Get help requesting financial assistance.
View, upload, download and e-sign conservation documents.
Request conservation assistance.
View, print and export detailed farm records and farm/tract maps.
Learn More About Farmers.gov Accounts
Tools for Farmers
Conservation Concerns Tool
Learn about conservation issues and build a list of concerns to discuss with a local USDA conservation specialist.
Disaster Assistance Discovery Tool
Learn about USDA disaster assistance programs that might be right for you by completing five simple steps.
Loan Assistance Tool
Learn about the farm loans that might be right for you, check your eligibility, and get instructional help with the application forms.
Get Involved
In addition to our farm programs, there are many leadership opportunities for beginning farmers to contribute their voices and experience. Through USDA, you can take advantage of several key opportunities like committee elections, research and promotion programs, and federal advisory committees. 
Connect With Your Agricultural Community
Additional Resources
Farmers.gov Blog: Beginning Farmers
Fact Sheet for Beginning Farmers
Have a Question? AskUSDA
Get Started! A Guide to USDA Resources for Historically Underserved Farmers and Ranchers
USDA Small and Mid-sized Farmer Resources
USDA CARES Partner Portal – Resources for underserved farmers, ranchers, and landowners and partners who work with them
SHOW MORE
Beginning Farmers Blog Posts
AG BUSINESS
Ask the Expert: Beginning Farmer and Rancher Q&A with Lindsey Abentroth
Amanda Robertson, Beginning Farmer and Rancher Regional Coordinator, USDA Farm Service Agency  •   Sep 13, 2023
CONSERVATION
Fridays on the Farm: From Veteran to Beginning Farmer
Chesley Comstock, Oklahoma State University  •   Feb 10, 2023
Find Your Local Service Center
Ver en:
Español
USDA Service Centers are locations where you can connect with Farm Service Agency, Natural Resources Conservation Service, or Rural Development employees for your business needs. Enter your state and county below to ﬁnd your local service center and agency offices. If this locator does not work in your browser, please visit offices.usda.gov.
Learn more about our Urban Service Centers.

Visit the Risk Management Agency website to ﬁnd a regional or compliance office or to ﬁnd an insurance agent near you.
State
        - Please select -
                Alabama
                Alaska
                American Samoa
                Arizona
                Arkansas
                California
                Colorado
                Connecticut
                Delaware
                District Of Columbia
                Federated States of Micronesia
                Florida
                Georgia
                Guam
                Hawaii
                Idaho
                Illinois
                Indiana
                Iowa
                Kansas
                Kentucky
                Louisiana
                Maine
                Marshall Islands
                Maryland
                Massachusetts
                Michigan
                Minnesota
                Mississippi
                Missouri
                Montana
                Nebraska
                Nevada
                New Hampshire
                New Jersey
                New Mexico
                New York
                North Carolina
                North Dakota
                Northern Mariana Islands
                Ohio
                Oklahoma
                Oregon
                Palau
                Pennsylvania
                Puerto Rico
                Rhode Island
                South Carolina
                South Dakota
                Tennessee
                Texas
                Utah
                Virgin Islands
                Vermont
                Virginia
                Washington
                West Virginia
                Wisconsin
                Wyoming
               County
        - Please select -
      