 
 Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapallli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 11 
Irrigation Water Conveyance  
 
Hi, friends  welcome to lecture 11 of Irrigation and Drainag e course , which is  on Irrigation 
Water Conveyance . In the last few classes , we have been talking about  the soil  and water 
and their relations hip, after that   crop water requirement and then irrigation scheduling , 
this is all at the farm level  and how much water is required at the farm level . But how to 
get that water from the water source ? It could be, irrigation using tube well s or irrigation  
using a canal water , or rainfall . 
If you are using  the rainfall water , i.e., precipitation , it is called rain -fed irrigatio n. Tube 
well irrigation is when you take water from the nearest tube well and canal irrigation  is 
taking water from canals  So, in this  lecture , we are going to talk about  how to convey the 
water from irrigation  canals  to field  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:33)  
 
The above picture  is an aerial view of Indira Gandhi  Canal, Rajasthan . It is around 649 km 
long canal , the canal starts from the Satluj river and also the  Beas river and then it passes 
through  Punjab and then Rajasthan . So, basically , this is a Rajasthan f eeder  and it  is a fully 
lined masonary  canal , giving  water to the desert area of Rajasthan . It is an example of how 
 
 the water is being conveyed from a r iver to canals and then finally to  the nearest fields . 
Several other canals are  existing in India; this is just an example .  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:01)  
 
The canal irrigation system , involved the conveyance of water from the river to the field . 
As seen in the earlier  example , the origin  is the river  and then from there , the water is 
conveyed to the canal regu lator. The head regulator is going to regulate the flow to the 
canal. T hen the main canal starts  and f rom the main canals , there are some branch  canals . 
From branch canals , distributaries are going to distribute water to different minors  and 
then to the watercourse or field channel and finally, it is going to reach the field . 
So, from  the river to the field, there are  different  pathways ; one is  the main canal and then  
branch canal,  the distributary , the minors and the water course , which  is a field channel a nd 
then finally, in the field. To convey water from  the river to the field , some structures  or 
components  are required. The components include open channels , pipelines and 
conveyan ce structures like diver sions and pumps , headgates , division , boxes and  turnouts, 
water measuring devices  and checks , gate control structures , flumes , siphons , culverts , etc. 
So, in this  lecture , we are going to talk about  these components  involved  in transporting 
or conveying water from the river to the field . 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:01)  
 
First is the canal water supply; t he canal water supply is  planned  according  to the crops 
planted in the  comman d area . The command area  is the area enclosed  to a particular river 
basin . The water supply to a  particular area  depends on the types  of crops plan ted in that 
area. Then the canal system has to be designed to the maximum  expected demand  since 
we don’t know the future demand , which might be more or  less. But the c anal system 
should be designed based on the maximum demand f or that area to me et the maximum 
demand . The c anal layout is important  as it should ensure smooth  channel flow . Since we 
are not  going to use any pumps , so the conveyance taking place in canals is mainly due to 
the gravity flow . The headwork regulates  the flow into  the canal from the river  at the 
diversion structure . 
The main canal takes water directly from  the river , but this is not  being used  for irrigation 
purpose s. The canal  is simply going to convey the water from the river to  the field  or 
branch canals . The main  canal draws water from the river and acts as a feeder channel to 
the branch canal . So, this is going to feed water to the branch channels and the branch  
canals generally carry discharge to  the feeder channel or major  distributaries . Then the 
branch c anal is goin g to supply  water to  the distributaries  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 07:12)  
 
About 70% of water  convey ed from  the canal  to the field level is going to be lost during  
the conveyance process because of the seepage . Seepage is the major  water  loss from the  
canal irrig ation supply . So lining is very important as  it minimizes  the canal loss through 
seepage and it gives low  flow resistance thus, reducing the frictional losses . So, compared 
to unlined  canals,  the lining will provid e low resistance and reduced the frictiona l losses . 
It maintains  the desired  flow or discharge at the tail end  and keep s the energy and water 
surface slopes  as low as possibl e, minimizing/preventing channel erosion.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:36)  
 
There are different types of linings available in c anal irrigation . The picture above  shows 
the c oncrete lining  and clearly de picts  how concrete is be ing used to line d the irrigation 
channels or canals . This lining  is best suited for the main canals , it involve s high initial 
 
 cost, but it has a long life and minimum maintenance . The c oncrete lining is  about 5 to 12 
cm thickness and side slopes  is maintain at 1.5 horizontal and 1 vertical  or 1.25 horizontal 
to 1 vertical . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:36)  
 
Shotcrete lining  is used when there are some  patches on the su rface . The mortal cement  
ratio of 1:4 is being applied  with a thickness of 3.5 cm on the walls . But before that , a wire 
mesh is reinforced . The above image  shows the pumping  of the  cement  morta r to the  wire 
mesh . The strength is more and then it is conveni ent for lining small sections for repair ing 
old linings , and for placing  linings a round the curves and structures  of ordinary cana ls such 
as cement lining .  A gun is used to apply the  cement  morta r to the surface . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:48)  
 
 
 The other lini ng is the brick or  burnt clay tile or precast concrete tile linings . So, this lining  
does not require skilled operators  or mason . The top layer  is generally laid in 1:3 cement  
mortal  over 15 mm thick layer plaster or  1:3 cement plaster . The mortar  is place d first , in 
between the bricks  and then the plaster  is pasted on top of this cement mortar. I t does not 
require  rigid  quality control  and i t is more labour intensive , and that generates 
employment .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:59)  
 
The other  lining  is the  bould er lining ; this lining  is suitable  when stones of required  
specifications are abundantly available local ly. This lining  is used for lining the earthen 
canal sections  and it is much  cheap er. To reduce the resistance to  the flow, a 20 to 25 mm 
thick cement p laster is provided  as a finishing surface  to get a smooth surface .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:57)  
 
 
 The next lining is the  earth lining ; in this  lining , cement  is not used , whatever the material 
present is going to be used. A stabilize d earth lining  is constru cted using either clay or by 
adding chemicals  beside s the binder . For example , bentonite  clay could be added  so that 
canals  will be stabilized . Loose earth  blankets  are linings where  fine-grained soil is being 
compacted  and that will act as lining to the c hannel . In compact ed earth linings , about 15 
% of  clay is spread and compacted . For example, in the picture  above , no lining material 
is used, but compaction is done for  making the canals . Buried  bentonite membranes  are 
earth linings  constructed by  spreadi ng soil bentonite mixture  and covering it with  gravel 
or compacted earth . Bentonite is a clay , which seals the pores  and also holds the soil 
particles ; it acts as  an excellent  binder . Recently we have used this bentonite  clay for lining 
farm ponds in the nearest village  called Kentia , which has been adopted for food security 
project . The farmers are pleased  since the  bentonite  lining is minimizing the  seepage . Soil 
cement lining  is another earth lining where  the cement and  sandy soil are mixed  and then 
comp acted at optimum moisture  content .  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:30)  
 
Next is the plastic lining ; it is an in expensive  lining  compare d to other type s of lining . The 
materials used for plastics  canal lining  are the low -density polyethylene  (LDPE ), polyvinyl 
chloride (PVC ), high molecular high -density polyethylene  (HDPE ) and linear low -density  
polyethylene   (LLDP ). The picture  above shows  how plastic is used for lining the irrigation 
channel . Plastic films are l ightweigh t, impermeable t o liquids and  gases ,  chemica lly inert  
and flexibility to resist s the microbiological a ttacks and ease of transportation and 
installation . With these  advantages, plastic  materials  can be used as promising lining 
 
 material for irrigation channels . The main disadvantage of plastic lining  is bur rowing  by 
rodents , which is a menace  causing water  loss or seepage .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:08)  
 
Other water  conveyance structures  available  are pipes or opens  structures . The first one  
we are going to study  is a drop structure . If you have the wate r source at an elevation and 
all of a sudden , there is a depression , and you want to convey  water from  that surface to 
the down stream , without the structur e, the water  is going to e rode the entire soil 
surro unding  the spot , but this can be avoided by  const ructing a drop structure . Drop 
structures have different  components like headwall  where the water flow through and it 
has head wall  extensions to add stability to  that structure . And there is the sidewall  and 
apron ; water is going to fall on the apron . Then there is a wing wall , longitudinal sill, end 
sill, toe wall , all are going to  dissipate  the energy and  then give a smooth flow to the 
channel . Drop structures  are constructed when the ground surface is of steep slopes , and it 
can be  open structures or pipe drop structures . All these components allow the water  to 
convey smoothly to the next channel .  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 20:31)  
 
The other structure  are chutes , the main difference between the d rop structure and chutes  
is that  chutes  are used when  land grade is high, length y and installing several  drop 
structures will be expensive . So, in that case , only one chute  can b e plan from top to bottom  
to convey the water from the head e nd to the tail end without  causing any damage to the 
soil. Chutes  consist  of three  main parts , inlet and steep ly slope channels and an outlet , as 
shown in the figure above , and it is  made up of concrete or masonry structure s.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:45)  
 
Next is the channel crossings , if there is a  channel  full of water and you want to cross f rom 
one end to another end , then some structures  are required . Structures can be constructed  
without  interruptin g the flow , or you can also  trans -pass the flow. The first image above is 
the invert ed siphon , and the next is a culvert  and the n there i s the flume . The water flow is 
 
 taking place , but you can still cross the channel. T here is a br idge you can cross  above the 
flumes.   
(Refer Slide Time: 22:42)  
 
The other components of canal systems are the diversion structures  such as  the check gate  
or ch eck dams . Diversion structures direct  or distributes the flo w or main tain the flow  for 
a particular  field. The c heck gate is a structure that maintain s the flo w at the h ead end, so; 
it raise s the upstream water level , and that water can be easily diverted to the field . Suppose 
the water level is  low but, if you have a structure  that abstract s the flo w, it will increase 
the water level  and it is easier for the flow to  be diver ted to fields .  Portable check dams  
operation is almost the same  as the check gates . Portable check dams could be  metal or 
plastic . The figure above show s a series of  artificial  or portable check dams , made up of 
plastic sheets . So, water is collected and maintain ed at some h ead so that this water can be  
conveyed  to the required fields ; this is another kind of  diversion structures .  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 24:20)  
 
Turnouts are  another diversion structures ; similar ly, the turnouts are used to convey the 
irrigation  from distribution channel to the field supply ditch or from  ditch to the field . The 
water which is accumulated  is diverted by  open ing the valve s o that water will enter 
through th e junction box and from there , there is another in a gate which open s to the field s 
Spiles are another  diversion structures where you can direct watercourse to the field . It is 
a pipe structure which convey s water to the field. It is made of bamboo , concrete , burnt  
clay, and rigid PVC  pipes to convey water from the field to furr ow or border or check 
basins . 
  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:01)  
 
 
 Pipeline structures require a certain structure at a specific position  for proper flow and  
control of discharge . These are helpful when you want to maintain  or control the flow rate . 
Pump stand is used for  conveying water flow to the pump  into the p ipe and maintaining  
the requir ed head . Suppose you  have  an underground pipeline which is taking water to the  
watercourse  and the field  and i f you are not getting enough  head , then you  need to pump  
the water and create the  head  so that the underlined pipeline will have  the required  head  
and ensure full flow in the pipeline ; It prevents  pipe damage from excessive pressure .  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:11)  
 
The other  pipeline structure  is the gate stands , the gate stands controls flow when the 
branch line is taken off from the mainline in a dif ferent direction . Suppose one -directional  
flow is divert ed to another  direction , then the  gate is closed in that direction , and the gate 
in the direction required is open  so that water will  go in the required direction  and then  
there are some air vents  which are used to remove air accumulated  in the pipeline . 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 28:02)  
 
The outlets are situated at  the field head e nd so that you can open the outlet and get water 
from the  other valves . For example, there are alfalfa valves or orchard valves  which  require  
to regulate the flow to the  field (as show n in the figure above) . When you open the outlet , 
it is going to pop up and the water is going to  come  out and you can regulate it based on 
the height  and regulate the flow to the fields . And the re are hydrants  and gated pipes ; 
hydrants can be used to  irrigate a  particular field  by connect ing a pipeline  to it and use it 
for irrigation  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:16)  
 
The other  diversion structure is siphon tubes . Siphon tubes are  used for diverting the w ater 
from the water course , as shown in the figure above . These tubes are plastic tubes  simply  
cut in a 1 - 1.5 m or less (75 cm). One end is kept in the watercourse  and the other end in 
the field or furrow and this end is closed  and then open ed up . This closing and open ing 
action  will create suction and the water comes from  at the other end in the furrow . So, 
 
 similarly , for each fu rrow, there is going to  be 1 or 2 siphon tube , based on the  discharge 
required for the field .  
So, in this lecture , the main foc us is the conveyance of water from the river  or canal to the 
field e nd and components involved in the whole c anal irrigation system . The components 
are headg ate, head regulator  from the river , then from there the main canal starts a nd from 
the main canal to the  branch canal , branch canal to the distributary and minors. And from 
the minors to the  field channels or water course and then it is convey ed to the field . 
Different conveyance systems have  some components a nd structure s like distribution 
structures , for example, drop structure . If there is a big depression or a sudden slope  
occurred , and you want to convey water from the upstream to down  streams , then you use 
drop structure . And if the  length of this drop is  longer , then you can use chute structure  
Pipe structures are  diversion structures  at the field level , for example,  siphon tubes . So,  
from  the canal to the field level , there are a lot of structures in volve d. Canal lining is also 
important to save 70 % of water , which is majorly  lost through seepage . Canal lining could 
be concrete lining or boulders , plastics  linings, etc. Canal lining save s seepage  water and  
also provide s less erosion  by water . And also more uniform water  distribution  and 
expected  desired flow rate , at the tail end .  
Thank you  so much for your  attention . 