Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapallli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 16 
Water Application Methods  
 
Welcome to lecture number 16 of  Irrigation  and Drainage  lecture serie s. In this lecture  we 
will be focusing on Water Application M ethods . As stated in earlier lectures w hen you are 
talking about irrigation , there  are three th ings we should keep in mind , when to give 
irrigation , how much to give irrigation and how do we giv e irrigation . 
How do we give irrigation  is the application methods we are targeting , and the other two 
that is how much and  when to give irrigat ions have  already  been  discussed in earlier 
lectures .  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:20)  
 
The main focus is on irrigati on methods  the irrigation methods  or water application 
methods are classified into  three groups . The first group is  based on the energy  or pressure 
required . i.e., gravity  irrigation  and pressurized irrigation. Gravity irrigation  does not 
require any pr essure , for examples  borders , basins and f urrows  irrigation; whereas,  
pressurized  irrigation , such as  drip and sprinkler irrigations , water is  pumped to the 
systems and  by pressure . 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:13)  
 
The other category of t he water application me thods is based on the placement of irrigation 
water , whether you are placing water on top of the surface or sub surface or  overhead . For 
example, here in case of  surface application; the  border , basin and furrow and also dr ip 
irrigations is  under s urface irrigation , because you are applying water on this surface . And 
sub-surface irrigation  is when you are applying water  beneath the root zone or with in the 
root zone system . And overhead irrigation example  is a sprinkler irrigation  where water is 
applied overhead , almost  near to the cr op height , the water is being  sprayed on top of the 
canopy or hand watering for gardening purpose  when water  is sprayed on the plant  surface .  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:33)  
 
The other classification is based on the wetted a rea of the crop root zone by irrigation . The 
water you applied on the surface forms a  kind of pattern and it is going to  the root zone . 
Based on the wetting patterns  the irrigations are classified as flood irrig ation  such as  basin , 
border and furrow . In this case  the water which is  applying on top of the surface , for 
example , in case of furrow , it creates the spherical  wetting front and drip or trickle 
irrigation  is also going to make  a perfect elliptical shape . In sprinkler irrigation , since you 
are appl ying throughout the surface just like rainfall  it forms a rectangular  wetting front 
pattern . And sub-surface  drip or sub -surface  irrigations a circle is formed beneath the 
surface making  the wetting pattern around the root zone .  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:21)  
 
Border irrigation is defined as  the application of water to an a rea downslope and 
surrounded by two border called levees . It is best adapte d for grain and forage crops for 
example,  alfalfa  crop or  any grain crop . The crop is grown in the border strips between 
levees, the borders are concentrated  between the  levees and this is good for uniform so ils 
with mild slope  in order to achieve  the uniform infiltration rate, and also the infiltration  
distribution is uniform  throughout the field  
The water is stagna nt in the borders , hence the crops which are sensitive to water  or 
sensitive to moisture condition or  wet condition are not suitable for this  irrigation . A 
typical efficiency  of 70 to 85 % can be achieved in this method.  Major investment  is on 
land gradi ng and leveling  because it is very important for the water to reach the tail end 
and to achieve a uniform distribution of water . The border s strip width  varies from 3 to 30 
m and border length  varies from 10 to 800 m. It has zero side slope and  uniform 
longitudinal slope ≤1 %.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:35)  
 
There are different  types of these  borders  irrigation such as  level borders , graded border  
and contour levee . In level borders the slope is almost flat  and crops are growth  inside  
within the  levees , from the head ditch there is a flood gate where you release water to the  
border strip . Graded border has  slope of less than 1 % and i n contour levee  the levee 
follows  the contour lines  that creates the slope  for water flow so these are the three basic  
types of borders one is  level borders , where the  slope is 0 and the other one is graded 
border where mild slope exists , and contour levees where the strips are following contour 
lines . 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:11)  
 
Basins  is also one type of surface irrigation method ; basins are rectan gular or circular in 
shape and it is surrounded by levees or dikes . The basin size could be 1 to 15 ha or 100 to 
400 m long , and its most commonly  practiced for rice and orchard crops . A circular  basin  
is mostly  for orchard crops  and rectangular basins is comm only used for growing rice 
crops . There are two different  classifications  - level basin , which has  almos t zero slope 
and level ed and water is held until infiltrates or is drained away ; initially  one basin will be 
closed  and once the  water is  completely infiltr ated down and it will be opened , so that  the 
water will be entered to this second basins . The next is the  graded b asin or contour basin 
the graded basin will have  some  uniform slope , it is constructed  with two levees parallel 
and two perpendiculars  to the fields  contours . Water enters along the upper contour and 
then flows to the lower contour  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:47)  
 
The advantage of basin irrigation is that water covers basin rapidly to ensure good 
uniformity  since it  is a rectangular  piece of  land with mild slope . Water immediately  enters  
through the  basin and covers the entire field and  infiltrates  down . It is best suited for lands 
crops where leaching is required to wash out salts from the root zones  and it involves  the 
least labor  for surface irrigat ion method s. The efficiencies  of basin could reach 70 to 85%. 
The limitations are that the  levees interfere with mo vement of farm equipment , because 
the levees or the bun ds are around the  basins . Higher amount of water is required compared  
to sprinkler and drip irrigation  because you have to fl ood the whole field. A major  cost of 
basin irrigation is for land grading and leveling . In case of border a nd basin and furrows 
the land grading is very important because it  impedes the surface drainage .  
(Refer Slid e Time: 14:52)  
 
Next is the furrow  irrigation , which is  basically partial flooding of the field . In case of 
border and basin irrigation the whole border or  basin is flooded , but if the particular piece 
of land is partially wetted by creating the channels  called furrows  it is called furrow 
irrigation.  Here the irrigation is accomplished by running water in small channels called 
furrows and  the furrows strip is where  the plants  are grow n. It is constructed with or across 
any field slope  and water infiltrates from the bottom and sid es of furrows , moving lateral ly 
downward to wet the soil ; water move soluble salts , fertilizers and herbicides  in water . 
Water infiltrates  vertically  down  in border and basins ; whereas, in furrows water infiltrates 
down  and also radially or horizontally . Furrow is suitable in  loam soil  with mild slope of 
0.5 to 2 percent and labor  require ment  is generally  higher just like  basin and border , major 
initial cost is construction of furrows  which is  critical  in case of  furrow irrigation .  
(Refer Slid e Time: 17:08)  
 
The types of furrows  are level furrow  which has 0% or very mild slope  and graded furrow  
where you expect the field to have  some slope and contour furrows where furrows follows 
the contour line s.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:59)  
 
The ad vantages of furrows are that 90% efficiency  can be achieve d and once land forming  
is done the maintenance  cost will be less  and e rosion is minimal  because it  is concentrated 
channel,  it is adaptable to wide range of lands slopes . The limitation  is that it  could be not 
suitable for highly permeable soil , where the vertical infiltration  is much higher than lateral 
entry .  
In these three  surface irrigation method  we basically  release or deliver water at the one end 
called the head  end and we expect this  water  to reach  the tail end . But if soil is highly 
permeable  the infiltration  rate will be more  the water which is delivered is going to 
infiltrate  down and  hardly reaches the tail end  which  is not the intension of the surface 
irrigation . Higher amount  of water is  required as compared to sprinkle a nd drip irrigation 
methods and furrows should be closely arranged  to get more uniform  wetting fronts  and 
infiltration  rate. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:00)  
 
Next is  the sprinkler ir rigation , which is  a pressurized  irrigation . The water is delivered 
through a pressurized pipe network to sprinklers nozzles jets which spray the water in to 
the air to fall in the soil as artificial rain . The water which w ill be pumped or pressurized 
water will enter through this sprinkler , and this is going to spray water on the surface , 
hence  the design of the sprinkler h ead is really  very important . The design will vary with 
different  flow rates  or discharge rate . Light sandy soils  are very  well suited  in this  case. 
Sprinklers c an be used on any topography , it can be flat land s, graded land s, even hilly 
areas , it does not require any graded  because the water is forced or pressurized using a 
pump  whereas, in other case like  border , basin or furrow , the water is flowing  on the  
surface through gravity .  
Sometimes sprinklers are used to germinate the seed and establish ground  cover for crops 
like lettuce , alfalfa and sod . Sprinklers have  very high efficiency of water application  
compared to surface irrigation methods because less er water is required to spray on top of 
the surface . It involves  high capital investment  to buy the laterals and all  parts of  the 
sprinkler system  as compared to surface irrigation systems , but  because system 
components are well designed  it requires low labor requirements .  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:03)  
 
The different  types of sprinkler irrigation could be like a portable or hand move  type where  
the laterals will be moved , so the part of the field  is going to be irrigated  then after that 
once  the irrigation is done the  lateral is move d to the next  point  and irrigate the next  piece 
of the land , this is called  the hand mo ve sprinkler system . The other one  is the solid set  
permanen t systems , in commercial crops for example,  grapes solid set or permanent 
irrigation systems are permanently installed ; you need not move this system out . The other 
one is travel gun  systems  it basically  consists  of a gun . The gun  delivers the water at high 
pressure and irrigates the entire  piece of the  cropland.  
Another type is the  side roll system  where the sprinkler later al is mounted on a kind of 
shaft  which acts like an axel to the number of wheels  the entire thing is going to roll from 
one place t o another place to irrigate a particular area. The entire system  moves very slowl y 
so that the area  gets enough  water .  
The o ther kind is  the center pivot and linear move system  in this , the system  is mounted 
on wheels  and all sprinklers are on the  lateral . The center pivot  is fixed and the entire  thing  
is going to mo ve in circular direction  to irrigate , so if you have a rectangular piece of land  
the corners are not going to be irrigated  which  is one limitation with  center pivot system , 
in order to avoid  this some  systems,  have a gun  to irriga te the corners . 
(Refer Slide Tim e: 26:25)  
 
The advantages of sprinkler systems  are it is readily automatable , it facilitates  chemigation 
and fertigation  by pumping  the fertilizer or liquid fertilizer along with the irrigation water 
in the system  and the labor  requirement will be less because once the system is installed 
well in the field  it is automated . In case of  surface irrigation systems every time you have 
to go and check whether the water is moving or if there is any blockage  and other thing s. 
Sprinkler  system is efficient and it does not require the frequent observation .  
And the limitations are it could  not be used for water s ensitive  crops  like citrus  crops  and 
its initial  high installation cost  of the components and  also high mainten ance cost  during  
block age of sprinklers or spri nkler head  malfunctioning .  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:39)  
 
Next is the drip irrigation , in sprinkler irrigation you have to create th e spray on  top of the 
surface  whereas, in drip irrigation  the water is applied to the plant ne arer to the surface or 
nearer to the  plant root drop by drop . A constant  steady flow of water is  applied directly 
to the roots zone  with the help of  applicators like orifices or emitters or poro us tubing or 
perforated pip e. Suppose there is a row of plant s and the drip  is installed a t each plant so 
the water wets only  a particular portion  near the drip and  the portion between two plants 
is dry , forming  wet pockets and dry pockets  whereas, in sprinkler irrigation system , the 
whole piece of land is wet . 
Drip is not designed for large ro ot systems , since we are  applying  limited water on the  top 
surface only , the deep rooted crops are not suitable for drip irrigation . It is suited for 
situations  where the water supply  is limited like  desert areas . It is very effective for 
applying  nutrien ts (fertigation, chemigation and insecticides ) just like in  sprinkler 
irrigation system .  
Burying the drip irrigation reduces water loss even f urther preventing runoff  across th e 
surface , this i s called sub surface syste m or  sub surface drip . You can apply  water 
effectively , by reducing the evaporation losses and also the runoff losses , generally there 
is no runoff , but mostly the evaporation losses will be avoided .  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:37)  
 
The advantages of drip irrigation are that it is  a highly  efficien t system  compared to surface 
as well as sprinkler irrigation systems , and limited water resource can be used . The  amount 
of water applied to the root zone can be automated and also reduces - nutrient leaching , 
labor requirement and operating cost . And nearly  uniform distribution of water  can be 
achieved with the system  and lower pressure are required  for pumping  the water since it 
has to pass through the small  pore. The pressure of pumping would  be less compared to 
sprinkler irrigation  
Limitations are h igh initial  cost and technical ly skilled labor is required . Damage of drip 
system due to rodents . Closer  spacing is required  which involve high initial cost . It cannot 
wet the soil volume quickly and facilitates  shallow root zone . Clean water is required in 
both drip and sprinkler irrigation;  hence these systems  have extra filtra tion systems .  
(Refer Slide Time: 33:26)  
 
There are other  forms of irrigations  like hand watering  are generally  for nurseries and fruit 
trees . Capillary irrigation  is where  root zone is wetted due to the capillary rise  from buried 
pipes or deep surface canals. L ocalized irrigations  is where  water is applied  around each 
group of plants and wets root zone onl y and subsurface irrigations . 
(Refer Slide Time: 33:51)  
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 35:09)  
 
The above two slides give the table of the whole comparison of all irrigation system  
performance  for different site and situation factors. So  we started with the surface 
irrigation systems : borders , basins and furrow irrigation system  and then the  pressurize d 
irrigation systems  like sprinkler and drip irrigation and also sub irrigation . Altogether  
surface irrigation  systems are easy to irrigate and  less skill is required and  no energy is 
required because  it is gravity irrigation  but compared to the present existing systems it is 
less efficient . Pressurized irrigation systems  required clean water for passage through 
systems so you need a filtration system also the cost is more , and more skilled labor is 
required to operate .  
In the next class we are going to see the  design  of furrow irrigation , border irrigation and 
basin irrigation , hydraulic principles etc. 
Thank you . 
