Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapalli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture - 41  
Drainage System Components  
Hi, this is lecture number 41  on Drainage System Components.   
(Refer Slide Time: 00:21)  
 
So, in the last class , we have initiated the  drainage systems and their components. So, we are 
going to stretch a little bit forward on the same .  If you recollect from the previ ous lecture  the 
field drainage system  has a collector drain or field drain . So, from field drains there  are laterals 
in the field which collects the excess water on the surface to the collect or drain. And from the 
collect or drain, it leads the water towards or  inside the main drain .  
The main drain  is shown in the image above  and the main drain is going to convey the water 
towards the outlet . So, from the outlet , it goes to the nearest stream or any watercourse. The 
outlet can be  a gravity outlet and a pump outlet.   
If the base of the  main drain is higher than the base of the watercour se, then the gravity outlet 
will work.  
Suppose the base of the main drain  is lower  than the water  level  of the watercourse , then 
there  is a chance  of water coming from the watercourse to the main drain and the drain may 
not be wo rking. So, in that case , we have to use  the pump outlet so, we are going to close the 
outlet and pump th e water to the watercourse . 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:24)  
 
As mentioned earlier we have a surface drainage system and subsurface drainage system.  The 
main goal of the surface drainage system is to remove excess water from the land surface  by 
using shallow drains . So, if you see in the picture  above , the initial water table  is shown in the 
dotted line  and you would like to  pull this water table below the root zone . So, to do that, we 
are going to construct  the shallow field drain in surface drainage , then when the field ch annels  
withdraw  water towards the main channel  the water table is going to a down to the water table 
with drainage (solid line) . The water table is  below the cr op root zone now and this is what we 
are expecting from the surface drainage . Whereas  subsurface drainage  is basically to control 
the water table in the root zone and also to control the salt  content . So, mostly we use the deep 
open ditches or pipe drains . In the image above  the pipe, drains  are used  then th e water table  is 
going to fall below the root zone . 
(Refer Slide Time: 04:34)  
 
If you focus on the sur face drainage system, it has 2 components , one is open drains to collect 
ponding water and divert it to collector drains  that is we have seen. So, first , it collects the 
water from the field drains  or open drains and then convey s this to the main drain.   
And another important thing is land forming. So, this is very important in the case of surface 
drainage system , this will enhance the flow of water towards the field drains. So, if we have  
terrain or  land surface which is not properly  leveled then, land f orming is very important to 
convey the water easily to the channels or open ditches .  
(Refer  Slide Time: 05:42)  
 
So, then what is land forming?  we are going to see the types of land forming we follow in a 
surface  drainage system. One such land forming practice is bedding , you are going to bed the 
soil from the channel to the other channel , and in between  a kind of shallow heap  is form . So, 
if there is water that is falling on the surface  that will be  run off to the  shallow channel or open 
ditch and finally, it goes to the collector ditch .  
So, bedding is ploughing  of the  land to form a series of low beds separated by parallel  field 
drains . It is most practicable on flat slopes  of less than 1.5 %. What happens if you have flat 
slopes? The water which is falling or the rainfall which is falling on the surface will be 
inundated or it will be causing ponding , that is  why we need to make a beddi ng. So, the water 
can easily runoff from the top to the nearest field  drain . Bedding  is the oldest practice used for 
grasslands mostly .  
Another land forming practice is called land grading.  In the land grading , if you have undulated 
terrain or undulated surface  and you make  a grade  or slope  using the cut and fill  method . So, 
wherever there is a heap or extra soil that will be cut and wherever the soil is  less, the extra soil 
from the heap is filled  and after that this will be  leveled and finally, the land grading is taking 
place.  
So, the cutting and filling then smoothing of the land to a predetermined slope  will reduce  the 
number of field  drains  and most  of the land will be available for farming.  
 In case of bedding , the field channels are closer and more in  number  hence  the f arming 
operations will be a l ittle difficult.  In land grading the  field channels are fewer  as compared to 
the bedding case and you have more favorable  farming operations and  are economical than the 
bedding b ecause the number of  field dr ains is less. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:22)  
 
And then, the third land forming practice is land pla ning. If you have a flat surface or  a well -
graded surf ace, but still there are some patches in between  so, in that case , we use a  landplane 
or land leveler to fill up  the patche s by using nearest hills soil or  some soil from other places . 
This is smoothing o f land surface by eliminating minor depressions or irregularities on the 
surface . The topography of the land surface is not changed because we are not going to change 
any land slope, the only thing we need to do is  adjusting the cuts and fills  or depressions.   
The image above shows  special equipment called  a landplane or leveler  used for land planing. 
The smoothing operation . may ordinarily be directed in the field without detailed survey or 
plans, although grid survey may be needed for  some critical parts of the field.  
Suppose if you have a  field with  a lot of patches or maybe at least 10 to 15 % of the land is 
under  depressions , then probably you may have to plan for land grading. In that case , a grid 
wise survey may be required . 
So that is all fo r the surface drainage system , bedding, grading , and planing  are very much 
required to convey the water which is falling on the sur face to the nearest field channels  thus it  
ease the conveyance  of water  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:16)  
 
Next is what  are the types  of field channel  layouts , the first could be the random field drainage 
system. So, as the name indicates it is a random field drainage system . If you have patches like 
depression here and there the water which is falling on the surface is causing inundation. And 
if you have too much water, then patches are going  to merge and increase the  inundation area. 
So the random field drainage system connects the patches to the main field channels . It connec ts 
depression to depression and  connected to the collector drain  or laterals and finally  to the main 
drain . It is applica ble when there are several  large but shallow depressions in the field . Field 
ditches connect the major depressions  and remove excess water. The collected drain  should be  
shallow enough to permit freq uent crossing by farm machinery  this is important because  farm 
machin ery and equipment’s  need to cross the field and do  operations eas ily. Soil from ditches 
can be used to fill minor depressions in the field. So, when you make the ditches  you have to 
remove some  soil that soil can be filled into the depressions .  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:55)  
 
And th e other one is the parallel field drainage system as the name indicates here the field 
ditches are parallel to each other . In the images above the ditch es can be seen which are parallel 
to each other . The distance between the ditches may varied , but the only thing is they need to 
be parallel . This is suit able for flatter and poorly drained soils that have numerous shallow 
depressions and these parallel drainage system s would help in  removing the excess water from 
the surface. They are  installed across the slope to break the field into shorter units of length and 
make it less susceptible to erosion  and another recommendation is that the field should be 
framed in the direction of the greatest slope . Ditches must be parallel, but need not be equal 
distances as already mentioned  and this method is  the most effective method for a surface 
drainage system  as compared to your random layo ut.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:45)  
 
And the other one is the sub surface drainage system. So, in sub -surface drainage systems as 
the name indicates. So, we going to collect the water  both from the surface as well as the root 
zone . Since we are interested in growing crops  so, we aim  to remove excess water from the 
root zone , at the same time  the subsurface drainage will also remove the sal ts. The advantage 
of the subsurface drainage system  is aeration of the soil . So, once you are removing  excess 
water from the root zone , the root zone layer all become unsaturated ; that means  there are soil 
pores filled with  air that air is very much important for roots to respir e.  
Another advantage  of sub surface  drainage is  the increase  in the length of growing seasons ; 
since th e drainage system will help in removing the excess water  at the beginning of the 
monsoon as we expect a lot of water in the beginning  so, our sowing date would be early , that 
way the length of growing season would not  affect  the crop growth . Next is  the improvement 
of soil water condition  since the area will be  under the aerated condition  not inundated  after 
drainage  the farming operations can be easily done . The other advantage s are remov ing toxic 
substances such as salt  which is on e of the  objectives of the subsurface drainage system  and 
greater storage capacity of the soil , since the water is being  removed and the unsaturated 
condition is achieved  the excess water which is falling can be stored inside the root zone  that 
will improve the storage capacity of the soil . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:10)  
 
Next is the selection between an open dr ain and pipe drainage system. So, the open drains can 
receive overland flow and also s erve as  surface drainage  to remove excess water which is 
ponding on the surface and so me of the land s is lost in the construction of drain s. So, compared 
to subsurface drainage  except in the case of  deep ditches , the surface drainage system is going 
to lose  soil because for making ditches you need to remove the s oil. And th e area cannot be  
used for any cultivation  so, you are losing farm land and it interferes with the irrigation system  
and it is difficult to operate the farming equipment  on the field.  
The pipe drains are the most widely used subsurface drainage method worldwide  because  in 
the case of pipe drains you cannot see the pipes because  it is underneath the surface  that will  
help in  farming operations  and also you are not going to lose any farmland.  
There are 2 options in col lectors  for pipe drains . one is  open drains  which  could be as a singular 
pipe drainage system and the other is the pipe drains which may be a composite pipe drainage 
system   
We are going to see what are the singular and what are the composite pipe drainage system  
 
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:13)  
 
So, here the singular systems are such that each field pipe drain discharges i nto an open 
collector drain if you see in th e first  picture  above . The pipe drains are going into the soil , but 
they are going  to yield water into the open ditch which  means, the pipe drain or the tiles are 
open to the main dra in or field d itches .  
Whereas  in a composite drainage system the pipes are installed underneath the ground surface  
along with the  collector  as shown in the image above, which collects the water from  all the 
fields . And the field drains or pipes are  connected to the collector drains  in a T joint  as shown 
in the image above . Composite  drainage  means  collecting drainage from all the tiles throu gh a 
single  pipeline.  In the image  above  the field , pipe drains discharge into a pipe collector which 
in turn discharges into a n open drain.  All pipe drains and collector drains are burie d pipes  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:14)  
 
And then in sub surface drainage system also if you see the layout is similar to the surface 
system . You have 2 kinds of layouts one is ran dom field drainage and the other one is the 
parallel  field drainage system. So, similarly here the random system pattern is suitable for 
undulating or rolling land that contains isolated wet areas. Similar to your surface system , in 
the case of the subsurface system also you are going to connect the depressions randomly . For 
example, there are wet spots , all these wet spots are co nnected  with tile drains. The tile drains 
are underneath the ground  and then you are going to collect the water from different patches . 
And then finally, to the  main channel or water course .  
The main drain is usually placed in the swales rather than in deep cuts through the ridges . And 
the laterals in th is pattern are arranged according to the size of the isolated wet areas.  And 
suppose if the area of depression is lar ger, then you can also plan other type s of drainage  
systems, for example, parallel drainage system  and then Herringbone systems.  So within the 
random system , we are going to see the other drainage layouts .  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:54)  
 
There is a parallel grid sys tem. So, here tiles installed within the ground  are parallel to each 
other . The collector  and the field drains  are shown in the image above , the field drains join  the 
collector at a n angle . The laterals in the pattern may  be spaced at any interval consistent with  
site condition s. Spacing is based on the terr ain of the soil , this pattern is used on flat regularly 
slope fields and uniform soils . Variations of this pattern are often combined with others  such 
as one-sided and multi -sided also. So metimes these parallel drains could drain to the collector 
in double -sided . So, a single side drainage system and double -sided also . So, this kind of system 
can be  observed in the parallel drain system.  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:35)  
 
So, then the third one is the Herringbone system , in the parallel system the field ditches are 
perpendicular to the collector, but in the herringbone system , the lateral or field ditches or tile 
drains  have a sharp angle  with the collector  like a bone kind of thing.  So, field drains joi n the 
collector at sharp angles usually from both sides  and the main is located on the m ajor slope of 
the land  and the lateral is angled upstream on a grade . It can provide the extra drainage needed 
for the less permeable soils. So, if you are  having  sandy loam soils or clay soil s this can provide 
extra drainage needed for the less permeable soils. And the disadvantage  of double drainage  is 
it is more  costly than other patterns like random and parallel because it contains more junctions. 
So, that is why Herringbone should be designed properly .  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:07)  
 
Sometimes you may also see the combined drainage system , this depends on the  different  
cropping patterns. So, if you are looking  for different cropping patterns , for example, paddy  
requires a lot of standing water compared  to maize  and cotton  crops which do not require much 
water . So, to balance or give water properly to the particular crop  you may have to use a 
combined drainage system. So, in the case of a combined drainage system the surface and 
subsurface drainage systems may be needed  when cropping patterns include rice rotation with 
dry foot crops such as maize or cotton. Dry foot crops require  aeration compared to paddy and 
subsurface drainage is needed for salinity control for maize or cotton sometimes. If you are 
growing maize and cotton in case of  saline so ils you may have to use leachate water to drain 
out so, subsurface drainage  and surface drainage are needed . Sometimes if the excess water is 
too much on the paddy surface generally, paddy standing water is practiced  as 5 to 10 c m. So, 
if the water is more than the required depth, you need to remove it using a surface drainage 
system  if you are having this kind of  situation you may have to use a combined drainage system. 
That means both surface and subsurface drainage system s. So, the areas with occasional ly high-
intensity rainfall > 50 mm /day cause  surface po nding  even when a subsurface drainage system 
has been installed  because such high-intensity rain fall cannot be accommodated in  the 
subsurface drainage system s. So, for th ose conditions, you have to use both surface s as well as 
subsurface drainage systems . In both of the above example s, for example, one is cropping 
pattern an d rainfall  in both cases the standing water could be removed by the subsurface 
drainage system . But this would either take too long or required drain spacing that is too close 
to be economically justifiable . In both cases  keeping the subsurface drainage system definitely 
will help, but it is not fast enough to drain the water so, you ne ed to use both surface s as well 
as subsurface drainage systems . 
(Refer Slide Time: 32:41)  
 
The above  picture tells how the combined drainage system can be used in case of different 
cropping patterns . For example, the dry f oot crop like cotton and maize and the rice are gro wn 
Dry spots does not require  standing water, so, if the water is too much  and the high rainfall 
intensity is taking place.  The water can be  removed by a subsurface drainage system, but 
whereas,  in the rice case  standing water is already there and the excess water cannot be  drained 
out and you may  you have to use a surface drainage system here . So, this is how the combine d 
drainage system is used during the different cropping pattern s as well as the high rainfall 
intensity cases . 
So, in this whole lecture , we were focusing on the different types of the drainage system and 
their layouts. A surface drainage system will be used to remove the ponding water which is 
standing on the surface of the g round by using shallow ditches . Whereas, the subsurface 
system 's main goal is to remove excess water from the root zone as well as the salts from the 
root zone . So, you ca n either use deep ditches or tiles or a pipe drainage system. There are 2 
layouts  in the surface drainage system  - random drainage system and parallel ditch system . The 
subsurface drainage system  also has a random drainage system and parallel drainage system  
and the third one is the Herringbone drainage  system.  In the random drainage system , you may 
also see the parallel as well as the Herringbone system for a particular wet spot  that is wider or 
having a bigger area. You may have to use either the combi nation of different layouts say 
random , parallel , and Herringbone system in case of the subsurface drainage  system . 
Sometimes you may have to use the combined systems . For example, there are 2 cases; case 
numbe r one is if you have a different crop  grown in a particular area  and their water 
requirements are different for example, paddy  requires standing water whereas, other crops like 
maize and cotton  may not be requiring  standing water  and if you have large  rainfall which is 
happening in a short period  and the crops which are aerated have subsurface drainage system  
but whereas  paddy crop  is already water stagnant  on the surface , the excess water can cause 
the water logging to the other fields , so you may require  both, surface  and subsurface drainage 
systems . 
Thank you so much. See you all.  