Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapal li 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture – 43 
Drainage System: Structures  
Welcome friends  to lecture number 42 we were discussing Drain age System on the pipe drain , 
mostly the pipe size and the drainpipe. Now, in this lecture , we will be talking about the 
Structures used in drainage.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:49)  
 
Structures in pipe drainage , if we see the first thing is the outlet of the pipe d rain into the ditch 
or canal. So, if you see in the image above  the tile outlet  is shown and  the structure should meet 
the following requirement that is it prevents  erosion of the side slopes , preferably not interfere 
with the ditch maintenance , and preven ts entry of animals into the drain. So, these are the main 
requirement to fulfill  before constructing the outlet of the pipe.  
In the image above you can see the outlet , the collector drains , and it  a singular outlet because 
the collector is directly open  into the ditch, if it is a  composite  that means  all the field drains  
or collector  drains are connected to a common collector  and then from there  it will be connected 
to the outlet.  
 
 
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:23)  
 
The second  structure  is a junction and inspection chambers. These are used in composite drain 
pipes because, all the collector , field channels , or field tiles are connected to a collector with 
different joints. So junction boxes have  a provision to trap silt , repair intercept or, or 
maintenance . The junction box  is shown in the image above which is of  herringbone kind and 
then you have the parallel system and you have a T junction box . The advantage of a junction 
box installed below the land surface is, it does not interfere wit h the f arming operations And if 
you see  in the 5th image above , about 0.3 m is left below the collector, this will be used to 
collect the sediments  also called a sediment  trap. So, whatever sediments present inside the 
drainage water will be  settled in the  sediment  trap and then the clean water will leave the 
junction box. Most connections are  made using blind junctions which cannot be inspected after 
installation because once they are installed th ey will be buried inside.  
 (Refer Slide Time: 05:02)  
 
And t hen sometimes you can see big junction boxes as shown in the image above, these 
junction boxes are use d in most of the urban drainages to dispose  of the wastewater.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:26)  
 
Another structure in the pipe drainage system is the surface water inlets. Surface water inlets 
are mainly used to facilitate infiltration of water or drain water into the tile or pipe so, it is used 
for incidental discharge of surface water.  As shown in t he image above , there is a rectangular 
pit that has a stone or gravel  that will help in infiltrating  the water into the tile or CPT is the 
Corrugated Pipe Tile drainage. So, here the blind inlets remove both surface and subsurface 
water and are suitable wh ere there are relatively small amounts of impounded water. So, it will 
remove excess water from the root zone as well as from the surface.   
Another example is that sometimes the  pipe is above the  ground  that is surface water inlet offset 
from the subsurfac e drain line to reduce potential damage to the line. As shown in the image it  
will be a little bit away from the main drainage system and then there is gravel surrounding it 
and an underground outlet, which  is a minimum of 5 feet of non-perforated  tubing or conduit . 
So, the water which is stored or impounded on the surface  will be passed through the pores and 
enters through the tube and water  will be removed through the drain pipe.  The advantage here 
is that the water which is ponded on the top sur face can easily escape so if you have depression 
as shown in the image above , water can easily pass through th e perforations of the tube  and 
then the extra water also will enter through th e gravel and  finally  goes through the drain pipe.  
 
 
 
 
(Refer Slide T ime: 08:22)  
 
And then the other one is known as the bedding, the gravel bed is most suitable for corrugated 
pipe lateral. So, if you see in the image there is a  perforated pipe and you can see the holes. 
When  water floods the trench and enters the pipe an d flow s away. So, water entered through 
the gravel and then gravel encase pipe , the gravel encase pipe  protects the perforated pipe from 
the gravel pressure ; and then water enters the perforated pipe.  Then there is a French drain  as 
shown in the image above  in the French drain there  is the main drain and then the gravel or 
coarse aggregates. Th e upper layer or top surface is the lawn area and earth. So, this is another 
bedding kind of thing , once you install the pipe drainage, you will be constructing the en velope,  
the envelope has a few material properties; it acts as a filter media , and also it protect s from 
compaction of the pipe, or any physical or mechanical stress acting on the top.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:55)  
 
Next  is a ditch system. So, the ditch systems are generally open ditches, if you see in th e picture  
above , the water table or initial groundwater table  before drainage . If you want to remove water 
below the root zone , there  are 2 ditches that will take away th e water or drain the water from 
the root zone. T he ditch system is laid out in various patterns. The drains are laid deep enough 
for effective drainage that is  1 to 1.5 m below. So, the ditch will be constructed  1 to 1.5 m 
below the ground and mostly the t rapezoidal shape will be used in the case of grass watershed  
as you can see clearly in the image above . The trapezoidal shapes are generally used for ditch 
systems to get more stability.   
(Refer Slide Time: 11:04)  
 
Next is the construction of pipe drainag e it has two activities first is setting out of alignments 
and levels because the pipe drainage requires a very well -grade slope so that the water from 
the surface or root zone will be well -drained to the collector drain . Then the second activity is  
the installation of the drain pipe in the soil . So, here if you see in th e picture above , there will 
be two ranging rods at point s A and B , these rods will be used in surveying.  
So, initially , these two ranging rods are installed in the ground and then a sightline  from  
between A and B  from a  person watching  at point A and t his is based on the particular  slope. 
So, these two points A and B are fixed , and then a traveler will be walking  from  point A to B 
and in between setting up  a mark . So, for example; the  mark which is set up is a valley  as shown 
in the picture above s o, we need to add soil to bring th e traveler  rod to the sightline  of AB . So, 
the cut fill method  will be  used to  cut and fill the soil  when required to maintain the desired 
slope . So, the sightline should be parallel with the pipe drain line . The heavy rods may be  used 
to check the level . 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:39)  
 
So, the next is installation so, once the land is leveled and then the pipe drain system is 
demarcated, then, you have to use machinery  to construct or excavate the trenches to install the 
pipe drains.  So, here for example; the backacter  can be used which  is a kind of heavy bulldozer. 
Most of this backacter will have 40 to 65 hp and it can excavate up to 4 m deep and it can make 
0.42 to 0.6 m trench width . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:41)  
 
The other machinery is the  continuous crawler trench  which  is up to 200 hp and it can make 3 
to 3.5 m deep  trenches and 0.2 to 0.45 m trench width . The image above  is the continuous 
crawler trench wi th crawler tracks and a  corrugated drain pipe bounded to a vertical shaft and 
then from there it is conveyed to the trench and then it is gets installed.  The trench has a cutting 
tool, that is going to cut and at the same time the pieces which are coming fr om the cutting, are 
going to be conveyed  to the belt and removed or thrown outside . Once that is done the 
corrugated pipe will be installed and there is a gravel hopper that simultaneously force s the 
gravel and the envelope will be made. So, simultaneous three operation s of cutting, installation 
of the drainpipe , and then filling the drain hole with the envelope material will be taken place 
using the crawler trench.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:06)  
 
Next is a trenchless crawler, this is also very popular because in trenchless crawler it does not 
make any trench. It has 135 to 200 hp and can dig up to 1.6 to 2 m deep.  In the image above o f 
the trenchless crawler , you can see the cutting tool  and you do not see a ny trench all is 
underground.  The corrugated pipe will be gone inside, on ce this tool makes a n opening 
simultaneously the  drainpipe will be installed, without opening any trench  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:10)  
 
So the next is trench installation, which involv es the excavation of the trenches. The first one 
is an excavation or opening of the soil and  then laying of the pipe with or without an envelope. 
So, laying of the pipe with envelope if, the trench is opened and without an envelope , if it is 
trenchless  e.g., moles drain s which you do not require to add any envelope because, the clay 
soil which is surrounding the pipe, can ac t as the envelope. The next step is  backfilling of the  
trenches , once it is opened  and installed then  backfilling . The excavation, installation , and the 
envelope can be done intense by machines that, we have seen in the previous slides . And 
manual operations are needed when there are level land s and the unavailab ility of machines.  
The trenchless drains , you have seen in the previous slide how the trenchless crawler works. 
The plough bottom contains a cutting tool or plough  as shown in the image above . So, the 
corrugated pipe will go all the way through the slot, which is present inside the plough  or the 
cutting tool  and that will  be laid off. So, the tool will move in the  direction as shown in the 
image while  the corrugated pipe will be laid in th e opposite  direction ok. The blade width and 
the cutting tool can be seen in the  figure . The installation timing should be during the dry 
season, when the soil supports heavy load because, here we will us e heavier equipment , and 
the soil should be favorable  for trafficability and also workability.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:59)  
 
The next part of the construction of pipe drains  is backfilling . This is very important  because  
once the drain is opened and the pipe is installed backfilling needs to be done. So, this is mainly 
done by filling topsoil first by hand or a blade, then the combination of trench backfilling and 
consolidation under humid an d irrigated  soils.  Each layer is sprinkled with water with tamping. 
Any remaining fill should finally be formed into a low bund to prevent water pond ing and  this 
will adjust in the soil because it will be compacted anyway in the future.  
The pipe trench ne eds to be cleaned regularly when there is a danger of deposition of fines or 
iron compounds or the flow is restricted by any other reason. So,  you need to regularly s ee 
whether the flow is really taking place or not , if the flow is not taking place then there is a 
problem inside the drainage system, so that needs to be maintained or cleaned out . The deposits 
of fine or iron compounds could be removed from the pipe by flushing.  In a composite system , 
special access points may be provided because it is diffic ult to  go underneath the ground and 
inspect every joint to see what is going inside the pipe drain system.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:57)  
  
The images above show  the different system s used for cleaning the drain pipes. For example; 
if you see  the first image is a fl ushing truck  that ha s a pipe wh ere water flow s through to flush 
out the  drains . It contains the jetting nozzle at the front and the jetting nozzle goes into the 
drainpipe  through the special access  point s, the jet tool will be introdu ced inside the drain pipe. 
Then with a high -velocity jet flush ed out  the particles which are deposited inside the pipe.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:03)  
 
Some of the useful videos are available on YouTube. You can go through these videos to help 
you understand the installation process of drain  pipe in case of backacter and trenchless 
crawler . It will give an idea, how the drainage pipe or the tile drain or corrugated pipe is being  
installed underground and how that is connected to the ditch system.  So, this is all in this lecture  
Thank you so much.  