Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapalli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture – 49 
Sub - Subsurface Drainage Design (Contd.)  
Hi, this is lecture number 49 on Subsurface Drainage Design. We are going to continue from 
the previous lectures. So, in this lecture we are going to talk about the drainage base width or 
drainage base depth  these are  very important because th ey decide the  cost of excavation and 
the finally, the cost of the drainage system. And then once the drainage systems are installed 
what kind of problems or malfunctions we are going to face and how to detect and rectify those 
problems.  And then the third aspect is dra inage drain pipe size design based on some thumb 
rules. And then finally, disposing of the drainage water  and how we can reuse it. 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:24)  
 
So, the first thing is the field drainage base depth as said  earlier it  is very important in drai nage 
system design . For a given H , increasing W, increase ‘h’; you need to arrange a wider drain 
spacing . A deeper drainage base could increase the cost of installation because if you are 
digging too much it will increas e the W, which  leads to an increase in installation cost due to 
the excavation cost. Generally , up to  2 to 2.5 m , these extra cost s are normally compensated 
by the savings result ing from the wide  spacing  by decreas ing the number of pipes.  
In the graph  above, W is on the x-axis and cost -benefit ratio on the y-axis. As W is increasing 
the cost -benefit ratio is going to decline up to a certain depth  then after, that it slightly 
increases. The critical depth is a minimum depth at which  the cost to benefit ratio will be less.  
At the same time  if you take the length on the other axis  and then combine the W , length , and 
cost-benefit ratio  you can draw a 3 -dimensional view, to find out exactly where the W and L 
will have a minimum cost -benefit ratio.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:41)  
 
Next are the local  conditions that influence the drainage base depth. In addition to the 
previously mentioned  parameters , the local conditions also influence the drainage base depth.  
The local or regional drainage base : the field drainage base should be higher than the local  or 
regional drainage base  because otherwise you need to pump water from the drainage to the 
sinks  or the local drainage base  and this will  involve extra pumping cost . The field drainage 
base should be higher than the local drainage so that the draine d water will flow freely by 
gravity to the drain base .  
The other one is soil conditions, the pipe should not be installed in quicksand, because the pipe 
network is going to sink and break age will occur and the drainage system is going to fail . Pipes 
shoul d not be installed in  unconsolidated soil condition s, and layers with low hydraulic 
conductivity  because  the water would not enter into the  drain pipes  in low hydraulic 
conductivity  and that will the problem for the drainage.  
And drought risk : deep drainag e may over drain the soil, pipe drain depth will mostly be based 
on the wet season  situation , if you design the drainage system based on the dry season situation , 
drains  will be installed at deeper, so the extra water will be drained out very fast and the soil 
will be in unsaturated condition and the water w ill not be available for the plant. So that is why 
to avoid the drought risk  the installation should be practiced or design  during the wet season 
situation.  
And the n the  seepage: the local drainage base may constitute  a sink drawing excessive amounts 
of seepage water from the surroundings. Suppose if your local drainage base is lower , because 
of this local drainage excess water is going to seep to the field drainage base  which must  be 
avoided .  
Available machinery : the most economical working depth is around 1 to 1.2 meter if you still 
want to go deeper then there are special machines required and that will  increase the  cost. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:16)  
 
Next is finding ou t the diameter of the pipe drain. So, the hydraulic design of drain pipe  is by 
using the standard pipe flow formula. So, the  following  parameters  will be considered:  
Discharge (Q)  
Hydraulic gradient(i)  
Pipe diameter (d)  
Wall roughness  
For uniform flow , in smooth pipes, the Darcy Weisbach equation is preferred  
𝑄 = 50𝑑2.71𝑖 0.57  
Whereas, for corrugated pipe , the Chezy and Manning’s equation is used  
𝑄 = 22𝑑2.67𝑖 0.5 
Where  
Q = discharge along the pipe, m3/s 
d = pipe internal diameter, m  
i = hydraulic gradient, m/m  
 
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:53)  
 
Similarly for non-uniform  flow, you have different equations for example, here  
For smooth pipe you have : 𝑄 = 89𝑑2.71𝑖 0.57  
For corrugated pipe : 𝑄 = 38𝑑2.67𝑖 0.5  
For uniform flow  as shown in the line diagram above,  if the blue line represents  a pipe, the 
hydraulic grad ient line is exactly lying on top of the water surface, whereas, here for non-
uniform  flow, you can observe th e actual hydraulic gradient line (curvy layer ) right ab ove the 
top of the water level in the pipe.  The difference between the pressure heads in the case of non-
uniform  flow may  cause  overpressure which may be expected to go up to 0.4 H in the actual 
hydraulic line compared to the average hydraulic line. So due to non-uniform  flow, you may 
expect the hydraulic gradient line a little bit higher than the average grade line.  
And over design is practiced  to increase the discharge, 1.33 for stable soils and 2 times for 
siltation prone situations  to consider the liftin g and misalignment of the piping.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:47)  
 
And the next example,  
Example 49.1:  
- Smooth concrete collector pipe  
- Slope of the pipeline is 0.1%  
- Receiving water from 20 ha of land drained by field drains designed for q = 5 mm/d  
- An allowance to be incorporated for a subsequent 25% reduction in transfer capacity 
due to siltation  
The discharge at the end of the line is  
𝑄=𝑞×𝐴
1000 ×3600 ×24𝑚3/𝑠 
A = Drainage area, m2 ; A= 200000 m2; q = 5 mm/day;  so, Q = 0.0116m3/s 
Allowing for s ituation Q design= 1
0.75(0.0116) = 0.0155  
Qdesign= 50d2.71 i 0.57 
d = 22 cm (inner dia)  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:02)  
 
Example 49.2:  
- Parallel system of pipe drains at 35 m spacing  
- Corrugated plastics drain pipe  
- Line length = 200 m  
-  q = 5 mm/d  
- Slope of the pipeline is 0.1%  
 The discharge Q at the end of the line is  
𝑄=𝑞×𝐴
1000 𝑚3/𝑑𝑎𝑦 
A = Drainage area,  m2  ; A= 200*35 = 7000 m2; q = 5 mm/day;   
so, Q = 35 m3/day or 0.0004 m3/s 
Taking a 50% safety to allow for situation:  
Qdesign= 2 x 35 = 70 m3/day or  0.0008 m3/s 
Qdesign= 38d2.67 i 0.50 
d = 64 mm (inner dia)  
 (Refer Slide Time: 16:45)  
 
Once the pipe network or the drainage system is installed, you need to observe what kind of 
malfunctions you can encounter . What are the checkpoints and what we need to check, whether 
the system is working properly or not ? The overall functioning of the drainage system can be 
checked based on the water table observations and also the individual drain discharges for  
malfunctioning. So, for that, in a drainp ipe piezometers are installed let's say 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 
as shown in the image above . For example , piezometer 5 is exactly install ed in  the drainpipe , 
and piezometer 4 at a distance of 10 to 20 cm  from the pipe drainage or outside the envelope.  
And to cap ture the water table  piezometer 3 is installed,  the second is for detecting the local 
water table and the first one is to check if there are any vertical flows. So, these observation 
wells are installed near to or exactly from the middle or between the two  drain points  or two 
tile drain points.  
Now, how to observe whether the system is working or not . There are four cases , case number 
one if you see , for example, impeded infiltration or percolation  so, the infiltration water is not 
infiltrating down or not percolating inside the soil profile ; in that case , the evidence could be 
perched water table, there is the formation of the local water table because of the formation of 
the clay layer below the soil  surface. If you see observation well number 1, you can s ee the 
water present in the observation well, whereas no water is present in well number 2 , so t hat 
means there is a perched water table which is causing the water to stay in the profile . That is a 
perched water table and because of th is the water can be stacked up on top of the surface, the 
causes could be hard cl ay pan and soil compaction.  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:59)  
 
Next is case number 2 : high resistance in groundwater flow, there is a lot of resistance and 
water is not flowing as desired ; suppose piezo meters were installed as  in the previous case. So, 
the evidence is slow fall in the water table  such that , if you have observed in one day and the 
second day you still see your water table is not falling, but whereas there is a depletion in water 
level  in the piezometer installed in the tile drain. So, depletion i n the tile drain is n ot matching 
with the depletion of water taking place in piezometer s 2 and 3. So, that indicates there is a 
problem in the  soil matrix  or there  is high resistance in groundwater  flow.   
This could be due to under design or overestimation of hydraulic conductivity while designing, 
higher hydraulic conductivity influences the spacing . It may be due to  the underestimation of 
the drainage coefficient, in the Hooghoudt equation when k is low Q will be less.  
The other is due to the w rong drain spacing formula , you might have missed out on some 
parameters  in the equation, that influence the  design.  
 
 
 
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:59)  
 
The nex t case is high entry resistance , if you see a point where the envelope  is installed , the 
water is present outside the envelope, but it is not entering into the pipe or envelope . It is the 
common cause of malfunctioning  of the envelope , that is why envelope material needs to be 
design ed very well . Drains have been installed in the trench by unsuitable methods, and other s 
could be like while installing the drains unsuitable methods might have been adopted to install 
the pipes and omitting the envelope sometimes if you omit the envelope that is going to clo g 
the drain . 
In this case , there is  no solution you only have to redesign the entire drain system.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:12)  
 
And the fourth case is obstructed pipe flow , so the flow is obstructed, if you see  piezometer 1, 
2, and 3  the water level is almos t at the ground level so, we expect the same level  in piezometer 
4 and 5 but that is not the case. This may be b ecause of too high a water level in the collected 
ditch right, if you see the drain there is a lot of pressure taking place and  it may also be d ue to 
too small pipe diameters causing the excess water rushing and filling up the observation well.  
Sometime s misalignment of pipes also pressurizes the flow and also clogging of the pipes by 
fine or iron compounds , the clogging of the pipes will reduce t he open areas , and that influences 
and obstructed the flow. Then it may be due to  blockage of pores by  roots, since we are  
designing for agricultural drainage there is the possibility of root intrusion inside the pipes and 
that may clog the opening and reduces the open area in the tile drains . 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:12)  
 
So, then the next is the drainage environmental considerations. So, once the drain flow or the 
drainage water is coming out, how to tackle that water in terms of environmental health . The 
drainage has an impact on the environment  so, because of that , this is under scrutiny by 
regulators and environmentalists . The drainage water is coming from the agricultural  lands  it 
definitely contains a lot of nutrients that are undesirable for the lo cal water bodies . The 
drainage water consist s of high nutrients such as nitrates and phosphates that will be the food 
for aquatic plants, for example, algae ; it is going to grow in the l ocal water bodies and then 
causes environmental  pollution  or fish kill ing and other toxic  effect s to the aquatic  animals.  
Fogiel and Belcher 1991, listed the falling positive environmental impacts of subsurface 
drainage. So, these could be negative because that is causing eutrophication in nearest water 
bodies, but whereas, there are some positive environment al impacts  if it reduced overland flow 
and erosion. So, the accumulated water which is percolating into the soil means, the overland 
flow is going to reduce , and definitely , that is going to reduce the  erosion  and reduce  the 
sediment  transport.  Once the ponding water which is once runoff is reduced, definitely 
sediment transport and attached phosphorus and potassium of the form are going to  be reduce d. 
Because the phosphorus or potassium retain ed on the top layer 5-10 mm a re active layer s, that 
is very important . Suppose if that soil is not washing of f from the field , definitely you are going 
to cut off the p hospho rous and potassium loads into the local water bodies.  
And improved surface nutrient management , since the nutrie nts are not running off from the 
fields you are going to retain the nutrients on the field and you can improve the surface nutrient 
management . And improve the ability to monitor the percolating flow , because these  drains 
are going to create the negative p ressure that will improve the percolation of water and reduc e 
the nonpoint source pollution or diffused pollution, which  is going to decrease due to the 
drainage systems.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:49)  
 
And then the drainage environment considerations; so NRCS , that is the Natural Resources 
Conservation Services recommended, several techniques for the reduction of the impact of 
drained water on the environment.  As mentioned earlier  the nutrient load is going to be coming 
out from the drainage field so, that is going  to influence  the water  bodies negative ly. So, 
NRCS  recommended  several  techniques by install ing on-farm detention ponds or wetlands 
that reduce nitr ate concentration in drainage water before  it leaves the farm.  
So once, the water is drained from the fields, if you have the wetlands or detention ponds, the 
drainage water is going to accumulate and remain  stagnant for some time and all nutrients are 
going to settle down and then you can reuse the water if you want to. Retrofit drainage systems 
reduce drainage during critical periods and manage the water table.  Sometimes y ou may have 
to construct a wall to stop over drainage, the wall would not allow the excess water  to seep 
from one place to another place he nce you can still manage the water table  under the desired 
drainage discharge.  
Another example is a gate that allow s the drainage water to enter into a chamber and maintain 
the water table. So, based on the opening and closing of this gate you can maintain the wat er 
table up to the desired level . Another option could be to implement cropping systems that 
reduce nitrate losses and improve fertilizer  and animal manure management timing. Suppose 
in winter if you apply a lot of fertilizer  before the  frosty wind or free zing conditions, then 
during summer , all the manure which is spread on the ground will be transported to the nearest 
water bodies right, because of the snowmelt. So, animal manure management is also very 
important in the case of drainage.  
(Refer Slide Time: 32:40)  
 
Drain discharge management - Disposal and Treatment . Disposal of agricultural drainage  by 
return ing the water either to natural depressions or lakes or rivers or to salt sinks such as oceans. 
The d isposal can also be by return ing the water ei ther to the land as part of the irrigation water 
supply  for reuse of agriculture purposes.  In the image above you can see the drainage water 
which is coming from the field has been pumped to the local water body and the same water 
can be pumped back to the  sprinklers for irrigating the fields.  Constructing disposal basins for 
saline agricultural drainage waters if the oceans and inland close basins are not the options . 
(Refer Slide Time: 34:23)  
 
 
And finally,  the treatment of drainage water could be physic al, chemical , and biological 
treatments. S ome physical treatments are removing suspended solids  through sedimentation , 
flotation , centrifugation , or filtration. Filtration further includes granular media beds, vacuum 
filters, belt presses , and filter presses. All these things are going to be used in the case of the 
filtration process to remove the suspended solids from the disposable water or drainage water.  
(Refer Slide Time: 35:00)  
 
And another one is adsor ption , which  is a chemical treatment , adsorption is the process of 
removing soluble contaminants by attachment to a solid so, for example, removal of soluble 
organic compounds via adsorption onto granular activated carbon.  So, the activated carbon  
has a particular cha rge and it is going to attract the opposite charge sediments  and 
particulates  of organic matter. And then you can remove  or separate the organic material 
from the drainage water by adsorption.  And then there is a distillation  which is a thermal 
process use d for salt removal , the water which is drain ed from the fields will be stored in  
ponds. And then due to evaporation , all freshwater is going to evaporate and the salts will be 
retained in the pond  so, generally , heat vaporize s the water leaving the salts b ehind then, the 
salts can be scrapped out from the ponds.  
So, this is all in this lecture, we focused on the importance of drainage base depth and what are 
the economical depth  and pipes size determination . How to  observe the malfunctions in a 
drainage system and then the drainage water disposal and how to reuse that and what kind of 
treatments, we need to do before treating the drainage water to avoid any environmental 
contamination.  
Thank you so much.  