 
Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapalli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture - 42  
Drainage System:  Drain Pipe  
This is lecture number 42 on Drainage Systems , in this lecture we are  going to talk about the 
singular and  composite system selection followed by the Drain Pipe.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:33)  
 
In the last class , I explained what is a singular system and a composite system in the case of 
subsurface drainage. So, in the singular  system , the laterals outlet are directed to the open ditch, 
whereas, in a composite system the laterals or field ditches or field tile ends are connected to 
the main pipe. and then the tile pipe will be exposed to the open ditch or in a watercourse.  
What is the choice between these two systems ? In the surface water , the singular system 
provides an outlet for excess surface water  so the singular system can convey the surface water 
out because if you remember the singular system has the pipeline which is out . So, that it can 
collect surface water as well as subsurface water. So, singular systems can handle surface water 
transport very nicely than the composite system.  
The field drains are single -sided field drains, as well as some field drains are double -sided field 
drains . So in case of blockages outflow from field drain to ditch collector is easy to inspect in 
singular systems because it is open to  the atmosphere. So, we can easily see what is going on 
in the case of a singular system.  
But the composite syst ems are buried. So, if something happens  or any problem occurs it is 
 
very difficult to look into that . The blockage affects a small area in the case of the singular 
system because it is only affecting a particular lateral, but if some blockage occurs in the case 
of the composite system everything is underground, so, it is very difficult to inspect and it is 
liable to continue over a longer period as the malfunction is not evident. In the case of a singular 
system, you can continue for a longer period becaus e the malfunction may not be a n immediate 
problem.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:05)  
 
Next is maintenance , ditch collectors require much more m aintenance than pipe collectors 
since it is exposed to the outside environment then definitely the ditch collectors requ ire more 
maintenance th an pipe collectors . The pipe outlets in the singular system represent weak spots 
because they are easily damaged during ditch maintenance, since the outlets are exposed  
outside there is a chance of breakage during maintenance.  
Then the hydraulic gradient  of the pipe collector requires 5 to 10 times more gradient than the 
ditch collector because of the smaller wet cross -section. So, since the pipe ha s a smaller 
diameter and the ditch has wider open channels then definitely , you need mo re grade gradient 
or more slope in pipes th an the open channels.   
When the available land slope is a constraint, this may restrict the length of the pipe collector . 
Suppose slope is a problem then you may have to cut down the  length of the pipe and then 
proceed  and it will lead to a pumping of the drain ed water using pumping sumps.  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:14)  
 
And, the cost of  installation for singular systems is lower than the composite system because 
the composite system  contains a lot of b ends or a lot of joints. The maintenance cost is higher 
for singular systems because it gets damaged frequently.  
The singular systems are most suitable for flat plains under humid climatic conditions whereas, 
the composite systems are most suitable for lands with highe r slopes or saline soils.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:27)  
 
And then the drain pipe is a small pipe you observe in the drain pipe installation. The pipe 
drains ha ve evolved since the first time , it wa s used some 300 years ag o. Clay pipes are more 
prominent  and w ere introduced in the 18th century . In a place , without a tile industry , the drain 
pipes w ere usually made of concrete. Then after that , plastic pipes were introduced in 1960, 
then it conquered almost all drain pipe market s because they are less cost as we ll as durability 
 
is more and lightweight and it is being used in almost all countries.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:34)  
 
 
Clay tiles  are types of drain pipes which is made of clay soil. The size of the pipe is varying 
between countr ies. Typical pipe sizes are like 30 cm long and hav ing internal diameters equal 
to 5 cm, 6.5 cm, 8 cm, 10 cm up to  20 cm. So, these are small pipes that are made of clay. Clay 
pipes are highly resistant to deterioration and corrosion and water enters through the joints   
In the image above  you can see the concrete pipe with a spacing lug,  so they are having  spacing 
lug in between the joints  and bell and spigot with space  is one kind of  a joint, and then the 
junctions in the pipe drain system are  cross piece blind junction and  the T piece .  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:41)  
 
Next is  the concrete pipe with a diameter a little bigger than the tile pipe which  varies from 30 
to 50 c m and the length is 30 c m for the smaller diameter pipes and 50 c m for large diameter 
 
pipe. This is made of Portland cemen t but deteriorat es in acidic or salt -affected soils . And water 
entry occurs through the joints into the collectors or the drains similar to the clay tile pipes.   
(Refer Slide Time: 1 3:00) 
 
And then the next is plastic pipe. So, the plastic pipe is most co mmonly available these days 
made from polyethylene and polyvinyl chloride. So, these two materials  are being used in 
fabricating the plastic pipe and the length is 30 c m for small diameter and 50 c m for  large -
diameter just like in c ement pipes and  they are very durable and deteriorated by long exposure 
to ultraviolet radiation. The PVC becomes brittle with freezing temperature suppose if you are 
installing th ese PVC pipes under the freezing condition that is going to solidify and the pipe 
become brittle  and break . 
Most of the plastic pipes are supplied with corrugations either spiral or parallel. Corrugated 
pipes are easier to transport and also you can get larger lengths in a single piece . Plastic pipe 
has higher hydraulic roughness and requires a 20 % increase in diameter to carry the same flow 
like a smooth pipe; so, because of the corrugations , the hydraulic roughness is going to 
increase.   
The cost of corrugated and smooth pipes are almost the same and the internal diameter is equal 
to 0.9 times the oute r diameter where outer diameters var y from 50 to 200 mm. So, this is the 
thumb rule to decide the internal and outer diameters.  
ID ≈ 0.9 × OD; where OD = 50, 60, 80, 100, 125, 160 and 200 mm  
Where ID is internal diameter and OD is the outer diameter  
 
 
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:21)  
 
Perforations  are important when you are talking about corrugated pipes. Perforations on t he 
pipe may ha ve any pattern that provide s even distribution around the circumference. You can 
see the holes or perforations in the image above , most  of the  perforations are on the valleys of 
the corrugations and they follow  a particular pattern.  The open area should be  minimally 800 
mm2 for the m-length of the pipe . This is a thumb rule to keep s the strength  of the pipe , 
otherwise , if you keep on making the holes the pipe strength is going to be less, then it may 
get damaged very soon  so, its life will be  reduced.  
(Refe r Slide Time: 16:36)  
 
The image above shows  different corrugation types. So, for example, the corrugations are 
sinusoidal that means if you see the surface  it is a kind of a sine curve . There are concentric or 
parallel corrugations , spiral corrugations th e cross -section will be different in the case of 
 
sinusoidal and the spiral case.  
 And the couplers such as one-way snap couple rs will be a joint between these two pipes . Then 
there is the slit piece of pipe for external connection  in between two corrugated  pipes it will be 
added. And so, you can also reduce the pipe size by using a reducer  for different applications. 
So, there ar e different couplers and joints  available in the market for joining the corrugated  
pipes.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:22) 
 
The other thing is pipe fittings. So, this is a cross piece pipe fitting if you have a corrugated 
pipe and  a reducer this can be used in composite pipe connections , these are  the T -piece and 
the Y -piece. These are  commercially available pieces and multiple si ze fittings can be use d to 
connect different laterals to it or the collector . Similarly, the elbow piece connection can be 
seen in the image above . 
(Refer Slide Time: 229:31)  
 
 
If you see the  image above the  entrance for clay pipes , as I said the water enters through the 
joints . So from the saturated soil or  soil inundated with water, water will be entering through 
the joints and then finally, enter through the to the main channels or main track.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:01)  
 
Similarly, in plastic pi pes with spiral corrugations if you look at th e openings slots. The water 
enters through the slots in the grooves  and the grooves  are in the valleys. Generally , the slot 
size or groove size  varies from 0.1 to 1 c m where the slot size is 5 mm long and 0.6 t o 2 mm 
wide. Long slots are not circular , rectangular slots are 5 mm long and 0.6 to 2 mm in width . In 
the plastic pipe and parallel corrugations case slot is at every corrugation a long with double 
entrance resistance . 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:37)  
 
When we a re talking about water entry into the pipes we see the entrance losses because the 
 
pipes with the smaller opening area s will have a higher head loss and vice versa. So, since  we 
are looking into th ese drain pipe entry points , all entry pipe points are smal ler in size either in 
clay pipe or corrugated pipe slots. The water which is flowing a little  bit faster and all of a 
sudden ent er in a  small opening then definitely experience a head loss.  
So that is why the entrance losses are important while designing t he drainage system. So, when 
drains have an envelope around them , entrance losses can be reduced significantly that is why 
the envelope is very important. The water is going to enter from the top, there is  enough 
opportunity to enter from this point to th e slot. So, that way the entrance losses are going to be  
reduced.  Then high entry resistance is mostly due to clogging or blocking of the opening  of 
the pipes . The blocking and clogging can cause increasing  head losses , though entry 
characteristics of diffe rent pipes envelope may be compared using the standardized resistance 
factor α which is defined as  follows  
he = α 𝑄
𝑘 
Where, h e is the head loss at entry, m; α = resistance factor ( -); Q = inflow rate to pipe /m 
length of pipe, (𝑚3
𝑚𝑑); k = hyd raulic conductivity of envelop e material, 𝑚
𝑑 
So, here if you remember  Darcy’s equation it is similar to it, Q = kiA  
Q is the inflow rate into the pipe, k is the hydraulic conductivity i is the head loss and A is the 
area of cross -section . 
(Refer Sli de Time: 24:57)  
 
The table above shows the range of  α for clay and concrete material which is  0.4 to 2.0 and for 
smooth plastic , it is 0.4 to 0.6 then corrugated plastic 0.05 to 0.1. So, in the case of corrugated 
plastic , the resistance is less compared t o clay and concrete pipes . The  graph shows the pipe 
 
diameter on the x-axis and the entrance area on the y-axis, the lines are showing the percentage  
perforation. So, increasing the pipe diameter , the entrance area needs to be increased to avoid 
entry  losse s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:01)  
 
And then the selection criteria of a drainpipe; so, clay and concrete pipes , are suitable where 
pipe drains are not locally available ; suppose in that particular area the clay soils are largely 
available, then probably the cl ay tiles would be better.  The concrete pipes are economically 
feasible for large areas . It is durable compared to the clay and whe n all types are available the 
use of corrugated plastic pipes has distinct advantages  because it is lightweight and deliver ed 
in long lengths and low transport cost because they come in bundles.  Plastic pipes are most 
suitable for mechanical installation  and performance is less affected by poor  installation.  The 
price of smaller diameter < 10 cm are usually of the same for all ma terial and larger diameter 
plastics are more expensive.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:31)  
 
 
And then pipe envelop s, the pipe envelope is the material which is  provided around the drain 
pipes . The function of the pipe envelope is that it acts as a filter function, to prevent the entry 
of the fine particles into the pipe. So, then when there is a pipe envelope when  water enters 
through the envelop e material and finally, to the drain pipe, this whole material will act as a 
filter media so; that means, the fine particles ar e going to  be trap in the envelope material and 
then the clean water goes into the drain pipe.  
And the next function is a hydraulic function. So, the envelope  provide s a porous medium of 
high porosity around the drain  and reduce the head loss at the entry . Since i t provides the 
porous media around the drain pipe. So, the fluid flow into the soil will be reduced and then 
the entrance loss will be reduced.  
And then mechanical support, the pipe envelope  acts or provide some passive mechanical 
support with the pipe. So , once you have a envelop material on top even  heavier  machines or 
farm m achinery can be run on top because it acts as a cushion. So, it acts  as a bedding function 
to provide a stable base for the drain pipe.  
(Refer Slide Time: 30:5 7) 
 
There are recommendation s from the United States Soil Conservation Service  for design ing 
gravel envelop.  
  𝐷50𝐹
𝐷50𝑠 = 12 to 58  
  𝐷15𝐹
𝐷15𝑠 = 12 to 40  
That means, here once you do the particle size analyses  and a graph is drawn with  grain size 
on the x-axis and percentage passing on the y-axis as shown in the graph above. Y ou take soil 
and pass it through different size s of sieves  then observe the percentage of passing for each 
 
size and you get this kind of curve.  So, 60 % of the material is passed through  a particular sieve 
size means the particle size , for example, will be 1.5 mm so the material which is 60 % passes 
is 1.5 mm. So, knowing this you can estimate this range of D50F by D50S  and D15F  by D15S.   
 For stability of filter:  
  𝐷15𝐹
𝐷85𝑠≤ 5 
  D85 F ≥ half of the width of the pipe perforated  
  D5F ≥ 0.42 mm (FAO, 1980)  
So, this is given by FAO 1980 where F is the filter material, S is the soil material.  
So, this is all in this lecture. So, here initially we compared the  singular and composite systems 
and different aspects considered  while choosing  the singular and composite system s in terms 
of cost  and maintenance . Then  we move to the drain pipe like clay tile pipes and then concrete 
pipes , then PVC , and then corrugated pipes . The choice is s uch that the clay tile pipes are use d 
where  the clay soils are prominent in that area to avoid the cost or mostly we look for the local 
material . Suppose if you have  all material s like clay, concrete , and plastic then you better 
choose t he plastic corrugated pipes because they have an added advantage of less transportation 
cost, less weight , and lon ger lengths. Then we have studied  the entrance losses  because the 
moment the water enters from the top to the drain pipe it has  a relatively high vel ocity that high-
velocity fluid enters the smaller openings  and experience s entrance losses. So, that can be 
avoided by  constructing an envelope.  So, the envelope has different  usages , it acts as a filter , 
it reduces the entrance losses , and also it supports the bottom of the drain pipe as a bedding 
material and there are recommendations to choose the material or the grain size for envelope 
material so, knowing the soil grain size  the United Sta tes Soil Conservation Service  
recommended  thumb rules and also FAO also suggested some thumb rules, to follow  for 
design ing the envelop e material  grain sizes.  
Thank you.  