Irrigation  and Drainage   
Prof.  Damodhara  Rao Mailapallli  
Department  of Agricultural  and Food  Engineering   
Indian Institute  of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture  -04  
Soil Water 
Friends,  welcome  to lecture  number  4 of Irrigation  and Drainage  lecture  series.  In this 
lecture , we are going  to learn  about  the soil, water,  relationships.  And, we are going  to see 
how the water  is held between  the soil particles  and what  are the forces  which  held the 
water  within  the soil particles.  Then  we are going  to talk about soil  water  and soil water  
potential  and some  examples  at the end of the lecture.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 01:05)  
 
The above figure shows the water  status  between  2 soil particles  and we are going to see how 
the water  is held between  them. Generally,  what  happens  at the nearest  part of the soil 
particles,  the water  is held tightly , but as we move towards the center between the soil 
particles , the water  is held very loose  or without  tension . This water at the center flows 
through gravity , hence it is called the gravita tional water. This water  can easily  pass through  
the soil particles  because  the tension  with which  this particular  water  held is 0 to 0.3 bars. 
Then  whatever  water, held  at the tension of exactly 0.3 bar is called field capacity. So, this is 
very important  as far as irrigation is concerned  because this is the main criteria /threshold for 
giving irrigation water.  Then from 0.3 to 15 bar tension , it represents the water available to 
plants.  The water at 15  bar tension is called the wilting point. So, the water , which is available 
for the plant , lies between field capacity and wilting point , and it is called plant available water . 
From 15 to 31 bar, the soil water  is held by some  forces  mostly  the capillary  forces , and this 
is called  the permanent wilting point.  At 31 bar, we call this permanent wilting point and also 
hygroscopic water /hygroscopic coefficient.  Beyond 31 bar,  the water is tightly held in the soil 
particle with the absorption forces  or energy  forces  of up to 10000 bar , and it is called the oven -
dry water. In the previous lectures we talked about oven -dry water  that i f you keep a moist  
sample in a n oven , the dry sample still contains some water , so that is called oven -dry water, 
but it is a completely dry condition. So, plant  available water is betwe en 15 bar to 0.3 bar , and 
then there is capillary water this 0.3 bar  to 31 bar.  
The water which is present between the soil particl es is held by certain forces  such as the 
gravitational force , the water held by  the gravitational force , will pass through th e soil particles  
and is not available to the plants . But, due to the difference in  materials  type, i.e.,  solid and 
liquid and the water has some adhesive forces; so these adhesive forces  are going to attach  the 
water towards the soil particles.  We are conc erned  about these  forces  because the plants have 
to extract this moisture  from the soil  (except the gravitational water ) for the plant growth, that 
is the reason we are interested in the water, which is held between the soil particles.  
What does the tensi on (bar) indicates ? Assume that the soil is entirely saturated ; that means, 
the soil pores /voids  are completely occupied by water  and when plant requires water, the plant 
extracts the water, and  the tiny reservoirs of water from the voids are going to get empty. So, 
then the negative pressure  (tension)  is create d. Saturated  to unsaturated soil conditions is going 
to achieve  which  is negative tensions, which  is called soil moisture tension.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 07:57)  
 
 
The three different types of soil water  we need  to consider  for irrigation purpose  are 
gravitational  water , capillary  water , and hygroscopic  water .   
The gravitational water  is held between 0  bar to 1/3 bar if you see the picture  above , the 
gravitational  water  is going  to drain  through  the soil pores  that means ; it will  not be available  
to the plants anymore.  The capillary  water is held in micro -pores  in between  1/3 bar to 31 bar 
suction , which is the total capillary  water  whereas,  the water  available  to the plant  is lying  
between  one-third  bar to 15 bar which is the wilting  point . Whereas  the water  which is not 
available to the  plants  is between  15 to 31 bar suction , it is called  permanent wilting point , and 
the plants cannot extract  any more water  whereas,  in 1/3 to 15 bar  the plants  are going  to show  
some  kind of wilting or slight wiltin g. 
The hygroscopic water is going to remain in the soil, and it is held tightly to the soil particles. 
So, the soil water above hygroscopic point is held at a suction , which is higher than 31 bar , and 
it is not available to the plants.  It is mostly held in soil collo ids and move at extremely slow 
rates or in the vapor state  and is not available to the plant.  So, our primary  focus or interest is 
the field capacity water . 
 (Refer  Slide  Time: 10:30)  
 
The field capacity denoted  with FC or Î¸FC is defined  as the water  content  of thoroughly  wet 
soil, at the surface  by irrigation  or rain. Suppose  you have  a field that has water  previously  by 
either  rain or irrigation,  so that means  the field is completely  saturated,  and that saturated  field 
is allowed  to drain  into dry soil. The topsoil surface is  saturated  whereas,  the bottom  is still dry 
so, due to  gravity  the gravitational  water  is going  to pass from  saturated  to unsaturated  zones.  
Then the drainage  of water  through  soil profile  due to the gravi ty becomes  negligible  as 
compared to plant root  uptake. So,  the situation when  the gravity water  is going  to be  0 or there 
is no  gravity flow, then the  moisture content of  that soil is called field capacity.  
Suppose you have rainfall today, the soil is co mpletely saturated , and then after that event , 
there is no rain overnight then the next morning you have gone to the field to check and found 
that the soil is not saturated completely, but still wet. So, that condition is called the field 
capacity; that  means, whatever water, which is saturated is drained by  gravitational force , and 
the remaining water which is retained within the soil pores or soil matrix is called the field 
capacity water . This condition  is achieved  within  a few hours  or few days after irrigation or 
rainfall event s depending  on the soil texture,  or soil structure,  and layering.  For example, in 
sandy soil the gravitational water  is going to  drain  out in few hours  whereas, clay  soil takes a 
longer time to drain  out the gravitational water.  
Similarly , the type of layering  affects the drainage of gravitational water. For example, if the 
top layer is an  imper vious kind or a semi -pervious layer , it will take time for the gravitational 
water to penetrate from one layer to another layer , and it ta kes time  to reach  the field capacity  
level.  
This field capacity  is also known  as the upper  limit  of soil water  available  to the plant  and soil 
water  content , where  gravity  drainage  becomes  negligible. The soil  moisture  stress  at field  
capacity  varies betwe en -1/10 bar to -1/3 bar. 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 14:50)  
 
Field capacity  is affected  by several  factors  such as soil texture,  layers,  organic  matter,  and 
also, the depth  of wetting ; however,  it is assumed  constant  over a crop growing  period.  So, 
during  modelin g or field experiments  or water -balanced studies , field capacity  is consider ed 
constant  throughout  the growing  period , and then irrigation  is decided based on that.  Field 
capacity is a n idealized concept because  salts do  not drain  to given  water  content an d cease  to 
a drain  further . The concept  is invalid  in the presence  of an impermeable  layer  or water  table . 
Suppose  there is water on the soil surface it will enter the soil through the infiltration process, 
and if there is a clay layer or any water table  within the soil surface  it is not going to move 
further . The gravity water will remain on the surface and cause drainage problem s. The field 
capacity  concept  may not apply  to soils with swelling  and shrinkage  properties . For example , 
in case of  clay soils r eaching field capacity will take longer time s, because the soil will swell 
with water and it is not drain ing water  easily . 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 16:46)  
 
Next is t he permanent  wilting  point  which is  generally  denote d by Î¸WP and is defined as  the 
amount  of water  left in  the soil  when  the plants  are unable  to extract  the water to meet  their 
demand,  during  that time the plants  start to wilt and it  means  plants  require  water  now, it is 
reaching  the wilting  point  level.   Perma nent wilting  point  is also called  the lower  limit  of soil 
water  available  to the plants. So, upper  limit  is field capacity , and the lower  limit  is the 
permanent  wilting  point . There is still some water in the soil  after reaching  permanent  wilting  
point , but it is not enough to be used by plants , the absorptive forces hold this water,  and it is 
known as  hygroscopic water. One-third to 15 bar is available to the plant whereas, -15 to 30  
bar is not available  to the plant s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 18:30)  
 
So, next is the available  water,  which  is the water  lying  between  the lower  and upper  limits  
that means between  field capacity  and wilting  point.  It is called  the available  water  because 
this water  is available  to the plant. The  equation  to calculate  the available  water is  
ğ´ğ‘Š =ğ·ğ‘Ÿğ‘§(ï±ğ‘“ğ‘ âˆ’ ï±ğ‘¤ğ‘)
100 
Drz is the root zone depth; ï±ğ‘“ğ‘ is the moisture content at field capacity and ï±ğ‘¤ğ‘ is moisture 
content at the wilting  point, and AW the available water is in percentage  so, we need  to divide  
by 100. So, ï±ğ‘“ğ‘ and ï±ğ‘¤ğ‘ are in volumetric  basis, suppose  if it is given on gravimetric  basis you  
can convert  into volumetric  basis  by multiply  with the bulk density.  
The graph above show s the  different  texture of  soils in the x-axis, and on y-axis is the  water 
per foot of soil that is in inches (water depth in the soil ). So, in this graph , the upper  limit  or 
field capacity  and the lower  limit  or wilting  point is clearly shown.  The water  which  is in 
between  or the water  per foot of soil held in between  is called  the plant  availab le water PAW . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Refer  Slide  Time: 20:44)  
 
The figure above compared c oarse  sand and silty clay loam  soil for the variation in water  
holding  capacity  between  these  fine-texture  and coarse -texture d soils.  Assum ing that in both 
cases , the dry soil is the same, the gravitational  water is more  in coarse  sand because  the pore  
size is larger  compared  to the tiny pore size of fine -textured soil . Hence, it is easy for the 
gravitational water  to pass through  the larger pores.  
Fine-texture d soils can retain more wate r compared to the co arse structure soils  so, the amount 
of available water is more. The unavailable water is even smaller  in sandy soils , whereas  
unavailable water is more significant  in fine -textured soil  because of the tiny pores , and 
because the water i s held strongly with the soil particles . So, if you see  the previous figure  the 
magnitude of water holding capacity  is more in  case of  fine texture  soils compared  to the 
coarse -texture d soils.  
Another concept called readily available water is very importan t as per irrigation is concerned, 
because based on this , we are going to decide when to give irrigation and how much to give 
irrigation, which is also known as irrigation scheduling. Suppose the field has the moisture 
content at field capacity and the plan t started extracting water from the reservoir through 
evapotranspiration (we are going to talk about this more in the following lectures). So, due to 
that, the water, which is held between the soil particles is going to escape through the plant.  
Then negat ive pressure or negative soil moisture is created that means soil water is going to 
deplete.  So, when water is going to deplete, from the upper level to the lower level, that is field 
capacity to wilting point due  to evapotranspiration , the available water or  reservoir i s going  to 
decline.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 23:10)  
 
The water which is available to the plant readily  for getting higher crop yield is called readily 
available water. If you see the graph above , on the x-axis is the soil water content in percentage 
and y -axis is the rate of evapotranspiration.  Initially , field capacity Î¸ fc is the starting point , then 
after that , due to loss of water through evapotranspiration , it reaches the wilting point  Î¸wp after 
that the curve goes down to the permanent wilting  point , and no more evapotran spiration  takes 
place . So, RAW  (readily available water ) is a point where  almost constant  evapotranspiration  
is obtained  up to Î¸FC, at this  constant  point even if you reduce  the moisture and not give 
irrigation , it may not affect  the crop yield,  but beyond  that point,  if you still wait for the crops  
to extract  water  and not giving  any irrigation,  it is going  to affect  the crop yield.  So, this  
condition  up to  which  the moisture  content  does not cause  yield  reduction  is called  the readily  
available  water.  
Generally , the readily  available  water  is estimated  as follows  
ï€¨ï€©
100D RAW rz wp fcï±ï±ï€­ï€½
 
W here D rz is the root zone  depth , Î¸fc and Î¸ wp are the soil moisture  at field capacity  
wilting  point , respectively . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 27:08)  
  
 
The next concept is called the maximum allowable deficit ( MAD ), this is used by irrigation 
engineers , and for most crops , MAD is 0.65 . MAD is de fined as readily available water divided 
by available water ; this is the fraction of total available water up to which the plant can grow 
without  yield reduction . We aim  to fill the soil moisture up to the field capacity , maintain ing 
the field capacity for achieving the maximum yield  is essential , but frequent  irrigation is 
required in order  to maintain  this kind of situation.  
As seen from the graph  earlier  that up to certain  moisture  content , the yield  is going  to be same  
so, instead of  frequent irrigation , we can wait until the moisture content reaches the point  where 
no yield reduction takes place  and then give irrigation. So, here , MAD decides this point that 
is at 65 % of depletion in available moisture content , irrigation is applied . So, this kind of 
irrigation  practice is called  deficit  irrigation  because  you are allowing  the plant  to be a little 
bit stressed.  
What is deficit irrigation ? Deficit irrigation  is sacrificing crop revenues to achieve a reduction 
in water and energy used. Reduction of  water a nd energy costs  by scarifying  little bit of crop 
revenues, such that it is not going  to impact  much  on the farm  economy is called  deficit  
irrigation.  
 
 
 
 
 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 30:07)  
 
Next is the soil water  potential , it contains  these  three  components : gravitat ional  water  
potential , matric  potential , and osmotic  potential.  
Gravitational  potential , as seen before , is the potential that is experienced by the gravity water 
and then  matric  potential  is mostly the capillary  water . Osmotic  potential  is due to the salts, 
which  are present  in the soil water.  Matric  potential  has the most significan t effect  on the 
release  of water  from  the soil to the plant , and our primary  concern  is the matric  potential.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 31:10)  
 
 
Gravitational  potential,  matric  poten tial is the component  of total potential  which  is due to 
position  of point s relevant  to some  reference  specific  elevations . In figure above  there is a  
reference  line in the soil stratum , point  A and point  B are two points  from  the reference  
point , if you go up the reference line  that will give  positive  potential  and down  is the 
negative  potential.  What does it mean?  For example, the reference line represents the  water 
reservoir , and a person  at point A wants  to fetch  water  from the reservoir ; that  means,  he has  to 
do some  work  positive  work  in order  to get water  from  this reference  line to point A  
whereas,  the other person  who is below  the reference  line at point B,  does not need  to work 
this is called  negative  potential.  Since  the water  is very slow  in this case in the porous  medium , 
we are  not considering  any kinetic  energy  here, only potential  energies.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 33:38)  
 
Let us see an example  of gravitational  potential  assume  A and B are the 2 points  located  at a 
distance  125 mm above  and 75 mm below  the reference  line, respectively . Also, determine  the 
gravitational  potential  of points  A and B and also change  in gravitational  potential  between  A 
and B.  
ğœ“ğ´is given  as 125 mm; ğœ“B is 75 mm . So, ğœ“ğ´ is positive because it is above the reference line  
and ğœ“ğµ is negative because this is below  the reference line  right  
Solution  
ğœ‘ğ‘”ğ´=125  ğ‘šğ‘š  ğ‘ğ‘›ğ‘‘ ğœ‘ğ‘”ğµ=75 ğ‘šğ‘š    
ğœ‘ğ‘”=ğœ‘ğ‘”ğ´âˆ’ ğœ‘ğ‘”ğµ=125 âˆ’ (âˆ’75)=200  ğ‘šğ‘š 
Therefore the change  in gravitational  potential  from  A to B is 200 mm . 
 
 
 
 
 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 34:18)  
 
The next is the matric  potential, which  is also called  soil moisture  stress  which  is the water  
held by soil particles . The application  of pressure  or suction  to the soil water  causes  the 
change  in water  potential  so, this change  of water  potential  is called  pressure  potential.  So, 
here, for example,  the pressure  potential  could  be positive , or could  it could be negative  
depends  on the increase  or decrease  in potential energy  with respect  to the free water  
atmosphere.  
Generally , in an atmosphere , the matric  potential  atmosphere  is 0, i.e., the water  table  level  is 
0, and when  the water  is depleting  from  the soil surface , negative  pressure  is create d. 
Tensiometers are used for measuring this negative pressure. In  the above slide, a tensiometer  
is shown in the figure which  is installed  in the soil. It consist s of a tube with  a porous  cup at 
the bottom,  and the top is connected  to the manometer.  So, initially , the tube is filled  with 
water  completely  before  installing,  and then you have  the initial water  level in  the manometer.  
After a few days, the manometer  level  is going  to go down,  because  the water,  which  is present  
in the soil is going  to deplete  when  the water  is taken  up by the plant s. Then the water  in the 
soil surrounding  the porous  cup is going  to deplete.  Since there  is available  water  from the 
tube, it is going  to come  out from  the ceramic  cup. The space  in the tube will create suction , 
and this level  can be monitored  and is  called  matric  potential.  Under  unsaturated  condition s, 
soil water  pressure  is negative,  and negative  pressure  potential  is also known  as capillary  
pressure  or matric  pressure  potential  or suction  or simply  tension ; all these  terms  are 
relative.  
 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 37:13)  
 
Matric potential  is a pressure  potential , for example,  here we are talking  about  the water  
table,  which  is the locus  of atmospheric  pressure  in the soil-water  system.  In an unconfined  
aquifer , the water  table  is at atmospheric  pressure  because  it is open  to the atmosphere.  
Suppose if the point is present at the l ocation below the water table  the total potential  acting at 
this point is the pressure potential . The other is elevation,  and we are not considering the other 
potential  such as  osmotic potential and also kinetic energy , because the water moves very 
slowly.  So, the total hydraulic head is the sum of  the pressure head and elevation head  only. 
(Refer Slide T ime: 38:56)  
 
 
Example 4.2 In a 1000 mm soil profile,  which is  divided  into 100 mm  sections , the water  
table  i s  at 600 mm distance  from  the top. Then  estimat ed the  pressure , gravitational  and 
hydraulic  (total) heads,  throughout  the profile  at an interval  of 100 mm assum ing that 
solute  concentration  is negligible  (that means,  osmotic  potential  is negligible  here). 
Solution:  
The depth 100  mm, 200 mm , 300 mm up to 1000 mm, which is the h. Since 600 is the reference  
point  the pressure is negative above th is poi nt, and its  positive  below it  and z is elevation. So, 
above  the point,  the water table elevation  is positive , whereas  below , the water  table  
elevation is  negative  
Considering water table as reference, values of pressure, gravitational and total heads are 
determined and given below.  
Depth, mm  h, mm  z, mm  H, mm  
0 -600 600 0 
100 -500 500 0 
200 -400 400 0 
300 -300 300 0 
400 -200 200 0 
500 -100 100 0 
600 0 0 0 
700 100 -100 0 
800 200 -200 0 
900 300 -300 0 
1000  400 -400 0 
 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 40:39)  
 
How to estimate  o r  measure  the soil water  potential ? The soil water  potential is  generally  
measured  with a tensiometer.  The tensiometer has a  long tube, and at the bottom , there is  a 
porous ceramic cup, and on top, there is  a water  reservoir , and there  is a vacuum  gauge that is 
attached  to the tube which  read between  0 to 100 centibars.  This tensiometers , however,  can 
practically measure  only from 0 to 0.75 bar, you can observe the  field capacity  at 0.33 bar. 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 41:51)  
 
 
 
The picture  above shows  how to install  a tensiometer in the field.  Initially before  installing 
it to the field, the column  or tube  is filled  with water , so that it acts as  a reservoir , the moment  
you installed  in the field if the soil is initially  saturated , then after a few hours , it will attain  
equilibrium.  So, then due to the soil water  depletion , the water  is going  to escape  from  the 
tube, and the water  level  is going  to decline , and that creates  a vacuum , and this vacuum  will 
be measured with the gauge attached to the tube. 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 43:07)  
 
There are different  kinds of tensiometer s, as shown in the figure above . There  is a simple  
vacuum  gauge, cable  to data logger ; where you  can directly  connected  to a data logger , and 
also record  the soil moisture  tension  in different time intervals. There is a pressure transducer -
based  tensiometer, which  is also continuous base. It has a digital  readout  where you can 
directly  attach and get the reading.  A needle is attached in the pressure transducer -based 
tensiometer  and the moment water goes down suction is created , and the needle of the pressure 
transducer senses it  and give the reading by digital readout  meter.  The tensiometer  can 
indirectly  measure  the soil moisture  by using  the soil moisture  release curve.   
(Refer  Slide  Time: 44:20)  
 
Another equipment  known as the electrical resistance blocks or gypsum blocks  is also used to 
measure the soil moisture tension  or soil water potential retention . It has electrodes  inside  and 
there  is a gypsum  block  and the electrodes  are connected to  resistance  meter.  So, then the 
working principle of these gypsum blocks is that when there is water, the electrical conductivity 
will be more when there is less water, electrical conductivity will be less.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Refer  Slide  Time: 44:28)  
 
In order to measure  the water content and the soil moisture tension , an apparatus called the 
pressure plate apparatus  is used. T he series of pictures above show s the operation  process.  The 
pressure plate is connected  to a vacuum  pump  that create s suction  inside  its chamber . It 
contains  the porous  plate  where  the samples are kept on top of it, and all  the samples are 
completely saturated . Then you put the lid on top and then screwed tightly so that there  will be  
no leakage and then the set the pressure . After running th e instrument, keep the vacuum  
overnight for 1 or 2 days.  After that , remove the lid and take out the sample and measure the 
soil moisture using the oven -dry method. So, the soil moisture corresponding to the vacuum 
created  is obtained . So, that way you  can measure  the soil moisture  at a particular  soil 
moisture  tension.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 47:19)  
 
Once the experiment is complete d, a graph  is obtained , as shown in figure above known as  soil 
water release curve , which is the curve between  matric potential or tension versus water 
content. The available water is on the Y -axis, and soil moisture tension  (bars) is on the X -axis. 
So, in this curve  initially  for less negative  pressures  the soil moisture  is higher , then after that 
it is going  to decline.  In order  to extract  the lower  moisture  content,  you need  to invest  higher  
pressures . For example,  sandy  soils at 5 bar can only retain  20 percent  moisture  whereas  clay 
soils can retain  50 percent  or 45 percent  moisture  content;  that means  the retention  capacity of  
clay soils is  higher  than the sandy  soils.  
(Refer  Slide  Time: 48:46)  
 
Soil texture is going to influence the height of the capillary rise , as shown in figure above , fine-
texture d soils versus coarse -texture d soils. The capillary rise is going to be higher  in the case 
of fine -texture d soils, as compared to the capillary rise in case of coarse -texture d soils. So, that 
means the pore size is an essential  factor in influenc ing the matric potential . 
Thank  you for your patience.  
