  
Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapalli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture – 53 Non - Conventional Drainage  
This is lecture number 53 on Non-Conventional  Drainage systems, in  the previous lecture  we 
have been talking about conventional drainage systems  - surface and subsurface drainage 
systems, such as open ditches and tile drains, but there are some places  where these systems 
are costlier,  hence they have  to go for non-conventional  drainage systems.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:51)  
 
Non-conventional drainage systems  are adopted when the conventional surface drainage 
system  and subsurface drainage system are not suitabl e due to technical or economic reasons. 
These are classified into vertical drainage, bio drainage , and mole drainage.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:42)  
 
  
We are going to discuss these 3 non-conventional  drainage systems, in this lecture. Their basic 
function is to achieve the same goal as that of your conventional drainage methods  i.e., 
removing excess water from the root zone . The draw down in the case of the subsurface  
drainage system is limited to a maximum depth of 2 m , but in the case of vertical drainage  or 
tube well the drainage occurs at a much greater depth of the soil profile  of about  20 to 30 m . 
In the picture  above  you can see the vertical drainage where  the field consists of series of wells 
and all wells are connected and the water is being pumped from the subsurface . The advantage 
here is that  tube wells can go up to 20 to 30 m  and deep water  but there is a cha nce of  tapping 
the ground water as well . 
(Refer Slide Time: 03:14)  
 
So, in the vertical drainage , we will be using the tube wells to remove the excess water from 
the root zone . In this picture above  you can see a series of tubes that are installed in the field to 
remove excess waters and all tubes are connected , the water which is from the subs urface will 
be removed . The cost estimation between  the conventional drainage and vertical drainage i s 
show n in the graphs above , the drain spacing  in the case of conventional drainage  and well 
spacing in cas e of vertical drainage  is on the x -axis, and the net annual system cost in dollar /acre 
is on the y-axis.  
For example,  drain line spacing of 65 feet , correspond s to 160 dollars /acre but in vertical 
drainage , for 160 dollars /acre the well spacing is between 700 -800 feet . So, vertical drainage 
could effectively work compare d to conventional drainage . This is related to  a study on  clay 
soil and which is taken from the Ca lifornia Agriculture Journal, the study was taking place in 
UC Davis Campus . So, vertical drainage has more economic  benefits  than conventional 
drainage because  it requires  fewer  wells and less cost, but the operational cost will be more  
  
since  the vertical drainage also requires  pumping of water whereas, conventional drainage may 
not require any pump . 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:44)  
 
Then the bio drainages , in the bio drainage  plants or trees are grown in drainage problematic 
areas ; the plants grown are  deep -rooted plants that will remove the water through evaporation 
or evapotranspiration . Bio drainage  is defin ed as the pumping of excess soil water by deep -
rooted plants using their bio energy .  So, solar energy will help in taking the water from the 
deep root s to the atmosphere  through evapotranspiration.  The plant 's transpiration is met 
primarily by withdrawing ground water . Rice plants also transpired quite heavily, but the 
process is not called bio drainage  because  the roots are shallow and are confined to 30 to 40 
cm deep only.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:00)  
 
  
In bio drainage , the medium to deep -rooted plants in shallow water table region  may act a s 
small capacity tube well , similar to vertical drainage. In the image above  each tree acted as a 
tube well because it removes water from the subsurface. In the case of tube well drainage, the 
area encompasse s by the tube well network is available for normal crop production , but in the 
case of bio drainage by a cluster of plants, the area within the cluster cannot be used for normal 
production , this is the main difference  between vertical drainage and bio drainage.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:26)  
 
In the case of bio drainage, the best example  is the fast -growing eucalyptus species  known for 
luxurious water consumption, under excess soil moisture conditions. The eucalyptus trees  bio 
drained around,  2000 mm and 2800 mm, 3000 mm, 2400 mm of water in 1st, 2nd, 3rd , and 
4th year at a groundwater salinity of 12 dS/m, in a study conducted by Punjab Agricultural 
University.  So, on average , it removes  around 2500 mm /year.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:50)  
 
  
So, next, is what is the advantage of bio drainage over conventional drainage? In the case of 
bio drainage, no operational cost as the plants use their bio energ y in draining out the excess 
groundwater into the atmosphere. S ince you do not require any pump to remove the water  the 
plants or trees  will grow continuously so, there is an increase in worth with age instead of 
depreciation , as the plantation grows it can be sold as timber material  and that will give an 
extra econom y.  
In bio drainage there is no need for any drainage outfall and disposal of drainage effluent  
because  it occur s through evapotranspiration , the excess water will be thrown away to the 
atmosphere  which is not  in case of conventional drainage, where you have to dispose  of the 
drainage water .  
The other advantage of bio drainage  is that there is  no environmental problem as the plants 
drain out filtere d fresh water into the atmosphere, this is a good  indicator of environmental 
friendliness . Bio drainage gives an in -situ solution to salinity and water logging problems  and 
also helps in carbon se questration and carbon credits . Since the plant absorbs carbon dioxide  
for its growth  that reduces the carbon load in the atmosphere . Bio drainage acts as windbreak 
and shelterbelts in agroforestry systems.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:49)  
 
The 3rd one is mole drainage, the mole drainage is unline d circular soil channels, which function  
like pipe drains in heavy clay soils . We have already talked abo ut this in the previous lectures.  
In the  image above  the channel  is made by mole so you can see the  mole drain and then the leg 
slot, which is kind of a cutter that is important  because that will break the  soil to make  the 
channel. So, whenever water is falling it will pass through these channels and get into the mole 
drain .  
  
So, why mole drain s? When natural drainage needs improving due to heavy clay subsoil , in the 
case of clay soils , the regular conventional drainage machinery cannot be useful in making the 
channels , it requires a specific or  special kind of drainage machinery  to make the  mole drain . 
The areas affected by salt -water logging  also required mole drainage . The mole  drain drains 
only wate r that enters from the above  and does not drain the groundwater , because , in clay soil , 
the groundwater entry into the system  may not be possible ; it is only possible  when  the water 
is falling on top of fractures which acts as pathways and  meet into the drainage , not from  the 
groundwater . Mole drainage is a more sophisticated drainage system  than other drain -source  
since it requires a special kind of machinery like a mole  plow to make the mole drains . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:19)  
 
And then next is w hen to mole drain ? It is practice d in particul ar seasons so  that the  catastrophe 
due to drainage would be minimized . The soil in the vicinity of the mole channel needs to be 
moist enough to form a channel  with soil moisture of  around 20 to 25 %, which usually occur s 
in late spring and early summer. When it is dry it is very difficult to run the mole plo w and the 
surface  needs to be dry enough to fo rm cracks at the time of mole drain ing and allow  traction . 
So here, 2 things subsoil and surface soil , subsoil is used to make channels  should  be moist  
whereas surface soil  should be a little dry so that  there is a formation of cracks  to give pathways  
for the water to enter into  the channel . The drying period with no rain should  allow the cracks 
to dry and the mole channel to harden . 
The pictures above are showing the mole plo w, it has a bulleted bottom which  will make a 
channel  and the chisels make  the cracks . 
 
 
  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:21)  
 
Mole Drainage Factors:  
Soils should have a minimum of 35% clay and less than 30% sand.   
Gradients fall bet ween 0.4% and 4% (Good gradient =3%)  
Generally,  moles are pulled at 40 –60 cm depth  
A rule of thumb is that the expander to mo le draining depth ratio is 1:7 ( i.e. a 70 mm 
diameter expander should have a mole depth of 490 mm)  
Spacing between moles shoul d be between 2 to 5 m.  
The a ccepted maximum effective length of a mole is about 200 m  
About 1 to 3 m long pipe should be inserted into the mole drain channel to prevent 
outlet destruction and soil erosion.  
Low-cost PVC pipe of 1 to 3 m size s should be selected for the outlet.  
 (Refer S lide Time: 20:52)  
 
  
There are some other factors  
Good fertilizer management practices such as not applying fertili zer within 4 days of 
predicted rain should reduce nutrient run -off to a minimum.  
Open drain outlets should be fenced off from stock and kept clean so the outfall is above 
the drain water level.  
Drainage trenches can outfall dams so that more water can be harvested.  
Moles should be pulled at 2 -3 km/hr to minimize disruption (tearing) of mole channels 
and increase mole life.  
The picture  in the above slide  shows  the mole channels with cracks  through, which water is 
going to flow and pass through . The leg slot length is around 400 to 600-m  
So this is all about the  non-conventional  drainage  systems  it has three types, one is vertical 
drainage, bio drainage , and mole drainage. So, in the case of vertical drainage, we mostly use 
the tube wells  to remove water, but it requires pumps  to remove water from wells , and 
compared to conventional drainage  these vertical drainage s are economical, but the operational 
cost is  more compared to conve ntional  drainage. And then the bio drainage is removing the  
excess water by planting of crops for example  eucalyptus  trees  which ha ve deeper  roots  
remove d around 2500 mm  water  from the agricultural lands.  The bio drainage is advantageous 
because it does not require operational cost  since it is a natural growth. So, over a while, you 
get economy on that and you get profits by selling the  timbers of  the tree.  It helps in carbon 
sequestration and carbon crediting and it has no pollution because  the water remov ed is thrown 
into the atmosphere has been filtered  during transpiration . 
The other one is mole drainage, which is  practiced in heavy clay sub soils, it has a particular 
mole plo w that will make channel s and formed  the cracks in the surface and subsurface . The 
water enters through the cracks and fill s the mole  channels . The mole drainage is practi ced 
during dry spells  periods  so that the cracks on the surface are not collapsed and at the same 
time the channel is not getting too much wet. So, generally, 2 0 to 25 % moisture,  we expec t in 
the subsoil whereas, in the top, we expect relatively dry soil so that you can have clear channels . 
The non-conventional  drainage systems  are used when  there is no provision to operate the 
conventional drainage systems . 
Thank you so much.  