  
Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapa lli 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture - 57 Endrain Model  
This is lecture number 57 on Irrigat ion and Drainage lecture series , in this lecture , we are going 
to focu s mostly on the drainage model  called EnDrain.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:32)  
 
So, why do we need a drainage model ? The estimation of drain spacing is still a cha llenging 
task for many drainage designs.  We need the drainage model to estimate the drain spacing 
because this is a challenging task for many drainage designs suppose if you planned wider drain 
spacing  then the system is not able to take out enough water  and the water table will be staying 
close to the ground . Whereas, if you have closer drain spac ing it will involve a lot of cost s and  
we need to optimize these drain spacing . At the same time , you need to understand how the 
soil properties are influencing t he hydraulic head . These things can be visualized using 
mathematical models. So, EnDrain is  is one such model  developed to understand the hydraulic  
heads as well as the behavior of hydraulic heads with different magnitude of inputs.  
EnDrain contains both the Darcy equation as well as the energy balance equation, which is 
developed by Professor Oosterbaan in the Netherlands. So, here the optimal drain spacing can 
be estimated with the help of models. The models will simulate or calculate up to mid midpoint 
water table height. The computer models are available already to estimate the optimal spacing 
and equivalent depth for the installation of artificial drainage  systems.  
This is an important model to understand the behavior of the soil, when the drainage sys tem is 
  
installed whether we will be able to extract the excess water from the surface as well as 
subsurface. And we can visualize the cost of whether it is beneficial for such a huge  investment.  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:33)  
 
So, here EnDrain is the model which is developed by Professor Oosterbaan in the Netherlands 
in 1994. Using the energy balance equations they have developed this model and also this 
model contains Darcy’s equation. So, it computes the drain spacing, the shape of the water 
table , drainage discharge , and head losses.  EnDrain is freely available, you can download this 
model online . The image above shows the  first window of EnDrain when you open the 
software , it contains 5 input sheets or tab sheets.  One is intr o, figure, input, output , and graphics 
sheets and you can see the picture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:25)  
 
EnDrain  is applied for reclamation; that means, remediation, rehabilitation, restoration of saline 
  
soils. And, traditional concepts based on Darcy and water balance or mass conservation 
equations are also considered along with the energy balance equation, but in addition to energy 
balance , Darcy and water balance or mass conservation equations are also  included.  The model 
allows for the presence of three soi l layers with different hydraulic conductivity and 
permeability . The last two layers can also have different horizontal and vertical hydraulic 
conductivit y. 
Assumptions  
Steady -state fluxes, i.e. no water and associated energy is stored  
Vertically two -dime nsional flow, i.e. the flow pattern repeats itself in parallel vertical planes  
The h orizontal component of the flow is constant in a vertical cross -section  
Soil's hydraulic conductivity is constant from place to place  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:21)  
 
The input  parameters  or terminologies  of the model are  
R: Time average recharge or discharge (m/day)  
D1: Bottom depth of 1st layer below s.s. (m)  
D2: Bottom depth of 2nd layer below s.s. (m)  
Dw: Depth water level in the drain below s.s. (m)  
Db: Depth of drain bott om below s.s (m)  
W: Max. width of the water body in the drain  
Ka: Hydraulic permeability, above drain level (m/day)  
Kb1: Horizontal permeability, 1st soil layer (m/day)  
Kv1: Vertical permeability, 1st soil layer (m/day)  
Kb2: Horizontal permeability, 2nd soil layer (m/day)  
  
Kv2: Vertical permeability, 2nd soil layer (m/day)  
Dm: Depth water -table midway between drains (m)  
So, these are the maximum inputs you have to provide in EnDrain and it will calculate the drain 
spacing or hydraulic heads or discharge a nd other parameters.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:43)  
 
The EnDrain model consists of an intro, figure, input and output , and graphics  and it can be 
seen in the image above . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:02)  
 
So, if you click on the intro sheet, the above window  will open . So, it  contains  a brief 
introduction to the EnDrain program and some  reference s, where you can get the articles related 
to EnDrain. The web address where you can go to download the EnDrain  program  is also 
available on this page .  
  
(Refer Slide T ime: 12:03)  
 
And then the next step is the figure sheet, which  tells the different parameters we need to give 
as input right. It contains both pipe and open drain system s and it explains the symbols , there 
are several p arameters mentioned. So, in the  picture above,  you can visualize two  kinds of 
drainage system s one is an open ditch system and a pipe drainage system just for the schematic 
purpose . It is not to design both tile and open ditch system s together. So,  based on your choice, 
if you want to determ ine the drain spacing or if you want to determine the shape of the water 
table , drainage discharge , or head losses. So, based on a particular option the input will vary.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:25)  
 
And the third is the input sheet , it has different variabl es and drain s parameters with units. So,  
you can save this file or you can open the input file  if you have already an existing file in the 
folder.  Then you can choose options to be calculated like  depth of water table or calculate the 
  
spacing or calculate the hydraulic heads and method. So, you can use the energy balance 
method or Darcy’s equation, Hooghoudt , so you can give the inputs in this window above . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:49)  
 
Then the fourth tab sheet is the output window as sh own in the  figure  above .  
Hydraulic head and the water table head calculated with both Darcy and Energy equation  
X       = distance from drain (m)  
p       = small increment of X (m)  
F*      = hydraulic head (m, Darcy)  
G*/p = gradient of F* (m/m)  
F       =  hydraulic head (m, energy balance)  
G/p   = gradient of F (m/m) {Note: G/p=T1+T2}  
T1     = energy loss/p (m/m)  
T2     = correction for energy input/p (m/m)  
 (Refer Slide Time: 6:45) 
 
  
For calculating the drain spacing. A similar procedure  is follo wed as the previous example  
except at the input tab we select the option for drain spacing calculation . So, in this case , when 
you run the model  the EnDrain  suggest s the drain  spacing  of 26.83  for the example solve 
earlier .  
(Refer Slide Time: 7:46) 
 
And also you can visualize this whole output in a graphical form  as shown in the image above , 
the curve of the water table is obtained . So, on the x-axis is the distance from the drain. and 
then the circles represent the energy balance model whereas , the cross  sign represents Darcy’s 
equation. So, they are close initially, but if you see at the midway in both cases they are going 
parallel.  The depth of  the water table diminishes with the distance from the drains. The water 
table is flat midway betwee n the drains (at half the distance of the drain spacing), elsewhere it 
is curved  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:42)  
 
  
Example 57.1: Tile drain of 5 cm  diameter, alluvial soil  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 19:37)  
 
The output and the graph are shown in the slide above.  
 
  
So, drain spacing is 2.49 m 
Midway hydraulic head  in case of energy  is 0.742  
Midway hydraulic head in the case of Darcy is 0.745  
Midway water table depth in case of energy is 0.8  
Midway water table depth in the case of Darcy is 0.68.  
So, the midway wate r table depth in the case of Darcy  is less than what we expect.  
 
The w ater-table level vari es according to the energy balance equation  is shown above.  So, this 
way you can get the drainage information  or design information like drain spacing, drain 
discha rge, and hydraulic heads , and water table depths.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:09)  
 
So, you can go through th ese reference s to know more about the energy balance equation.  
R.J. Oosterbaan, J. Boonstra , and K.V.G.K. Rao, 1996, “The energy balance of groundwater 
  
flow”. Published in V.P.Singh and B.Kumar (eds.), Subsurface -Water Hydrology, p. 153 -160, 
Vol.2 of Proceedings of the International Conference on Hydrology and Water Resources, New 
Delhi, India, 1993. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.  ISBN: 978 -0-
7923 -3651 -8 
Rares HALBAC -COTOARA -ZAMFIR0, 2010, “Calculation of distance between drains 
between drains using EnDrain Program, Research Journal of Agricultural Science, 42 (3), 
2010.  
Endrain is available for free at https://www.waterlog.info/endrain.htm  
Once you get the model, it will ask us to extract the whole model. Then once you extract it, it 
will have two files the executable file and the input data files ok. So, then click on the EnDra in 
application file and run it.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:06)  
 
So, here the two files EnDrain is the application file and data.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:15)  
 
  
It is a data file where you can see  there are a lot of input data.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:21)  
 
So, click on EnDrain , and it will ask us to run. So, run it.  
(Refer Slide Time: 23:25)  
 
And look at the first window which starts with an intro that is the introduction. So, th e first tab 
sheet introduc es the EnDrain program. So, the EnDrain program calculates the discharge, 
hydraulic head , or spacing between the parallel surface drains. It could be pipe drains or open 
ditches with or without entrance resistances. So, this is information and you can also go through 
the other links, that you get the ar ticles, program and all relevant information.  
 
 
 
  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:07)  
 
So, then the next is the figure, if you see the figure,  it contains both tile drains and open ditch 
here and all the information related to inputs like terminologies we use for in put purpose s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:28)  
 
So, then I am going to get the input file that is already available in the data folder.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:55)  
 
  
So, if I click open to input and data folder  I will select the  example, it will show the file where 
I extracted . The example file c alculate the depth of the water table and there are other options 
available  viz., drain spacing to be calculated, drain discharge is to be calculated , and calculate 
the depth of the water  table, calculate the hydraulic conductivity  so, there are four options 
available and you can choose any one of th ese. But in this example calculate the depth of the 
water table and here  there are two methods one is the new energy balance method and the 
classical Darcy method. So, let us use the new energy balance method , and then the input 
values are given.  And, if you want to change you can change it  or update it. And, since it is not 
for estimating the distance between the 2 drains, you have to give the distance between the 2 
drain s let say 65, because the option is to calculate the depth of the water table.  Now once you 
give the  input data then save and run.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:50) 
 
The calculations were made and the output is found.  
(Refer  Slide Time: 26:55)  
 
  
So, output was found  as shown above . 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:01) 
 
So, in the output window, it will give the input data too. 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:10)  
 
And then th e above window  is the output   
(Refer Slide Time: 28:34)  
 
  
And, if you want to see the graph you can see in the graphic , we can also see both energy 
balance and Darcy’s equation.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:48)  
 
And then you save the example . So, this is a very useful tool to understand the drainage 
discharges , drain spacing between the 2 drains. It could be both tile drain as well as open ditch 
system and also understand the hydraulic heads. So,  please go  through the program and install 
it. And, you can give random  inputs or if there  is a real -life problem then you can design a 
drainage system.  
Thank you  
