 
Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapal li 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur  
Lecture - 56 Drainage Case Study  
Welcome  to lecture number 56 on Irrigation and Drainage, we are going to see a case study on 
Drainage.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37)  
 
So, we are going to see how the drainage and reclamation of the low lying area of Punjab 
Agriculture University f arm in Ludhiana. I n Punjab , most of the areas are affected by salts.  
This is also the main problem in Ludhiana f arm, the main f arm is affected with salts because  it 
is a low -lying area. W hatever water which is coming from the high land areas are going to the 
farm area,  carrying salts and also causing water inundation and  the land is not used for farming.  
(Refer Slide Time: 01:48)  
 
 
So, in Punjab for an area of  around 15000 -ha land, the water table is above the surface , and in 
1 million h a of the area,  the water table  is about  1.5 m  below the ground , and around 1.5 million 
ha land the water table  is 3 m below the surface . 
So, 15000 h a land has a problem  of waterlogging, even the  1 million h a agriculture land is 
under drainage requirement  due to shallow water table . A favorable salt  balance must be 
maintained in the  area if irrigated agriculture is to be sustained . 
(Refer Slide Time: 0 3.12) 
 
So, in the image above you can see the Punjab agricultural university f arm, which has a 30 ha 
low lying area . Around 10 plots A B  C D E FG H I J are identified as shown in the image 
above.  D plot has an acute salt problem ; E, F, C, G, and  H have an appreciable amount of salts ; 
and A, I, J are located in higher areas and hence no salt problem . There is a  municipal drain 
called  Budha Nala near the university  as shown in the image above.  
The problem is how to lower down the water table and the idea is to take out the water from 
the agricultural f arm and dispose  it off to the Budha Nala.  
And then what kind of drainage system we need to design for the situation because the plots 
are not having the same kind of problem. Some plots have a severe salt problem and then some 
plots have an appreciable amount of salts and some plots do not have any salt problems. So, 
how to design  a drainage sys tem for  such kind of mixed salt -affected conditions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 5:09) 
 
Accumulation of runoff & seepage water from the higher area & the absence of a drainage 
facility were the main problems fac ed by  the low -lying area of the PAU farm . So, th ese two 
issues are causing the water inundation  on the f arm. So, the objectives are to develop design  
criteria for surface and sub-surface  drainage and land reclamation of the affected area of 
Punjab . 
To evolve suitable techniques for investigating the sources of waterlogging, characteristics of 
the soil , and water quality  
To develop techniques & procedures for reclamation and management of areas having various 
problems of waterlogging and salt accumulation  
(Refer Slide Time: 6:04) 
 
So, before deciding drainage system , the main thing is a reconnaissance survey . So we go and 
 
see where is the source of water and where exactly the excess water is taking place all those 
information and survey.  
The e arlier land drainage methods  
non-conventional drainage syste m 
biological control and pump drainage  
These drainage systems were practiced before 1966  and could not satisfy the desired technical 
and economic standards  
Current Method  
Gravity drainage and outlet to Budha Nala  
The farm lowest point is 2.4 m higher than  the water surface in Budha Nala 
Unlikehood of floodwater of the Budha Nala rea ches the low -lying  area of the 
university farm  
 (Refer Slide Time: 7:38) 
 
And then the next step is drainage  survey and investigations . 
A topographic map of 30 m x 30 m grid  was prepared  
Contours of 30 cm contour interval  
Topographic maps  were  used for determining  
drainage area  
establish grades of drains & field plots  
locate & design the drains & associated structures  
design the methods of irrigation water application  
estimat e quantity and cost of work  
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 8:59) 
 
So, even before that groundwater investigations is very important to understand how the water 
table is changing seasonally in that particular area.  
The f irst major step in drainage investigations was  to select the drainage method best suited to 
a particular area based on  
Identification of the source  
The e xtent of the water logging problem  
Position and fluctuation of the water table in the study area  
Piezometer batteries were installed at the node of 60 m square grid  
Three piezometers were installed in each node at 1.5, 2.0 , and 2.5 m  
An o bservation well was installed at 1.5 m below the ground surface  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:18)  
 
 
So, with these observations , we will be understanding the groundwater fluc tuations and the 
aquifer  system. Supposed the observation well and piezometer surface are the same; that 
means, there is a water table a quifer , otherwise in piezometric case if this is under pressure the 
artesian pressure then it is an artesian a quifer .  
Depth to the water table in piezometer = depth of water in  piezometer from the top – pipe 
length above the ground  
The d epth of the water table was measured by using an electric depth gauge , so an electric 
depth gauge was used on top of the piezometer to find out the depth from the top of the 
piezometer to the water level.  
So, Daily observations in all piezometer & observation wells  were made and weekly 
observation s during the rainy season because during the rainy season the water table would not 
fluctuat e much, that is why weekly grading w as taken. The observations give the depth of the 
water table & the direction of the groundwater flow  
No artesian pressure was observed and water table maps are very  important.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:47)  
 
After getting t he water table observation,  water table maps  were  generated. water table maps 
are fortnightly average water table elevation,  and starting from the second fortnight of 
September 16 to 30 1966 to April 16 to 30 1967 all drains were constructed after 9 months . 
If you see th e figure or maps above  are the water table contours  shown  before and after the 
construction of the drainage system . These water table contours represent the water table levels.  
The first map is for  1966  before the construction of the drainage system  and th e second is 
during 1967  after the construction of the drainage system.  It can be observed that  after 9 months 
the water table levels have gone deeper.  For example in 1966 the water level of one contour 
 
was 24 but if you compare it wit h the one in 1967 the water level is  23.4, similarly , you can 
compare for other contours also.  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:10)  
 
The maps  above  are useful for identifying the areal extent and the boundary of waterlogged . 
So for example, in the 1966 map, the reg ions with  0 to 30 c m, 30 to 60  cm, and 60 to 90  cm 
water table  were circumscribed  into different regions as shown in the maps in 1966 . So, after 
installing the drains  in 1967  the water tabl e with 0 -30 cm in 1966 became  90 -150 cm after the 
installation of the drainage system. S imilarly , the 30 to 60  cm in 1966  became 105 to 120 cm 
in 1967 . So, that means  the drainage system which is installed definitely helped in lowering 
the water table . 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:53)  
 
And then next is observation well hydrograph.  The nearest well  is used to collect the water 
 
table . The h ydrograph s above  show the seasonal fluctuation of the water table before and after 
the drainage system was installed.  So, the water table was initially 24.6, then  it is reduced to 
24 in this is a datum , this clearly shows the water table has gone down after the drainage  system . 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:32)  
 
Topography and groundwater investigation revealed the need of providing a combination of 
surface and subsurface gravity drainage systems because in some places the water table is 
shallow and in other places the water table is deep. So, to remove excess water from both 
situations, we plan for the surface as well as subsurface gra vity drainage in the university f arm. 
So, the surface drainage system is comprised of intercept or drain and relief drain , and outlet 
drain , these 3 drains will connect to the Budha Nala . The  intercept or drain  drains  water from 
the upland area,  and the relief drain will be taken care of getting water or extracting water from 
the middle land areas , and this water will be carried  by the outlet drain to the municipal drain.   
(Refer Slide Time: 20:22) 
 
 
So, this is the plan for the university f arm,  
The interceptor drain & relief drains were joined at the lowermost point in the farm through a 
short link drain, which was connected to the outlet drain  
The bottom box of the out drain w as made of brick masonry laid in cement mortar  
Runoff entering the surface  drain was determined by the Rational formula  
The v elocity of flow in the open drain was estimated using manning formula & the drains 
were designed considering unlined open channel design  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:30) 
 
Then there is a n outlet drain decided a fter calculations  
The b ase width of 1.6 m, top width of 8.25 m, depth of 1.6 m, bed slope of 0.2 % & 
total length of 780 m  
The bed slope was appropriate to ensure a non -erosive & non -silting mean velocity of 
flow 
And there is a relief drain  
The relief drain had a total length of 221 m with a bottom width of 0.6 m, top width of 1.6 
m & a depth of 0.7 m till the berm  
It is design ed to carry the combination of peak runoff & sub -surface flow from its 
watershed  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:22)  
 
So, next intercepted drains  
The interceptor drain was 667 m long; bottom width 1.5 -1.8 m, top width 3 -4.2 m & 
depth 1.35 -1.8 m  
The discharge capacity of all the t hree types of drains w as adequate to carry design discharge  
The out let drain in addition to benefiting the university farm, solved the problem of 
waterlogging of the neighboring Habowal khurd village  & the adjoining farmland  
 (Refer Slide Time: 23:46)  
 
So, now once the drainage is designed , reclamation and development of university farms .  
First, deep -rooted grasses in the marshy areas were uprooted  
Cutting trenches leading to shallow natural drains for draining the standing surface water  
The l and was disc plo wed by using heavy -duty (45-50 HP) wheel -type tractors. Furrow  slice 
allowed to air dry  for few days  
 
The higher plot A, I & J – sandy loam soil  
B, E, C, F, & H – Sticky clay loam soil  
The field was graded to get a uniform downfield gradient  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:50)  
 
The l ongitudinal slope for different plots w as as follows  
A plot - 0.3-0.5 %; B, C, D, G & J plot – 0.3 %  
H plot – 0.3 %; F plot – 0.2-0.3 %; E plot - 0.1-0.2 %  
A, B, C, D, E, F & G – Border irrigation (width: 3.5 – 5 m & length: 75 - 140 m)  
H plot – furrow irrigation  
I & J plot – Contour border strip  irrigation (90 m long & 5 m wide)  
Winter crop (Rabi):  
Wheat is grown in plots of - A, B, C, G, J & I  
Barley crop is grown in the plots of - E, F & D  
(Refer Slide Time: 1126:09 ) 
 
 
It was observed that 60 %  of water samples have salt concentration reduced by about 7- 23%. 
And soil samples were taken from different depths in the area. 0-15, 15 -30 & 30 -60 cm depth  
The EC ranges from 0.18 -1.15 dS/m; pH ranges from 8.6 -10 
Organic carbon -0.12-0.48 %; available phosp horus -3.6-8.8 Kg/ha  
Calcium carbonate 1 -4 % 
Texturally, the soil w as mostly sandy loam with some of the samples being loamy sand & 
sand 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:23) 
 
The conclusions from the case study include  
A surface drainage system comprising an interceptor drain along the upper boundary of the 
farm, a relief drain along the middle & a suitable outlet drain leading the drainage water to 
the outlet point in the municipal drain were the main feature of the drainage system  
Constriction of outlet d rain with the cooperation of farmers of the neighboring villages was 
highly beneficial  as it improved the drainage situation of a large area, even beyond the PAU 
research farm  
Water table control was feasible even with an open drainage network , properly de signed and 
strategically laid out.  
Border strip and furrow irrigation are compatible with a surface drainage system when a 
shallow drainage channel is provided at the lower end of the field  
Improve irrigation system s on properly graded land results in increased water application 
efficiency . So, this particular case study gives a good example of using a drainage system in 
salt-affected areas or drainage problematic areas like agricultural fields.  
Thank you so much.  
