  
Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapal li 
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture - 60 Cropwat  
Friends, this is  lecture number 60  and the  last lecture o n Irrigation and Drainage  course  in this 
we are going to see how an irrigation model called Cropwat can be used to determine the cro p 
water requirement as well as irrigation scheduling for a particular crop or multiple crops . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:47)  
 
Cropwat is freely available on the internet , it can be directly download ed from the FAO site  
through this link  (http://www.fao.org/land -water/databases -and-software/ Cropwat /en/) and 
you can install it on your PC’s or laptops and  run the model for estimating the crop water 
requirement and irrigation scheduling . 
(Refer Slide Time: 01:43)  
  
 
Cropwat  calculates the crop water requirement and irrigation schedules . These two functions 
of the Cropwat  have different modules , there are some input modules and calculation modules 
and in  the same module the outputs are going to  be display ed. The model has 5 input modules 
and 3 calculation modules.  For example, here the evapotranspiration ET 0 can be given as input 
or it can be estimated using  some climate parameters or weather data  using the Penman -
Monteith formula  for crop water requirement s. The other one is effective rainfall  so, knowing 
the rainfall data the effective rainfall will be calculated based on  different criteria  such as  a 
fixed percentag e or SCS curve number  method . Crop data can be  for a dry crop or wet crop  
such as rice. S oil data  are required as  input for calculating upward requirement and irrigation 
scheduling . The scheme supply is required for multiple cropping  pattern s. And Cropwat 
involve s a wide variety of options for data input and calculation. , there are several options 
available to calculate and also give input .  
(Refer Slide Time: 03:47)   
 
  
 
The structure of Cropwat can be seen in the bar image above  which open s in the Cropwat 
window.  , The bar contains options for  inputs like a climate or ET or rain or crop and soil , and 
there is a crop pattern  option  if you have multiple crops  and also the outputs or the calculation 
window . It is organized in to 8 different modules ; data input modules  are 5 and calculation 
modules are 3 . Then the modules are located on the module bar  and it is easy to access for the 
calculation of water requirements , irrigation schedules , and supplies  
  
 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:17)  
 
The image above  shows the  Cropwat  window; once we open the icon on the desktop .  It consists 
of climate  i.e., ET0, rain as  the inputs a long with  crop data and crop pattern . The outputs are 
calculation windows Cropwat  requirements schedule and scheme supply . Other things like a 
new wi ndow and start  option are available , then  click on each  module  to open the required 
window . If you click on the ET 0 and climate module a  window will appear  called monthly 
Penman -Monteith  and the moment you open it , there is there are some files already available 
you can click on that and directly you can  import that data to  the datasheet . Then you can click 
on the rain , crop, and soil and after giving  the inputs you can click on crop water requirement 
and schedule  to see the output . If you have multiple crops you can click crop pattern and then, 
it will give the schemes. So, this is a simple and  very useful tool developed by FAO . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:01) 
 
Data input modules  are  
1. Climate/ETo:   for the input of measured ET0 or of climatic data for estimating ET0  
  
2. Rain: for the input of rainfall data and calculation of effective rainfall  
3. Crop (dry crop or rice ): for the input of crop data and planting date  
4. Soil: for the input of soil data for (only needed for irrigation scheduling)  
5. Crop pattern: for the input of a cropping pattern for scheme supply calculations  
Calculation mod ules:  
6. CWR - for calculation of Crop Water Requirements  
7. Schedules (dry crop or rice) - for the calculation of irrigation schedules  
8. Scheme - for the calculation of scheme supply based on a specific cropping pattern  
(Refer Slide Time: 8 :07)  
 
So, for example, here the moment you click the climate  option the above image of  the window 
will appear , and then you can punch the input data or you can also call or import the data from 
the open window . For example, this location is given in latitude longitude and a station name 
is given and then the different  month  from  January up to December . Then once you punch all 
the data  the radiation and ET 0 are calculated.  These input  values can be changed during the run.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:15)  
 
  
Next , the rain input data  window will appear  as show n in the slide above , and then you can a lso 
import the data from the existing file  or enter the data manually . The effective rainfall  is 
calculated by  the fixed percentage method for example, for May the rain is  25 mm but the 
effective rain is  20mm. So, the effective rainfall is eighty percent  and you c an also change the 
effective rainfall method.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:05)  
 
For the conversion of rain to effective rainfall , there are some methods available , you can go 
to settings you will see different methods fo r the calculation of effective rainfall is available. 
There is a fixed percentage method , dependable rain FAO , empirical formulas , and USDA  
conservation service  method  and when rainfall is not considered in irrigation calculation  the 
effective rainfall will be 0. So, if you do not want to use the rainfall in  calculations, yo u can go 
for this option. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:50)  
 
  
And then the third one is crop input , for crop data crop coefficients  Kc dry and K c wet are 
required. T hen the stage  include s the nursery stage , land preparation stage , grow th stages , and 
the total  stage . And then root depth at the different stages for example 0.1 at the initial stage 
and then grow th stage of 0.6 m  and p uddling depth , nursery area , critical depletion yield 
response; all inputs can be  changed or you can also import from the existing file s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:43)  
 
And the fourth one is the soil  input  like soil name and ge neral soil data like field capacity ( FC) 
wilting point ( WP). The field capacity minus wilting point maximum  rain infiltration rate, 
maximum root depth, initial soil moisture depletion , and initial ly available moisture . And you 
can also have  some additional data  exclusively for rice;  such as drainable porosity, critical 
depletion of puddling , cracking, maximum percolation rate after puddling, water availability 
of plant ing, and maximum water depth  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:32 ) 
 
  
And the next is crop pattern , the crop pattern  is used  if we have multiple crops; for example, 
here one crop is groundnut and the other one is rice . So, you have to provide the crop name 
planting date and harvesting date , and area planted, this is important to know  the area in 
percentages  for a particular crop . 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:07)  
 
Next is the model output or calculation windows . If you see crop water requirement CWR , the 
window looks like that of ET0. A column decade in  the window represents 10 days so , the first 
decade is the first 10 days, the second 10 days, third 10 days  which represents a month . Stages 
here are given  along  with Kc value s for different stages . ETc the crop water crop 
evapotranspiration on a daily and decade basis . Effective rain is given , irrigation requirement 
is given. , this way you can understand at different  grow th stages  what is i rrigation requirement . 
So, that is a crop water requirement is calculated for the particular crop.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:17)  
 
  
And the next is irrigation scheduling , the scheduling window is show n in the above image. The 
station value , crop, planting date , and harvesting date , and yield reduction are given . Pre 
puddling, puddling , and grow ing stages.  The i rrigation  schedule  can be seen on the window  at 
different dates  and you have to give the required irrigation . The total gross irrigation, total net 
irrigation, total irrigation losses , irrigation efficiency , rain total rain loss , etc. all these things 
you can  calculate using the Cropwat .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:27)  
 
The other one is scheme  supply  which we used  if we have multiple crops . In the image of the 
window above you can see the  station name and then the crop pattern , for example, rice and 
ground nut are grown from  June to December .  The net scheme irrigation requirement , irrigated 
area, and irrigation requirement for the actual  area,  all these things can be estimated using the 
Cropwat . This simple model Cropwat  which is developed by FAO and is used to determine the 
crop water requirement and irrigation scheduling for both single as well as multiple  crops.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:59)  
 
So, we can see in the above image how Cropwat  is being used . This is the climate window in 
Cropwat  with different climate parameters. , Once you download and install it. , the database is 
already installed in the climate folder , then just open it , it will give you the climate data; the 
complete minimum and maximum  temperature and the station information and ET 0 are 
calculated using the Penman -Monteith methods. You can also check the different methods for 
ET calculat ion from temperature data and other things and temperature minimum maximum.  
The next input  is rain, the location selec ted is Kurnool you will get some other stations along 
with their rainfall data . You can change th e percentage values in the  fixed percentage method 
or you can select other methods as well ( dependable rain FAO  or empirical formulas ). 
(Refer Slide Time: 18:33)  
 
And the n you can open the chart and get the rainfall and effective rain  as shown in the image 
above , based on the fixed percentage.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:49)  
 
 
And then the  third input is the crop , the crop requires the information on K c along with the stage 
root depth . You can get take the value from available data for Kurnool rice . Crop data for rice and soil 
information also can be obtain ed from the available folder . Let us say, black clay soil and you get the 
information for the black clay soils . So, then now the crop water requirement can be estimated using 
this data and using the 4 inputs like climate , rain, crop, and soil . 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:47)  
 
So, this is the crop water requirement fo r the particular rice crop. Th e above image presents  the 
first decade like a first 10 days, second 10 days, third 10 days in June month and th e nursery 
stage and K c value . ETc and other values are also given.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:09)  
 
You can click on the chart  to see the irrigation requirement in each month or each decade . You 
can also click  on the  ET crop . There is a line showing the E Tcrop and  you can also see the 
 
ETcrop  in bar values and also  3D views .  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:51)  
 
The schedule will give the answer for when to give irrigation, how much to give irrigation. , 
The above image presents the schedule and it is a fixed window, you cannot change anything 
in this window. The day, stage , rain and all information  such as total gross irrigation, total net 
irrigation, total irrigation losses , total precipitation losses actual w ater used by the crop and 
potentially use by crop, efficient irrigation schedule can be obtain ed from the irrigation 
scheduling window.  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:37)  
 
Crop pattern is the input  for when you have 2 crops grown in the area . You can also change the 
crops in the crop pattern window and  you can choose from the number of crops available .  
 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:07)  
 
Now once you input this, you can go for the scheme , the scheme supply , will give  all the value s 
like precipitation deficit and net scheme irrigation requirement in mm /day, irrigation area , 
actual area . So, this way you can get the information for multiple crops.  This is very useful 
software, you can download it and practice  with it by using the existing data or if you have 
some data to analyze irrigati on requirement or crop water requirement and irrigation 
scheduling.  So, this is definitely a very good tool to apply in on on-faorm irrigation planning 
and management. And you know  no and no now yeah that is it.  
 
