Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapallli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture – 08 
Crop Water Requirement  
This is lecture number 8 of the Irrigation and Drainage lecture series , so in this lecture , we 
are going to le arn about  the Crop Water Requirement . 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:43)  
 
What is the crop water requirement ? In the previous lecture we  have focus ed only on 
evapotranspiration , but if the evapotranspiration is extended for the  whole crop period , it 
is called  crop water  requirement . For example, in case of rice the day you transplant  and 
give first irrigation to the last irrigation  is the crop water  requirement . 
So, the amount of water  needed  to compensate  for the evapotranspira tion loss from the 
crop field is  termed as crop water requirement . Crop water requirement represents the  ET 
under ideal crop  growth condition  and it also  varies with time and space . It determines 
which time the crop required a particular   amount of water for example, at middle of the  
crop growth or in the initial  period  or end of the period . The crop water v aries  with space  
as well , such as the tail end and head e nd.  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:29)  
 
Similarly the ET demand also varies with local climate  and cro p condition s. ET depends 
on the  climatic conditions , crop condition  and also the stage  of the crop . What are the 
factors affecting  the crop water requirement ? Mostly the factors which are affecting the 
evapotranspiration  affect  the crop water requirement . Some of the  factors like crop factors , 
for example, type of  crops like cultivar s or species and growing stage ,  the leaf area , root 
length and root density  all are going to influence  the evapotranspiration and as wel l as the 
crop water requirement . 
Weather  factors such as temperature , increase the evapotranspiration and the crop water 
requirement . Radiation s, humidity , and wind speed  factors  definitely influence the  crop 
water requirement  some are positive and some are negative for example, if  crop is unde r 
humid condition , the evapotranspiration will be less and crop water requirement may be 
less. The graph  above  clearly shows a typical  pattern of  ET demand  during the  growth 
period of the cereal crop . Initially  ET demand is less, and after that , ET demand is 
increasing and  then it i s going to decline at the end of the season .  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:32)  
 
And the n next is how to calculate this crop water requirement , so similar to  ET calculation , 
you can combine th e sum of all daily ET’s and you get the crop  water  requiremen t for the 
whole season . So the crop water requirement  CWR i for a given crop for the whole growing 
season  is as follows  
 
ETi is the  crop evapotranspiration for the  growing period ; i indicates growing period ; t is 
the time interval ;  So ET0t is the reference crop evapotranspiration  at time t; Kct is the crop 
coefficient for the  time t. So, you will get evapotranspiration  for a particular  time ET1, 
ET2, ET3, and so on then you can sum up all those  ET’s  and you get  ET for a  particular  
crop and if you hav e number of crops in the field  for each crop you get  a particular  ET for 
the particular crop and also crop water requirement and if you can combine whole crops 
you get total crop water requirement for the whole field .  
What is the difference between crop water requirement and irr igation water requirement ? 
Crop water requirement is a subset of irrigation water requirement s. The crop water 
requirement is the function of weather and crop , whereas; irrigation water requirement 
depends on weather , crop, and soil , rainfall , irrigation m ethod , depth of water table . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:20)  
 
The table above shows the crop water requirement for some of the major  crops , for 
example the crop water requirement  of rice crop is 110 to 160 cm and the crop water 
requirement for sugarcane  is 150 to 200 cm, the crop with  least crop water requirement is 
lentils which require  15 to 25 cm water , so crop water requirement varies from crop to 
crop and also the  duration of  crop in the field, for sugarcane the  crop duration is a  whole 
year whereas  rice is for one season , so this way, the irrigation water requirement  is always 
more than the  crop water  requirement . 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:30)  
 
Irrigation water requirement  is the net irrigation  water requirement , which is the quantity 
of water  required for  succes sful crop growth ; that means water used from the day the field 
is prepared  to the day after harvesting all this water is irrigation water  requirement . So that 
is why it is more than the crop water requirement . Weather , crop and soil factors influence 
the irrigation water requirement determination, similar to evapotranspiration and crop 
water requirement . 
Soil factors  are soil type , soil storage and release properties of water  from soil , for example 
soil type such as fine-texture d soil and sandy loam soils  affects  the storage and releas ing 
properties  and hence  definitely influence the  irrigation water requirement . Also if the 
organic matter content is more , it will hold more  water and hence reduce the amount of  
water for irrigation  because water  is already  present in the soil . The  seepage and 
percolation rate in sandy soil is higher  than silty soil and  clay soils , so the sandy soil s 
require  more irrigation water compare d to the silty soils.  
The other factor  is effective rainfall ; the part of the rainfall , which is  effectively used for 
filling the soil reservoir  is called effective rainfall . Water is required  for leaching of  salts, 
suppose a field has lot of salt s then you have to use more water to l each these salts. Water 
is required for land preparation  and land s oaking  also th is amount of additional water is 
required under field  preparation , so water is required  not only for the crop s, but also for 
preparing  the field to a favorable soil condition for the plant , that water is also included in 
the irrigation water requirement . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:23)  
 
The total irrigation water requirement has  the following components : water  for land 
preparation , water  for land soa king, crop water demand (that includes  ET and seepage and 
percolation ), water  for leaching  requireme nt (to leach salts from saline soils) and water for 
special use such as  crop cool ing freezing  protection ; for instances while  cultivating  of crop 
under  cold conditions  sometimes soil might be frozen , water  is applied  in order to unfroze  
the soil , so that plants can extract that water . Water for land preparation , land soaking , 
leaching , and special use , all together  adds up  to the total irrigation water requirement .  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:49)  
 
Let u s focus on estimating individual components  for the total irrigation water 
requirement . So the first  one is water for land soaking , so the water  for land s oaking which 
is represented as WRLS and is given as follows  
 
Where,  Ws is the water required to saturate the soil ; ET0 is the  reference evapotranspiratio n 
during the time of soil saturation; C  is the  evap oration coefficient; E a is the application 
efficiency ; P is the deep percolation  and Re is the  effective rainfall . 
The water for  land soaking is required when initially the  land you have  needs to be wette d 
with water before growing any crop . The application  efficiency  come s into the picture  
because t here m ay be some  water  losses from delivery point t o the point of field 
application .  
So, during the process , first water is  needed for saturation ; once  water is available for 
saturation  then definitely  there is evaporation  from  the open surface and deep percolation  
and during that time . If you  have  effective rainfall  that is also added  so that will be  the 
extra amount you are adding . So the water for land soaki ng is equal to  the water used for 
saturation and  the water losses during that time  in evapotranspiration , and deep 
percolation .  
(Refer Slide Time: 15:26)  
 
And the next point is the water required for  land preparation  which is given as follows  
 
Where, WRLP is the water required for land preparation ; Ds is the water depth  for 
submergence ; C and ET 0 is the crop demand ; P is the deep percolation  and Re is the 
effective  rainfall  and Ea is the application efficiency , so this is for the land preparation .  
Similarly water required for  leaching  of salts.  
 
Where LR is the  leaching  requirement ; EC w is the salinity of the applied irrigation water , 
EC is the electrical conductivity , so salinity is represented with EC. EC t is the threshold 
salinity , which is the  average soil salinity tolerated  by the crop since each crop h as a 
tolerance level . So based on that we decide  the leach ing requirement .  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:51)  
 
Then next is the total depth of water  (AW)  for a season to meet  irrigation and leaching 
requirements   
 
Where ET is the total seasonal demand (cm/season)  of crop  and LR is leaching requirement 
(fraction)  for the  removal of salts. It gives the seasonal  requirement,  suppose you have  
zero leaching req uirement , available  or applied water w ill be  equal to  ET because you are 
not us ing any  water for  leaching  requirement .  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:38)  
 
The other component  of this total irrigation water  requirement is the irrigation water 
requirement for  norma l growth period  (IWR nci).  
 
So Kc×ET 0  represents  the crop demand  and P is the deep percolation;  Re is the effective 
rainfall and  GWc is the groundwater contribution during the  period , so these  Re and GW c 
are positive because this water is added and are the inputs we can say.  ET0 and P are the 
losses . So,  if we have  daily  data we can  sum up  the irrigation water requirement during 
normal growth period .  The normal growth  period  is from sowing to  transplanting  to the 
last watering  or you can say the water p eriod , i.e., the first irrigation  to the last irrigation 
period .  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:52)  
 
Once you get all the components  of irrigation water requirement , the total or net  irrigation 
water requirement  (NIWR)  is given as follows  
 
WR LS is the water requ irement  for land soaking , WR LP is the water r equirement for land 
preparation, WR nc is the water requirement for  ET demand , and WR L is the water 
requirement for  leaching .  
(Refer Slide Time: 19:39)  
 
The net irrigation water requirement  based on moisture  deficit (NIWR m) is 
 
Where FCi is the field capacity  of soil of i layer , in percent volume ; SM i is the present  soil 
moisture  content in percent volume ; di is the horizon  depth  of i layer , and LF is the leaching 
fraction  if you have leaching  requirements . So, then using the above  equation , you get the 
net irrigation water requirement based on the moisture  deficit  criteria . 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:26)  
 
Then once you have the net irrigation water requirement , the gro ss irrigation water 
requirement (GIWR) is equal  to net irrigation  water requirement divided by application 
efficiency (Ea) and the conveyance efficiency  (Ec).  
 
So, for conveyance efficiencies  generally from  canal water is delivered  to the fields  and 
suppose  a volume Q1 is delivered from the canal and Q2 volume is received  at the field  
and Q3 volume is  applied . So, Q1 minus  Q2 divided by  Q1 will give the  conveyance 
efficiency because  you are not getting  Q1 at the tail end, whereas Q2 minus  Q3 divided by  
Q2 will give application efficiency , we are going  to talk about this  more in later lectures .  
(Refer Slide Time: 21:51)  
 
The steps required for total irrigation water requirement  are first of all  identify ing the 
climate zone  and agro -climatic  zone of the  project area and then the next thing is  to select  
the appropriate crop and cropping pattern for the area  which is suitable for the a gro-
climatic zone . And then next is to collect the long  term information on soil as well as crop 
information and then fo urth is to calculate  the reference evapotranspiration  from the crop  
period . So based on the data available , for e.g., weather data and soil data you can estimate 
the crop evapotranspiration for the whole crop period . 
The crop  coefficient values  can be obtained  from the literature or similar crop  and varietie s. 
So once  you estimate the evapo transpiration or  refere nce evapotranspiration for that 
particular  area, crop coefficient  is multipl ied with reference evapotranspiration , to get the 
crop evapotranspiration this will give the crop water demand . 
And then , calculate other  special water requirement s, like land preparation , soaking , 
leaching requirement , salt balance  and then determine the water  requirements . Estimate 
the overall water conveyance efficiency and  application efficiencies , and then finally, you 
get the irrigation water requirement  and the gross water requirement . So, we started with 
evapotranspiration and then crop water requirement and then  irrigation  water requirement 
and then total irrigation water  requirement .  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:41)  
 
Exampl e 8.1. The following information is available for a land:  
Depth of water required to saturate 20 cm soil = 6 cm  
Daily reference evapotranspiration = 5 mm  
Time from water application to deplete field capacity = 6 h  
Deep percolation loss during soil saturati on = 4 mm  
Rainfall during the period = 0  
Determine the irrigation water requirement for land soaking  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:51)  
 
The solution is like this  
Irrigation water  requirement for land soaking,  
 
Given:  
Ws = 6 cm = 60 mm;  
Deep percolation , P = 4 mm ;  
Effective rainfall Re = 0;  
ET0/day = 5 mm; Assuming day time hour is 12  hours a day   
ET0/6 h = 2.5mm;  
Application efficiency , Ea = 95%;  
Conveyance efficiency  Ec = 80%.  
Assuming C=0.95 and substituting the  above values in the equation, WR ls = 87.3 mm  
(Refer Slide Time: 27:46)  
 
Example  is 8.2 For winter wheat crop grown in spring, the following information is 
gathered for a particular growth phase:  
Reference evapotranspiration for the growth phase = 30 mm,  
Crop coefficient for that phase = 1.0,  
Deep pe rcolation for water application = 4 mm,  
Groundwater contribution = 0.  
Find:  
(a) Net irrigation required  
(b) Gross irrigation required, if application efficiency = 85%, and conveyance efficiency 
= 75%Given:  
 (Refer Slide Time: 29:02)  
 
Solution:  
ET0=30mm; K c=1; P=4mm; R e=5mm; GWc=0; Ea= 85%; EC = 70%  
a) Net Irrigation Required:  
 
Puttting the values, WR nc= (1 x30) + 4 - (5+0) = 29 mm  
(b) Gross irrigation water required, TIWR = 𝑊𝑅𝑛𝑐
𝐸𝑎 𝑥 𝐸𝑐= 29
0.85 𝑥0.7=  45.5 mm  
So, in this lecture , basically we focuse d on the crop water requirement and we also  
demonstrated that crop water requirement is not same as irrigation water requirement 
because irrigation water requirement  combines crop water requirement  and then other  
irrigation water required for land soaking , leaching , and saturation  and then gross irrigation 
water requirement is obtained  once you get irrigation water requirement , by divid ing it 
with both application and conveyance efficiency . So, first is the evaporation and then 
transpiration  and then combi ning them to  evapotranspiration by knowing the  referen ce 
evapotranspiration and crop coefficients . Once the evapotranspiration for a particular day  
and particular crop  is known you can extend that  to find out the crop water requirement 
for the  whole  growin g period ; then you can estimate  irrigation water requirement and then 
finally, gross irrigation water requirement for a particular crop and particular season . If 
you have  the larger area and  more number of crops  so you can estimate  irrigation water 
require ment  by knowing the irrigation water requirement for individual crops . 
Thank you . 
