Irrigation and Drainage  
Prof. Damodhara Rao Mailapallli  
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture – 09 
Irrigation Scheduling  
 
Friends  welcome to lecture number 9 of Irrigation  and Drainage  lecture se ries. In this 
lecture we are going to learn what is Irrigation Scheduling and  what are the methods  
involved in deciding irrigation and how much water is really required for plant and finally,  
we are going to solve some the example s. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:5 2) 
 
What is irrigation  scheduling ? The  main objective of irrigation scheduling  is to maximize 
yield , in addition to that  it is to increase irrigation effectiveness/ efficiency  and crop quality  
by applying the exact amount of water n eeded by the crop or replenish  the soil moisture to 
the d esire d level . And finally,  as a result we are expect ing good crop quality . So we need 
to ask ourselves , 3 questions in irrigation scheduling , i) when to give irrigation , ii) how 
much to give irrigation  and iii) how to give irrigation ? So these 3 questions are important  
before deciding a n irrigation event .  
(Refer Slide Time: 02:12)  
 
Next is the irrigation scheduling  goals , suppose land  is a limiting  condition i.e., limited 
land situations in that case the main goal/ objectiv e of irrigation schedul ing is to maximize  
the yield  per unit area , because your area is limited . Whereas, if water  is a limiting 
condition  or limited water resources  is available,  in that case the objective is to maximize  
the yield per unit  water applied . And another case  is when abundant water and land 
condition  is available , (land and water is not a limiting condition ), in that case the irrigation 
scheduling objective is to maximize yield per unit energy ; energy  related to farming 
operation , irrigation  equipment  operation  and other things . The main thing is maximizing 
the net profit . This is important for farming  enterprises and not popular for day to day 
scheduling , day to day scheduling is for checking whether required  quantity of water is 
given or not .  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:06)  
 
In irrigation scheduling , suppose that our objective is  to irrigate  a crop that required  around 
8 mm water  per day ; that means,  the whole field required 8 mm of water uniformly  as 
shown in picture above . Then so how do we give this 8 mm water? S uppose  the daily 
evapo transpi ration required by the crop  is 8 mm per day  so that means  the crop requires 8 
mm depth of water  to consume from  the soil surface , so you have to replenish that 8 mm 
every day  or you can give 24 mm every 3 days or 40 mm every 5 days (since 3 ×8 =24 and 
5×8=40) . So by accumulating  the daily amount to a particular time interval  you can give 
the irrigation . 
In principle the irrigation amount i n one application  is the amount of water used by plants 
since the previou s irrigation . Suppose you are giving irrigation every 3 days so the first 
day let us say 0th day you give 24 mm, so on the 3rd day you give again 24 mm so  whatever 
amount you are giving  is accumulated by previous 3 days, that is the water used by plant s 
since the previous irrigation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:28)  
 
Proper irrigation scheduling  minimizes the following ; first, if you are giving water  
properly then yield is  not going to reduce because you are not giving excess  water , you 
can minimize the  wastage o f water and also irrigation cost e.g., operating pump cost, 
minimizing excess  groundwater withdrawal . Since you are giving adequate water to the 
plant you need not withdraw excess  water from the  ground . Pollution of surface and 
groundwater by agrochemical s like fertilizer and pesticides are reduced since we are 
applying limited water to the  ground , the leached amount will be less and you can reduce 
the pollution of surface as well as ground water . Drainage requirement , water -logging , 
salinity hazard and env ironmental and health hazard  can be minimized . Giving adequate 
water or exactly what plant  is required or may be  less leads to  lowering of leaching  of 
agrochemicals  to ground water as well as surface water and that leads to environmental 
health  and disease  free environment  and less pollution .  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:55)  
 
What are the indicators of irrigation  need ? When you go to the field and observe the crop  
how to know that whether the crop required any irrigation or not ? There are some 
indicators  that yo u can identify  whether the particula r crop required irrigation at that point 
of time or n ot. Some of the indicators are plant leaf appearance if  you look at the plant  leaf 
sometime leaves are curly in nature as shown in the picture  above,  sometimes you see  the 
dead l eaves  so that means, the plant requires water  at that point of time . And another one 
is soil moisture status , in the  field the expe rts take the soil in their hand and then press and 
fold the soil  and based on their experience they can identify  weather  the soil has enough 
water or not . 
The other indicator  is the soil water potential ; in our previous lectures  we have  discussed 
on soil water potential  measurement  using  tensiometers . So install ing tensiometers  in the 
field can give you an indication of water stress . The other indicator is the  leaf w ater 
potential , this is similar to soil water potential , leaf water potential  will tell how much 
water is really present within the  plant.  
Leaf temperature  is another  indicator , higher temperature means, the pores or stomata are  
closing down and that is really  causing an increased in the  heat generate d inside the  leaf 
that indicat es that the plant is starving  so it needs water . 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:40)  
 
Irrigation scheduling methods , generally use for sch eduling an irrigation is climate 
approach or  ET based, we mostly  used the ET based approach to decide the daily  water 
consumption . And the next is  the pan evapor imeter , this is a very easy method  and any 
farmer can install  pan evapo rimeter in their field a nd obtained  the daily pan evaporation 
and then find out the crop evapotranspiration  using the theory discuss ed earlier . Next is 
the soil moisture based which measures how much moisture is present in the soil  by 
collecting  soil sample from the ground and measuring the moisture present in the  soil using 
gravimetric  method . Another method is the deficit irrigation  concept , this was also 
discuss ed earlier , so the field capacity is the upper limit  and wilting point is the lower limit  
and the available water is f ield capacity  minus wilting point , based  on your percentage of 
interest if  the reserve  depletes  50 % or 70% then irrigation  is given .  
Some other methods of irrigation scheduling are s oil water potential  by using  the 
tensiometers ; Leaf water  potential  by using instruments ; stress  day index  by measuring the 
stress level on a particular day; I rrigation calendar , which is also an easy method  to tra ck 
the moisture level  daily  by using a calendar or a book  e.g., check book or soil moisture  
balance approach . 
There are irrigation models available  to help decide when  to give irrigation  and how much 
to give irrigation . Real time  irrigation scheduling  approach connects both real time weather 
data and then the soil moisture using the software  available and finally, decide how much  
soil moisture is present in the gr ound  and triggers the irrigation based on the predefined  
deficit level  and then it ON’s the pump  automatically  and s upply  the necessary  irrigation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:11)  
 
Climate approach /ET based method  of irrigation scheduling  is calculated  based on the 
historical weather data for  crop period in advance , this requires lot of historical weather 
data and based on that  the ET requirement is estimated for that particular crop then 
irrigation is applied equal  to ET amount or  fraction multiples  of ET.  
Suppose you have the whole season ET, for a particular crop  so the whole cumulative  ET 
will be  divided into different fractions  different  irrigations  application . For e.g., you want 
to irrigate  100 mm water for  the whole season , so you decided to  give 20 mm irrigation 
each time for 5 times to amount to 100 mm.  Fischbach and Somerhalde  have conducted a  
lot of  field experiments and found  that the amount of water  equivalent to 0.5 (50%) of the 
peak  ET rate gave th e highest yield . 
In this method  a number of weather  parameters are needed to  determine  ET value and we 
have already  come across  this in the previous lecture , how to find out  ET using weather 
data. Data may be difficult to obtain , costly sometimes  and also uncertainty  of data 
depends on who has collected the data , whether it is re liable  or not. Hence this method has 
some limitations , otherwise this is straightforward method once you know the  ET you can  
give irrigation  based on  ET.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:52)  
 
Next is the pan evaporation , this is another method , in this method there is a pan  
evapo rimeter . The image above shows the class  A pan installed  in the field , the decrease 
in water level  is recorded  daily  so that gives the evaporation from the  pan and if you 
multiply with the pan c oefficient  so that will give  the lake evaporation. The  irrigation  
applied is simply equal to the cumulative  pan evaporation , for example, ten days of data  is 
available from the pan, then  you cumulate all th e 10 days’  data whic h is also called  CPE 
(Cumulative pan evaporation ) at several days of  interval  such as 3, 5, 7, 10 or 15 days and 
based on that you can give irrigation , so the cumulative  ET can be demarcated or 
distribut ed based on the time  interval decided  and irrigation is also  applied according to 
the predetermine d ratio of CPE. You can decide  the ratio for example,  0.5 is my ratio,  so, 
my irrigation  will be  given  at 50% of CPE, suppose you have 10 days CPE and 0.5 is my 
fraction  so when this 50% is going to evaporate  then irrigation  is replenish ed. This concept 
is simple , farmer friendly and need no technical hand and no sophisticated instrument , you 
only need on e pan in the  field. 
(Refer Slide Time: 21:07)  
 
Next is an example, based on the pan data . Pan evap oration data recorded at a certain 
location over a period of one week are 4.0, 4.3, 4.6, 4.9, 5.12, 5.18, and 6.21 mm. If 
irrigation scheduling based on ratio of irrigation water (IW) to cumulative pan evaporation 
(CPE) is practiced, the depth of irrigatio n at an interval of a week for IW/CPE = 0.9 is  
Solution:  
Pan evaporation data at a certain location = 4.0, 4.3, 4.6, 4.9, 5.12, 5.18, and 6.21 mm  
Cumulative pan evaporation = 34.31 mm  
"Irrigation water (IW) “/"cumulative pan evaporation (CPE)" =0.9  
"Irrigation water (IW) " /"34.31" =0.9  
"Irrigation water (IW) = 0.9 "×34.31=30.88 𝑚𝑚 (Ans.)  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:36)  
 
The other  irrigation scheduling methods  is the stress day index , represented with  SDI, 
𝑆𝐷𝐼=∑𝑆𝐷𝑖×𝐶𝑆𝑖𝑛
𝑖=1 
Where SD i is the stress day factor ; CSi is the crop  susce ptibility factor ; n is the number o f 
growth  period considered . The stress day factor  is the measure of degree and duration of 
plant water deficit . Crop susceptibility factor indicates  the plant susceptibility to a given 
water deficit and  depends on the species and stage of growth and  the gi ven crop .  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:18)  
 
The stress day factor is estimated as, 𝑆𝐷=𝐸
𝐸𝑑 
Where E is the transpiration  rate and Ed is the potential evaporation .  
The crop susceptibility factor  (CS) is the plot between crop yield (x-axis) and c umulative  
SD for given growth period  (y-axis). The slope will give CS which is  given as follows  
𝐶𝑆𝑖=𝑆𝐷
𝑌𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:09)  
 
Next is the soil moisture balance /check  book method , mostly we use the soil water balanc e 
based on knowing  the initial soil moistu re and then later you are  going to check the  soil 
moisture  status based on the previous day  moisture content , this is the initial information 
you need to provide . The above table represents the sample of a check book  with details 
like days after emergence , days after first day , second day , third day , date and tota l water 
within the root zone , crop water use  etc. I f you have rainfall  and irrigation which are the 
inputs and then result in moisture content . The total water within the root zone (column 3) 
minus  crop water (column 4 ) is the amount of water utilized but there are some  additional 
inputs like rainfall and  irrigation , so based on th is balance  you get the current days soil 
moisture .  
(Refer Slide Time: 26:24)  
 
There is another method called book keeping method , the book keeping method is similar  
to the  check b ook method . Moisture status of the soil is calculated by estimating the values 
of evapotranspiration , and crop is irrigated when estimated soil moisture attains a 
predetermined value , for example here a crop  has 200 mm of available water in the root 
zone , this is the total  available soil water r eservoir . The field capacity has to be irrigated 
at a deficit of 100 mm so  you have 200 mm and is irrigate d when it reduces  to 100 m m. 
The table above shows  date in  the first column , age of crop  (column 2 ) is given which may 
be 20, 21 or 22 days. ET is estimate d in mm per day  (column 3 ) on daily  basis  and the 
accumulated deficit  (column 4 ) is calculated. So initially deficit is  4 mm and  based on the 
ET accumulated deficit is obtained by adding the estimated ET and when it  is coming to  
100 mm then you give  irrigation . 
 (Refer Slide Time: 28:16)  
 
If the average value of  ET is considered , irrigation interval is estimated using th e following  
equation   

ETDS SII FC
 
Where SFC and S I are soil moisture content (volume basis) at field capacity and at the 
permissible depletion; D is root zone depth and ET is evapotranspiration . This will give 
the total reserved  available of water at a particular depth . This method is  similar to the  
popular IW/CPE method, s uppose  IW is fixed irrigation water  and it is 6 cm that means  
ET is fixed and  IW/CPE ratio is also fixed say 0.8, then you can  estimate the  CPE which 
is 7.5 so  irrigation  is provided  when  CPE is 7.5 cm, so this way you can  give irrigation . 
(Refer Slide Time: 29:44)  
 
Irrigation schedul ing methods  through modeling  approach  is also conducted with different 
available models  such as  FAO CROPWAT T which can be used to  estimate  scheduling  
irrigation event . And there is  CROSOWAT by Joshi et a l., 1995  which is the numerical 
model ling approach  for estimating irrigation water requirement in humid basins  under 
various management options . And there is  another model called IRRI  ORYZA 2000  which 
is developed  at IRRI , which  is mostly  used for rice crop . 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:35)  
 
The ab ove image shows how the r eal time irrigation scheduling  takes weather data and 
soil information and soil moisture status from data logger and based on that an algorithm 
in the software  is available that takes the  weather data , soil data  and give the  present soil 
moisture condition . And then if irrigation is required as per the basin irrigation criteria it 
triggers the  pump  then give irrigation . The other image above shows  the overall view of 
the same thing  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:40)  
 
Scheduling strategies are basically two types  either you gave  entire irrigation that means, 
filling up to the field capacity to maximize the production or deficit irrigation  by allowing 
plant water stress  and partial ly supplying the irrigation requirement and when irrigation 
system  limits water availability  but adequate  water is given during critical stages . 
(Refer Slide Time: 32:33)  
 
Next is when to irrigate ? Some general approaches are similar so we are just going to 
review some of the things , as mentioned for when to give irriga tion, plant indicators , soil 
indicators and water budgeting techniques  using check book method and other  methods . 
The plant indicators are appearance , growth , leaf temperature  and leaf water potential . 
(Refer Slide Time: 33:09)  
 
Soil indicators are determ ining the current water content of the soil, so appearance  and 
feel, is one method where you take the soil and just feel it  and based on you r experience 
you can say what is the percentage  of moisture content ; gravimetric sampling , 
tensiometers , porous  blocks, neutron scattering technique etc. can also be used to measure  
soil moisture . After determining the soil moisture,  it is compar ed to the  predetermined 
minimum w ater content or threshold such as ϴc and the irrigat ion is given to maintain  soil 
water content  above the minimum level .  
(Refer Slide Time: 34:12)  
 
We already  discussed  the appearance and feel method along with gravimetric 
measurement of soil moisture.  
(Refer Slide Time: 34:20)  
 
Next is the water budget t echnique , it is  similar to soil indicator methods  but the soil water 
content is computed as follows:  




rze
i iDP ET1001 
Where  θi, θi-1 is the soil water content in percent by volume at the end of day i and day i -
1, respectively; Drz is depth of root zone (cm, in) ; ET is the evapotranspiration (cm, in)  
and Pe is the effective precipitation (cm, in)  Pe is the effective input i.e., extra water you 
are getting from the  atmosphere and  ET is the loss. So this much is already applied and 
you want to find out what is the  current day moisture content . 
(Refer Slide Time: 35:01)  
 
The table above shows the different  methods of irrigation scheduling  and there is a hand 
feel and appearance  method , gravimetric method , tensiometers , electrical resist ance and 
water budgeting approach and modified atmometer . The measured parameters and 
equipment needed and irrigation criteria are given , for example hand feel method , soil 
moisture content  advantages and disadvantages are given . You can go through the sli de to 
know more about the advantage , disadvantage and equipment needed for a particular  
irrigation scheduling method . 
In this lecture  we focused on irrigation  scheduling , i.e., when to give irrigation , how much 
to give irrigation and how to give an irrigation ? We just discussed  when to give irrigation 
and how much to give irrigation . How to give irrigation will be  discuss ed later. 
Thank you . 
