Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 10
One Dimensional Steady State Heat Conduction (Contd.)
Hello. So, good morning today again we are continuing that One Dimensional Steady
State Heat Conduction equation. We were solving problems and through h the solution
of the problems we are coming across more and more how to solve different problems
with different boundary conditions, ‘right’. So, now, let us go to another. So, this again
one dimensional steady state heat conduction continuation lecture number 10.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:59)
 
So, we come to this that problem. Let us know how consider a case where energy is
generated at constant rate of E 0 W/m3 in a slab of thickness L having constant thermal
conductivity k.
The boundary surface at x is equal to 0 is insulated that is under adiabatic condition.
And, that at x is equal to L dissipates heat by convection with a heat transfer coefficient
h into a fluid at a temperature T e. Derive expressions for the temperature distribution
T(x) and heat flux q(x) in the slab.Calculate the temperature at the surface x is equal to 0 and x is equal to L under the
following conditions; L is 8 millimeter, k is 15 W/mºC, E 0 is 10×107 W/m3, h is 5000 W/
m2ºC and Te is 120ºC.
So, if we can solve this one also, but since here you see that internal energy generation is
present. Since, internal energy generation is present we cannot use thermal resistance
concept, ‘right’. Had there been no internal resistance generation, we could definitely
solve it with the thermal resistance concept, but it cannot be now, ‘right’. So, we have to
do analytical solution.
So, to understand you should read the problem number of times at least once or twice so,
that you understand the problem mentally. The problem again is saying like this let us
consider now a case where energy is generated at a constant rate of E 0 W/m3. So, energy
generation is present.
In a slab of thickness L having constant thermal conductivity k. The boundary surface
now the boundary condition at x is equal to 0 is insulated; that means, you have some
insulation that is that can be said equivalent to be under adiabatic condition ‘right’ no
heat flow. And, that at x is equal to L dissipates heat so, other side is dissipating heat to
the boundary by convection with a heat transfer coefficient h into fluid at a temperature
Te, ‘right’. The derive expression for temperature distribution T(x) and heat flux q(x) in
the slab and, also we have to calculate the values of T es perhaps values of calculate the
temperature at the surface x is equal to 0 and x is equal to L.
So, x is equal to 0 and L we have to find out the temperatures and we are given thermal
conductivity heat transfer coefficient length of the slab that is thickness or L 0 to L. So,
thickness of the slab and internal energy and environmental temperature everything are
given. So, we can solve it, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 05:17)
So, in this  case the  thermal  resistance  concept  cannot  be utilized,  because  there  is
internal energy generation. The condition or the conduction equation for the constant
heat flux, or the constant not heat flux, for the constant heat generation, and constant
thermal conductivity has to be utilized. And, now we start with that where we ended with
you remember we said that the here it is steady state.
So, the moment it is steady state, so the right side becomes equal to 0. So, our equation
becomes equal to          and this is to be used for the
solution. And, boundary condition given one side it is given you remember one side it is
given that it is insulated. The moment the boundary condition is insulated we can say
that  
( ) ( )0 0; , ( ) 0 edT x dT xat x and k h T x T at x L
dx dx        So, conduction equal to
convection  that  is  the  second  boundary.  First  boundary  was  insulation  and  second
boundary is conduction equivalent to convection.
So, our governing equation was if we  integrate
first integration give  
01
1( )1 ,
0dT x Ex C and applying the BC we getdx k
C  
. And, now if we apply the first boundary
condition that is dT(x)/d x is equal to 0 at x is equal to 0 we get C 1 is equal to 0.2
02( )0 0d T x Ein x L
dx k   
2
02( )0 0d T x Ein x L
dx k   Because, this x is 0 so, this is 0 and dT(x)/dx is 0 from here. So, we get C 1 is equal to 0.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:37)
So, on second integration we get C 1 is equal to 0, ‘right’. Then
 202
20 02
20 02
220 0( )2
2
2
( ) 12e
e
eET x x C and applying BC at x L gives usk
E L E LT Ch K
E L E LC Tk k
temperature distribution in the slab becomes
E L x E LT x Tk L h   
   
  

           (Refer Slide Time: 11:47)
So, this is for energy generation and this is for the heat transfer coefficient. So, we can
write that    . So, we have the solution we have found out the
temperature distribution T(x) and also you have found out the q(x) at any x which is E 0x,
‘right’. Now, we can solve easily and find out the temperatures at x equal to 0 and that x
as to L 
Then, if we plot that the temperature distribution, then it comes like this you will see we
can show that here one and here another, ok.
So, our temperature distribution that can be written that can be shown that this is equal to
let us take this. So, here it was ok before that let us have the slab, this is the one part of
this slab and this is the other part of this slab, ‘right’. So, our boundaries are like that. So,
the temperature then becomes equal to some temperature here, ‘right’ and then it became
like this and then it became like that.
So, this is the temperature distribution which we are we have found out, ‘right’. So, this
is the solution which we have shown yeah this is the solution there this is 280 oh this was
this was constant. So, this started from here itself, ‘right’ E 0, T0 was 493 here and then it0( )( )dT xq x k E xdx  
7 3 2 7 3
7 310 10 (8 10 ) 10 10 (8 10 )(0)2 15 5000
120 493.3
10 10 (8 10 )( ) 120 2805000o
oX X X X X XTX
C
X X XT L C 
 
 
  dropped to this 280 and outside was 120, ‘right’. So, this way we can resolve the
problems ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:35)
So, we let us take another problem a constant uniform heat flux q 0 is introduced at the
boundary  surface  at  x  is  equal  to  0  of  an  iron  plate  of  thickness  L  with  thermal
conductivity k. From the other boundary surface at x is equal to L, heat is dissipated by
convection into a fluid at temperature T e with the heat transfer coefficient h.
Derive expressions for the surface temperatures T 1 and T2 at the surfaces x is equal to 0
and x is equal to L respectively. What will be the surface temperature T 1 and T2 if L is
2.5 centimeter k is 16 W/mºC, q 05×105 W/m2, Te 40 degree centigrade and h 600 W/mºC.
 Say, here also you see that the since there is internal energy generation we cannot
assume the thermal resistance concept, ‘right’. So, again we need to solve it analytically.
And again as you said to solve we have to read the problem and understand mentally and
then follow it accordingly.
So, I am reading the problem or reading out the problem once again a constant uniform
heat flux q 0 is introduced at the boundary surface at x equal to 0 of an iron plate of
thickness L with thermal conductivity k. From the other boundary surface at x is equal to
L heat is dissipated by convection into a fluid at temperature T e with a heat transfercoefficient  h. Derive  the expressions  for the  surface  temperatures  T 1 and  T2 at  the
surfaces x is equal to L and x is equal to L 0 and x is equal to L respectively, ‘right’.
So, this means that our problem is saying that you have a plate iron plate and one side is
subjected to the boundary condition of second kind that is prescribed heat flux boundary
condition. And the other side is boundary condition of the third kind that is prescribed
convective boundary condition as well internal heat generation is there. So, you have to
do first the analytical solution and if you then you have the temperature distribution
equation, you can easily find out what is the two phases temperatures that is T 0 and TL,
‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:57)
Here is that pictorially we can you can write it this is the iron slab and one side is heat
supply by q we what so, much watt per meter square this is that, ‘right’.
Internal heat one thing, internal heat generation that is why we have to read it, ‘right’.
So, here there is no internal generation is saying, but what did it saying that the flux. So,
though looking at the q; I mean that the internal generation of heat was mentioned? no it
is  not  mentioned  here.  So,  here  one  boundary  is  heat  flux,  another  boundary  is
convective boundary condition and the plate is there, ‘right’.So, since there is no internal generation of heat as well since it is a steady state though it
is not said, but it is understood that there is a steady state. So, here we can use thermal
resistance concept, ‘right’.
So, that is what we are using W watt per meter square that is T 1 and T2 and a boundary
with convective boundary. So, with a fluid flow at T e temperature h as the heat transfer
coefficient 0 to L and it is in the X direction. So, A q that is capital q quantity of heat is
coming all, ‘right’, q is heat flux, A is the area. So, A q, q quantity of capital q quantity of
heat is coming and at the face this is T 1 and within that resistance of the material, it is
coming to T2 and then getting dissipated to T e as the other side of the boundary. So, we
have two resistances, one is internal and another is this and this is supplied by the heat
flux.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:21)
So, solution of heat can be that q is equal to capital Q that is
Now, to know the surface temperature say T 1, let us equate the first and last expressions
then we get     . And, then by equating the first and the third
expression T2 can be found out and this can be written as T 2 is equal to q0 over h plus Te,
‘right’.1 2 2 101 1e eT T T T T TAqL L
Ak Ah Ak Ah    

1 01
eLT q T
k h      (Refer Slide Time: 22:33)
So, if we have already found out T 1 and T2 we can easily now calculate the numerical
values, because all others are given. So,
The material offers resistance of heat transfer. So, that you have to keep in mind that
material is offering resistance and depending on how much may resistance it is offering
the drop in temperature will be accordingly, ‘right’. So, let us see whether any other
problem we have or not; we can say that we observed all types of problems. 
Once with the constant temperature boundary condition at left side, there is one side an
another constant temperature boundary condition on the other side, we have made the
analytical solution and we have also made the thermal resistance solution. So, the where
internal energy was not present, internal energy generation was not present they are
thermal energy also we have solved.
In another case we have also seen both the sides are convective, this side convective, this
side also convective through boundaries and the material is getting conducted. So, we35
1
5
22.5 10 15 10 40
16 600
951.45
5 1040 873
600o
oXT X X
C
XT C      

   have solved that analytically in both the cases once when there was internal energy
generation and in another case when there was no internal energy generation, ‘right’.
If internal energy generation is there we cannot solve it analytically, we cannot solve it
by thermal resistance concept, but we have to solve it by analytical solution. So, we did it
by analytical solution and then we also solved when internal energy was not there
through the thermal resistance concept.
And, third one we have done when a constant heat flux was supplied that one boundary
and the other boundary was by convective boundary condition and the in material is
offering resistance. So, the temperature is dropping from one high one temperature to
another. So, whether it is how high or low all will depend on what kind of values you are
getting, what kind of values you are assuming for the different parameters like, heat
transfer coefficient like, heat flux like, you know conductivity like, your thickness of the
material or if there is internal energy generation.
So, depending on the  values  which  you are choosing, your this  thing will  also be
accordingly,  ‘right’.  So,  with  this  let  us  conclude  with  thermal  concept  with  one
dimensional heat transfer coefficient. So, we thank you and thank you for the next class,
ok, we will meet in the next class.
Thank you.