Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 18
Finned Surfaces (Contd.)
Good morning. So, we are dealing with that Finned Surface, ‘right’, the analysis of
finned  surface heat  transfer.  So,  here we have  this  is  on 18th class  finned surface
continuation, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:46)
So, we go now, to that long fin we had said that the base temperature must be known,
‘right’. So, that we had defined to be θ0 = T0 - Te and that is θ0, ‘right’ theta at x is equal
to 0, ‘right’. So, we said that to find out these constants that is C 1 and C2 we need to
know boundaries to out of which one conventionally or generally it is taken as the fin
base temperature to be known. 
And thus to find out the second case that second boundary there could be three cases
appearing. One it can be a long fin or second it can be a; it can be negligible heat loss
from the tip of the fin and third one is maybe the convective boundary at the fin tip,
‘right’. So, these three cases may arise and let us look at one by one into them, ‘right’. So, long fin for that we can say that for a sufficiently long fin, sufficiently long fin means
there are step like this, ‘right’. So, if this is that material through which it is flowing and
if this is the fin which is attached to it, ‘right’. So, then this can be considered to be a
sufficiently long fin, ‘right’. So, similar to that when the fin is sufficiently long then we
can say it can be assumed that the temperature at the tip, the fin tip was this is the fin tip,
‘right’. 
So, this is the fin base where my this hand is holding it, this is the fin base and this is the
fin tip, ‘right’. So, we can assume that the temperature at the fin tip of the fin approaches
the temperature of the environment that is T e, ‘right’. So, this surrounding temperature T e
is assumed by the fin tip because, it is a long fin why the mechanism how it can be? So,
we have this and we are attaching this one, ‘right’ and the heat transfer is associated with
this one only, ‘right’ and this is the environment which is at T infinity, ‘right’.  So,
suppose for our main thing is this body where the heat is being transferred, ‘right’.
We have added this fin so, that the heat transfer is enhanced, ‘right’, now environment is
here. So, by the time any heat flowing through this and coming to the tip or the reverse
this fin is going and making it. So, the temperature which is associated at the tip that will
not be affected much by the base or by the basic where the fin is attached to, ‘right’. That
is why it can be said that the fin tip may attain the temperature of the environment easily.
So, that is the assumption for the long tip and this is how we have explained, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 05:15)
So, the mathematical formulation for this one dimensional steady state heat transfer in a
long fin this can be written as; 
  This was our governing equation and
valid  for x greater  than  0, ‘right’  and the boundary  condition  first which we have
assumed that theta x is equal to T 0 -T∞  there or T is Te rather we should say infinity
normally we denote. But, here it is give you we are giving T e that is environmental
temperature, ‘right’. 
In many cases you may see that the environmental temperature is denoted as T infinity
also; however, since here we are precisely depending it to be T e let us stick to that this is
Te. So, θx is T0 -Te at x is equal to 0 and is equal to θ0, ‘right’ and third one is θx, when it
is approaching a 0 as x tends to infinity, ‘right’. Now, as theta x this was the first one x
equal to 0, second is theta x tends to 0 as x tends to infinity because, if this x is tending to
long fin that is infinity, ‘right’. So, in that case this becomes equal to theta x becomes
equal to 0, ‘right’. So, T x also becomes equal to T 0 and this becomes equal it is also
tending towards 0, ‘right’. So, this is the second boundary second condition, ‘right’. 
Because, this is T infinity not Tx minus T0 Tx minus Te so, this also is approaching Te.
So, Te minus Te so, that becomes equal to 0, ‘right’. So, that is how we are making the
second boundary that theta x is tending towards 0 as x is tending towards infinity, ‘right’
and m is or m square is Ph by Ak, ‘right’. So, this by definition we had given earlier Ph
by Ak where we are said the unit of m is meter inverse, we have shown how it has come
as meter inverse, ‘right’. 
Now, we take the solution in the form that because we had said earlier that this can have
several types of solutions. It can be exponential, it can be hyperbolic any kind, ‘right’
though according to your suit, according to your requirement you can choose which type
of solution you are asked looking for. So, here in this case let us take the solution in the
form of exponential and then theta x becomes equal to C 1e-mx + C2emx. This is the
solution where we have the constants C 1 and C2 to be found out, ‘right’. 
So, we can apply this boundary that the second boundary, if we apply we get here that
which said x tends to infinity theta x tends to 0, ‘right’. So, this theta x tends to 0 as x
tends to infinity then C 2 becomes equal to 0, ‘right’. So, C 2 becomes equal to 0 andapplying the first boundary condition, first boundary was that theta x is equal to theta 0 at
x is equal to 0. So, this becomes theta 0 as x becomes 0 so, this C 1 becomes equal to
theta 0, ‘right’. 
So, we got C1 to be theta 0 and C 2 to be 0. So, substituting this into the general solution
which we got this that theta x is equal to C 1e-mx + C2emx. So, C1  has become equal to to
θ0 and C2 has become 0. So, we can write theta x equal to θ0×e-mx +C2. So, the solution
has become theta 0 theta x is equal to θ0×e-mx. 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:46)
Hence, the solution of the differential equation can be written in the form that the heat
flow through the fin can be determined, 
‘right’, this is one solution, ‘right’. So, second either by integrating the convective heat
transfer over the entire fin surface as Q is equal to 
evaluating heat transfer at the fin base that is  0 0
0( )( )
, ( )mxe
e
mxT x TxeT T
or x e

 
 

0( )L
xQ h p x dx

0( )|xd xQ Akdx
 (Refer Slide Time: 13:38)
And solving this the value of Q comes to equal to this that Q is equal to the result
obtained from these two equations are identical since, heat flow through the internal
surfaces by convection is equal to the heat flow at the fin base by conduction. Assuming
the conduction equation and with the help of the temperature distribution obtained as
theta x we can write the heat flow as Q is equal to 
this Ak when is going inside then it is on the top Ak square k square. So, this Ak and this
square goes out and then it becomes under root hP Ak, ‘right’ that is what we have
written that instead of Ak m under root hP Ak. So, the Q has become equal to 
This is the cube, ‘right’, since m was under root Ph/Ak. This is how we have found out
that for a long fin the temperature distribution within the body, within the fin it was theta
0 theta x is equal to θ0×e-mx,  that was one solution. 
This was the temperature distribution within the fin and the heat flow we have taken that
Q is becoming equal to theta 0 under root PhkA so much watt, ‘right’. So, this is for long
fin, ‘right’, now let us look into the other one that is if the fin at the tip as negligible fin, I
mean heat loss, ‘right’. 0 0
sin ,Q Ak m PhkA W
Phce mAk  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:42)
So, if we take the second thing that fins with negligible heat loss at the fin tip; here heat
transfer area at the fin tip is generally small compared with the lateral area that is what
we had shown repeatedly. So, this was our base and this was our fin. So, this lateral area,
which we have compared to that of the fin tip area, is very small negligible, ‘right’. So,
heat transfer area at the fin tip is generally small compared with the lateral area of the fin
for heat transfer, ‘right’. So, under these situations the heat loss from the fin tip is
negligible  compared  with  that  from  the  heat  loss  from  the  fin  tip  from  the  lateral
surfaces, ‘right’. 
And the boundary condition at the fin tip characterizing this situation this can be written
as dθ/dx = 0 at x = L, ‘right’. The mathematical formulation of this fin problem this can
be written as   , that is 0 less than equal to x less
than equal to L. This is valid this governing equation is valid between 0 to L of x. So,
is the governing equation. Now, we need the boundary conditions,
‘right’. 222( )( ) 0 0d xm x in x Ldx   (Refer Slide Time: 19:01)
So, to have the boundary we can write that the boundary conditions are that 
And theta x what we had defined? Theta x we had defined as T x- Te, ‘right’. So that
means, that at x goes to 0 change with x there is no change in the θ, ‘right’ dθ/dx = 0. 
If  this  be  true  then  the  solution  we  can  take  for  this  is
 And if we applied the second boundary condition, the what is the second boundary?
That is at x is equal to L dθ(x)/dx is equal to 0 then we get C2 is equal to 0 from here,
‘right’ this is the second boundary. And, putting the first boundary we get C1 is equal to
θ0 /cosh mL that is at x goes to 0 theta x is theta 0 from that. So, by substituting into this
equation we get C1 is equal to θ 0 /cosh mL, ‘right’. 0 0( ) 0
( ), 0ex T T at x
d xand at x Ldx 
   
 (Refer Slide Time: 21:20)
Then the solution then comes to be equal to so, the solution can be written in the form.
So, our solution for the case where it is fin at
the tip negligible heat loss, for that we have taken the solution to be in the form of
hyperbolic solution, ‘right’. So, from there the we have found out the constants with the
boundary conditions boundary 1 and boundary 2, boundary 1 was theta is theta 0 at x is
equal to 0. 
And second boundary was d theta dx is equal to 0 at x is equal to L, ‘right’, from there
we found out and got that C 2 became equal to 0 and C1 became equal to C 1 become equal
to cos hyperbolic; let me check that C 1 became equal to θ0 /cosh mL, ‘right’. So, if this be
true  then  we  can  write  that  the  solution  of  this  is  
  this  is  equal  to the heat flow rate Q through the fin that can be written as to
 
because, we have seen Ak times m, earlier we have seen Ak times m this is equal to tan
hyperbolic Ph by a PhkA, ‘right’. So, that we have shown also how it has become that
Ak times m is equal to under root PhkA. So, Q has become equal to theta 0 under root
PhkA tan hyperbolic mL, ‘right’. Now, if this is the limiting condition because if it
satisfies; that means, our solution is also correct. What is the limiting condition? If mL is
sufficiently  large,  now  what  does  it mean if mL is  sufficiently  large?  That means,
product of m and L, ‘right’ so, product of m and L. And then what is m? M was under
root Ph over kA, ‘right’. 
So, generally this Ph over kA is small; so, this means that if L is going large, ‘right’. So,
if mL is sufficiently large; that means, tanh mL becomes equal to; that means, tanh mL
that becomes very close to 1, ‘right’. So, tan hyperbolic mL this becomes very close to 1
and this is meaning that the expression for Q which we have written here as theta 0 Ph
under root PhkA tan hyperbolic mL this expression reduces to that for the long fin. 
So, if you remember for long fin because tan hyperbolic m L that becomes a 1. So, theta
0 so, Q has become theta 0 under root PhkA which was the solution for Q for long fin,
‘right’. So, this means that for long fin whatever Q we are getting and if the m L value is
sufficiently high large then the Q also for the fin with negligible heat loss at the fin tip
that is also becoming same, ‘right’. And tan hyperbolic m L is equal to say 0.76, 0.96
and 0.99 for m L is equal to 1 or 2 or 3. 
So, if mL value is 0.76 then this tan hyperbolic mL this a tan hyperbolic mL equal to
0.76 is the mL value is 1, it becomes tan hyperbolic mL becomes 0.96 if mL is 2 or tan
hyperbolic mL becomes almost 0.99 or close to 1 if it is 3. So, beyond that it is always
equal to 1, almost it can be taken like 0.9999 as many, ‘right’. So, this says that we have
come to the solution where that the fin with long fin and the fin with negligible heat loss
at the surface, so that a fin tip, sorry, at the fin tip that has the same Q, ‘right’. This is a limiting condition which since, it has become same it has become identical with
the long fin we can say the solution which we have made is correct. And the solution has
been cross checked with the value of Q for both long fin and fin with negligible heat loss
at the fin tip. Because, if the value of mL is becoming high, or large, so that it is
converting tanh mL, very close to 1, ‘right’. So, the value of Q that became equal to theta
0 under root PhkA which was also true for the long fin, ‘right’. 
So, with this let us stop today because our time is now over and we will have the third
one that is the convective boundary, ‘right’, that convective boundary solution that will
have still remaining for the fin or fin analysis, ‘right’. But, be sure that you are also
doing some problem at home so, that you can come to know and you get solving the
problems gives you some idea about the numerals. 
So, that is very much required. So, I hope you will do it and if we can do it here fine
otherwise if the time is also limited then we will ask you to do at home. And if there is
any doubt anywhere you may contact us as in the portal we have said ok.
Thank you.