Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 13
One Dimensional Heat Transfer Through Cylinders (Contd.)
 Good afternoon. So, we have done on cylindrical coordinate both solid cylinder as well
as hollow cylinder; how to do analytical solution that we have done, ‘right’. And today is
the 13th class on that One Dimensional Heat Transfer Through Cylinders, this will do
today also, ‘right’, ok.
So, one dimensional heat transfer through cylinders, this will do today and we said that
we will come to the solution of problems, ‘right’. So, with let us go to that we have done
this problem earlier and this problem also. Now, let us do this one which we have not
done.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:29)
A hollow  cylinder having constant thermal  conductivity k is maintained  at uniform
temperature T1 and T2. This we have done. This solution of it we have done and we have
seen that the area is coming Log mean area, ‘right’ and the solution it came to be like
this, ‘right’.This was the solution for that. So, where R was t/kA m and Am was 
So, now we will do another problem. A hollow cylinder with inner radius R is equal to A
and outer radius R is equal to B is heated at the inner surface at a rate of E 0 W/m2 and
dissipates heat by convection from the outer surface into a fluid at temperature T e with
the  heat  transfer  coefficient  h.  There  is  no  energy  generation,  and  the  thermal
conductivity of the solid is assumed to be constant.So, we have to derive the equations for the determination of temperature T 1 and T2 of the
inner and outer surfaces of the cylinder. And then, we have to also quantify what will be
the surface temperature T 1 and T2 for the given set of values; A is equal to 5 centimeter,
B is equal to 7 centimeter, h is 500 W/m2ºC, Te is 100ºC, k conductivity to be 20 W/mºC
and the heat flux q0 is 105 W/m2. Then, we have to solve it.
Now, here again there is no internal energy generation, ‘right’. So that means, we can
also use the thermal resistance concept. So, we read once again quickly a hollow cylinder
with inner radius R is equal to A and outer radius R is equal to B is heated at the inner
surface at a rate of E 0 Watt per meter square and dissipates heat by convection from the
outer surface in to a fleet at temperature T e with a transfer coefficient H. There is no
internal energy generation and the thermal conductivity of the solid is also assumed to be
constant.
Derive the equation for the determination of the temperature T 1 and T2 of the inner and
outer surfaces of the cylinder. Also what will be the surface temperature T 1 and T2 for the
given set of values A equal to 5 centimeter, B equal to 7 centimeter, h is 500 W/m2ºC, Te
is 100ºC, k is W/mºC and q 0 heat flux to be 105 Watt per meter square.
So, if we see this we can make this like that. As you see that we have taken a cylinder,
this is a hollow cylinder, ‘right’. This white portion is saying to be hollow, ‘right’ and it
has a radius of B and also a radius of A and this surface is T 1 at this inner radius andouter radius is T2, ‘right’ and the length of the cylinder is H. The environment is outside
is fluid flow at temperature T e and the heat transfer coefficient of h, ‘right’.
Then, we can do this with the thermal resistance concept, ‘right’. With the thermal
resistance concept, we can do this solution of this problem, ‘right’. So, what we do? We
do the analogous of the thermal resistance, ‘right’.
So, heat flux is coming we are given q 0 equal to some value afterwards ok. Now, q 0 is
coming; so, Q is equal to q 0 times area, ‘right’. So, area is here 2πrH ‘right’ or 2π yes, in
this case it is A; instead of r, we are writing A, because our given is Q is equal to 2 π A
into H; H is the length, ‘right’. So, our radius given is A. 
So, inner radius is that; so, that is what we are supplying Q, ‘right’. The same Q is going
out through the other side and the inner temperature is T 1, ‘right’. So, there is a resistance
and this resistance is equivalent to ln(B/A)/2πkH which we have seen earlier and the
outer surface is at the boundary. It is a fluid at temperature T e with a heat transfer
coefficient of H, ‘right’. 
So, this is the resistance which is equivalent to 1/Ah, where A is 2πBHh, ‘right’. So,
2πBH is area here and h is a transfer coefficient. So, we have seen that this is equivalent
to 1/Ah, ‘right’ and this 1/Ah is equal to 1/2πBH is the area and h is the heat transfer
coefficient, ‘right’. So, this is what we have.
And this through the body, we have seen that earlier it is t, ‘right’ that was t by B H, this
was ln(B/A) that is the 2 areas over 2πkH, ‘right’.So, if these be true, then we can write that solution of T e to be equal to the solution of it
we can write from the figure which we have given 2πAHq 0, ‘right’;
 
So, this we got and now the solution of this we get equal to by equating the first and the
last term, we get that first and last term if we equate; then, we get T 1 is 
This is by equating first and third ‘right’; first and third means, let us go back to that,
first and third means here, ‘right’. So, 
Now, if we put the values by putting the numerical values, we get T 1 which is given
‘right’ the value of A, value of B and A those are given like A is given 5 centimeter let
us take that this black color. These goes up A is 5 centimeter; B is 7 centimeter; h is 500
W/m2ºC. Te is 100ºC; k is 20 W/mºC and q 0 is 105, ‘right’. If that be true, then we can
rewrite and say that T 1 is equal to 0.05 by 20 because our expression was like that. If we
look at our expression was like that, it was 


1 2 20
121 ln /22
n /1
2 2e
eT T T TAHqB ABHhkH
T T
l B A
kH BHh

   


1 0lneA B AT q Tk A Bh     
2 0eAT q TBh 
1 0lneA B AT q Tk A Bh     So, by substituting the values,          
I repeat again and again in all the classes, I am repeating that whenever you are doing
this calculations, please also check whether the values are correctly calculated or not; if it
is not, so please bring to our notice; so, that we also can rectify accordingly. Hopefully it
is ok, but yes can be said. 
Now, I cannot do this calculation here because that will take unnecessarily some more
time and which may not allow us to do some new and new things, ‘right’. So, that is why
it is already solved and you are requested to calculate it again and check and if there is
anything wrong, then bring to our notice. If it is a let of course, nothing to be said. So, T 1
came to be 327.98 ºC and T 2 and from the expression of T 2, if we see that whatever is T 2?
So,  So that means, that the if you remember we
had taken this, ‘right’, this was our A and according to this it is 5 centimeter and this was
B which is according to this is 7 centimeter, ‘right’. And we have found out that the
temperature at the inner one; so, here the temperature at the inner one T 1 is equal to
327.98; whereas, the temperature at the outer one is 242.86.
Whereas, our outside ambient temperature was hundred degree; that means, this heat if
you if you plot, the thickness versus temperature; if it is thickness, ‘right’ thickness
versus temperature. So, this is the 0; so, 0th your temperature was around 327 and from
the temperature has come down to 242 not 48, 242, ‘right’. 242.86. So, it was 242.86 and
from there the temperature went down to this, where it is it was 327. So, T 1 was 327
sorry. 
So, T1 was 327. So, if we plot this that 327.98and this came down to 242.86. So, 242.86;
that  means,  the  inner  one  had  higher  temperature  than  the  outer  one  and  it  was
dissipating heat to the ambient at 100ºC and heat transfer coefficient of 500W/m2ºC. So,
this way we can solved the problems. 
Now, if we look at some other problem, if we look at; so, this is how we are doing. So, if
we recapitulate that what we have done on T 1, T2 of the thermal resistance concept as
well  we  have  done  on  the  internal  energy  generation,  where  internal  energy  was510.05 0.07 0.05ln 10 10020 0.05 0.07 500
327.98oT XX
C     

2 0eAT q TBh 
520.0510 100 242.860.07 500oT X CX  generated,  ‘right’. So, there we have done and also the thermal  resistance  concept,
‘right’.
So, in that thermal resistance, here it was much more easier where it was general that T 1
was C1ln a+ C2 and this was T2 was C1ln b+C2 and we found out C 1 to be
 and we also found out C 2 to be 
So, once we did this, then we also did that this that T(r) is
equal to T1 minus and so, what I would like to highlight here. 
In this is that here we had done based on this, ‘right’, this was based on this firmly did
here by integrating this that, but when we came to the yes t was k by A m, fine A0 minus
A0 by l; so, hollow cylinder when we came to this another hello we had done, ‘right’.
This one no, I hope with a resistance concept we had done one only and with the internal
energy generation we have done another one only.However, so in the internal energy generation, if there is no. So, in the energy concept,
then you have to do like this that from here let us let us go to the other one, ‘right’.
So, when we are doing internal energy concept, here it is only three there can be some
port. So, in that case, so what do you need; so, these resistances whatever you have, you
go on adding, ‘right’. So, and these resistances you have to know, ‘right’; so, these
resistances you have to know as if that Q quantity of heat is coming and that Q quantity
of heat is going out, ‘right’.
So, this has to be kept in mind that Q quantity of heat is coming in and Q quantity of heat
is going out and these resistances depending on whether it is heat flux or with that it is a
temperature or it is a another temperature or it is a convective boundary. So, whatever wethe situation, you have to find out the resistances, ‘right’ and then, since you know that Q
is flowing. So, Q is equal to like here it is 2πAHq 0; since it is a heat flux, ‘right’. So,
2πAHq0 that is q0 into A that you know, ‘right’.
Similarly, here you know the resistance, ‘right’ ln of B over A/2πkH or 2πkH ‘right’; so,
this you know. So, similarly the convective boundary that is also known that is 1/2πBH,
‘right’. So, had it been that one more resistance is there. So, that also you have to add,
‘right’. So, then that he like here (T 1-Te) is the driving force or ∆T ‘right’; so, T 1-Te is the
driving force or delta T.
So, that by adding all or as we have said that adding 1 and 3 or are equating 1 and 3 or 1
and 2 or 2 and 3 depending on how you are solving it what you need to solve, ‘right’,
which we have done here. In this case also we have done here that, we have taken that
this one this one this one and this one, ‘right’. So, we added them when we added them,
we got T1 minus Te over ln(B/A), ‘right’.
Over 2πkH +1/2πBHh. This is by adding everybody, ‘right’. So, that is q 0 into A, this is
equal to all these, ‘right’. Then, from there may be equating this and that and maybe
equating this and that you can get T 1, T2 all equations and then, by solving them means
you it cannot be that it will be all the time very simple, ‘right’.
So, it may not be all the time it is very simple equations, but it is also known that number
of unknown and number of equations if they are same, then it can it is solvable. Yes, it
may take some time, it may take some iterations or it may take some simplification. So,
that may be required, but you may have to do that equating 1 and 2 or 1 and 3 or
depending on what it is coming that you have to make and then you have to solve them,
‘right’. And as earlier you have seen that in this problem itself it came that you are given
some data and based on that the numerical values you have to find out, ‘right’. So, this is
how you need to solve and you need to do the solutions and numerals also, ‘right’.
So, this we have done T 1 from there equating this and we got the T 2 also and then, by
substituting the values 0.05, 5 centimeter and 7 centimeter were the 2 radii given, ‘right’
and we got it. Then, we can also find out if it is required what is the value of capital Q,
‘right’.What is the value of capital Q that also we can find out because we know Q is equal to
2πAHh, ‘right’. 
So, that can be easily found out or this was 2πAH and not h q 0, ‘right’. 2πAHq0. So, that
can be easily found out. q 0 if it is given; H is known, A is known, π is known. So, what is
the value of Q that can be found out, ‘right’. 
With  this,  we  come  to  the  end  of  this  one  dimensional  heat  transfer,  ‘right’;  one
dimensional heat transfer on cylindrical coordinate, ‘right’. So, we will do next time the
spherical coordinate, ‘right’ on the sphere, ok.
Thank you.