Thermal Operation in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 14
One Dimensional Heat Transfer
Good morning. So, we have done on cylindrical coordinate, also earlier on Cartesian
coordinate  One  Dimensional  Heat  Transfer,  ‘right’.  Now,  we  will  do  that  one
dimensional heat transfer in spherical coordinate, ‘right’. So, this is the lecture number
14 and we are now moving towards the sphere, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:49)
So,  in  this  case  the  temperature  distribution  in  one  dimensional,  steady  state,  heat
conduction in sphere with energy generation at the rate of E(r) Watt per meter cube this
can be written as      So, this again I am saying so, it is a
repeat, but still our general equation was if  conductivity  is  constant,
energy generation is 0,. And, it is steady state condition.
And, here when we were with Cartesian coordinate that time n was equal to 0, n was
equal to 0 and we also took that r to be equal to x, ‘right’, but when into a cylinder we
had taken n is equal to 1 and r of course, equal to 1. But, when it is now in the spherical
coordinate then; obviously, r is equal to r, but n is equal to now 2. And, that is why these221 ( )0d dT E rrr dr dr k    
0nd dTrdr dr   terms had come , and  this  is  the  basic  governing
equation, ‘right’. 
So,  with  the  help  of  boundary  conditions,  it  is  possible  to  know  the  temperature
distribution T(r) in the sphere and the heat flux q r is to be determined from the relation, q
r is equal to minus k dT /dr of at any r; so, much of W/m2. So, if we want to solve it then
we need to do the integration and then put the boundary conditions, ‘right’.
So, if we want to solve it then on integration, we get, first integration, we get 
So, these are the two solutions these are the two integration constants and after two
integrations we get it, ‘right’.
Now, it is very earlier as you have seen that when it was a solid cylinder, then we had
taken  at  the  center  to  be  we  had  taken  the  center  to  be  under  constant  boundary
condition. That was the dT/dr is equal to 0, ‘right’, dT/dr is equal to 0; that means, this
was assumed to be insulated. Similarly, for sphere also if it is a solid sphere then at the
center there also, we can assume the same boundary that is if it is a solid dT/dr at r is
equal to 0.221 ( )0d dT E rrr dr dr k    
0 12
20 12( )
3
, ( )
6dT r E Cr
dr k r
E Cand T r r C
k r  
   But, if it is a hollow sphere, ‘right’, then two dimensional picture will appear like this
only if it is a hollow sphere, ‘right’. So, the else it will have 1 a and it will have 1 a area
in one radius another radius, ‘right’. So, we have to get the boundaries also accordingly
‘right’.  So,  for  the  cases  of  hollow  cylinder  one  of  the  three  types  of  boundary
conditions, that is boundary condition of first kind, or boundary condition of second
kind, or boundary condition of third kind, that is boundary condition under constant
temperature  condition,  or  boundary  condition  under  constant  heat  flux  boundary
condition, or the boundary condition under convective boundary condition.
Any one of them or in combination can be the two boundaries on the hollow sphere
‘right’. So, that will help in determining the two constants. But for solid spheres, like the
solid cylinder just now as I said, one boundary is specified at the outer surface and
another boundary at the center of the sphere.
And this can be given like this can be given like this that at r is equal to T(r) is equal to
finite at r is equal to 0, that is one boundary, or it can be said in other way that dT/dr is
equal to 0 at r is equal to 0, ‘right’. Where your boundary though it is given, it is like that
you have this and this is the direction of the heat flow and this is the radius solid, ‘right’.
So, that is one and if it is for hollow then; obviously, you have a radius here a you have a
radius here b, ‘right’ sorry a radius b and the direction of the flow is this, then we can
depending on what are the boundaries you are given accordingly you can solve them,‘right’. So, it is easy as earlier also we have done for Cartesian, we have done for
cylinder and now we are doing for the sphere, ‘right’.
So, let us now do for the sphere that with a problem. Problem is like this uniform
temperatures T1 and T2 of a hollow sphere is maintained at it is inner and outer surfaces
at r=A and at r= B respectively. The thermal conductivity k of the solid is constant.
Derive an expression for the one dimensional steady state temperature distribution T(r)
in the sphere; also derive an expression for the radial heat flow rate Q through the hollow
sphere. And thought, what is the expression for the thermal resistance of the sphere? 
So, I repeat uniform temperatures, T 1 and T2 of a hollow cylinder hollow sphere is
maintained at it is inner and outer surfaces, at r is equal to A and r is equal to B
respectively. The thermal conductivity k of the solid is constant. Derive an expression for
the one dimensional steady state temperature distribution T(r) in the sphere. Derive an
expression for the radial heat flow rate Q through the hollow sphere. And, third what is
the resistor, what is the expression for the thermal resistance of the sphere? So, these three we can do easily from the experience what you have again, in case of
rectangular coordinate or cylindrical coordinate, ‘right’. Now for this, but the thing is
similar that according to the given problem we can write d/dr, because here we are said
that you have a hollow sphere, but steady state no internal energy generation. So, these
conditions if it is applied and conductivity is constant, if these are applied then from the
governing equation straightway we can write 
2
1
2
12
12( )0
( )
, ( )
int ,
( )
, ( )d dT rr in A r B
dr dr
T r T at r A
and T r T at r B
On egrations we get
dT r C
dr r
Cand T r C
r     
 
 

  Now, a hollow sphere of radius r is equal to A and outside radius r is equal to B is
electrically heated at the inner surface at a constant rate of q 0 W/m2. At the outer surface
it  dissipates  heat  by  convection  into  a  fluid  at  temperature  T e with  a heat  transfer
coefficient h. The thermal conductivity k of the solid is constant.
Derive expressions for the determination of the inner and outer surface temperatures T 1
and T2 of the sphere. Calculate the inner and outer surface temperatures for A is equal to
4 centimeter and B is equal to 6 centimeter, h is 500W/m2ºC, T outside or ambient our
environment Te is equal to 90 ºC, conductivity of the material is 20 W/mºC and the heat
flux q is equal to q0 is equal to 105 W/m2, ‘right’.
So, we repeat quickly hollow sphere of inside radius r is equal to A and outside radius r
is equal to B is electrically heated at the inner surface at a constant rate of q 0 W/m2. At
the outer surface it dissipates heat by convection in to a fluid at temperature T e with high
heat transfer coefficient h. The thermal conductivity k of the solid is constant. Derive
expressions for the determination of the inner and outer surface temperatures T 1 and T2
of the sphere.
Calculate the inner and outer surface temperatures for A is equal to 4 centimeter B is 6
centimeter h is 500 W/m2ºC, Te is 90 ºC, k 20 W/mºC and q 0, 105 W/m2.Then from the thermal analogy concept, or thermal  resistance concept, or electrical
analogy concept whatever we call, we can solve it like this, ‘right’. (B-A) by that your
first thing is your first thing is that this is the heat flux, which is getting in to the area. So,
area is 4πA2 is the area or 4πA2 square is given here into q 0 the first. Then this Q is
flowing through this resistance or metal resistance that is    ,  then  it  is  also
flowing through the other resistance that is ,  ‘right’,  that  is  the  convective
boundary, ‘right’.
So, if this is true then by applying thermal resistance network, we can write
So, like the previous one we can here also say previous means I mean in the in the
cylindrical coordinate where we did it similar.4B A
kAB
21
4B h

21 2 202
1
24144
1
44e
eT T T TA qB AkABB h
T T
B A
kABB h

  
178.8 degrees centigrade is the T 2. So, that whether it is coming correct or not 178.8
degrees centigrade or 245.5 degrees centigrade, please you check and then let us know
whether there is any mistake or not, hopefully there should not be any mistake, ‘right’,
but you can never tell because the calculator when you are using, ‘right’ there could be
some.
So, you please check it and let us let me know with that the values are correct or not, but
again on the thermal resistance concept that when we are using you have to keep in mind
irrespective  of  the  irrespective  of  the  coordinate  system,  whether  it  is  Cartesian
coordinate,  or cylindrical  coordinate,  or spherical  coordinate  means, whether it is  a
rectangle or slab or a cylinder or a sphere, wherever it is if there is no internal energy
generation.And, generally the conductivity is also constant, because if conductivity is not constant
what  it  can  be  conductivity  can  be  a  function  of  temperature,  ‘right’.  Generally
conductivity is a function of temperature, but for the given range of temperature many
materials may not have any change in the conductivity or if they are really change that is
so, in appreciable that it may not be considered. So, that is why conductivity constant
taken is easier.
So, if it is taken then whenever you are doing it the there should not be any internal
energy generation. So, once there is no internal energy generation, then you can do the
thermal resistance concept and solve it, ‘right’. So, our today’s time is over. So, we will
do in the next class subsequent problems and maybe this resistance because here we are
doing all in series. So, there could be some resistances where it is not all series so, that
we will try to do in the next class, ok.
Thank you.