Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 12
One Dimensional Heat Transfer Through Cylinders (Contd.)
 
Good morning, so we were discussing about the steady state One Dimensional Heat
Transfer in your cylindrical coordinate, ‘right’. So, it is lecture 12, ‘right’, so it was by
mistake it was written lecture 11, so now, it is 12, ‘right’. So, we now go to that
straightaway, where we were solving the problem. You remember, we were given a
problem, so let us go directly to that.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:02)
That this problem was given energy is generated at a constant rate of E 0 W/m3 in a solid
cylinder with a radius r is equal to ‘a’ maintains a constant temperature T 1. Derive an
expression for one dimensional, radial, steady state temperature distribution T(r) and the
heat flux q(r), ‘right’.
So, this is to be done and also we are suppose to calculate for different E 0, r and T1 what
is the center temperature, ‘right’. So, we had come to the level that we had integrated,
‘right’ and then, we had found out the two integration constant C 1 and C2 by utilizing the
boundary conditions; two boundary conditions; one boundary was dT/dr is equal to 0 at r
is equal to 0, that is the it is similar to that there is no heat transfer at r is equal to 0,‘right’ and the second boundary was at r is equal to a T(r) is equal to T 1, ‘right’. So, with
these two boundaries, we found out C 1 to be 0 and then the second boundary, where our
time was over, second boundary, we found out C 2.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:51)
In the previous classes also I said whenever we are doing problems and you also please
check that the whether the values coming like this or not. There may be some mistake
calculation mistake or by as you have seen somewhere in some places by cut and paste
there are some mistake. 
So, mistakes can happen, so please do cross check and if it is different, then please bring
to our notice that it is not, ‘right’. Hopefully, it will not be, but still we cannot say that it202 1
2201
0
7 2;4
( ) 1 ; ( ) det min4
( )( )2
1 10 (0.02), (0) 150 212.54 16oE aC T Thetemperaturedistributioninthecylinde rbecomesk
E a rT r T and theheat fluxq r is er ed fromitssefiniti onk a
dT r E rq r kdr
X XNow T CX
and 
         
  
  
75 2 01 10 0.02, ( ) 1 10 /2 2E a X Xq a X W m  will not be. So, please check, then if it is all right no problem, but if it is different, then
bring to our notice we shall definitely do the correction again and then tell you, ‘right’.
there is an internal energy generation, your question may come in mind that you said that
this is the axis and this is ‘a’, ‘right’; this is ‘a’, ‘right’ and this side is T 1 and this side is
also T1. sorry, this side is also T 1. 
So, if this is true then and this T 1 value is 150 oC, then how come this T 0 is 212.5, ‘right’?
So, that may be a question arising in your mind, but the thing is that here we have said
there is an internal energy generation. So, that is equivalent to 1×107 W / m3, ‘right’. So,
that is why the temperature distribution has become like this that here 150 sorry; here it
was 150; rest to 212 and the other side is same because this is the mirror image, ‘right’.
So, this can happen because there is internal energy generation. So, this way if there is
internal  energy generation,  we can solve the  problem  by analytical  method  and by
integrating and then, putting the boundaries, we can solve it, ‘right’, so this is one way.
Now, let us look into the next.
A hollow  cylinder having constant thermal  conductivity k is maintained  at uniform
temperature T1 and T2 at the inner surface r at r is equal to ‘a’ and at the outer surface at r
is equal to ‘b’ respectively. Derive an expression for the one dimensional steady state
temperature distribution T(r) in the cylinder. Also derive an expression for the radial
flow radial heat flow rate capital Q through the cylinder over a length H. Derive an
expression for the thermal resistance of a hollow cylinder of length H, ‘right’ and youremember that in the some previous class, we said also that to solve any problem please
read at least twice, so that you first time you whenever you are reading.
So,  that  time  only  you  can  make  what  we  what  is  given  and  what  we  done,  but
subsequently on the second time be sure that this is given and this is to be done, so that is
fundamental. So, it here also it is like that a hollow cylinder having constant thermal
conductivity k is maintained at uniform temperatures T 1and T2, at the inner surface at r is
equal to ‘a’ and the outer surface at r is equal to ‘b’ respectively.
Derive an expression for the one dimensional steady state temperature distribution T r in
the cylinder as well. Derive an expression for the radial heat flow rate capital Q through
the cylinder over a length H and also derive an expression for the thermal resistance,
‘right’; for the thermal resistance of the hollow cylinder of length H, ‘right’. Now, if we
remember, we had said earlier that if you have; if you have a hollow cylinder like this,
‘right’ that is what is said. So, this is the axis; that means, if we take this side that is good
enough to say the other side. 
So, if we; that means, here the one radius is given that is at ‘a’ and the other radius is
given at ‘b’. The same is true on this two sides also, this is ‘a’ and that is ‘b’, ‘right’. So,
this means if we take only this one side, then this side has can be eliminated ‘right’. So,
to do that what we can do? Here, we draw it again perhaps we have drawn that it appears
to be like this and this is b and this is sorry rewritten, this is b and this was a, ‘right’; this
is a and this is b. So, the net this one is b minus a, ‘right’. So, b minus a is the thickness
through which the heat is flowing, either this way or this way depending on what is the
temperature.
Now, the temperature given is also here it is say T 1 at r is equal to a. So, here it is T 1 and
here  it is  T2, ‘right’,  then  and there  is  no internal  energy  generation.  Now, if  you
remember in Cartesian coordinate, we said if there is no a internal energy generation,
then the solution becomes easier because then you can utilize the electrical resistance
concept also or equivalent to thermal resistance concept, ‘right’. So, from the resistance concept, we can write we can solve it like this; we can solve it
like this that this is the probable solution is 
T(r) is equal to T2 not T1, So, if these
be true, then we can say that integrating between that integrating the two integrations 
1
1( )0
( )
, ( )d dT rr ina r bdr dr
T r T atr a
and T r T atr b     
 
 
1
1 2( )
, ( ) lndT r C
dr r
and T r C r C
 Then if this  be true, we have 2 boundaries and we can solve it like the boundary
conditions given are 
So, by I mean what we did we subtracted equation 2 from equation 1, ‘right’. So, we are
equation  1  which  subtracted  from  equation  2  that  is  why  it  became
 .
Therefore, C1 is known now we can substitute anywhere either in 1 or 2, this value of C 1
and we can get the value of 
  So, C2 ln becomes this becomes,
‘right’ like that and we can we can say that C 2 has become like this.
1 1 2
2 1 2
2 11
2 1 2 1ln
ln
ln
ln,
lnT C a C
T C b C
T TCb
a
aand C T T Tb
a 
 
    
      
So, this on rearrangement again, it is coming
1
2 1
2 1
1
1 2ln( ),
ln
( )( ) 2
ln
2 2
2
lnr
T r TaHencebT T
a
dT rQ q r Xarea k X rH
dr
T T
b
C ak X rH X k rH
r r
kHT Tb
a
 
   
   
   

      
 
   

 
1 2
ln
2
ln
,
2
ln (2 ) /(2 )
2T TTQ
bR
a
kH
b
aNow R
kH
b a bH aH
b a kH

 
 
 
  
 
  


So, we have multiplied by 2 π a H both in the numerator with b and a, so it goes up. This
is what we have explicitly made according to our future goal that we want to bring it to
the tune, as we have shown delta T by R is Q and delta T, we have said T 1 - T2, but are
we  as  now  coming  to  this  that  this  is  equal  to  that  R  is  T/kA m,  ‘right’.
Am called log mean area, ‘right’; A m is the log mean area. So, R is 
Am is the log logarithmic area or mean area, thickness is t; small t. Though, small t is
generally denoted for time, but in many cases where time is not t because here it is time
independent. So, that is why t is taken as the thickness, in many cases t is also taken as
thickness and not only the time. Either time or thickness normally this is these are the
two connotations used.
So, t is the thickness which is b minus a, that is thickness of the cylinder. So, we can
write R= T/ kAm and Am we have already written, ‘right’. So, again we have come to the
end of the class. So, here we have seen today that we are able to do both for this solid
cylinder  analytical  solution  and for the  hollow  cylinder,  we have  done the  not the
analytical solution, again it is of course, I cannot say it is analytical solution, but not like
that it is with respect to the thermal resistance concept.0
0
0, ; ,
ln( / )
,
2
2
logim
m i
i
mt A Aor R where A
kA A A
where
A aH areaof innersurfaceof cylinder
A bH areaof outersurfaceof cylinder
A arithmicmeanarea
t b a thicknessof cylinder
 
 
 

  And with the thermal resistance concept, we have found out and shown that you know
anything is equal to delta T/R or driving force this is called driving force by resistance,
‘right’. Any parameter which can be written as driving force by resistance; driving force
in this case is temperature this is delta T and resistance R that also you have shown,
‘right’. Hopefully, you will go through and in the next class we will do some problem
solutions, ok.
Thank you.