Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 19
Finned Surfaces (Contd.)
So, we are discussing about the finned heat transfer analysis. We have done for fin with
long fin or we have also done for fin with negligible heat loss at the fin tip. And, these
were the two situations which we said and we were left with the third that is fin with the
convective boundary, ‘right’; obviously, that fin with the convective boundary will not
be that easy. So, we have come to the 19th class lecture number 19 we are handling
Finned Surface and this is being continued, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:23)
So,  we  are  now  going  to  that  fin  with  convective  boundary,  ‘right’.  So, fins  with
convection at the tip. So, this is the most realistic boundary condition, why we are saying
this is the most realistic boundary condition? Because, that most of the cases as we said
that if this is that and if this is the fin tip, ‘right’, fin. 
So, then when we are saying in one case we are saying it is a long fin and in other case
we are saying that fin tip is attaining the boundary temperature. These two are more
hypothetical than that the fin is under some convective boundary condition. So, that is
why this is being said that this situation is more realistic than the other two.So, we also do solve this one and the mathematical formulation for this can be written,
the generalized equation is     and the boundaries.
The first boundary is 
This we said conventionally this is assumed and which we are taken as one boundary.
Second boundary that varied with long fin that varied with fin with negligible heat loss at
the fin tip. So, this is the third that is the fin with convective boundary condition. So, that
boundary condition we can write that conduction must be equal to convection, ‘right’ or
some of the convection and conduction equal to 0 in the fin.
So,  here,  we  write  that
 .  And,  the  solution  of  heat
transfer, we can write in the form as shown above. 
So, this is a solution and we have to find out the values of C 1 and C2 with the help of the
boundary conditions. A first boundary was theta x is equal to T 0 -Te at theta x is equal to
0 which was equal to theta 0. And, the second solution was theta x is equal to cos;
second boundary was k d theta x dx plus h e into theta x is equal to 0 at x is equal to L,
‘right’. 
So, if we look at the solution of it the solution came to be equal to that theta x is equal to
We  take  both  this  for  long  with
negligible heat loss at the fin tip and this convective boundary both the cases the solution
in the form of hyperbolic, ‘right’.222( )( ) 0 0d xm x in x Ldx   (Refer Slide Time: 06:26)
So, if we look at that application of boundary conditions to this lead to 
So, from these two equations if we look at the solution we can find out the values of C 1
and C2 ‘right’. So, determining the constants C 1 and C2 and replacing them into the
solution the temperature distribution in the fin that becomes equal to; so, let us look into
that what it is coming in. 0 1 2
2 1
1 2
2cosh sinh
, 0
sin ,
| sinh ( ) cosh ( )e
x L x LC mL C mL
and kC m h C
ce
dC m m L x C m m L xdx
C m

  
  
    
 (Refer Slide Time: 08:08)
Now, the limiting condition is appearing, ‘right’, what is that limiting condition which is
coming in? So, what is coming?
If ho, which corresponds to the no heat loss, if h is equal to 0, ‘right’, that is heat transfer
coefficient at the fin surface fin tip, ‘right’, that is, if h e is becoming 0; that means, that,
there is no heat loss from the fin tip, ‘right’. This leads to the solution obtained earlier h e
is 0 meaning that this factor is becoming 0, meaning this whole thing is becoming 0,
meaning this whole thing is again becoming 0, meaning it is becoming sin hyperbolic
mL over cos hyperbolic mL; that means, it is becoming tan hyperbolic mL, ‘right’.
And, this tan hyperbolic when it is becoming; that tan hyperbolic mL that with the value
of L this is becoming close to 1. So, Q is becoming theta 0 under root PhkA, ‘right’. So,
if it is theta 0 under root PhkA then we can say that the whole thing is now equivalent to
that fin with negligible heat loss, if h e that is environmentally transfer coefficient is 0,0 0
0( )( )
cosh ( ) ( )sinh ( )
cosh ( )sinh
sinh ( )cosh
cosh ( )sinhe
e
e
e
e
eT x Tx
T T
m L x h mk m L x
mL h mk mL
and the heat flow rate through the fin is
mL h mk mLQ PhkAmL h mk mL


  
   ‘right’. So, that is becoming equivalent to that heat loss with that heat loss with the
negligible heat loss at the fin tip, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:32)
So, we can say now that one end of a steel with a problem, ‘right’, we said that we will
try to do some problem if possible and if we do some problem; obviously, will be more
clear with the things ‘right’. So, let us take that a one end of a steel rod of diameter D is
equal to 2.5 centimeter, L = 25 centimeter, & thermal conductivity k is equal to 60 W /
(m  oC)  is  maintained  at  a  temperature  of  100  oC.  And,  the  rod  is  exposed  to  an
environmental air at T e is equal to 25 oC having a heat transfer coefficient h is equal to 50
W / (m2oC).
Now, calculate the heat loss from the rod, ‘right’. So, let us repeat a one end of steel rod
of diameter 2.5 centimeter, L = 25 centimeter, & thermal conductivity k 60 W / (moC) is
maintained at a temperature of 100oC. and the steel rod is exposed to an ambient air at Te
is equal to 25 oC having a heat transfer coefficient h equal to 50 W/m2oC; then calculate
the heat loss from the rod, ‘right’.
So, here we have not been said whether the end of the fin is what under what condition
whether it is a long fin or it is a fin with negligible heat loss at the tip nothing has been
said, ‘right’. So, let us assume that the length of the diameter ratio and which is equal to
almost 10 time which is 10 rather indicating that we can assume it to be a long fin, ‘right’because, we are given diameter is 2.5, length is 25. So, L by D that is becoming equal to
10; that means, length is 10 times more than the diameter.
So, if that be true we can assume that it to be a long fin and if we assume it to be a long
fin then first thing which we need to know that let us find out what is the value of m,
‘right’. So, 
Now, you remember, we said earlier that tan mL, if mL value is 1 it was somewhere 0.7
if it was 2 if it was 0.96 and if it was 3, it was almost 0.99, ‘right’. So, this value has
come 2.88; now if that be true then let us find out what is the value of the solution.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:19)
So, Q is equal to then
So, if we had used the equation for negligible heat loss the difference in the result would
have been a factor of tan hyperbolic mL and that is equal to mL = tanh 2.88 = 0.9937.
which is negligible because, this value is 25.5 and this 25.5 into 0.9937 almost would2
24 4 50133.3360 0.025
4
11.54 , 11.54 0.25 2.88hP h D h XmAk kD XD k
m and mL X
       
   

20 0
34
100 25 0.025 60 50 25.52Q Pakh D D kh
X X W  
      
  have been close to 25, ‘right’. So that means, in this case first we can assume since,
nothing was given we had assumed this is to be a long fin. And, with the solution of the
long fin we have found out the value of Q, and the value of Q came out to be 25.5 Watts,
‘right’. Now, let us look into the other thing, what could be the other thing? That fin with
negligible heat lost at the fin tip.
If we would have taken the difference would have been that tan mL ‘right’. So, tan
hyperbolic mL, that tanh mL the value of that when the value of mL became equal to
2.88 means almost close to 3 the tanh mL almost came to be close to 1, because 0.99
something.  So that means, the loss I mean that the difference would have been very
negligible, ‘right’. So, this is one case where the fin condition was not specified, ‘right’,
but we assumed one, that is we assumed first long fin and then we showed that, if we
would have assumed the other one that is fin with negligible heat loss at the fin tip.
Then also the difference between that solution that is the flow of heat that is Q would
been negligible, ‘right’, because that was coming to the factor of 0.99 something, ‘right’.
So, 0.99 something and the close one is almost same. So, we did not do anything wrong
by assuming the first one and we proved then other one also would have lead to the same
result or almost very close, ‘right’. 
So now, let us look into some other situation, other problem that yeah, let us look into
other problem which perhaps I missed it here. And, perhaps we will be doing that what is
the situation, when we are an linked with different mL or rather we are different situation
of the fin, ‘right’.
So, that in some class maybe in the next or next to next classes we will be doing with
that what are the different types of fins, ‘right’; some idea we should have what are the
different types of fins are there. So, that we will do perhaps and different types of fin
meaning that different types of fin meaning that as we said that, if you assume that this
hand is a tube, ‘right’ and normally the people who make this fin. So, they say that this is
an watch fine, but if you just remember, you just imagine that the ladies who are putting
what we call fin, ‘right’, what do you are calling that they are putting some bangles and
other things, ‘right’.
So, they are pushing it and this fitting is a shrink fitting, this fitting is a shrink fitting and
regarding shrink fitting, what it how can it be done? That by some means this say this isthe fin, ‘right’, this is the fin, ‘right’ and this diameter has to be actually a little closer or
smaller than this one, ‘right’ then by some means this pipe is made contracted. So, that it
becomes shorter in diameter at that situation where, you can put this fin, ‘right’ like a fin
which this one has become shorter. And, you are putting this fin over it, ‘right’ and it
then when it becomes normal then becomes expanded then it fits absolutely perfectly,
‘right’.
Now, you remember we said the thermal contact resistance, ‘right’, if the fin is not
properly fixing on it then there will be thermal contact resistance and that will lead to the
loss or temperature drop much more. So, which is not desirable that is why this is called
shrink fitting; in many cases a round type of a fins are there then they are fitted like that,
‘right’. There are that is, ‘right’ sometime we will also show that what are the different
types of fins available and that we will show some day, maybe next class or next to next
class depending on how we are doing, ‘right’.
So, let us then since our time is over, let us now make it to be a thank you and thank you
for your attention. And, but again and again I am saying that do some problem solutions
unless you do the solutions of the problems you will not come across, you will not be
able to do the solutions or understanding of the situation, ‘right’.
Thank you very much. 