Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 17
Finned Surfaces
So, good afternoon. We were discussing about the Finned Surface heat transfer, ‘right’.
So, why fin is required in the previous class we have discussed, ‘right’. And today we
will do the analysis of the fin heat transfer, how the heat is being transferred through the
fin surface. 
The necessity of the fin addition we have discussed in the previous class along with that
contact thermal resistance, ‘right’. So, thermal conductor resistance, so that we have
discussed and also the drawing we had shown.
Hopefully, if you remember we had given this drawing that this is the base where the fin
is attached, this is the rectangular. And if it is a cylindrical then it would have been like
this. We said the perimeter P, sectional area A, heat transfer coefficient surrounding h
and a temperature of the surrounding T these are all known. And we have taken section
where we have this delta x as the thickness or delta x as small volume element delta x
and the thickness is T, ‘right’ this height is T. So, we can now do the analysis, ‘right’. (Refer Slide Time: 02:07)
So, if you look at there are some basic assumptions over it during developing the heat
transfer equations, there are some assumptions for this. First assumption is that one
dimensional heat transfer is occurring then steady state heat transfer is occurring, and for
fins of uniform cross section that is also another thing. Because fin can be uniform or
non-uniform there, but the one drawing which we had shown was of uniform cross
section. If it is not uniform then the solutions become very critical and may be very
complex, ‘right’.
So, to do that we have to do maybe, it may be required now different techniques have
come up finite element, finite surface, all these analysis could be required, ‘right’. So, we
are not going into that. But definitely we are assumptions are to be clear, that uniform
cross section is there and the governing equations for these are that net rate of heat gain
by conduction in the x direction into the volume element of delta x and that T, ‘right’
delta x we have taken that volume element which we have given the shaded, ‘right’ is
that net rate of heat gained by conduction plus net rate of heat gained by convection
through lateral surfaces into the volume element delta x, ‘right’. 
This must be equal to 0 because we have assumed steady state, ‘right’. So, there is no
generation of heat or there is no accumulation of heat, ‘right’. So, it is steady and one
dimensional and uniform cross section of the fin, ‘right’.So, this two governing equation is very much required that the net rate of heat gained by
conduction in x direction into the volume element which we have taken as delta x and
that shaded portion and this plus the net rate of heat gained by convection through the
lateral surfaces into the volume element delta x and that shaded portion must be equal to
0. So, let us show that shaded portion again that this is this, this delta x we have taken,
‘right’ and this volume element we have taken, ‘right’. So, delta x is this and this is the
T; this is T, ‘right’ and this is the width third dimension, ‘right’. So, whatever be the
width, so that we have; obviously, taken in terms of sectional area as well as perimeter
which will come afterwards, ‘right’.
So, keeping in mind this very basic equation or basic governing equation let us now go.
First one is this we have taken conduction equation as 1, convection as 2, so summing up
of these two will result to us 0. 
(Refer Slide Time: 06:23)
So, the net heat gained by conduction as it is shown as I which is Roman one, we had
shown. So, this is equal to  
So, this is 
 . The net heat gained by convection is again by two this is oh no,
so this is not that, this is that distance, delta x is the distance, ‘right’. So, it is delta x
only. Like here also the second part is two is h into that we know h∆TA, ‘right’. So, here
h into A, A is the perimeter times delta x, ‘right’, perimeter times delta x that is why it2
2( ) ( )d qA d T xI x kA x
dx dx    struck because in many other cases we take this others you side to be unit, so that is why
delta x into 1 in many cases. So, I made it compute. So, this is not this is a distance delta
x, ok.
So, P times delta x is the perimeter times delta x area, h is the transfer coefficient and T e
minus Tx is the delta T. So, this is the net heat gained by convection 2, this is the net heat
gained by conduction that is 1. So, we can write where we have explained what is what
that the cross-sectional area is A, the perimeter is P, the heat transfer coefficient is h and
the thermal conductivity of the material is k and k is also constant, ‘right’. So, it is
independent of temperature. Normally, k as we said earlier also k may be a function of
temperature or k may be related to temperature. But we are for all practical purposes we
are assuming it to be constant, ‘right’. 
So, if we put them into the governing equation then we can write the governing equation
to be d2T(x)/dx2, ‘right’. And this one is h×(T e -Tx)×P×∆x, ‘right’. So, that we rewrite d 2
x here you remember here we had written kA d2x/dx2 delta x it was that, ‘right’. 
Now, if we this was 1, ‘right’ and now if we divide this on the both sides then this side
which was d2T(x)/dx2 we had kA that we have divided here. It is no longer here, so we
have here one P, one delta x was here, so we have divided both sides with kA delta x,
‘right’,  kA  delta  x we have  divided  after adding  1 and 2, and rearranging  we get
d2T(x)/dx2and this becomes minus because T x is now coming to first. So, then it becomes
minus, minus hP over A k into T x-Te this is equal to 0, ‘right’. I repeat because this is
first, we have found out what is the first; we have found out what is the I, ‘right’ this is
coming red color which cannot be erased 
However, this will be very also true for you, you can also make it that this is one where it
is minus d qA by dx into delta x, ‘right’ d dx of qA into delta x, ‘right’, that is the one
and this is equal to kA d2T(x)/dx2into delta x 1, and the P and the second term that is
convective heat transfer was h into delta T into area P into delta x, ‘right’. So, if we add
them then we get, you see I am writing here kA d 2 T, I am not writing again x dx
square, ‘right’ into delta x plus h T e minus T say x, ‘right’. So, here also let me write
down x, Tx is into P into delta x this is equal to 0 by adding 1 and 2 equal to 0 from the
governing equation which we had earlier, ‘right’.Now, if we rearrange it then it becomes instead of minus plus this becomes minus and
this Tx becomes plus and this T e becomes minus, ‘right’. And if we divide both sides
with h is on the top, P delta x, ‘right’ and k no, hP is there, so if we divide both sides
with kA and delta x, ‘right’. 
So, if we divide that then we get this delta x goes out, ‘right’ this delta x goes out
because we are dividing. So, it becomes d2T(x)/dx2, ‘right’ and here we had h and P. So,
hP divided by kA, here also we have no kA that got cancelled out. So, hP by Ak this
remains there and this one rearrangement we have written like this, ‘right’ T x-Te is equal
to 0.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:29)
This  equation  we  can  rearrange  and  make  more  compact  in  the  form  of
this we are writing, ‘right’ in terms of this where obviously, θx is Tx-
Te. So, θx also has the same unit as the temperature as degree centigrade, ‘right’. And m
square we are defining as hP over Ak, ‘right’, m2 we are defining hP over Ak. You see
what will be the unit of m2, h is W/m2ºC, ‘right’, P is perimeter meter, A is m2, ‘right’
and k is W/mºC, ‘right’. So, degree centigrade degree centigrade goes out, ‘right’. In terms of what? We can write
it to be Joules per second, ‘right’. So, we have Joules per second, here 1 meter and 1
meter, this meter scale goes out, ‘right’, ok. No need of joules per second because this
Watt and this Watt also goes out, ‘right’. Then we have only 1 meter square. So, m
square is inverse of meter square, ‘right’; so, m is inverse of meter, ‘right’. So, unit of m
is inverse of meter, ‘right’. 
So, we can then this is the equation where the basic equation which we had is it was like
this, ‘right’ and this on substitution with θx is Tx-Te and
m2 is equal to hP by Ak if we substitute then we can rewrite this equation in terms of
‘right’. This equation A, is known as one dimensional fin equation
for fins of uniform cross section and is a linear homogeneous second order ordinary
differential equation with constant coefficients, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 17:51)
So,  then  the  general  solution  of  that  equation  this  again  we  go  back  that
, this is the general solution of it is like this, theta x is equal to2
2( )( ) 0ed T x hPT x Tdx Ak  This is true for long cylinders, ‘right’, long fins cylinder, this is
true for long fins or we can also write with the fins with a finite length; for fins with
finite  length  we  can  also  write  the  solution  to  be  theta  x  is  equal  to
So, anyone of these solutions can be utilized  provided we are able to find out the
constants that is C 1 and C2; obviously, to find out these two constants we need to have
minimum two boundaries. So, if we have two boundaries we can solve and get C 1 and
C2, ‘right’. So, for determining the constants C 1 and C2, two boundary conditions, one at
the fin base and the other one at the fin tip are required to be known. 
Now, customarily this is generally done that is why customarily the temperature at the
fin base that is x equal to 0 is considered to be known. So, it must be given that fin base,
if you remember we had this kind of pictorial view, so we had the fin like this, ‘right’.
So,  generally  this  was  our  x  is  equal  to  0  and  this  temperature  must  be  known
customarily say it could be T 0 or something, ‘right’ or T base, T b whatever as you would
like you can make it. So, it must be known that is the fundamental, that customarily or
generally the fin base temperature that is at x is equal to 0 and this is our direction of x, x
is equal to 0 the fin base is known, ‘right’. (Refer Slide Time: 22:01)
If that be true then, fin based condition is like this that θ0 is T0 -Te where it is θ0, ‘right’, θ
at 0, that is the base theta at 0 that is x is equal to 0 it should be T 0 -Te that is theta 0,
‘right’ where T0 is the inverse temperature and several different conditions may arise for
this solution. Such as, it may be a long fin, it may be negligible heat loss from the tip or
it may be convection at the fin tip, ‘right’. 
So, we can summarize that we have started with fin where the base is connected with the
fin like this, if this is the base and if this is the fin this is connected like this, ‘right’ and
this fin base customarily we are assuming that the temperature or the condition of the fin
base is known, ‘right’. 
We have seen that the general equation we as we have derived from conduction and
convection summation of conduction and convection equations, and substituting them
the temperatures in terms of theta and h b A k, h was heat transfer coefficient, P was
parameter, k is conductivity and A is the area; sectional area. 
If hP/Ak is taken as m and theta was taken as T x-Te, Te is the environmental temperature,
then our general equation came to 
  and we said solution of heat can be
a many types. One was in the exponential form and the other two were maybe in terms oftan  hyperbolic  or  cos  hyperbolic  and  sin  hyperbolic  as  well  the  other  one  is  cos
hyperbolic m rather L minus x and also the other one also m L minus x, ‘right’.
Now, we had two constants C 1 and C2, and these two constants are to be determined.
Now, to determine these two constants at least two boundary equations are known and in
that we said one is conventionally or customarily taken as the fin based condition is
known or the temperature of the fin base is known and that we have defined to be that
theta at the fin base that is x equal to 0 is θx is equal to 0 or it can be written as theta
within  bracket  0  is  equal  to  if  T 0 is  the  fin  base  temperature,  T 0-Te,  Te is  the
environmental  temperature.  So, T 0 being the fin base temperature  and T e being the
environment temperature; so, theta 0 becomes that at x is equal to 0 in terms of theta.
We said that solution of this can be for different cases, ‘right’. One could be for long fin,
another could be for fin with negligible heat loss from the tip and third one it can be a
convection at the fin tip, ‘right’.
So, let us after this summarization let us conclude today, and in the next class we will do
for long fin, fin with negligible, it is at the fin tip or convective heat on their condition.
All these three cases we will do in the next class, ok.
Thank you.