Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 11
One Dimensional Heat Transfer through Cylinders
Good  afternoon.  We  have  done  the  one-dimensional  heat  transfer  in  a  Cartesian
coordinate  x,  y,  z.  So,  today  we  will  do  One-Dimensional  Heat  Transfer  through
Cylinders. You remember that we had said earlier that whenever we started with the
generalized equation which was independent of the dimensions, ‘right’ x, y, z or r theta
q, r theta z or r pi theta whatever it be means with a cylindrical or spherical or Cartesian
whatever  be  the  coordinate  system  we  had  developed  the  generalized  equation
remember. 
So, will also utilize that generalized equation as and when it is required, ‘right’. So, here
we are saying that let us take cylindrical coordinate where for energy generation in the
solid at a rate of say E at any r in W/m3 with a constant thermal conductivity k we have
to find out the temperature distribution T within any r at any r, T r in the solid by
conduction and this we can start with from the generalized equation that 
Why it is 0? Because we have said that this is the steady state
conduction since, it is a steady state conduction we can say that, the right side is 0,
‘right’. 
And, the left side so far I recall that it was 
 and in the right side
we had 
 means temperature and time, numerator temperature, denominator time,
‘right’. So,  
 at any (r,t) it was o, general equation or from there since it is given
steady state and, there is internal energy generation as well the conductivity is constant. 1 1( ) 0d dTr E rr dr dr k    So, if it would have been r is equal to x is equal to 0, then it would have been in the x
Cartesian coordinate for cylindrical coordinate if you remember you said r to the power n
that n is equal to 1, then it is cylindrical coordinate. So, that corresponds to 1 by r delete r
of rdT/dr +Er/k =0, ‘right’.
Now, the radial heat that is heat flux the radial heat flux is what that we can say. So, if it
is the cylinder. So, whatever heat flux is going heat is being transferred in this, ‘right’.
The other two-dimensions this and the third dimension this are infinite, ‘right’. So, these
two dimensions are infinite or much larger than this. So, we can say that one dimensional
heat transfer is occurring. So, the radial heat flux which is occurring is anywhere in the
solid or in this cylindrical coordinate, ‘right’ in the cylinder anywhere in this cylinder we
can write that .               This is square watt per meter square; ‘right’ that
is qr or flux.
So, heat flux radial heat flux we can write that q(r) anywhere in the solid that can be
written, ‘right’ from the definition of the heat flux called q is equal to minus k dT da
‘right’. So, dT/dx it was for Cartesian coordinates, so, in cylindrical coordinate is dT/dr.
So, -k dT/dr at any position r so much watt per meter square, ‘right’. So, let us write
again watt per meter square. So, this was by mistake cube means perhaps here it yes this
is watt per meter cube. So, perhaps that cut and paste made that mistake. However, so,
we have corrected watt per meter square. 
Now, this is the general equation for conduction in radial coordinate or in cylindrical
coordinate there should be the, ‘right’ term to use and when we have this equation we
now need to solve it, ‘right’. So, solution of this can be obviously done, from differential
equations. So, on two successive integrations, it will give a solution, ‘right’. 3( )( ) /dT rq r k W mdr (Refer Slide Time: 07:55)
So, let us look into that. So, let us consider a case where energy generation is constant,
‘right’.  Energy  generation  is  constant  at  a  rate  of  say  E 0 with  a  constant  thermal
conductivity, k then this generalized equation we can write 
 this  is  equal  to
minus  
.  Now,  if  you  remember  that  in  the  previous  slide  here  it  was
. Now, we said this E, we are taking as E 0 and this r is then going
and this conductivity is constant and this is also constant E 0.
So, if we take that then we come to this that dT/dr, ‘right’. So, we can write that k dT/dr
are dT/dr is a is equal to E 0/k. You remember that it was 
 . So, this
was the thing. So, now, we have taken to that side r, so, we are writing with the thermal
constant thermal conductivity. So, 
 is equal to E0/k ×r this 1/r which we hadearlier 1 by r. So, this 1 by r is changed to this position, ‘right’. So, this r has gone to that
position number 1.
Number 2, here perhaps one minus sign negative sign is missing because in that from the
left side we have taken it to the ‘right’. So, this should be taken off, ‘right’. Now, if we
integrate it on successive integrations we can write that dT(r)/ dr this is equal to dT(r)/dr
is equal to this is that negative we have again made it, ‘right’, here, ok. So, dT(r)/ dr is
equal.
  ,‘right’.
So, we have taken this r has now come back to that C 1/r and on second integration we
can write   
the new constant that is there. Now, we have two equations say this is equation a ‘right’
if we say like that and this is if it is B, then we can we integrate equation A and equation
B, ‘right’. For integration of equation A and I sorry we have only integrated equation A
and B we get C1 and C2 this got to constant we have to find out. 
Now, as we earlier in the Cartesian coordinate also we have seen that whenever we are
after integration we had to get two boundaries, ‘right’. So, two boundary conditions
defined boundary conditions  we have to have. So, to determine the two integration
constants, two boundary conditions are required. So, two types of cylinders may be there
one is hollow and the other is solid, ‘right’; that means, if it is solid like this then that
will have one type and if this is a hollow. So, for the hollow we need; so, this is a hollow
cylinder.
So, what we need? This will come to this here also it is there and it will come out from
here or it will come out from there, ‘right’ this is the hollow and the other one is the
solid. So, let us look into that what could be the boundary condition and to do that let us
see.(Refer Slide Time: 14:05)
So, that this is the solid, ‘right’. So, this is the solid and cylinder where we have taken
this solid with 0 to r is the radius I mean this in one direction heat has been transferred
and radius we have assumed to be b, ‘right’ for solid cylinder. For hollow cylinder, again
we have 0 to r this is the axis and we have inner radius a and the outer radius b, say inner
radius is this and the outer radius is this, ‘right’. So, if that we true then we have these
two conditions these two cylinders one is solid and other is hollow.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:15)
So, if that is the case then we can now, write that the boundary condition at this inner and
outer surfaces of the hollow cylinder can be one either prescribed temperature boundary
condition;  or  a  prescribed  heat  flux  boundary  condition;  or  a  convective  boundary
condition, ‘right’. Either of this any of two of these three, I in combination or singly that
can be the typical case, ‘right’. 
But, for the case of the solid cylinder which we had shown earlier; so, solid cylinder we
had this, ‘right’. So, there we have seen; so, here this is one boundary and this is another
boundary. So, this boundary can be either prescribed heat flux or prescribed temperature
or  prescribed  convective  boundary,  this  side  also  either  prescribed  temperature  or
prescribed heat flux or convective boundary. Any one of these two can be the boundary
and we can solve it. 
But, what about the solid? Solid we will have one at this boundary. So, this boundary and
this boundary is same because this is the central axis and we can say that this side is the
mirror image of this side. So, this is at the center, ‘right’. So, here whatever be the
boundary, the same boundary is also pre building here. So, physically we get only one
boundary. So, what to do with the others? So, other boundary we can say since you we
said that at the center it is there, ‘right’ and it is the mirror image. So, the you see
whatever temperature was there the same temperature is supposed to be here because it is
the mirror image; whatever temperature is here the same temperature has to be here at
this other end.
So, that means, that we can write del del t, ‘right’ we can write that r is equal to 0 ok. For
the case of solid cylinder only one boundary condition which we have said can be
specified for the outer surface. Another condition can be specified from the physical
consideration  of  the  physical  consideration  of  the  temperature  distribution  in  the
cylinder, ‘right’. A meaningful solution can be that the temperature does not become
equal to infinite at r is equal to 0. So, this is true if T of at any r t at any r is finite at r is
equal to 0, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 18:39)
So, an alternative can be that an alternative boundary which can we think out that dT/dr
is 0 at r is equal to 0; that means, rate of change of temperature with respect to r at r is
equal to 0 is 0. That is true because if we go back to that here, ‘right’ rate of change of
temperature with respect to r; so, r is this way or this way with respect to r is 0 at r is
equal to 0. r is equal to 0 is here because at this point from this side also whatever
temperature has come from this side also the same temperature has come. So, there is no
change at that point at the center position yes there will be a change if we go at delta r
from this axis then there will be a change if we go even more then there may be a
change, but at this center there is no change, ‘right’.
Since from the symmetry of the cylinder we can say that at the alternative boundary
condition can be that since there is a symmetry and the distribution of temperature about
the center of the cylinder when one dimensional radial heat transfer is considered the this
can be written as dT/dr is equal to 0 at r is equal to 0, ‘right’. Hope you have understood
why this we are taking. This is almost equivalent this is not almost this is equivalent to
that we can assume that at r is equal to 0, this phase at r is equal to 0 there is insulation
no heat is neither going higher or coming in from this side. So, this is equivalent to that
this r is equal to 0 is under full insulation.
And, this  insulation  means  it is  adiabatic  absolutely;  no heat is  getting transferred,
‘right’. So, in that case this dT/dr is 0 at r is equal to 0, ‘right’. Now, we have twoboundaries both the boundary conditions at the center of this solid cylinder can be used
yielding the same result. So, one we have said that since T is not infinite at r is equal to 0
it is finite so, ‘right’. So, that is one solution which we have said earlier. So, here we
have said that the temperature does not become equal to infinite at r is equal to 0. So, if
this is only true if T at any r is finite at r is equal to 0. This is one boundary and the
second boundary as we are saying that there is no change of temperature at this center
that is at r is equal to 0, dT/dr is equal to 0, ‘right’.
So,  now  we  have  both  for  the  solid  cylinder  as  well  as  the  hollow  cylinder  two
boundaries and we can solve any with any given boundary the analytical solution, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:49)
So, let us take first with the problem that the problem is like this: energy is generated at a
constant rate E0 watt per meter cube in a solid cylinder with a radius r is equal to that
maintains a constant temperature T 1. Derive an expression for one dimensional radial
steady state temperature distribution T(r) and the heat flux q(r), ‘right’. So, once you
have developed this temperature distribution as well as the heat flux equation, then from
that determine also calculate the center temperature T 0 and the heat flux and the heat flux
at the boundary surface r is equal to a, ‘right’.
And, for ‘a’ is equal to 2 cm, E 0 =1×107 W/m3, k is equal to 16 W/mºC and T 1 is equal to
150ºC, ‘right’. So, if we draw this solution that energy is generated at; so, we have a
cylinder, ‘right’ at a constant energy. So, a constant energy source is getting generated E 0W/m3 in a solid cylinder with a radius. So, if the solid cylinder means we have. So, this is
at r is equal to ‘a’, ‘right’ derive an expression for one dimensional radial heat transfer.
So, we have to find out what is the T(r), ‘right’ this expression as well as we have to find
out q(r), ‘right’.
So, this is the temperature distribution T(r) ‘right’ and we can write from this two and
given boundary applying, the boundary condition we can write 0
1
0 1
2021 ( )0 0
( )0 0
( )
( )
2
, ( ) ln4d dT r Er in r br dr dr k
dT rat rdr
T r T at r a
Integrating twice the governing equation
dT r E Crdr k r
Eand T r r C r Ck      
 
 
  
   
0 0dTat rdr If that be true from the previous equation you see we have from the previous equation
what we have that dT/dr is 0, ‘right’ dT/dr is 0 and if this is 0 at r is equal to 0, so both
this is becoming 0 this is also becoming 0. So, C 1 is becoming 0, ‘right’. So, this is the
case which is happening. So, if we go to the next then we see that since we have 
this one dT/dr is 0 at r is equal to 0, C 1 is 0 and applying the second boundary we get T(r)
= 0 at r = a. So, this is the second boundary and we can write C 2 is  
Perhaps for this class we are running out of time and in the next class we will solve it and
do some more problems, ‘right’. So, let us stop it here because time is out or time is over.
Thank you.