Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 02
Fundamentals of Food Processing and Preservation (Contd.)
Good morning. So, you have seen that in the previous  class, we have started with
Fundamentals of Food so, that a little Food Processing and Preservation is also being
said, because that is required for the understanding of the subsequent things ‘right’. So,
we had said if you recall that what are the different sources ‘right’. So now, from that
sources, what are the other things we get?
(Refer Slide Time: 01:05)
Let us see energy available from nutrients and some foods, which are obtained from the
food as energy. So, we can say that the nutrients in terms of kilo calorie per gram. Now
per gram kilo calorie you will say that kilo calorie is not a SI unit ‘right’, but still why
we are saying it in non SI unit, because the numbers are so, unique and whole number
had it been in SI, then it would have been a decimal or some fraction. So, may not be
easy to remember for that is up remembering, we all not only here all over the world, we
give this example in kilo calorie or non SI units, ‘right’.
So, carbohydrate has 4 kilo calorie per gram whereas, fat has 9 kilo calorie per gram see
4 and 9 more than double per gram. So, if you take 1 gram of fat you get 9 kilo caloriewhereas, if you take 1 gram of carbohydrate, you get only 4 kilocalories. So, the energy
content in fat is very-very high, and then protein it also is at the tune of 4 kilo calorie per
gram. So, energy in terms of carbohydrate and protein they are at per whereas, fat is
more than double, ‘right’.
So, that is why the fatty-mid food materials, they give more energy per unit gram, ‘right’.
Now, energy available from 100 gram of the edible version of some foods, why again
and again I am saying edible; yes milk is edible 100 percent, ‘right’, but other things are
not all time all parts are edible. Like example given say fruit, when you are taking a fruit
say banana.
Banana though it may be say 100 gram as such with its peel, but without the peel it may
not be 100 gram much lower than that, that and that peel is not edible you do not take
those peel. So, that is why we are I am referring to more and more that edible portion.
So, 100 gram of the edible portion of food, generally what we get from that in terms of
energy  as  milk  gives  around  65  kilocalories,  bread  230  kilocalories,  butter  740
kilocalories, and egg around 150 kilocalories, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:28)
So, these tell that how the total nutrients we get from different sources, ‘right’. Now, as a
food technologies ultimately which you will be food technologist or scientist or engineer
all over the world or any process engineer; what is expected from you that to make theavailable nutrients from the food at a cheaper rate, then to improve the nutritive value
and to minimize the losses during processing. 
These are not our part at this  moment, but just highlighting  that  to ensure storage
stability at even normal temperature to prevent food processing or food poisoning or
contaminations, and to cater special dietary requirements, then to develop new varieties
of instant or convenience food, ‘right’ instant or convenient food. So, that is also there.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:44)
Now, let us have some terminologies definition, ‘right’. Because, unless we know them,
it will not be possible for you to understand perishable foods, ‘right’, what is that? Why
you call it to perishable? I hope by that term perishable we understand that it is getting
rotten, ‘right’, it is getting spoiled, that type of food by definition we can say. So, these
deteriorates quickly after harvest for example, fruits and vegetables, they are harvested
or soon after slaughter. Plant origins are harvested, animal origins are not harvested they
are called slaughtering, ‘right’ or catching after slaughter or catch fresh meat, poultry,
fish etcetera.
So, these are that deteriorates quickly after harvest or slaughter or catch are known as
perishable, ‘right’. So, it is true that if you if you if you if you take a it is a mango this is
the season of mango. When mango is being harvested, if you are not taking care within
couple of days the thing gets rotten and you have to throw it out, ‘right’. Similarly, fish
when it is caught if you are not taking care of it maybe after several hours, it may gowrong particularly in summer season like this in winter it may not be so, vulnerable, but
trained someone definitely, ‘right’.
So, then semi perishable food, there are many foods which are under this category,
because the nature the best friend or the best enemy whatever you call is the nature.
Nature is such where it gives some protection to everything for it is survivability, ‘right’.
So, where these contains  natural inhibitors  to spoilage?  For example,  egg and root
vegetables both do have egg, it has a it has a coating over it, ‘right’.
So, nature has begun away because from the egg if it is hatched, then it may bring the
young animal. So, that is why it is given by the nature that protection of this shell. So,
that the in internal things are easily protected, ‘right’. However, when you take egg that
time; obviously, you are not hatching it and you are not allowing it to make it to the
young animal so, but you are getting the benefit of the natural support, ‘right’. Again and
again as scientist we believe most at least, I do not know whether all or not that nature is
the best friend and nature is the best enemy.
So, whatever best nature can do, if you are taking it in that way it will be your friend, if
you are taking in the other way it may not be your friend or we may become your enemy
they are all depends; however. So, egg and root vegetables are a natural example or have
received some type of mild preservation treatment which creates greater tolerances to the
environmental conditions and abuses during handling and distribution.
For  example,  pasteurization  or  smoking  or  pickling,  these  are  some  example
pasteurization is that which you get, when you are getting the milk from the from the
market, you will see that nowadays in earlier days it was maybe in bottles and other
things, but nowadays you all are in mostly in pouches. And, those pouches of milk, if
they are not pasteurized I am not going in detail, because this is not that part if it is not
pasteurized,  but it is  also a thermal  if it is  not pasteurized,  then the milk  will get
deteriorated not only that pasteurization what it does it kills the pathogenic organisms,
‘right’.
So, at least if the milk is not spoiled, but if somebody consumes the non pasteurized milk
may get some or other kind of sickness due to if it is not pasteurized if the or I if the
organisms responsible for any disease causing is there. So, that is why pasteurization is
run and that is the thermal.So, this protects the material. The purpose is that it is semi perishable because you have
given some free treatment or some treatment such that it can survive or it can sustain for
a longer period, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:47)
Then shelf stable foods, ‘right’; there are many foods which are called shelf stable. Shelf
stable means without any requirement of anything it is as such I give you the best
example, I do not know at your age of course, you are around now 20 plus minus.
So, this aging may not be, but if you ask your parents that during their time or during
your  grandparents  time  the  there  was  some  convention  household  convention  that,
people is to buy from the market  when it is available in good condition,  or cheap
whatever we or good quality all depending on these factors, they used to buy lot many or
lot or much quantity of rice and keep under at the at home at some places, ‘right’. Why,
because they have seen that this rice, which they are purchased from the market and in
bulk  quantity  is  self  stable,  it  does  not  need  to  have  a  refrigerator  or  some  other
component, where it can be stored, ‘right’.
So, it is already in some baggage or in some container. So, that is good enough to keep it
for a long period maybe 6 months 1 year maybe in many cases earlier the privilege to
have this kind of food for over a period of 6 months to 1 year, ‘right’. So, that is what
these are non perishable at room temperature. For example, cereal grains and nuts orreceived reservation treatment for example, canning ‘right’. Another thing canning is
also a part of thermal, ‘right’.
So, where you are you are heating the food material at home you have you see that
mummy or some elders are using pressure cookers, ‘right’. So, what you are doing
during that pressure cooker you are increasing the pressure, because it has a lid and that
lid is capable of holding that pressure and when the pressure comes to 14.7 psig, ‘right’,
PG for gauge, ‘right’ one atmospheric pressure gauge, then this material is boiled at very
high temperature around 121 degree centigrade corresponding to that pressure, ‘right’.
So, and the material becomes cooked at much earlier time and maybe uniformly or very
good I mean boiling is done.
Now, canning is such operation where materials like that like your canned nowadays
available canned your food materials, ‘right’, we will say pineapple canned pineapple,
‘right’. So, these are of available now a days and this canning is done under pressure and
high treatment. But, this is also once you canned then that is stable for a long period,
maybe couple of months to couple of years depending on how you are processing, what
you were processing canning is one example. So, these are called self stable foods,
‘right’ or process to reduce moisture content. You will see that most of the dried food
material; dried food material example we give say potato chips, ‘right’. It is fried and
dried both, ‘right’, it is fried or dried.
Nowadays again some more new things have come up where it is not fried also, but the
moisture content is brought down to such a level, because maybe in continuation of these
course or preamble, we will come to that and touch upon that, because your moisture
when it is present it is capable of spoiling the material at an early date or early stage,
compared to that where the moisture content is much lower, ‘right’. This will come
perhaps in subsequent classes little and because the first week we have dedicated for this
preamble understanding what why reasoning for the thermal processes, ‘right’.
So, this is that. So, canning is one example we have given which is very good example of
thermal treatment and drying is also another very good example of thermal processing,
where you are drying up (Refer Time: 17:55) required primarily heat treatment. And, you
are removing the must have purposes, you are removing the moisture if the moisturecontent becomes lower, then some number will give you this number we will do not
want to discuss now.
So, then it becomes either stable or that is why it is called shelf stable, ‘right’. So, shelf
stable  food  materials  are  those  which  are  non  perishable  at  room  temperature  we
example  given cereal  grains, nuts etcetera  or received certain  preservation  technical
methods  and  treatment  whatever  it  be,  and  example  could  be  candying  or  canned
material. And it might have also undergone processing to reduce the moisture content,
‘right’ for example, the dried material, ‘right’.
Then, the definition of dry storage, now this is one where we say that storage at 20
degree centigrade and 50 percent R.H again you see R.H maybe not in ok. Since, it has
come let me also tell, because the more you learn the more you know better for you R.H
is Relative Humidity, like in this room where we are sitting I am sitting and you all are
sitting. This room contains say relative humidity of around say 55 or 60 percent, ‘right’.
What does it mean? It means that the air relative humidity is a part of air water this
relation, ‘right’.
So, this means that in this room if it is 60 percent water relative humidity. So, it may
contain another 40 to make it saturation, ‘right’. Once, it become saturated then the extra
will condense out and will separate, ‘right’. So, that is water holding capacity relative
humidity can be in other words said that the water holding capacity, ‘right’. So, it is 50
percent R.H and 20 degree centigrade is one of the storing method or condition for 20
degree centigrade as dry storage, ‘right’.
Then, some other like cool storage cool storage is definitely, where the temperature will
be lower than 20 degree centigrade and there it is stored below at 12 degree centigrade,
‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 21:01)
Another example is refrigerated storage. Refrigerated storage is the storage between 0 to
8 degree centigrade, that is called refrigerated storage now the earlier we have said that
your food material, ‘right’.
So, there the major crop is that potato, ‘right’. And, potato is available throughout the
year in our country at least, ‘right’. And, this is being why potato is stored around plus
minus 2 degree centigrade, ‘right’. So, that comes under this refrigerated storage between
0 to 8 degree centigrade, then freezer storage. Freezer storage is; obviously, where it is at
or below minus 23 degree centigrade or 0 to minus 20 degree centigrade.
So, lower than this is called sub-zero, ‘right’, it is called sub-zero storage and above 0
you know that was 0 to 8. So, 0 to 8 there is no phase change, ‘right’, 0 to 8 degree there
is no phase change in potato the moisture content in the potato is not getting any phase
change whereas, the material which is less than 0 degree centigrade is undergoing the
phase change of the water content in it and that water is becoming ice, ‘right’.
The best example is ice cream; ‘right’, ice cream is stored at or below minus 18 degree
centigrade, ‘right’, where over there is no normally yes because by the definition there is
some un-freezable water and that un-freezable water is known as bound water this is
there, but minus 18 or below is the temperature, where the frozen materials are being
stored, ‘right’. So, these are called  freezer  storage. Then shelf life this  is the  time
duration between processing and consumption.So, you are processing now consuming at this time, this time duration is known as the
shelf life SHELF, ‘right’. It is not s e l f, s h e l f shelf life. So, the time duration between
processing and consumption is known as the shelf life, ‘right’. Then, light protected yes
there are some food materials which are also kept in some colored containers. So, that
light cannot make any disturbance to that, ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:23)
 Then, we come to the whole thing that food for storage in presence of air, ‘right’ and
these are called aerobic bacteria yeast or mold, ‘right’, food how they are getting spoiled
is or how it can be stored also. If it is impedance of air then aerobic bacteria, aerobic
yeast or aerobic mold can act on it, ‘right’.
So, the other part comes in presence of or in absence of air, ‘right’. So, where also
anaerobic  bacteria  and  anaerobic  yeast  can  grow,  ‘right’  anaerobic  bacteria  and
anaerobic yeast can grow. Then, in the category of aerobic bacteria yeast and mold, then
it also comes to high moisture, where all if it is under high moisture, all aerobic bacteria
yeast and mold can grow and spoil whereas, the other one if it is low moisture, then only
mold can grow, ‘right’, where if it is under low moisture only mold can grow.
So, high moisture all three that is aerobic bacteria yeast and mold can grow, but if it is
low moisture then mold only can grow. Then it comes to that low moisture to the level;
obviously, where mold also can grow. If, it is below that then none of them can grow, but
if it is in absence of air, then again if it is under high moisture, then anaerobic bacteria oryeast can grow, ‘right’. And if it is not high moisture, but very low moisture then none;
obviously, here we have written molds, but it should not be let it be rectified, that if it is
low moisture then none can grow not even molds, ‘right’ none can grow.
So, then it comes that food if it is under aerobic condition, this mold and bacteria can
grow, if it is anaerobic then anaerobic bacteria or anaerobic yeast can grow, if it is under
high moisture as well as air then all 3 aerobic bacteria yeast mold can grow, but if it is
under low moisture, then only mold can grow right under air aerobic condition. But, if it
is not aerobic, but it is in absence of air, then under high moisture, then it can be that
anaerobic bacteria and yeast can grow and if it is under low moisture nothing can grow,
‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:12)
I hope we have come to the end of the time. So, let me thank you and in subsequent
classes we will also try to give some more highlights on the basic of the food material
why, what it is, ‘right’ why it they need the thermal operations, why it they are required.
So, that is why it is required to understand, ok.
Thank you.