Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 20
Heat Transfer in Finned Surfaces
Good morning. We had been talking about the finned surfaces Heat Transfer in Finned
Surface and perhaps we said that and the finned last class today we would like to also
correlate the fin efficiency and some other vital parameter on which the different graphs
have been plotted against fin efficiency and how those parameters came up today would
like to also highlight on that. And, as we are saying repeatedly as I am saying repeatedly
that please also look into your problems and solutions.
It is not that whatever problems we are solving here you only concentrate on that, but
also try to solve some many other problems associated with the topics we were covering.
That will help you in understanding the subject in a better way because solving problems
gives you confidence, ‘right’. So, we come back to heat transfer in finned surface in
lecture number 20, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:15)
So, this was our finned surface, ‘right’ and as we said that there are different there are
this was the fin base, ‘right’ and this was the fin, ‘right’ and this is on rectangular
coordinate and this was on cylindrical coordinate, ‘right’.So, we know the sectional area A; we know the perimeter P; we know delta X or X; we
know  heat  transfer  a  coefficient  and  we  know  the  ambient  heat  transfer  ambient
temperature, ‘right’. So, it can be T ∞ or T0 as I said earlier that in many cases people do
nominate to people do nomenclature in such a way that T ∞  is also equivalent to T en
environment, ‘right’. So, this is the thing on which we are working, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:53)
So now, let us define another important very much parameter; very much important
parameter that is fin efficiency, ‘right’. So, fin efficiency is defined as the actual heat
transfer through fin divided by ideal heat transfer through fin if the entire fin surface
were at the fin base temperature T 0, ‘right’. So, entire fin surface is at the fin base
temperature T0, if that is there then the heat transfer through the fin can be assumed to be
the ideal heat transfer, ‘right’. So, actual by ideal that we have to find out and that is
equivalent to the fin eta that is the fin efficiency.
Now, then what is then actual heat transfer and ideal heat transfer? Ideal heat transfer
will be equivalent to a f×h×θ0, ‘right’ to where θ0 is the T0-Te or T∞, whatever we call. T 0 -
Te that is the environmental temperature ‘right’ that is theta 0; a f is the surface area of the
fin and h is the heat  transfer coefficient.  Now, all  are in SI units. So, we are not
separately letting you know what is the SI unit of h? So, it is, we know, W/(m2ºC),
‘right’, and surface area is in m2n ‘right’. And like this delta I mean θ0 is in ºC, ‘right’.Now, this fin efficiency is obviously, that you are referring as Q fin over Q ideal, ‘right’.
So, whatever fin has actually transferred heat through the fin that is actual heat transfer
through the fin over the ideal heat transfer through the fin if the entire fin would have
been at the fin based temperature of T 0, ‘right’. So, if this is there then and we said that Q
ideal is equivalent to a f×h×θ0.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:07)
So, then what is the fin real that is actual? What is the fin actual? Fin actual will be like
this  that  the  heat  transfer  through  the  fin  is  Q=  ηQideal,  ‘right’;  η×Qideal that  is  fin
efficiency into Qideal that is what it is because here we said that Q fin here we said that Q fin
this is equal to eta times Q ideal, ‘right’. That is the Q fin  actual. So, if we can make Q ideal
then we can also frame what is the Q actual or real heat transfer ‘right’. So, this eta Q ideal
is η×af×h×θ0, ‘right’.
So, if we have a plot of fin efficiency η versus L√(2h/kt), L times under root 2h by kt. If
we have a plot  of this, ‘right’  for typical  geometries,  ‘right’ this  is  also geometry
dependent like we will show it in a figure say 1, that shows the fin efficiency of actual
fins where the fin thickness y may vary with the distance x from the fin base when the
thickness is T, ‘right’.
Similarly, another figure that will show the fin efficiency for the circular disk fins of
constant thickness, ‘right’. So, this, if we look at the first one is eta versus L√(2h/kt) for
different fins, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 09:33)
That you see in this figure we are plotting L√(2h/kt), ‘right’ we have said that t is the
thickness, ‘right’, t is the thickness; h is heat transfer coefficient; k is the conductivity of
the fin material, ‘right’ and L obviously, that is the length of the fin, ‘right’. So, here this
versus fin efficiency that Q ideal which we have said is equal to a f×h×θ0. Af is the surface
area of the fin; h is the heat transfer coefficient and θ0 is T0-T∞, ‘right’ or Te whatever we
name it, ‘right’. It can be θ0 equal to T0 -Te or T∞ whatever, ‘right’.
So, for different geometries we said there. So, here y is equal to t, ‘right’ this is the t,
‘right’ and this y is equal to t. Here y is a function of t as t into x by L to the power half,
‘right’. For this is ‘A’ geometry; this is ‘B’ geometry; for ‘C’ geometry you see it is
more sharp at the end (Pl. refer to the above figure). This is y is a function of t, but it is
equal to t x by L ‘right’ and for the ‘D’ this is another type of fin where it is y is equal to
t into x by L to the power 3 by 2. And for ‘E’, ‘E’ is another type of where you see it is
absolutely a long portion is very much sharpened, ‘right’ or pointed ‘right’. So, where y
is equal to t x L x by L to the power 2, ‘right’.
If these are different fin types then we have plotted this fin efficiency versus L under root
2h / kt ‘right’ where efficiency of axial fins where the fin thickness y varies with the
distance x from the root of the fin where y is equal to t, ‘right’. So, this y is equal to t,
that is this thickness, ‘right’ and if we see the next one this figure says like that.(Refer Slide Time: 13:24)
If we look at the next figure that is figure 2 which we referred to earlier this is that for
the circular fins, ‘right’. Here also you see that the L under root 2h / kt, ‘right’ this is
plotted against the fin efficiency, ‘right’. For different r o/ ri ‘right’. So, this first one is r o/
ri 1 and this last one is r o/ri is 4 in between 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2.0, 3.0 etcetera are also there,
but the thing is that what we need to know that what are the different parameters like L,
like t and here ro and ri, ‘right’.
This to understand these things we need to see this picture, ‘right’ where you see r o is the
outer radius, this is the r o, ‘right’ and ri is the inner radius that is this one, ‘right’. So, r o
and ri are known and L is this, ‘right’, L is this that is this is the L, ‘right’. So, if L is this,
‘right’ ri is this one and ro is this one, ‘right’ L is this and t is the thickness which one is
this one, ‘right’. So, r o, ri is known, t here is known, k is already k and h are different k is
the conductivity of the material h is the transfer coefficient and L that we have shown
this to be like this, ‘right’ L to be like this.
So, once you know then you can find out by knowing this parameter for different r o over
ri you can find out the fin efficiency for circular fins which is like this, ‘right’. You
remember the other day, I said that putting something like that on which we call 2 d per
hour. So, that kind of thing when you are making a shrink fitting and that shrink fitting is
happening here for circular fins like that. Whereas, the other one which we showed thereit is not so much where the contact resistance thermal contact resistance could be factor
if not properly done like this one, ‘right’.
Here you see on this base you have put the fin in such a way that this is the thickness this
is the thickness and this all are t, ‘right’ this all are t’s and this is the L, ‘right’ from this
to that; from this to that; from this to that; from this to that and from this to that.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:22)
So, you know t, you know L and h and k are given. So, you can find out fin efficiency
and if you know the fin efficiency then if you know the Q ideal which is a f h theta 0
then you can find out Q real or Qactual as Qactual is equal to η×Qideal, ‘right’. So, this way you
can find out what is the Q for the actual already you have found out Q for ideal cases,
‘right’.
So, let us look into that where we where we left. So, there if we go that fin we were here,
‘right’. So, for from the plots of  η versusand for different geometries we can
find out the values of eta for different geometries or for the for the circular fins also,
‘right’; circular this type fins also where the thickness was constant, ‘right’.
For all practical purposes the fin heat transfer surface is composed of the fin surfaces and
the un finned portion, ‘right’. So, obviously, if we if you remember the previous graph
which we had shown that fin surfaces where this was like this let us say in one case this
was like this. So, and if this is the fin then the surface area of this plus un-finned portion.2hLktSo, un-finned plus fin portion is the total surface area and the total heat transfer Q total
from such a surface is obtained by summing the heat transfer through the fins and the on
fin portions, ‘right’ and this can be done by summing finned and un finned portion as it
is shown like this.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:57)
Qtotal = Qfin + Qunfinned  = η af h θ0 + (a – af) h θ0 ; obviously, af is the finned area where, fin
is there and ‘a’ is the total heat transfer area that is fin plus un finned, ‘right’. So, from
the total heat transfer area finned and un-finned if we subtract the finned area then we get
the un-finned area which is there, ‘right’. So, if we know that total surface area where the
finned or un-finned together then.
So, as a practical guide ratio of Pk by should be much larger to justify the use of fins that
is Pk / ah, you also see that for a given area and for a given material, k is known and for
the given system, h is known. So, if area times h, ‘right’ if that product is X and the
perimeter times conductivity, if that is Y then Y has to be much greater than X then only
you can justify adding fin.
Otherwise, if you are adding finned for no reason then the additional cost involved in it
that will not be justified with respect to heat transfer. If heat transfer is not improved then'0 0
'1
, 1
,total
fQ ah ah
where area weighted fin efficiency
aanda    
  
      
    
what is the point of what is the point of extending the surface area because that is also
cost involved.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:52)
So, in that way if we look at that Pk / ah, this value should be much larger and to become
it much larger for a given P, for a given ‘a’ or Pk / ah, ‘right’ P is the perimeter, ‘a’ is the
area for a given P and for a given h, if k is becoming higher, the higher the value of k the
more is the value of Pk / ah, ‘right’. So, more it will be justified or fine you can you can
say that now adding fin is helpful for the heat transfer, ‘right’.
So, for plate fins P/A is nothing, but 2/t that is there.(Refer Slide Time: 24:48)
So, if the fins are like that plate then it is that thickness if there this is the thickness then
P/a that is perimeter work the area that is becomes equal to 2/t,‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:20)
So, this if it is so, then we can find out the value of Pk by as 2k over t over h, ‘right’. So,
because P by A has been equivalent to 2 by t; so, Pk is ‘right’ which implies
that  internal  conductance  of  the  fin  should  be  much  greater  than  the  heat  transfer
coefficient for the fins to improve heat transfer rate. Internal conductance of the fin2k t
h 
  should be much greater than that is this internal conductance of the fin through you
should be much greater than the external heat transfer coefficient, ‘right’.
So, with this let us solve a very simple form problem that what is the expression for the
efficiency  of  fin  of  uniform  cross  section  when  the  heat  loss  from  the  fin  tip  is
considered negligible? ‘right’, we have already seen that                 that
was total Q to the fin. And, and this can be solved that heat transfer area for fin of length
L and perimeter P is a f equal to PL and Q ideal that can be said to be equal to 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:34)
where, P/A = 2/t, t being the fin thickness. This is why fin efficiency is plotted against
the parameter                 .
So, this we said in the beginning that why this L under root 2h by k or 2h by kt or Ph by
Ak. So, ultimately to it was 2h by kt. Why it is plotted against efficiency is because of
this, ‘right’ that efficiency can be ultimately termed in terms of tan hyperbolic mL over
mL where mL is nothing, but L times P and L times √(Ph/Ak) that is0tanhfinQ PhAk mL
0idealQ PLh
0
0tanh tanh
2,PhkA mL mL
PLh mL
Ph hwhere mL L L
Ak kt
  
 
2hLkt
2hLktSo, this is why we have plotted subsequently this which we have shown you, ‘right’ this
one that        and this is fin efficiency and the next one was also           that the
against fin efficiency, ‘right’. So, with this let us conclude the heat transfer through fins,
‘right’ and please do some problems as and when you can.
Thank you.2hLkt2hLkt