Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 26 
Heisler Chart (Contd.)
Good morning. So, we were dealing with that Heisler chart and we have shown for
infinite long slab; infinitely long slab what is the Heisler chart, how it looks like; how we
can determine the temperature distribution at the centre as well as any location. Given we
have to find out that we have to know that thing. So, it is lecture number 26.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:15)
So, in lecture number 26 we now go to that Heisler chart this was done, ‘right’ for long
cylinder. And now we are finding for infinitely long cylinder that was for long slab
infinitely long slab, this is for infinitely long cylinder, ‘right’.
So, for infinitely long cylinder Heisler chart is based on the first term in an exact solution
to a Bessel function. Each chart plots similar curves to the previous examples and on
each axis is plotted a similar variable like this, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 01:52)
So, this is the Heisler chart for long cylinders, ‘right’ where 
 /Lr02 square instead of L
it is ro, ‘right’,
is the your x-axis. So, this is Fourier number and this is θ, i.e., θ0, θt/θ0
is that which is T infinity minus rather T.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:38)
T at any place t at any place minus T ∞/Ti -T∞, ‘right’. So, this is for the long cylinder,
‘right’ and here also if we know Fourier number there is alpha T by instead of L it is L
for slab it is ro square, ‘right’, that if we know r value of r then you know the value of
Fourier number, then from that Fourier number here also you have inverse of Biot
number there is 1/Bi that is hL/k. So, k/hL that value if you know, then you can point
that where it is on the graph. 
So, from there the value of theta you can find out and then you can find out this either
this temperature or that temperature or this temperature accordingly if whatever is given,
‘right’. So, this is for the temperature distribution at the centre.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:57)
Then we get that temperature distribution and the special temperature distribution means
in the cylinder body where we know Biot number is h ro/2k, ‘right’ in earlier graph also it
was hro/2k, ‘right’. Here also it is k/h ro, ‘right’ 1 by inverse of Biot number. So, here it is
Biot number is hro/2k and we can find out from the value of this is plotted 1/2Bi,
‘right’;that 1/2Bi is plotted against that θ, ‘right’ and knowing the value of Bi r/r o that is
the position.
So, if this  is  the cylinder, if this  is  the axis then  what is  this  if this  is  the initial
temperature distribution uniform then after time t is equal to t, if it is heated then what is
the temperature here that we have seen from the previous cylinder graph and what is the
temperature after time t is equal to t at this location or at this location or at this locationdepending on what is the value of r/r o, ‘right’. Then you find out the value of θ and then
you get either T(r t) or T(0 t) or T ∞  minus T whatever value you want you can find out,
‘right’. This is the second graph.
Third one as earlier we have seen is the heat which is being transferred, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:04)
Heat which is being transferred this is again plotted Bi square was in times Fo versus Bi
that is for different Bi h ro/k this is Bi2 ,Fo×Bi2. So, that is how that for different Bi you
get the value of Q/Q 0, ‘right’ and if Q0 is known you can find out the value of Q, ‘right’.
So, this is another. So, quickly we are going through this and next one is this is for
cylinder.(Refer Slide Time: 06:55)
So, similarly for the sphere also we can get it, ‘right’. For sphere of radius r o, the Heisler
chart for a sphere is based on the first term in the exact Fourier series solution, and these
charts can be similar to the first two sets of the plots of similar variables. Like here it is
Fo, here it is theta and here it is inverse of Bi that is h by or rather k/h ro, ‘right’. So,
inverse of Bi is k/h ro, ‘right’ and this is Fourier number that Fourier number is 
 / ro2,
‘right’ and this is for θ.
So, once we know that again if we know the value of Fourier number, if you know value
of 1 by Bi then you can know the value of theta and from there you can find out the
temperature, ‘right’. This is second way of this sphere and similarly internal distribution
of temperature you can find out. This is 1/3Bi instead of 1/2Bi for sphere it is 1/3Bi and
this is Bi =hro/3k Bi is equal to each other by 3k.
Once we plot that then for a given value of 1/3 Bi versus this r o/ri also rather r/ro that is
for different values of that we can get this and from there we get the value of θ as it is
given here T(r t)-T ∞/T(0 t)-T∞. So, that from there you find out the value of theta, ‘right’.
Similarly, the other one is for the heat flow that is Q. So, the value of Q you have here
similarly Bi2Fo for the sphere and for different Bi value is equivalent to h ro/k you get the
value; get the Bi value and get the value of Q/Q 0 and Q0 if you know earlier so, you can
find out the value of Q, ‘right’. This is how the different charts are to be read, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 10:01)
Now, we have to utilize these charts. So, for that I think it is the best thing to know by
solving problems, ‘right’. So, we solved the problems maybe 1, 2 or 3 or as many you
can subsequently you can you do yourself we are giving some example. So, based on that
example you can do subsequently and may do very; I mean, you can experience as well
you can learn.
So, problem is like this 10 centimetre thick slab centimetre initially at 500oC is immersed
in a liquid at 100oC having heat transfer coefficient of 1200 W (m2 oC)-1, ‘right’. This we
have written in this work.
Determine the temperature at the centre one minute after immersion, ‘right’. Here also
you see what do you have a 10 centimetre thick slab initially at 500oC is the immersed in
a liquid at 100oC. So, you have a liquid you have immersed a slab in that liquid. Initially
it was at uniform temperature of 500oC, suddenly it is immersed. So, it appears that you
can use the lumped system, but again for lumped system we have said that Bi has to be
less than 0.1. So, if Bi is less than 0.1 then only you can apply lumped system.
So, the first thing you have to check whether Bi is less than 1.1 or not, ‘right’. So, from
the given properties that given properties are like this the slab has.  = 8.4 X 10-5 m2 s-1;
conductivity of 215 W (m oC)-1; specific heat Cp = 0.9 kJ (kg oC)-1, and density of ρ =
2700 kg m-3, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 12:47)
So, for the solution what do you need? First you look into that what is the value of Bi.
So, Bi is hl/k; this is for slab. So, it is given 10 centimetre. So, 10 centimetre is the
thickness. So, t/2 is the characteristic Length; so, L s being t/2. So, it is 10 centimetre
thick. So, it becomes 10/2 that is 5 centimetre.  
which means Bi is greater than 0.1. So, you cannot you cannot employ this lumped
system. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:49)
So, if you cannot employ lumped system what other it could have been? It could have
been an analytical solution, ‘right’, but analytical solution you have seen, we have shown
you also earlier that it needs lot of calculation or analysis.
Now, is to avoid that just we have said that the Heisler charts they are very handy,
‘right’. So, we can utilize the Heisler chart here also. So, Bi you have found out 1 by Bi
is 3.57. Now, from 
 ; alpha is given, t has been given, t is after 1 minute, ‘right’;
so,  60  second  t  is  given.  Alpha  t  by  l  square;  l  already  0.05  we  have  seen.  So,
So, Fourier number is 2.016. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:04)
Then again what we need to do? We need to go to that theta versus Fourier number that
plot, ‘right’ which was like this for different 1 by Bi. So, for a given Fourier number that
is 2.06 for a given 3.57 that is this. So, we look at the point and then find out the value of
θ, ‘right’. 
 . So, this value of theta from the plot we get 0.63. So, if we get from the plot this value equal to 0.63 then we can find out the value of T c or
centre  temperature  that  is  T ∞ is  already  given;  T ∞ is  outside,
 So, after 1 minute which you emerged into
the solution that solution this from 500 degree centigrade, if it is 100 degree centigrade
the after 60 seconds the temperature has come down to 352 degree centigrade, centre
temperature, ‘right’.
So, similarly if this is centre temperature similarly at any position if it would have been
asked, you would have found out that what is the positional temperature using the second
curve, ‘right’. So, this is one example where what we have done? We have first checked
what is the value of Biot number? That value is less than 0.1 or not that we have checked
because if it is less than 0.1 then directly we can use the easy solution as lumped
solution. But, since it is we saw that it is not point less than 0.1 it is more than 0.1. So,
we are not able to use lumped system directly.
So,  if  we  are  not  using  lumped  system  directly  another  solution  could  have  been
analytical solution based on the boundary conditions given from the basic governing
equation. But, that may take some time or some analysis or some block complication
depending on the situation. That is why we are trying to find out the centre temperature
from the Heisler chart.
For the Heisler chart to find out the centre temperature what we need? We have to find
out what is the Fourier number that is 
 ; the values are given, t is given for 1
minute that is 60 seconds, alpha is given and the l characteristic length dimension also
given 10 centimetre thick. So, t/2 is that; so, it is 0.05 centimetre 0.05 meter, ‘right’ 5
centimetre 0.05 meter.
So, from there we found out Fourier number, you have found out already Biot number.
So, inverse of the Biot number you know; so, these are the two points from where you
can point out on the graph of Heisler chart Fourier number versus non-dimensional
temperature against 1 by Bi. That point from there you find out what is the value of θ and
from that θ value you now expand that θ in non-dimensional temperature into that intothe form of T that is 
 . So, other two are given, T centre you find out and it
became to be in this problem 352 degree centigrade, ‘right’. Similarly, other problems
also can be solved.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:57)
Let us go into that this is the second problem; that was with the slab, this is with the
cylinder. A long cylinder 12 centimetre in diameter and initially at 20oC is placed into a
furnace at 820oC with local heat transfer coefficient of 140 W(m2 oC)-1 Calculate the time
required for the access temperature to reach 800 degree centigrade. Also calculate the
corresponding temperature at radius of 0.5 centimetre.
Given alpha 6.11 X 10-6 m2s-1; conductivity 21 W (m oC)-1. So, if this is known then we
can find out, again I will read long steel cylinder 12 centimetre in diameter and initially
at 20oC, placed into a furnace at 820oC with local heat transfer coefficient of 140W(m2
oC)-1.
Calculate the time required for the access temperature to reach 800oC also calculate
corresponding temperature at radius of 5.4 centimetre. Given alpha is equal to 6.11 X 10-
6 m2s-1; conductivity k 21 W (m oC)-1, ‘right’.
So, it is also again coming that first we have to find out Biot number. So, Biot number is 
140 0.06 10.2; 2.52 2 21 2ohr XBik X Bi   So, if Bi is greater than 0.1 we cannot use lumped system.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:35)
So, we have found out what is the value of 1 by 2 Bi which is 2.5. So, we have found out
this; so, theta c by theta i. Now again we go to that plot where we have to find out 1/2Bi,
‘right’; so, 1/2Bi versus r o/ri so, that here it is centre temperature. So, centre temperature
is 1 by Bi so, from there we get this value and get the value of theta, ‘right’. So, the c /
I that has come to be 0.025, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 23:28)
So, 0.025 we have found out and from there we have this centre temperature we can find
out there is from the graph of this, this is 0.025, ‘right’ and this why we have made 800
minus  820 this  is  the  environmental  temperature,  initial  temperature,  environmental
temperature, ‘right’. So, here we should first find out because 800 degree centigrade we
have not shown.
So, however, this is like that that 0.025 was that from the graph and we can find out T c
and that Tc comes to equal to 800, ‘right’ T c comes to 800, because calculate the time
required for the access temperature to become 800 I made mistake I thought that time is
given.(Refer Slide Time: 24:41)
Since time was not given so, we have found out theta c over theta i and that has become
0.025, Fo is not given. So, from this value and from 1/2 this value we find out F o value.
So, Fo value came out to be 5, ‘right’; F o value Fourier number came out to be 5. So, if it
is 5 then we know it is 
  and this is ro2, ‘right’; 
 /ro2 Fo value 5 we can find out value
of t. So, which we have done subsequently. Let us see that subsequently we have done
this.(Refer Slide Time: 25:36)
Fo is 5, ‘right’ and 
 , ‘right’. So,
you remember that the value of r was given the value of r or 12 centimetre, ‘right’. So,
12/2 that is r is 6 centimetre, ‘right’.
Now,  we  are  asked  that  what  is  the  value  of  theta  or  temperature  when  r  is  5.4
centimetre, ‘right’. So, When r = 5.4 cm = 0.054m, ‘right’ again Bi is
So, if 1/2Bi is known then from the chart we can find out what is the value of theta
‘right’. So, theta becomes equal to from the chart of what? In this case our chart will be
again 1/2Bi versus Bi. So, that Bi we have found out what is the 1/Bi what is the value of
θ, ‘right’. So, that θ we have found out to be 0.84, ‘right’.
So, we have found out T r from the graph there is at a location 5.4 centimetre at the as the
radius, ‘right’. So, we have with this we can find out which was 803.2 degree centigrade,
‘right’.140 0.054 10.18; 2.772 2 21 2ohr XBik X Bi   
00.84; 0.84 (800 820) 8 0 .22803rro T TT XT TC
     (Refer Slide Time: 29:03)
Now, you also see, your concept wise your radius was like this it was put at some 820
degree centigrade that is the your oven temperature and it came to be after some time
whatever time was given after time t whatever it came centre temperature came to be
800, ‘right’. You were know you were asked to find out what is the time required. So,
time  we had shown some almost close to 3000 seconds, ‘right’. So, close to 3000
seconds we have shown.
Now, from there what we did? We now found out that at the different location, ‘right’;
so, at the different location to find it out as we have taken the 
 that value, ‘right’
and this came to be 0.84, how? This was with that 1/2Bi, ‘right’ versus different Bi
whatever. So, this value we got from there, ‘right’. So, this was 0.84; so, from this 0.84
value we then calculated the value of T r that is the value of temperature at r is equal to
5.4 centimetre, ‘right’ and we got it to be 820.
So, what I would like to say if the centre is 800 and if the outside is 820 then this was at r
is equal to 6, ‘right’. So, at r is equal to 5.4 it will be away from 6 so, somewhere here.
So, not the centre, but closer to the surface than the centre, this point is closer to the
surface than the centre. So, it is likely that if the centre was 800 and if the outside was 820 this temperature will
be higher than 800 that is what we got it to be 803.2 degree centigrade, ‘right’. This is
how we expect that you will also do some problems perhaps the next class we will do a
some problem with the sphere and then we will complete this and some more sphere or
some other similar so that this Heisler chart becomes handy to you and you can easily
determine the temperatures, ‘right’. So, with this let us stop to this class. 
Thank you.