Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 27
Heat Transfer by Convection
Good afternoon, my students. We have completed conduction heat transfer. Of course, in
that we have also looked into a part of the convection also little the thing is that we have
when completed this graphs, that is the Heisler chart. So, Heisler chart you have seen
there you need both Fourier number alpha t by l square and you need Biot number that is
hL/k. So, there also wherever h is also there so, there is a part of convection 
However we have not covered the basics of convection. So, today we shall start that in
our lecture number 27, ‘right’; so, Heat Transfer by Convection.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:47)
Now, convection that is the flow of heat associated with the movement of a fluid such as
when hot air from a furnace enters a room, or to the transfer of heat from a hot surface to
a flowing fluid. In other word, when heat is carried away by moving forced convection
by we when heat is carried away by moving fluid. The fluid the flow can either be
caused  by  external  influences,  forced  convection  or  by  conveyance  forces  natural
convection. Convective heat transfer is tightly coupled to the fluid flow solution.In this regard let me tell you that this is your everyday experience that you have seen
your mummy and others, they are keeping in the household refrigerator food materials
and may be cooked or precooked or raw vegetable, fruits they are keeping in different
shelves of the refrigerator.
Now, in that refrigerator you have seen that on the top there is a cabinet where there is a
cooling coil down below the cabinet. Now, this  cooling coil is around minus 10ºC
whereas, the shelves where the food materials  are kept the temperature there are at
different levels the upper stair or upper shelf may have lower temperature of to the tune
of 3 to 4 degree. Then as you go down the freeze the temperature goes up and it may be
to the tune of even 6 to 8 ºC depending on the loading depending on the condition of the
freezer etcetera.
Now, the question is in the refrigerator there is no fan, if you have noticed that there is
no fan. Then the question comes when the hot material hot to the respect that room
temperature hot food materials or fruits and vegetables they are kept inside how the heat
is being transferred from there to the material or to the cooling coil. This is a question
which you should answer and also like in this room is fully air conditioned, but there is
no fan, ‘right’.
So, how this is happening that this whole room is getting cold there whereas, there is no
fan, ‘right’ the answer to this both are that there is a convection current in both the
refrigerator as well as the room such that hot gas or hot air in both the cases that goes up
and the cold air being heavier that comes down. Just now we said that by buoyancy
forces. So, that buoyancy force is being applied into these cases. These cases are that that
because of the density difference there is a convective current generated that is by nature
and that is why it is called though without any fan that is why it is called convective heat
transfer, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 07:27)
So, let us look into some more that what happens to the particles in a liquid or a gas
when you heat them? Again, a part of heat will come under boiling that when we will go
to the boiling that time you will see. But, again that mummy is preparing your tea in the
early morning, ‘right’. So, she has put water in a container and put on the oven now
when it was being heated that time if you have ever noticed that initially there are some
few droplets bubbles they are getting generated from the hot surface.
Then gradually the rate of this bubble formation is getting increased, ‘right’, and after
sometime there are lots of bubbles are happening from the lower part of the container or
hot surface and they are gradually in to coming to the surface and it is like a bubble
which are dancing on the whole liquid, ‘right’. The whole liquid there is turbulence and
that condition we call it to be that it is boiling, ‘right’ 
So, what is happening there? There also the liquids are liquid through the liquid this
bubbles are getting escaped. While getting escaped the hot gas which is hot vapour
which is coming out it is giving away the heat, ‘right’ and there is a current convection
current that is being prevailing on the surface of the hot container there from the whole
liquid, ‘right’. So, this is what a pictorial depiction of this ‘right’.
What happens to the particles in a liquid or a gas when you heat them the particles spread
out and become less dense, ‘right’ like this.(Refer Slide Time: 10:36)
So, you are heating; so, these if these are the particles of the liquid. So, they spread out
like this and thereby they are becoming less dense, ‘right’ this is what is happening.
Now, of course, the question comes to what is the fluid ‘right’? So, we can say a fluid is
a liquid or a gas, ‘right’, both liquid and gas they are together or individually they are
considered as fluid, ‘right’. So, this way the particles are generating or propagating heat,
‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:05)
So, this is another pictorial view that the cooler, more dense, fluid sink through warmer,
less dense fluids, ‘right’. In effect, warmer liquids and gases rise up and cooler liquids
and gases sink, ‘right’. This is what is happening this is the warmer liquid particles, they
are moving up and these are the colder liquid, which are denser and they are sinking.
This way there is a convection current that is created and that is conveying the heat in the
liquid.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:08)
This is what I was just saying that mummy when she is preparing that tea, so, this is how
the convection current is happening, ‘right’. So, cooler water that sinks that blue colour
they are cool and this hot is going up that is hot water rises, ‘right’. This is called that
water movement cools at the surface and there is convection current this service is
getting cooled and hot water rises. This way this is happening, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 12:56)
So, we can then say another thing another example is that why is it windy at the seaside,
‘right’? You will see that wherever you are going near the sea you are always getting a
breeze always getting a wind blow in the seaside, ‘right’. This is because land is warmer
than the sea, ‘right’ this is this from the seashore this is coming and land warms the air
above it and it rises like this.
Whereas, the cold air from the sea above the sea moves into to take the place of warm air
that has risen. So, warm air because it is the surface of the land is hot so, this is
producing hot air. So, that is heating up whereas, cold air from your sea it is coming up
and gradually it is replacing the hot air on the seashore. That is why it is windy on the
seaside, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 14:31)
So, if we look at another pictorial view that the cold air sinks where is the freezer
compartment put in fridge which we have already said, ‘right’ and this is the freezer
compartment. This is the freezer compartment and this is producing that a cold, ‘right’; it
is warmer at the bottom. So, this warmer air rises and a convection current is set up. 
So, hot air that is getting risen and the moment it is coming in contact with that cold
freezer compartment this is getting colder and the cold air because of the higher density
that is going gradually down, ‘right’. This way the convection current is there and your
food material are kept in the different shelves they are getting gradually cold, ‘right’.
So, it is put at the top because this freezer compartment freezes put at the top because
cool air sinks. So, it cools the food on the way down, ‘right’. So, this is how the
household refrigerators  they work and how without fan the food materials  they are
getting cold or they are getting chilled, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 16:24)
So, next we see that movement of the molecules within the fluids occur between a
surface and a moving or stationary fluid when they are at different temperatures. For
example, here we are showing that moving fluid is like this it is happening, ‘right’ and
the Tsurface, ‘right’ is higher than T environment. That is why that the surface is getting heated
up, the air is getting heated up, that is going up and the cold air that is coming and
replacing this hot air, ‘right’.
There are two mechanisms for this one is free natural free or natural convection when the
flow is induced by conveyance forces then it is called natural convection, ‘right’ and
when it is by some forced convection, when the flow is caused by external forces this
external force is generally we referred to as a fan, ‘right’ generally we refer to as a fan.
So, fan is causing that force of the air replacing the cold air by hot air and all rather hot
air by cold air and vice versa. This way the convection current is generated.
This is also one reason why there are huge breezes or storms when it is happening
‘right’. So, the place where storm is occurring from the colder side the cold air is coming
and the hotter side this hot air is being displaced by that cold air. That is why there is a
huge blow up that is why there is a huge blow and of air current and there is a convection
‘right’ force convection it can be said is. So, so though it is not by fan that is called by
definitely because of the delta T, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 19:25)
Now, if we look at that the two ways when cooling a heated object with a fluid say air by
applying fan it is called forced convection, ‘right’ it is called forced convection and this
means that the faster a fluid is travelling over an object, the faster it is capable of
removing heat and cooling the object, ‘right’. 
And, this is governed by the formula called a Newton’s law of cooling that is 
. So, this is the also known as Newton’s law of
cooling, ‘right’ where this ∆T or ∆Q is equal to or Q is equal to simply we can write Q is
equal to hA∆T, ‘right’ or in this case since it is there is also dt that is in the time dt how
much heat has been transferred.
The formula indicates that heat transfer of a fluid to an object must equal to equal the
change in internal energy of the object, ‘right’. So, that is the convective heat transfer or
convective heat must be equal to the internal generation internal energy generation,
‘right’ mCpdt. 
And, this equation in this equation of course, h is the heat transfer coefficient h is the
heat transfer coefficient in watt per meter square degree centigrade, A is the surface area
of the object in meter square and T is the temperature of the temperature of T is the
temperature of the at any time of the object it should be of the object at any time, T f isthe final temperature of the object and C p is the specific heat in joules per kg degree
centigrade, ‘right’ and rho is the density in kg per meter cube and V is the volume in
meter cube of the object, ‘right’.
So, this equation can be integrated to form that Newtonian cooling method or notably
lumped capacity method, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:08)
So, this can be done like this that (T-T f) /(T0-Tf) this is equal to e-(hA/ρCpV)t . So, this one
integration the previous equation on integration we can write that equation means this
equation  this  equation  on  integration,  we  can  write  like  this,  ‘right’  and  this  one
integration gives us the Newtonian law of cooling or Newton’s law of cooling as (T-T f) /
(T0-Tf) = e-(hA/ρCpV)t,  ‘right’. 
So, this formula is very convenient to use, but only possible when the object has a high
thermal conductivity because unless the object has a high thermal conductivity that the
lumped  system  formula  cannot  be  used,  ‘right’.  So,  this  high  thermal  conductivity
compared to the external surface resistance that is h; compared to the value of h the value
of k that should be very high which we have in detail discussed earlier, ‘right’. So, thatconvective  heat  transfer  coefficient  that  resist  convective  resistance  must  be  low
compared to the conductive resistance, ‘right’ that we have said earlier in many cases. 
So,  equation  2,  this  we  can  rewrite  and  if  we  take  the  log  we  can  say  that
, ‘right’ this can now be plotted in T-T f versus
time, ‘right’. So, this is T-T f versus time on a graph from where the slope is 
can be used to calculate the value of h ‘right’. So, the value of h can be calculated from a
graph of T-Tf versus time T where the slope of the graph will give h, ‘right’. So, the
slope of the graph will be 
 , ‘right’. So, this from there we can find out the
value of h.
So, coming to the end of the this beginning class of the convection that we can say that
this is primarily governed by and known as the Newton’s law of cooling, ‘right’. So,
Newton’s law of cooling says that hA∆T is the Q and from as we said the h, the value of
h is very fundamental and this has to be measured or calculated as the case may be,
‘right’. So, we will do in subsequent classes the h are the importance of h that is heat
transfer coefficient and how it can be measured or how it can be calculated or some
problems associated with them we will do that, ‘right’.
Thank you.