Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 21
Transient Heat Transfer
So, good afternoon; again, we are coming we have finished more or less conduction heat
transferred, but on the steady state condition ‘right’. So, now, let us go into Heat Transfer
for Transient condition that is this is called time dependent heat transfer ‘right’. Earlier it
was time independent; that means, under steady state, but when there is unsteady state,
then there is all altogether different heat transfer and the solutions are also different.
And I let us give an example an example is that say you have a boiled water boiling
water, ‘right’. And you have a ball say maybe; maybe; maybe made of say iron ball of
this kind of or the playing that duce ball by which cricket is being played, ‘right’, that is
made of say iron and you dip it into that boiling water. The moment you have dipped
into that boiling water initially towards under room temperature now you have given it
under boiling condition. So, the inside of this ball the temperature will be going on
increasing till it is attaining a steady state temperature, ‘right’.
So, under this situation the heat transfer is known as transient heat transfer, ‘right’ or
heat transfer during transient condition or also known as unsteady state heat transfer,
‘right’. (Refer Slide Time: 02:27)
So, if we look at that for the solution of heat, ‘right’ for it is solution let us look into that
this is called a lumped system heat transfer conduction, ‘right’ lumped system analysis
that is as I said that it being cricket ball or kind of thing say it being a ball. So, you are
dipping it into hot water or boiling water the temperature inside will go on changing. So,
that while it is giving on changing till it is attaining a steady temperature. So, that period
is known as transient heat transfer or the heat transfer during this process is called
unsteady state heat transfer, ‘right’.
So, we are taking in that case as I said you have taken on ball of iron. So, that is a
spherical, but to do the analysis let us not take any specific geometry, ‘right’. So, let us
take an arbitrary geometry where there is no shape and size, ‘right’ as we have shown in
this that this is the; this is the shape of I mean a non specific shape of solid having
volume V, specific heat C p, density rho and temperature at any time T (t) and initial
temperature T0 with a heat transfer area A and ambient condition is that ambient is at a
temperature Te with a heat transfer coefficient of h, ‘right’.
This is similar to that we said that in a pot we have boiling heat water and you have
dipped one ball into it, ‘right’ who is this conditions are known that is its volume is
known; its specific heat is known; its density is known and its initial temperature is
known we have to find out at definite time what is the temperature. If that be true this we
are going to do it here, ‘right’. Here instead of taking this spherical shape let us take onegeometry which is not a specific this like this one and also here we would like to say that
this environment that is the water boiling has a temperature known as T e with a heat
transfer coefficient of h, ‘right’.
If that be true then the fluid with heat transfer coefficient of h and the temperature T e, if
that is surrounded by and the body is having a volume as we said with an area A, then
the governing equation which will govern the heat transfer we can say that the rate of
heat flow into the volume into the solid of volume V through the boundary surface A, if
we take that to be equal to capital I or roman I and that must be equal to rate of increase
of internal energy of the solid of volume V, ‘right’.
So, we are equating  the rate  of heat  flow  into  the solid of volume  V  through the
boundary A or surface A that should equal to the rate of increase of internal energy of the
solid of volume V, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:50)
So,  this  is  the  governing  equation  and  by  writing  the  appropriate  mathematical
expression for each of this termed we can say that the heat which is being transferred is
by convection from this medium ‘right’ which is equal to
  Te in this
case if it is a boiling water then it is higher T e than the temperature of the body, ‘right’.
So, heat is being transferred from the environment to the body, ‘right’ with the area Aand the heat transfer coefficient being h, ‘right’. So, this must be equal to 
we know Q is equal to mC p∆T, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:48)
So, Q is equal to mC p∆T that we know. So, to have the m we are making ρ times V,
‘right’; ρ is in kg per meter cube and V is in meter cube, so, it is kg-m, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:12)
So, mCp∆T and this ∆T, is a function of time, ‘right’ that is why we write dT/dt that is
del del T of t, that is, rate of change of temperature with respect to time. So, this equation
we can solve that the governing equation which we have said rate of heat flow into the
solid of volume V through the boundary surface A must be equal to the rate of increase
of internal energy.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:53)
And this internal energy we have calculated as mC p∆T, where m corresponded to ρ times
V and this is m and C p and ∆T and this ∆T is a function of time. So, that is why it is
dT/dt that is rate of change of temperature with respect to time, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 10:38)
So,  once  we  have  this  the  solution  of  heat  can  be  written  as
This is the same as the previous one which we had said that 
 at any t,
this is the body temperature, this was equal to ρ times Cp times V times dT/dt, ‘right’.
So,  this  we  are  rearranging  and  writing  like  this  and.
 (Refer Slide Time: 12:05)
Not at time t is equal to 0 because time t is equal to 0 is the initial condition. So, this is
valid for time t greater than 0. And initial condition is like this that T at any time t is
equal to T0 for t is greater is equal to 0, ‘right’ this is the initial condition, ‘right’ and new
temperature definition we let us define θt, ‘right’ θt let us define as a new temperature
and that is to be defined as T t -Te, ‘right’.
So,  this  we  are  depending  as  T t  -Te like  this  temperature  is  also having  a  unit  of
temperature that is either degree centigrade or any equivalent temperature unit, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:26)
Now, if these be true then we can write that this equation we can rewrite as in terms of
theta as 
A is the surface area, h is the heat transfer coefficient ρ is the density Cp is the specific
heat and V is the volume of the body through which that is being transferred ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:46)
So, if this be true the we can write that as we have said the initial condition is θt is equal
to Tt  -Te which is equal to θ0 and this is valid for t time is equal to 0; that is why it is
called initial condition at time t is equal to 0, ‘right’. So, at time t is equal to 0, θt is equal
to θ0 and defined as Tt -Te, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 15:24)
And solution of this differential equation gives in the form θt, ‘right’, θt is equal to Ce-mx 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:45)
So, it is like that; θt is equal to Ce-mx. Now, things are all clear and you can see. So, this is
the solution.(Refer Slide Time: 15:59)
Then we can write that applying the initial condition applying the initial condition and
integration of this gives that C is equal to θ0, ‘right’; C is equal to θ0, ‘right’ because we
had theta t is equal to Ce-mx, ‘right’, and we said at time rather at time t is equal to 0 at
time t is equal to 0, we said theta t is equal to θ0, ‘right’. So, that if we put at time t is
equal to 0. So, here it was sorry not mx it was m t if we remember correctly, ‘right’ it
was mt not mx
(Refer Slide Time: 17:26)
So, if it is mt then at time t is equal to 0, we can write that theta 0 theta 0 is equal to or
theta t was now theta 0 and that is equal to that e to the power minus mt. So, c became
equal to θ0, ‘right’ because time t is equal to 0 and is θ0. So, C became equal to it was Ce-
mt. So, time t is equal to 0. So, it became t theta 0 and C became equal to θ0, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:16)
So, if that be true then the temperature distribution is 
 (Refer Slide Time: 19:28)
0 0( ) ( ) mte
et T t TeT T
 So, if this be true this is dependent on here this is valid only if that a number Biot
number Bi is equal to , where h is the transfer coefficient of the environment; L s
is the characteristic length and this is defined as equal to V over A, where V is the
volume of the body, A is the surface area. So, L s is V over A and that is in meter, ‘right’.
So, this is called characteristics length or L s.
So, this term that is called Biot number shortly denoted as Bi is ,  Ls is  the
characteristic length or characteristic dia dimension of the body and k s is the thermal
conductivity of the material, ‘right’. So, if this    this is less than equal to
0.1, then only this solution is true means it is valid. So, unless that 
  this value is less
than 0.1, we cannot go for this lumped system analysis.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:21)
This is the very fundamental that the Biot number has to be very high which in other
word is saying that is take again I gave the same example that we had bath of water
under boiling condition, ‘right’, and we had put spherical ball in it this environmental
temperature was equal to 100 degree centigrade and this initial temperature was say 25
degree centigrade. 
Now, suddenly when we dipped into this solution the temperature of this ball will go on
increasing and we said that it will go on increasing till the outside and inside temperatures
shLBik
s
shLBik
s
shLBikare under equilibrium or it is called under steady state. Till that we will go on and the
time required for this we can find out from this equation.  But, this is when the Biot
number is less than 0.1 that is 
 is 0.1. Physically what it means that this we are of the
metal if the temperature is here 100 degree that should immediately be conducted into
the body. So, the body resistance is negligible. Body resistance for the thermal energy to
be transported is negligible if that is happening then only it is this solution can be valid
or you can apply this solution, ‘right’.
So, the moment this is coming to the contact of the environmental temperature this will
be conducted immediately inside, ‘right’. Otherwise normally what is happening assume
that your this as we are repeatedly saying this is the solution of the water boiling water
100 degree centigrade. And suppose you have one bowl of food material normally food
material is not having high conductivity very low poorly conducting any food material, is
generally poorly conducting. So, what will happen? This temperature we will come to
the surface and there will be resistance and inside it will take long time to go into this,
immediately this will not be going inside. So, if this is not happening then you cannot
apply this situation. That is why as we have defined that      that has to be less
than 0.1 which in subsequent thing we are saying.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:33)
s
shLBikNow, where ks is the thermal conductivity of the solid irrespective of the shape of the
solid the temperature distribution during transient condition within a solid at any instant
is uniform with an error less than 5 percent; if less than 0.1, ‘right’; here it
is Biot number, if Biot number is  
 less than 0.1. Hence let us assume the lumped
system analysis  is applicable  for Bi less than 0.1 only, ‘right’, and physically it is
meaning that Bi is 
 . This means h is the convective heat transfer and k s/Ls is the
conductive heat transfer, ‘right’.
So, if you still remember that we had given this analysis or this analogy for this example
that this is water and we had this one, ‘right’. So, h came from the water, ‘right’, and k s/
Ls is that conductive. So, this is a convective heat transfer and this is the conductive heat
transfer, the ratio of these two, ‘right’. So, h has to be much lower than compared to k s/
Ls, then only it will be less than 0.1, ‘right’. So, that means, this is the ratio of heat
transfer coefficient for convection at the surface of the solid to the specific conductance
of this solid.
Hence assumption is valid if the specific conductance of the solid k s/Ls is much larger
than 0.1, ‘right’, is valid if the specific conductance of the solid that is k s/Ls is much
larger than h not 0.1 h, ‘right’. So, then only this is valid, h has come here. s
shLBik(Refer Slide Time: 27:24)
So, with this let us say that we have initiated the unsteady state heat transfer and we have
seen Biot number is h over k s/Ls and the value of it has to be less than 0.1, then only we
can make the lumped system analysis, ‘right’.
So, today time is over. We will continue in the next class solving different problems and
solutions of heat ok.
Thank you. 