Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 22
Transient Heat Transfer (Contd.)
So, in our 22nd class we were covering Transient Heat Transfer in the previous class,
‘right’. And we said what is the meaning of transient heat transfer that is unsteady state
heat transfer; if you remember we gave the example that you are putting in a pot hot
water and then you dip some spherical ball and the temperature in the ball should be
uniform; then only the heat transfer in the form of lumped system can be analyzed and
we began with that, ‘right’. So, we are continuing that transient heat transfer in the class
22nd.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:21)
 (Refer Slide Time: 01:25)
We had taken this we had analyzed and we came to the solution that θt is equal to Ce-mt
where m was supposed to n m was made equivalent to by ρCp V, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:43)
And this we then converted into the non dimensional temperature like theta t over theta 0
that was defined to be T t -Te over T0- Te and this was made equivalent to e to the power
minus mt, ‘right’.
And we said that this is dependent on non-dimensional parameter called Biot number or
Bi which is where Ls = V/A, or it is known as characteristic length or length ors
shLBikcharacteristic dimensional parameter. And h is the heat transfer coefficient and k s is the
conductivity of the solid, ‘right’; we give the example  of your that ball, so that is
conductivity of the solid, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:53)
So, if these we true then we said that Bi and the k s the thermal conductivity of the solid
irrespective of the shape of the solid, temperature distribution during transient condition
within a solid at any instant is uniform with an error less than 5 percent if we said Biot
number is equal to   and is less than 0.1. 
Hence, let us assume that the lamped system analysis is applicable for Biot number less
than 0.1. And the physical significance we get like that h meaning that this is
the ratio of heat transfer coefficient for convection at the surface of the solid to the
specific conductance of the solid. Hence assumption is valid if the specific conductance
of the solid is ks over Ls much larger than that of h, ‘right’. s
shLBik
s shBik L(Refer Slide Time: 04:15)
So, now we started we can go for a solution of a problem, ‘right’. And the problem is
like this in a well stirred liquid maintained at constant temperature T e is equal to 25
degree centigrade a copper plate having conductivity k s equal to 386 W/moC; specific
heat  Cp equal  to 383.1 J/kgoC, density   = 8954 kg/m3, thickness  L is  equal  to  5
centimeter and at the uniform temperature of T 0 equal to 250 oC is suddenly immersed at
time t is equal to 0. 
The heat transfer coefficient between the plate and the fluid is h and this is equal to 350
W/m2oC. What will be the time required for the center temperature of the plate to reach
60 degree centigrade, ‘right’. (Refer Slide Time: 05:59)
And this can be solved very easily like; solution of this problem can be written. But
before we go to the solution we read out the problem once more that in a well stirred
liquid maintained at a constant temperature T e to be 25 oC, a copper plate, ‘right’. 
So, a well stirred liquid as we said earlier; so there you are putting a copper plate. So,
that copper plate is under this new condition that is suddenly it is immersed into that
liquid,  ‘right’.  So,  if  that  be  true  that  is  the  liquid  is  maintained  at  the  constant
temperature of Te equal to 25 degree centigrade, a copper plate having conductivity k =
386 W/moC specific heat Cp = 383 J/kgoC.
And specific heat C p to be 383.1 J/kgoC having a density of 8954 kg/m3, thickness L = 5
centimeter and uniform temperature of T 0 250 oC is suddenly immersed at time t is equal
to 0; that copper plate is suddenly immersed into this liquid at 25 oC, ‘right’. 
Now, this immersion is done in the liquid where the heat transfer coefficient between the
plate and fluid is or h is 350; 350 W/m2oC; what will be the time required for the center
temperature of the plate to reach 60 degree centigrade? So, from that 250 oC to 60 oC
how much time is required, ‘right’? Now to solve it if we do it with the help of lamped
system, then first we must look into what is the value of Biot number. Because for
application of lamped system Biot number or Bi that is  that  number  should
be less than 0.1, ‘right’.s
shLBikSo, let us look into what is that first let us find out that what is the characteristic length
dimension, ‘right’. So, that L s of that is solid length or characteristic length because to
volume of the solid over the area of the solid that is LA over 2A; since it is a plate, so
normally it is taken both the side the plate. 
So, 2 is the area and L is the volume; so we can say it is 
So, the characteristic length we got to be 2.5 centimeter, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:37)
Now, before therefore, we can find out the Biot number and that Biot number is equal to
Bi equal to     so this is less than 0.1.
So, we can use the lamped system analysis and in that lamped system analysis we have
we remember that our solution was
 
So, we have seen that a hotplate when suddenly immersed into a liquid with a heat
transfer coefficient and the characteristic length and all other parameters are known; then52.52 2 2sVolume LA LL cmArea A    
2350 2.5 100.023386shL X XBik
  
0
2
1 0.00408( ) 60 25,250 25
350,8954 383.1 2.5 10
0.00408 0.155
, 0.00408 1.864
, 456.94 7.62 minmt mte
e
p p s
tT t Te or eT T
hA hwhere mC V C L X X X
s e
or t
or t s  

     
  
  

 how much time it will take from one initial temperature to a final temperature say 250 to
60  degree.  So,  what  will  be  the  time  required  to  do  this  change  under  the  given
condition; this is what is transient heat transfer and this is what is the beauty of the
lamped system. 
So, easily you can solve the situation, ‘right’, but we have to check whether the Biot
number was less than 0.5 or not, ‘right’. Sorry, Biot number has to be less than 0.1; then
only this is applicable, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:27)
So, let us look into another problem which is like this that the junction of a thermocouple
which  is  approximated  to  be  a  sphere  of  a  diameter;  of  diameter  D  equal  to  0.8
millimeter having k conductivity to be 30 W/moC. Density  8000 kg/m3 or specific heat
500 J/kg oC is being used to measure the temperature of a gas. 
The heat transfer coefficient between the junction and the gas is h equal to 600 W/m2oC.
Determine the time required to for the thermocouple to record 98 percent of the applied
temperature difference, ‘right’.
So, here you have to be careful because while reading some things are given which are
very useful and very thoughtful also, ‘right’. So, quickly if we look at the junction of a
thermocouple which is approximated to be a sphere of diameter D 0.8 millimeter; having
conductivity cap 30 W/moC, density 8000 kg/m3.And specific heat C p 500 J/kg oC; it is being used to measure the temperature of a gas,
‘right’ thermocouple you know. So, this is what junction one metal another metal; so
make the junction and this point is used as the thermocouple and the other end of these
two points are given to the measuring device, ‘right’. 
So, the heat transfer coefficient between the junction and the gas is h is equal to 600 W/
m2oC.  Determine  realized  that  importance;  determine  the  time  required  for  the
thermocouple to record 98 percent of the applied temperature difference. That means,
you have already measured 98 percent that is accomplished 98 percent; unaccomplished
2 percent, ‘right’. So, that is the crux of the problem; that is the key point of the problem
‘right’. 
So, again we have to first find out the Biot number to; find out the Biot number first we
have to find out the characteristic length. So, characteristic length of this is a sphere, so it
is 
 (Refer Slide Time: 18:09)
If that be true then the Biot number we can determine that is 
it is that is 0.00266; that means, it is less than 0.1 ‘right’. So, since it is less than 0.1, so
we can apply the lumped system analysis; so applying the lumped system analysis we
can write that 3
240.83
4 3 6 6srV r DLA rmm
    
33 600 0.8 102.66 1030 6shL X XBi Xk X  
0( )mte
eT t TeT TAnd θt/θ0 was equal to 
  T temperature at any time T minus temperature of the
environment or of the fluid where the it is getting transferred; over the initial temperature
minus the environmental temperature, that is what the medium is getting heat transferred.
So, 
.
3.475 second was the time. So, the crux of the problem was how to make; how to make
the use of that 98 percent factor, ‘right’. So, that 98 percent factor we have used that 98
percent has been already accomplished; we have remaining 2 percent; so these 2 percent
has to be measured. So, that is why it became 2 percent equivalent to 2 by 100, ‘right’.
So, we found out m and from there from the relation theta t by theta 0; e to the power
minus mt, we have found out what is the time required.
It can be the other way around that in some problem, you may have been given all the 4
temperatures and you know you might not have been given all the 4 temperature you
have been given on 3 temperatures. And you are asked that within this time how much
will be the temperature drop or how much will be the temperature gain or what will be
the environmental temperature etcetera; that combination you have to do with different
problems, ‘right’.0( )mte
eT t TeT T
132 100; , 50 , 3.91100 2
,
600 61.1258000 500 0.8 103.475mt mt
p p se or e or mt
hA hNow mC V C L
Xs tXsX X 
   
 
   (Refer Slide Time: 25:17)
So, let us look into that to solve this kind of problem boundary conditions are very much
necessary; boundary conditions of any slab that is fundamental to be looked into, ‘right’.
So, here we have given one boundary that you have a slab of thickness L and heat is
being supplied q quantity. So, much Watt per meter square in one side and another side,
a convection to a fluid that is T the heat transfer at the coefficient of h the slab has a
thickness of L. 
So, it is a slab of thickness L at an initial temperature of T 0 is considered heat is supplied
at one of its boundary, surface at a constant rate of q W/m2; when time is greater than 0.
Heat is dissipated by convection from the other boundary surface into a medium at a
uniform temperature T e; with a heat transfer coefficient h, ‘right’; if that be true that this
is a problem which is to be solved. So, q is given that is heat flux in one side, other side
is convective heat transfer at time T is a greater than 0 constant rate of it flux is given
another side is an the boundary, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 27:09)
And let us define a new temperature theta t; as theta t is T t-Te, ‘right’. So, if this be true
then we can find out that the solution of it, ‘right’. So, next class we will do this solution
because today now we are running out of time. So, we will solve it in the next class. So,
next class before solving we will first have this problem again and then solve it ok.
Thank you.0( )( )
( ). ( ) 0
( ) 0
( )
( ) ( )e p
e p
edT TAq Ah T T t C ALdt
dT tor q h T T t C L for tdt
and the initial condition is
T t T for t
Let us define a new temperature t as
t T t T


  
    
   
 
 