Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 31
Heat Transfer by Convection (Contd.)
Good morning. We have been dealing with Convection Heat Transfer if you remember
and we have given some of the very important non-dimensional parameters which are
very  useful.  Your  heat  transfer  typically  convectional  many  empirical  as  well  as
experimental both relations are available because as you have seen that the Newton’s law
of cooling their Q was equal to (h A ΔT), ‘right’.
Now, the problem is this h that is the function of many parameters. So, it cannot be
identical for any and every purpose for conduction heat transfer that Fourier law when
you are using that minus Q is minus k dt dx a.  So, that time you are knowing that if area
is fixed if material is fixed and conductivity does not change then here you know the Q,
but here in convection if your area is also fixed, if your delta t is also fixed, but for
different system of transfer of heat h will be different for which that q also is different.
That is why very straightforward relation with h is very difficult, ‘right’.
So, today we will try to give you some ideas, not only ideas some relations which are
very helpful and to determine the h, heat transfer coefficient some problems also we will
try to solve. Only the problem could be that the solution I could not check beforehand
because when I was doing these slides  because I did it first in the word and then
converted into that. So, I could not make the systematic way. However, we will do that
and many such correlations we will try to bring about, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 03:34)
So, in our 31st class of Heat Transfer by Convection it is a continued one. We have
already given many numbers of non-dimensional numbers and these numbers are very
very helpful. Some of them we have said Reynolds number, Prandtl number, then earlier
we have also perhaps given the Nusselt number, ‘right’ and we have Biot number.
So, there also we said if you remember that the Biot number or Biot number and Nusselt
number both are having the same expression hl/K; l is the characteristic length, h is the
heat transfer coefficient, convective heat transfer coefficient and k for Biot number it is
the conductivity of the material through which it is being conducted whereas, in Nusselt
number it is the conductivity of the fluid through which heat is being conveyed, ‘right’.
So, this is the major difference between Nusselt number and Biot number and most of
these students make this mistake. That is why emphatically I am highlighting on this that
take care of this fine. Some more numbers which are very useful like Schmidt number it
is not necessarily that all of them are for only heat transfer some could also be utilized in
mass transfer. And, heat and mass transfer analogy if you go into there you will see these
non-dimensional parameters are very helpful, ‘right’.
So,  Schmidt  number  is  Sc  that  is  defined  as  υ/Dthat  is  the  ratio  of  momentum
diffusivity or viscous diffusivity to the mass diffusivity, ‘right’; υ/D. This D is not the
diameter, this D is the division coefficient, ‘right’ or mass diffusivity. That is why in the
definition we are saying it. Sherwood number this is also mass transfer related non-dimensional  parameter,  ‘right’.  Sherwood  number  is  DLhρShDa that  is  ratio  of
convective to diffusive mass transport, ‘right’; ratio of convective to diffusive mass
transport.
Similarly, Lewis number this is useful for heat transfer also heat transfer rather this is
D again this is ratio of mass diffusivity and thermal diffusivity, ‘right’ D;  is the
thermal diffusivity or diffusion coefficient, D is the mass transfer diffusion coefficient.
So, it is ratio of mass diffusivity and thermal diffusivity. 
Stanton number or it is written as St, it is also related with non-dimensional numbers
other and there  PrReNu
 that is Nusselt number over product of Prandtl number and
Reynolds number and significance is it is the ratio of heat transferred into a fluid to the
thermal capacity of the fluid. I repeat ratio of heat transferred into a fluid to the thermal
capacity of the fluid, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:51)
Similarly, some other numbers could be Peclet number, ‘right’. This is also very useful
in both; in this is majorly in heat transfer and that is Pe, Peclet number is product of
Reynolds number and Prandtl number, ‘right’ or N Pr and NRe; NRe times NPr. So, this can
be defined as ratio of the rate of advection of a physical quantity by the flow to the rateof diffusion of the same quantity driven by an appropriate gradient. I repeat ratio of the
rate of advection of a physical quantity by the flow to the rate of diffusion of the same
quantity driven by an appropriate gradient, ‘right’.
And, perhaps the last number which we are telling you there are some more also, ‘right’
there are some more also, but I do not like to bring all to you because may or may not be
you will be utilizing all of them at least many of them will be utilized or are being
utilized in this heat transfer course. But, some of them may not be in the heat transfer
course or may be required for mass transfer if it is not in this class in other classes, but
should be known also, ‘right’.
Like  this  one  we  have  already  used  Fourier  number  Fo  that  is2αt/l.  I  hope  you
remember that when we were using Heisler chart, that Heisler chart we had typically
used  this  Fourier  number  in  the  x-axis,  ‘right’  this  is  called  non  dimensional  time
parameter, ‘right’. 
Fourier number is a non-dimensional time parameter 2αt/l ‘right’ which is the ratio of
the heat conduction rate to the rate of thermal energy storage. Repeat, ratio the heat
conduction rate to the thermal energy storage. This time that is alpha t perhaps till now,
whatever you have seen in none of them directly we had time as one of the parameter,
‘right’.
So, far we have seen in non-dimensional units or non-dimensional numbers in none of
the numbers you have used time as one of the variable, but in Fourier number only it is
2αt/l and that is why this is also known as non-dimensional time, ‘right’. So, non-
dimensional time because time is second minute or hour whatever be the unit, but here in
Fourier number you do not have any unit it is also non-dimensional  2αt/l,‘right’. So,
like that you have many numbers which we have say said. Now, let us utilize them,
‘right’, ok.(Refer Slide Time: 13:12)
Some  of  them  are  utilized  in  this  way  as  I  said  that  there  are  many  relations  or
correlations available for heat transfer typically convective heat transfer, ‘right’. And that
is valid for different regime different conditions; flow either flow conditions or boundary
conditions etcetera. So, heat transfer coefficient inside tube, ‘right’.
So, we would like to find out the heat transfer coefficient inside tube. What condition?
Condition is laminar flow ‘right’ and this is called Nusselt-Graetz correlation. Nusselt
Graetz correlation, ‘right’ that is valid for thermal entrance length with parabolic velocity
profile and constant wall temperature, ‘right’. This is valid for thermal entrance length
with parabolic velocity profile and constant wall temperature.
So, Nux is given like that 1/3i/x)D1.007(Pe ,‘right’ and this is valid that is why I said
that regime; the word regime I utilized that it is valid between 2i10/xDPe, ‘right’.
So, this is valid for that whereas, this Nusselt number x; x means at any position because
Nusselt  number  is  hl/K,  ‘right’.  So,  this  is  x  at  any  position  that  is  3.66  when
2i10/xDPe, ‘right’.
Similar, other relations average Nusselt number this is localized Nu x. So, this is average
Nusselt number x is anyway x rather  1/3i/L)D1.61(Pe valid for  2i10/LDPe
where as it is 3.66 when Pi into Di sorry 2i10/LDPe where of course, Peclet numberPe is the Peclet number as we have already defined equal to Reynolds number times
Prandtl number which is again nothing, but 





KμC
μρVDPi, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:34)
So, like this some more correlations we look into like Hausen’s correlations. Hausen’s
correlation is valid for developing hydrodynamic and thermal boundary layer and for
constant wall temperature. So, again it is a /L)Pe0.0668(D3.66 Nu i d . Of course,
these nomenclatures are normal like D i meaning internal diameter; L meaning length. 
So, these are implicit, ‘right’, over 3/2i/L)Pe(D0.041 . This is with respect to Nu d,
‘right’  in  terms  of  diameter  whereas,  average  Nu  this  is  a
0.467
i0.8i
Pe/LD0.1171/L)D0.19(Pe3.66 Nu
 , ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 19:23)
So, let us look into some other relations. This is very useful particularly when you are
doing food handling and or liquid food or liquid fluid handling through pipes, ‘right’.
Obviously, flow in conduit and open flow they are quite different. That is the difference
between that maybe your land and water and food and chemical. So, where mostly it is
under bounded condition whereas, in land and water it is open, ‘right’.
However, but many basic things are common it has to be. So, they do not use this one
Sider Tate because normally this is for the conduit. So, Sider Tate equation is this is
valid for constant wall temperature mu w is the viscosity at the wall temperature, ‘right’.
In many cases you will see there is I do not know whether it is with me or not that is
called Detus Voltars equation, ‘right’. 
In one case that this is called viscosity correction factor that is mu over mu w this is
called viscosity correction factor. How it is coming, ‘right’. Maybe in all the cases it will
not be possible for us to explain because of the time constraint, but when it has come let
us say that you have a pipe, ‘right’ and this is the central axis, ‘right’ and a fluid is
flowing, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 21:48)
And your pipe it has say outside temperature is Twhereas, this fluid as a temperature
of say Ti and obviously,  Tis may be much greater than T i or less than how does it
matter? It does not matter, Twill be much less than T i, ‘right’. In one case one it will
have a have one type in other case it will be just inverse or reverse, ‘right’. So, when it is
coming as we know that viscosity mu is a function of temperature, ‘right’.
In most of the cases without exception, in most of the cases the viscosity is a function of
temperature that is true, but as the temperature increases viscosity decreases, ‘right’, this
is by enlarge happening. As the temperature is increasing viscosity is decreasing or that
vice versa as the temperature is decreasing viscosity is increasing it is becoming more
and more viscous; viscosity increasing when more and more viscous, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 23:25)
So, when we had this flow. So, the viscosity at the wall which was  Taround and
viscosity at the center which is say T i around, ‘right’ are quite different. So, unless you
take care of this viscosity correction then you will have some error. So, that is what the
Sider Tate correlation has incorporated that. 
So, valid for constant wall temperature and mu w is the viscosity at the wall temperature.
Then Nusselt number in terms of diameter is   14.03/13/1//86.1 wiLDPe . This is in
many cases through pipe flow are utilized, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:05)
Similarly,  some  other  like  Schlunder’s  correlation  it  is  valid  for  constant  wall
temperature and the average Nu is 3.66; Nu is Nusselt number. Again h l / k do not forget
that  this  k  is  the  conductivity  of  the  fluid  or  the  medium.  So,
3/133)]/.(61.1)66.3[( LDPei , ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:47)
So, if this is true then for constant heat flux, again under different conditions for constant
heat  flux  3/1/.302.1xDPeNuix ,  where  410/.xDPei.  Whereas,  NuD is  means
Nusselt number in terms of diameter is 4.36. This is also valid for P i into Di sorry
310/.xDPei. Average Nusselt number is 3/1/.953.1xDPei that is 210/.xDPei.
Similarly, for average Nusselt number is 4.36 if 310/.xDPei‘right’. So, this type of
many correlations are there, perhaps some more will also bring in because as and when
you will have different situations of your system, that time you may need to utilize it,
‘right’. And, these are collections from different resources that is why I preferred that I
should share with you so that in future when you are doing your either master or post doc
or doc that time you may be required, ‘right’. So, with this let us stop today here and. 
Thank you.