Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 03
Preservation Techniques
So, good morning. In the previous class we have said about food, about some of the
definitions, ‘right’, as the preamble of this course. Now, let us look also into some other
aspects like Preservation Techniques. What are the preservation techniques, because out
of which many will come under the umbrella of this, that thermal operations, ‘right’. So,
let us look into the preservation techniques.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:01)
There we see that first application of heat, by which it is preserved removal of cold, that
is also by which it can be preserved, dehydration, physical methods other than thermal,
some  biological  controls,  fermentation,  chemical  preservation,  irradiation,  emerging
technologies, ‘right’. Out of which this application of heat removal of cold dehydration
these come and some physical methods under which are thermal they come under this
category, ok.
So, quickly we will go. So, application of heat is cooking frying, boiling, or simply
heating prior to consumption that is under simple heating. Then commercial processes
like blanching, then pasteurization, then sterilization, dehydration, they are all under theapplication of heat. When blanching comes in many cases, when you will see in other
courses  that,  when  you  are  doing  that  processing  a  blanching  may  be  very  much
essential, ‘right’ and, this is done around 75 to 95 degree centigrade maybe time duration
1 to 10 minutes.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:55)
The fundamental reason for this blanching is that, it is done prior to drying, or canning,
or freezing, which delays the enzymes to act or enzymes inactivation is also occurred.
So, blanching is priors or preamble or prior to the process fundamental processing is
done. It restricts  undesirable changes in odour, flavor, colour, texture, and nutritive
values during storage by freezing as well, removes intercellular gases. 
Minimizes the potential for oxidative changes reduces microbial load. Leaches toxic
constituents such as nitrates, which in many cases call methaemoglobinemia and in that
is true for the infants and it removes the pesticides also. (Refer Slide Time: 04:16)
Other  reasons  for  doing  the  doing  the  blanching  is  to  increase  the  stability  of  the
chlorophyll, sometimes sodium carbonate and calcium oxide is used and during the 3
minute blanching at 90 degree centigrade in many cases and also it prevents the dis-
colouration.
So, for that some sodium pyrophosphate is added during blanching of potatoes and
cauliflower. So, blanching primarily is removing some of the bad part during the main
processing. So, that the main processing the changes are minimized. So, for that this is
required the blanching method could be achieved, using hot water, steam, microwave or
electro conduction, but some disadvantages are associated with it like loss of nutrient
around 30 to 40 percent vitamins are lost, vitamins and minerals both, 20 percent of
proteins are lost and commonly measured nutrient is ascorbic acid.(Refer Slide Time: 05:44)
Whether these losses have been occurred or not that is measured in terms of ascorbic
acid content means, initially how much ascorbic acid was present and after the blanching
how  much  ascorbic  acid  has  been  retained,  that  indicates,  that  how  much  quality
deterioration, during the process of blanching has been made, ‘right’.
Efficiency is measured through peroxidase activity. Pasteurization is another technique
by which it is not blanching by which application of heat is being done and it is below
100 degree centigrade. The method is hot water, steam, dry heat or electric currents and
cooled and they cooled promptly the method is done.
Low Temperature Long Time LTLT that is one of the pasteurization technique, where 63
degree  centigrade  for  30  minutes  this  LTLT  is  used  for  pasteurization,  and  high
temperature short time, high temperature not long time, high temperature short time, it
should be at 72 degree centigrade for 15 seconds and then cooled to 10 degree centigrade
immediately.
Now, this cooling there is a reasoning for that, that why after pasteurization at say 72
degree centigrade or say 63 degree centigrade, that cooling is done instantaneously.
Primarily, because that another thing which we have not I do not know where it is if it is
coming very good, otherwise let me also tell here, that there is a term called Q 10, ‘right’
Q10. So, in that Q10 there is a definition of it, that Q 10 refers to the rate of change of
anything be it chemical, biochemical, microbial, or enzymatic at temperature T to that,the same at temperature T plus 10 degree, ‘right’; that means, if you are doing roughly
like this perhaps it is coming afterwards if I have not mistaken,‘right’. If it is coming it is
like that that if you are heating at 20 degree centigrade. 
So, the rate of change in terms of as we said chemical, microbial, biochemical, or
enzymatic changes which will happen at 10 degree 20 degree centigrade, if it is increased
by 10 degree. So, in 30 degree centigrade, it will be almost double. In most of the cases it
is almost double. Whereas, if you lower the temperature from 20 to 10, then it can be
said that this rates of change of chemical, biochemical, microbial or enzymatic changes
will be almost half compared to that at 20 degree centigrade. So; that means, the higher
the temperature more is the likely changes are associated.
So, this is why primarily that is done and another case that while they sharp that you are
from high temperature to low temperature, you know I again we will come perhaps in
our this preamble classes, that microbes, there are they are particularly bacteria there are
3 types; one is  called  thermophilic,  one is called  mesophilic,  and another is called
psychrophilic. Thermophilic bacteria, is liking the high temperature around say 40 45 to
50 55, then mesophilic around say 20 25 to 30 degree centigrade and psychrophilic is
around plus minus 5 degree centigrade.
So, if you are not bringing down the temperature,  there is if it is  bring down the
temperature  quickly,  there  is  likelihood  that  thermophiles  may  grow  or  when  do
something. So, that is why again it is brought down very quickly. So, that organisms are
also, if there be any they are also. Now in this particularly pasteurization, you are not
killing all organisms, you are killing only the pathogenic organisms or which are disease
causing or which can produce some disease which can cause some disease they are
killed, ‘right’. So, high temperature short time at 72 degree centigrade for 15 seconds and
then cooled very quickly to 10 degree or even lower, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 11:43)
At least one instance of branching prior to canning is used to activate an enzyme. With
some green beans, the epidermis is loosened upon heating and their results in a quality
defect known as ‘sloughing’. A moderate heat treatment less than 61 degree centigrade
followed by a holding period prior to thermal processing can be prevented can prevent
sloughing  through  heat  inactivation  of  an  enzyme,  pectin  methylesterase,  which
demethylates the pectin molecule allowing cross linking with calcium ions.
This crosslinking bonds the outer layer of tissue to the underlying structure underlying
structure, thus preventing sloughing.(Refer Slide Time: 12:47)
Activity  of two enzymes, like  peroxidase  and catalase  can be  used to  evaluate  the
effectiveness of a blanching treatment. If both are inactivated then it can be assume that
other significant enzymes also are inactivated. The heating time necessary to destroy
catalase or peroxidase depends on the type and the size of the fruit or vegetable, the
method of heating, and the temperature of the heating medium.
Although blanching of vegetables is most often done in hot water or steam, blanching of
fruits is often done in calcium brines to firm the fruit through the formation of calcium
pectinates or pectates.(Refer Slide Time: 13:40)
Colloidal thickeners, such as pectin, carboxymethyl cellulose and alginates, also can be
used  to  aid  fruit  firmness  following  blanching.  Material  requires  are  vegetable  for
examples say, green vegetables or green beans 0.2 molar Sodium hydrogen phosphate,
sodium hydrogen phosphate, 0.1 molar citric acid, hydrogen peroxide around 1 percent
solution. Since, 600 ml beakers, Bunsen burner, cheese clothes squares and string for
holding the green beans during heating, test tubes. However, we are skipping this is
given to you.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:37)
So, you can see afterwards. Test organism is mycobacterium tuberculosis and brucella
abortus, ‘right’. Efficiency is determined by phosphatase test methylene blue test this
way ‘right’. It is used to kill the pathogenic organisms 121 degree centigrade for 15
minute and Ultra high temperature around 150 degree centigrade for 1 minute or 1 to 3
second so, that is used.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:16)
Another process appertization, this is a part of canning. I am not going into it. So, these
things  are  given  now, the  one  which  you are  saying  for  Q 10 or  that  this  is  called
temperature  quotient  Q 10.  Generally,  this  is  a  directive  or  this  is  an  indicator,  not
directive, this is an indicator for how quickly the changes may occur or may not occur.
‘right’. So, this is associated with cool preservation. 
So, Q10 =K10+T/K10 or KT ‘right’ T is any temperature. So, 10 degree centigrade lowering
of temperature makes shelf life almost double. Without a doubt, the most important
factor  affecting  post  harvest  life  is  temperature.  This  is  because  temperature  has  a
profound  affects  on  the  rates  of  biological  reactions,  for  example,  metabolism  and
respiration.(Refer Slide Time: 16:26)
Over the physiological range of most crops, that is 0 to 30  degree centigrade increased
temperature cause an exponential rise in respiration. The Van’t Hoff Rule states that the
velocity of a biological reaction increases 2 to 3 fold for every 10 degree centigrade rise
in temperature, ‘right’. Typically Q 10 for growth is around 1.5 Q 10, for imbibitions is 1.5
to 1.8, Q10 for photosynthesis around 2.1 to 2.5, Q 10 for respiration is around 2 to 3; that
means, you are saying that as we said that every 10 degree is rise or lowering, then the
temperature say we get the example of 20 degree centigrade. 
So, if it is increased by 10 degree 30 degree centigrade, or increased by another 10
degree 40 degree centigrade, then whatever the rates were at 30 degree centigrade at 40
degree centigrade rates will be almost double, you see these values are almost around 2,
‘right’. So, that is why roughly it can be said, that these rates of reactions will be almost
double if the temperature is raised by around 10 degree centigrade, ‘right’. So, this is the
beauty of Q10 that you can you can predict.(Refer Slide Time: 17:57)
Chill storage another was 0 to 5 degree centigrade, ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:04)
Then moisture loss a major problem protected by the several types of packaging, yeah
this is another thing, but of course, this is not the major part of power. So, you can skip
little. So, that, but the information is given to you so, you can go through it.(Refer Slide Time: 18:25)
And, freezing another technique by which it is preserved, the most popular method and
brought  convenience  in  at  homes.  Food  material  begins  to  freeze  as  temperature
decreases. Perishable foods are stored at minus 18 or below degree centigrade below
minus 18 or below temperature.
Microbial growth is not possible at this temperature, but enzymatic and non enzymatic
reactions are not stopped, but the rates are slow down. So, for example, we are giving if
the temperature is minus 18, if it is cauliflower it can be stored for around 12 months. If
it is minus 12 degree centigrade could be stored for 2.5 months or at minus 7 degree
centigrade could be stored for 10 days.
So, minus 7 to minus 18 you see the lifespan of cauliflower is increasing from days to
months or year days to month or year, ‘right’.  So, minus 7 10 days, minus 12 2.5
months, and minus 18 it is almost 12 months. Chicken another example, cauliflower
given annual plant source, ‘right’ and animal source is chicken we again minus 18 it 27
months minus 12 15 months and minus 7  8 months.
So, normally as we said earlier also, that animal source is of food are preserved at or
below 0 degree centigrade, usually around minus 18 degree centigrade. The lower the
temperature more is the shelf life that is obvious, that also comes from the definition of
the temperature quotient or Q 10, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 20:32)
So, we can say that comparison between chilling and freezing storages are like this. If the
products are like, fresh egg or in shell, at 4 degree centigrade 3 to 5 weeks or minus 18
degree centigrade it does not freeze of course. Then, raw yolks white yolk or whites that
2 to 4 days at 4 degree centigrade whereas, at minus 18 it can be stored for a year.
Hotdogs opened package it could be 1 week or 1 to 2 months at 4 and minus 18 degree
centigrade respectively. Fresh beef or lamb or pork it could be 3 to 5 days at 4 degree
centigrade whereas, 6 to 12 months at minus 18 degree centigrade. 
Chicken or turkey, whole it is it could be stored at 1 to 2 degree 2 days for 1 year at
minus 18 degrees centigrade. Pizza it is 3 to 4 days at 4 degrees centigrade whereas, 1 to
2 months if it is stored at minus 18 degree centigrade. Juices fruit drinks punch, this is a
different kind types of liquid foods ‘right’ juices, fruit drinks, or punch. So, they can be
stored at 4 degree centigrade up to 3 weeks unopened and around 8 to 12 months, if it is
at minus 18 degree centigrade. Butter, if it is 1 to 3 months at 4 degree centigrade and 6
to 9 months or even more at minus 18 degree centigrade.
Normally, butter is solid at room temperature, but that room temperature normally we
say  around  25  degree  centigrade.  You  will  see  butter  in  hot  summer,  when  the
temperature many parts of the country temperature goes as high as my plus 50 degree
centigrade or even higher. So, there you cannot keep butter outside, it gets melted, ‘right’
that many of you I do not know how many of you, but many of few have observed it,‘right’. If, the temperature goes to plus 50 or somewhere close to that the butter is
normally not kept outside. Though in most of the student hostels this butter lies on the
table in most of the hostels, but that is true when the temperature is around 20 25 even 30
degree, then also it become soft, but not melts.
But, if it is plus 50 degree centigrade then it gets melted. So, it can be stored at 4 degree
centigrade for couple of months 1 to 3 months and if it is at minus 18 degree centigrade
can be stored for 6 to 9 months or even higher. Then, cottage cheese of course, is a
variety or is a product, or is a milk oriented product, that is mostly popular in western
countries. In our country butter is much better popular as well dahi or similar kind of
milk products are more popular than cheese, but still cheese in our country is gradually
penetrating and people are liking a little and if cheese is there, then it can be stored at 4
degree centigrade for 1 week, and it does not freeze well at minus 18 degree centigrade,
‘right’. Lean fish that is earlier we said lean fish is low fat fishes, ‘right’.
So, low fat fishes it is for example cod, haddock, zebra it is 1 to 2 days at 4 degree
centigrade, but for 6 months if it is at minus 18 degree centigrade. Whereas, fatty fish
where fat content is high it is again 1 to 2 days at 4 degree centigrade, but 2 to 3 month if
it is at minus 18. So, there since fat content is high fat becomes the primary things which
gets converted, ‘right’, which is affected, ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:33)
Then, we can see that the methods of food preservations could be said like that freezing,
ok; one drying, another then curing or smoking and curing and smoking is such that
when you are curing or smoking means some smoke flavors are coming. So, that time
and  during that  curing  also  some fermentation  takes  place  these  are  the  good. For
example,  pickles  etcetera,  ‘right’.  Then,  fermentation  is  also  another  method  of
preservation pickling, jam jelly marmalade preparations they are also are canning.
So, different ways either chemical non chemical or heat thermal this can be some your
ways by which you can preserve the food materials, ‘right’, for a longer period. Longer
means to the tune of 6 to 8 months or even years, ‘right’. So, our time is getting over. So,
let us say let us just recapitulate that there are many ways of preserving our point of
interest is thermal. So, heat treatment is one of them. So, or fundamental and we will talk
about after these preambles are over then we will come to the basic thermal courses.
So, here what we learnt primarily  that term this  is very-very important that Q 10 or
temperature quotient where it is the it can be said is the parameter or it can be said is the
tool by which you can understand, you can think of that how long or how less the food
material can be stored. So, every 10 degree rise increases all the reaction rates whereas,
every 10 degree lowering decreases all the reaction rates almost double or half, ‘right’
respectively.
Double if it is increased or half if it decrease then the base temperature, base temperature
we get the example say 20 degree, then doubling will be at 30 degree, then it is doubling
will be at 40 degree, then that at 30 degree, ‘right’, it becomes then quadratic of 20,
‘right’. So, similarly half will be a 10 and one fourth will be at 0. So, Q 10 has very-very
long term implication and it is very-very important, ‘right’. So, let us now conclude this
class.
Thank you all.