Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 30
Heat Transfer by Convection (Contd.)
So, good evening again, we are now on the class lecture number 30, where we are doing
convection heat transfer. And we have done already with a lot with the help of Heisler
chart also and subsequently now we will do the convective heat transfer for the normal
other things also.
Like we have already said what we mean by convection, how many types of convections
are also there in what way etcetera. We have also shown that, how we can find out center
temperature, how we can find out surface or any other temperature, how we can find out
the time required to reach the center or surface temperature etcetera from Heisler chart,
but there are cases where it is not so, easy that this can directly be put into Heisler charts
or into the lumped system. So there it may be required that some other solutions or some
other equations which may be useful, ‘right’. So, now let us go some a little deep into the
convection, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:05)
So, whatever we have already done we can skip them and perhaps now, we have come to
this that there are two types of convections, ‘right’; one is natural which you have saidand the other one is forced convection, ‘right’. So, fluid in the natural convection it can
be said that the fluid moves due to density differences caused by how caused by heat
transfer between solid and the liquid or liquid and liquid or gas and gas, ‘right’. So, in
that way heat is getting transferred or it can be forced where fluid motion is imparted by
external means that is by pump or by fan or by some gravitational slope etcetera, ‘right’.
So, the mechanism of first convection is like this; convection heat transfer is complicated
since  it  involves  fluid  motion  and  heat  conduction  both,  ‘right’.  The  fluid  motion
enhances heat transfer the rate of conviction heat transfer is governed by; obviously, we
have said earlier also that Newton’s law of cooling and that Newton’s law of cooling can
be written in this form.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:39)
That 
 ; ‘right’ or it can also be written that Q convection
capital Q convection in any case small q refers to per unit m2, ‘right’; that is flux that
heat flux is 
 and Q capital is 
The convective heat transfer coefficient h strongly depends on the fluid properties and
roughness of the solid surface. And also the type of the fluid which is flowing, ‘right’
that is the type of the fluid flow not the fluid properties only, but the flow of the fluidthat also will all dictate the value of h, ‘right’. So, h is very important in convective heat
transfer because that will dictate how good or how bad the heat transfer will take place,
‘right’. 
And from where the earlier we have done that fin so whether you need the fin in addition
or not that is also dependent on this value of h. So, h is a very important parameter in
convective  heat transfer and this heat transfer coefficient may be required to either
calculate or predict or determine whatever.
So, it is having a very significant role on the heat transfer, ‘right’. So, we can say that
qconvective is equal to qconductive it is under; obviously, under steady state that whatever q is
coming through convection. So, if this is a body; if this is a body. So, whatever q is
coming due to h and T ∞ at this place is conducted by the body, ‘right’. 
So, that is only possible and the same Q is; same Q is coming into this and going out
from there, ‘right’, this is only possible under steady state. So,
And this is true because 
 , ‘right’. So, this conductive by this thing;
we have divided so much Watt per meter square h, theoretically we are able to find out,
‘right’. So, let us look into some other aspects of this convection, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 07:47)
So, solid if we have a hot solid, ‘right’ we if we have a hot solid surface like that this is
the  hot  solid  surface.  So,  this  is  through  conduction  coming  to  this  and  then  by
convection it is going and this is the V velocity of the surrounding medium, ‘right’. So,
zero velocity at this surface; we know that the fluid which is in contact with the solid, so
that is it is called clinging to the surface, ‘right’.
It is clinging to the surface that fluid clinging to the surface; that means, the velocity at
that surface is zero that is what is shown, ‘right’. We have a velocity profile like this is
called  parabolic  velocity  profile,  ‘right’.  So,  velocity  profile  is  whatever  be;  so
environmental for velocity of the fluid is like that and this is what is the reality of the
convective heat transfer, ‘right’. (Refer Slide Time: 09:13)
Now if we look at; it is the assumed that the velocity of the fluid is zero at the wall and
this is assumption and this assumption is known as no slip condition, ‘right’. No slip
condition means clinging there is not slipping no slip condition, ‘right’; it is assumed that
the velocity of the fluid is zero at the wall and this assumption is known as no slip
condition.
As a result of the heat transfer from the solid surface to the fluid layer adjacent to the
surface is by pure conduction since the fluid is motion less there. Thus h in general varies
along the flow direction; this means that the mean or average convection heat transfer
coefficient for the surface is determined by averaging; properly averaging the local heat
transfer coefficient over the entire surface, ‘right’ this is called velocity boundary layer,
‘right’ this is called velocity boundary layer. 
So, this is also in the previous or thing we had shown that we have velocity profile which
is like this called parabolic, ‘right’. So, we have this is x is 0s; that is the viscous sub
layer  here  ok,  then  laminar  region  is  here,  then  transition  region  is  here  and  then
turbulent region is here depending on the flow pattern of the fluid; the boundary layer is
becoming different, ‘right’. (Refer Slide Time: 11:43)
So, let us look into that laminar flow; this flow in boundary layer starts at smooth and
streamlined, ‘right’. So, boundary layer in the laminar flow it is; obviously, that is
streamlined like that all the layers are parallel; there is no mingling intermingling of the
layers, ‘right’; so that mixing of the layers are not possible in laminar. Turbulent flow at
some distance from the leading edge flowed turns chaotic, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:29)
So, this was the surface; so here it was laminar. So, after some time heat started making
turbulent, ‘right’ the flow became mix the, ‘right’ or the layers became mixable and thisis called the turbulent flow. Then the transition region where it is neither mixing, nor it is
this fully under in under full mixing that situation is not there; in between this region is
called transition region, ‘right’ at some distance from there ok.
Transition occurs from laminar to turbulent flow and over some region. Now velocity
profile if we look at in the laminar region; approximately parabolic, in the turbulent flow
heat  it  becomes  flatter,  ‘right’.  Because  in  the  laminar  region  it  is  approximately
parabolic like this, but in the turbulent region; it becomes more or less flatter.
And in the turbulent region laminar sub layer viscous effects are also dominant laminar
sub layer is possible there, but viscous effects are also dominant, ‘right’. Now buffer
layer is also there were both laminar and turbulent effects exist in the turbulent layer,
‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:21)
So, now after understanding all these; let us define some of the dimensionless parameters
which has very important in convective heat transfer. And this dimensionless parameters
as we have seen in the earlier even in the graphical method; that is Heisler chart that
dimensionless  parameters  are  important,  here  also  for  finding  out  the  heat  transfer
coefficient basically there are different correlations with this dimensionless parameters
and some are empirical, some are experimental. So, different very pronounced or effective here relations are there for convective heat
transfer with the help of dimensionless numbers; so, these numbers also are important.
So, let us know some of them that the Nusselt number first is that Nusselt number or
normally  called  N Nu, ‘right’. As  we said earlier  that  numbers  are  said with N like
Reynolds number N Re, similarly the Nusselt number is said N Nu, ‘right’.
So, there it is said that a dimensionless number also known as dimensionless convective
heat transfer coefficient representing the enhancement of heat transfer due to bulk fluid
motion; over a surface with respect to the heat transfer by conduction. 
(Refer Slide Time: 16:17)
So, NNu is 
  You remember
when  we  were  discussing  Biot  number;  I  said  that  this  is  also  very  important  to
remember that hl by k this; the same terminology or the same notations are used for other
case, only the difference the property values, ‘right’. So, in the Nusselt number; it is also
the number wise or the representation wise same as Biot number hl/k, but h is written
coefficient.
It was also there in Biot number heat transfer coefficient, l or characteristic length where
whatever nomenclature you use l, lc whatever you use that is characteristic dimension
parameter and divided by k; now in that Biot number this k was the conductivity of thissolid through each it is being conducted and here it is the conductivity of the fluid by
which heat is being convective, ‘right’. 
So, this is the difference primarily or most of these cases this is ignored or the mistakes
are made. So, this k is the conductivity of the fluid; not the material, conductivity of the
fluid that is what is Nusselt number. Reynolds number we know by this time many of us
because Nusselt number being in heat transfer could be new, but necessary Reynolds
number; since we know the fluid flow hopefully we know Reynolds numbers.
But still it is a dimensionless number which is the ratio of inertia forces to the viscous
forces in flowing fluid the value of N re indicates that the flow is laminar or turbulent.
Critical Reynolds number is the value above which the flow is turbulent; that is called
critical Reynolds number. The Reynolds number; the value of which above which is the
flow is turbulent that is called critical Reynolds number, ‘right’; so, some more non
dimensional parameters.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:21)
The geometry of the body and the flow conditions determine the value of the critical
Reynolds  number. For example  value is 5×105 over a flat plate, ‘right’. So, N Re is
 or it can also be written as 
 ; where 
 is the kinematic viscosity ofthe fluid. And 
 is 
/ρ where, c
 is the dynamic viscosity or shear viscosity of the
fluid, ‘right’.
Then Prandtle number; N Pr, ‘right’, Prandtle number normally denoted as N Pr, this is a
dimensionless number which is the ratio of momentum diffusivity; kinematic viscosity to
thermal diffusivity. And it is the relative thickness of velocity and thermal boundary
layers; it is the relative thickness of velocity and thermal boundary layers. So, N Pr is can
be written as nu by alpha which can be simplified as C p mu over k; normally not in this
form,  but  in  this  form  N Re or  NPs or  rather  NPr is  known  that  Prandtle  number  is
, ‘right’.
Obviously, Cp is the medium specific heat,  
  is the medium viscosity, k is also the
medium conductivity..
(Refer Slide Time: 21:49)
Then we see typical values of N Pr are 0.01 for liquid metals; 0.7 for most gases and
Prandtle number is 6 for water at room temperature. That means, you have different
situations and Prandtle numbers are quite different; in liquid metals Prandtle number is
very low 0.01 whereas, Prandtle number is 0.7 for most of the gaseous.Like air oxygen or most of the gases Prandtle number is 0.7; whereas, Prandtle number is
very high 6, for water at room temperature, ‘right’. And you use as I said that N Pr is equal
to 
. So, all these property values are for that medium, ‘right’. So, when it was 7 or 6
for water; the all the values C p, 
, k are for water only, ‘right’.
Similarly, when it was 0.7 for gases; say air then C p, 
, k all are for air only, ‘right’ for
liquid materials it is 0.01; again that C p, 
, k were all for the liquid metal only, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:03)
So, unlike that Nusselt number which was hL/k and this L characteristic dimension, h is
heat transfer coefficient, but this k for Nusselt number was for the medium or fluid,
‘right’. Because this Nusselt number means this surface we have; over it there is a flow
of fluid and that fluid has heat transfer coefficient of h. And the characteristic length
through which heat is being transferred is L; then this k was for this medium. 
But the same is not true for the Biot number, where h is same, but L was as we were
saying that characteristic  length, but this k was the conductivity through which the
material is being conducted; the heat is being conducted through the material, ‘right’. So,the property values are very important and it should be also known that which property is
being used, ‘right’. 
So, for which dimensionless parameter which property is being used that should be very
much known, ‘right’. So, again and again we are; I am highlighting that do not confuse
with the; with the Biot number and the Nusselt number, ‘right’. Because in a convective
heat transfer Nusselt number is very commonly used and perhaps is one of the; one of
the non dimensional parameters which is correlated with some other non dimensional
parameters, in most of the relations subsequently when we will come across we will see,
‘right’.
So, be careful that you must differentiate between Nusselt number and Prandtle number;
Nusselt number and Biot number. In both the cases the expression is same hL/k; h you
cannot make any mistake because that is a convective heat coefficient. L you cannot
make any mistake because that is also the characteristic dimension; like maybe length or
whatever you say one dimension that is characteristic dimension of heat transfer. 
And k for Nusselt number this k is for the medium through which heat is being convicted
and for Biot number this k is the; this k is the conductivity of the material through which
heat is being conducted, ‘right’. So, these two differences are very fundamental and most
of the cases students do mistake; may not be the today it is being read; so we will be
remembered. But in most of the cases, we have seen during viva we see this mistake is
being occurred by majority of the students.
So, that is why I am highlighting repeatedly that you do not make this mistake, ‘right’.
So, another and as also you see that Prandtle number; we have shown given some typical
numbers typical values for different cases that for liquid it is 0.01, for liquid metals of
course, for most of the gases it is 0.7 and for water at room temperature it is 6; so wide.
Then another non dimensional number is Grashof number which is normally used for
natural convection, ‘right’. It is the ratio between buoyancy forces and viscous forces,
‘right’; this is the ratio between buoyancy forces and this viscous forces. And can be
expressed in other form also it can be expressed maybe today time is going up. So, you
may not be able to in some other day; we will also show that it can be expressed in some
other way also. So, here we are writing that it is expressed as L cube g; delta rho over nu
square into rho w, ‘right’ or rho w, ‘right’ at the wall. So, Grashof number is  
 . So, for the last for today it is Reynolds
Rayleigh  number;  Rayleigh  number  is  the  number  that  governs  natural  convection
phenomena, ‘right’. Both Grashof number and Rayleigh number are associated with
natural  convection  whereas,  Nusselt  number  is  normally  with  force  convection  by
enlarge, ‘right’. 
So, Grashof number and Rayleigh  number are  for natural  convection  and  Rayleigh
number is nothing, but a product of Grashof number and Prandtle number. So, Grashof
number into Prandtle number is the Rayleigh number and Rayleigh number is designated
as Ra. So, that is equal to. . So, some of the non
dimensional parameters we have come across. There are few many more and there are
many relations between them for different cases for different situations. So, in the next
class, we will do that, ‘right’, today time is over. So, let us now stop it and.
Thank you. //323TgLkTcgLp