Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 34
Heat Transfer by Radiation
After convection and conduction thoroughly done, now I would like to go for Heat
Transfer under Radiation and this is lecture number 34. So, we are going to heat transfer
by radiation, ‘right”. Now, let me tell beforehand that the importance, we have already
said the importance of conductor a conduction, we have said importance of convection
and the importance of radiation also we must say, ‘right”. It is that you if you have ever
seen that a kitchen is also is one of the very important place to learn many things. 
So, if you have ever seen that your mummy and others are making food and maybe doing
some roti or bread or things like that and the plate on which it is being made, I do not
know whether you have observed it or not that you do not have to touch the plate, but if
you are nearby, then also you feel some heat, ‘right”. So, that heat you have not touched
the thing, and there was no fan or nothing, you are very close to the plate and you
observed or you faced or you felt that some heat is coming to you. How? Because this is
possible when the temperature is very high that time the radiation takes place. 
And when we go into the radiation in detail you will see that the normal our conduction
convection we have seen that the deltas delta ts are all in terms of all in terms of normal
Tc -Th -Tc things like that. But here it will be in the time thumbs up power to the power 4,
Th4, Tc4, δT is that Th4-Tc4, ‘right”. So, because of; that means, the higher the temperature
more is the radiation, ‘right”. However, without saying much more let us go into the
subject and we first look at what is radiation, ‘right”. (Refer Slide Time: 03:37)
So, radiation heat transfer is that how does earth get heat energy from the sun? ‘‘right”’.
Sun is several lakhs kilometer away from earth. And yes, sun is so hot and this hot is
coming to us we are getting in summer season you feel very hot, in the winter season you
feel also cold, but still when there is a sun you feel a better. So, the sun is sending you
that energy, ‘right”.
How it is happening? ‘right”. There are no particles between the earth and the sun and
hence it cannot travel by conduction or by convection because you have seen for either
conduction or convection you need to have some medium, ‘right”. But since between the
earth and sun there is no medium, ‘right”. So, how it is being transmitted or how it is
being sent? ‘right”. It is only by radiation, ‘right” the energy which is coming there is
only by radiation because there is no medium, so no convection, no conduction, so only
by radiation it is being transmitted from sun to the earth, ‘right”.(Refer Slide Time: 05:26)
So, for this the certain things are to remember for radiation heat transfer, that radiation
travels in straight lines. Radiation can travel through a vacuum also because the space is
that where there is nothing no medium, but still it is propagating. Radiation does not
require particles to travel. Radiation travels at the speed of light. Thermal radiation is
emission of energy as electromagnetic waves. Intensity depends on body temperature
and surface characteristics. 
Important  mode of heat transfer it is also an very important mode of heat transfer
otherwise a had there been no radiation heat transfer, then earth would not have got so
much  energy  from  the  sun,  ‘right”.  So,  important  mode  of  heat  transfer  at  high
temperatures for example, combustion etcetera, there as we said that it is to the power of
4,  T4,  that  temperature  to  the  power  4,  in  that  order  the  variations  are.  Radiation
exchange is difficult to solve, it is not that easy that you can solve like conduction or like
conviction also you can solve the problem so easily. It is more and more complicated. (Refer Slide Time: 07:24)
However, we must do some basics and show that when a radiation is coming that is
incident energy flux like this, ‘right”, q W/m2 that is the incident energy flux, and this is
the surface which is a translucent slab. So, out of this when it is incident, then αq
quantity is absorbed, Rq quantity is reflected, and τq quantity is transmitted, ‘right”. 
That means, the total is 1 which is α total q, ‘right” is α+R+τ this time q, so it becomes 1
plus 1 is α+R+τ out of which α is the absorptance, R is the reflectance, and τ is the
transmittance, ‘right”. So, this is how the energy is getting transmitted out of which some
are observed, some are reflected and some are also transmitted, ‘right”.(Refer Slide Time: 09:22)
So, if we look at a black body. A black body is a model of a perfect radiator which
absorbs all energy that reaches it and reflects nothing. So, in the black body α is equal to
1, R is equal to τ is equal to 0. So, the previous slide which we had shown there this for a
perfect black body, absorption is 1. So, α becomes equal to 1 because the reflectance is 0
and also transmittance is 0, nil. So, it becomes 1, α is 1 which is the quantum for
absorption, ‘right”. 
So, we can say that the energy emitted by a black body is the theoretical maximum that
is q is equal to σT4, ‘right”. So, q = σT4 and is governed by Stefan Boltzmann law, where
sigma is the Stefan Boltzmann constant. 
Generally, it is known as 5.67 not to this tune 5.6697, it is generally known as 5.67
maybe 8, ‘right”, 5.67 8 or 5.67 generally, 2 digit into 10-8 W/m2.K4, ‘right”. So, this is
Stefan Boltzmann constant, so where it is denoted as q = σT4. So, this is the theoretically
maximum which can be emitted by a black body, ‘right”.(Refer Slide Time: 12:01)
The wavelength at which the maximum amount of radiation occurs is given by another
law which is called Wien’s law, ‘right”; which is called Wien’s law. And this is λ maxT
=2.898×10-3 m.K, ‘right”, λmax is meter T is in Kelvin. So, λ max T is 2.898, 10-3 m.K. 
Typical wave length are λ max is 10 µm this is true for infrared at room temperature or far
infrared at room temperature and ok, this is that. So, at room temperature and δ max or λmax,
sorry λmax is 0.5 µm that is called green at 6000 K, ‘right”. 
For the sun which is at 5800 K λ max is about 0.5 µm whereas, for the earth which is
roughly 288 K, λmax is approximately 10 µm, ‘right” is 0.5 µm for sun, whereas, for earth
it is 10 µm, ‘right”. (Refer Slide Time: 14:44)
So, with this some preamble of our blackbody, let us now go to the real bodies, ‘right”.
So, real bodies are those which emit less variation than a blackbody where q is ɛσT4. So,
the quantity of heat which is emitted is ɛσT4. ɛ is the emissivity which is a number
between 0 and 1. Such a body would be called gray because the emissivity is the average
over the spectrum, ‘right”. You see air from the T infinity q infinity is coming, ok, net is
capital Q, q watt is being transmitted at T wall and area is A. 
So, for this we have given that example, radiation from a small body to its surroundings
like this is both the body and its surroundings emit thermal radiation, both the body and
its surrounding. The net heat transfer will be from the hotter to the colder; obviously, if
this is hot than the other then it will be from there or if it is hot than the other then it will
be from there, ‘right”. 
So, the net heat transfer is then )Tεσ(TQ44wallnet. From small or rather for small ΔT
this termwT4wT,  4T can roughly be approximated as )(3TTTw. And in that
case netQcan be related as ΔTAhr, where ΔT hr ×Δ T, where hr is an effective radiation
heat  transfer  coefficient  and ΔT  is  the  temperature  difference,  ‘right”.  So, h r is  an
effective radiation heat transfer coefficient. (Refer Slide Time: 18:26)
So, if this is known then let us go for calculation of wall heat flux. So, if we want to find
out the wall heat flux, then heat flux q is h f ×(Tw - Tf) + qradiation and for laminar flows h f is
kf/Δy, for turbulent flows h f follows from correlations describing the thermal boundary
layer profile. 
External  wall  radiation  is  like  this  )Tσ(Tεq4w4externalrad,  where  Tw is  the  wall
temperature, Tf is the fluid temperature, T infinity that user specified temperature or
surrounding temperature. 
externalε is the emissivity of external wall surface, σ is the Stefan Boltzmann constant, h f
is fluid side local heat transfer coefficient, and Δx normal distance fluid cell center to the
wall, fluid cell center from the fluid to the wall, ‘right”. The distance that is Δx or Δy, in
this case we have used delta y, ‘right”. So, h f into = kf / Δy. (Refer Slide Time: 20:30)
So, from these basic relations  we go to the optimization of heat transfer. Like, the
following relations for heat transfers are optimized like, if it is conduction then it is
/dTkAf, ‘right” that is for conduction. If it is convection, then  TAhand if it is
radiation then TAhr, ‘right”. This is more or less optimization of the heat transfer for
3 modes of heat transfer, /dTkAf, TAh and TAh TAhr, ‘right”. 
So, as a result when equipment designers want to improve heat transfer rates they focus
on either increasing the area A. For example, by profile pipes and ribbed surfaces which
we have done by extension of area that is by fin, ‘right”, that fin heat transfer also we
have done, ‘right”. Increasing ΔT which is not always controllable, it is not that when
you are cooking suddenly your temperature is 100 °C, suddenly you thought it is taking
time let me make it 200 °C not visible, ‘right”. So, this control is beyond you. 
So, that is why increasing ΔT is not normally controllable, but increasing the surface area
A, yes as and when you need you can do it, ‘right”. And we had said also in the fluid
heat transfer that there is a parameter by which heat that is justified then only you can do,
‘right”. For conduction increasing k f/d that value if you can increase. So, more the value
up for a given d, more the value of k f you have more conduction conductive heat transfer.
Increasing h by not relying on natural convection, but introducing forced convection we
also saw that compared to natural convection or free convection forced convection hasmore heat transfer, ‘right”, the rate is a much much higher and increase h r by using black
surfaces. So, this  is  how  we can optimize  the heat transfer in 3 modes that is the
conduction, convection and radiation. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:57)
Now, we have said earlier one term that epsilon or emissivity, ‘right”. So, that emissivity
or emission how can we measure or to have some idea, let us look into this. Those 4
containers were filled with warm water, which container would have the warmest water
after 10 min? One, shiny metal container with shiny metal, container made of dull metal,
container made of dull black and container made of shiny black. 
The question is which container would have the warmest water after 10 min all other
conditions remaining identical. You have a container which that is made of shiny metal
or a container the same size everything same, container content everything same is dull
metal, then container with dull black and container with shiny black, which one is the
one that will have the maximum temperature or a warmest temperature or condition of
water which one will have? ‘right”. 
So, the answer is the shiny metal container would be the warmest after 10 min. The shiny
metal container would be the warmest after 10 min because its shiny surface reflects heat
radiation back into the container. So, less is lost, ‘right” and the container with dull black
would be the coolest, with dull black will be the coolest because it is the best at emitting
heat radiation, ‘right”.So, it is the best at emitting heat radiation. So, we have seen that we have taken if; that
means, radiation is also a function of the material, ‘right” that we have given and once
we have seen that some radiation is occurring or internal, ‘right”, so that is becoming the
warmest, that is the shiny metal. That is why you will see in most of the cases; the walls
are getting highly policed highly shining so that the reflection or radiation is taking place
very well. That depends on the case to case how what you want to do the utilization,
‘right”. 
So, with this let us complete this initial class of the radiation, subsequently we will also
go  into  a  little  detail  to  find  out  the  emissivity  etcetera.  Let  us  see  how  we  are
proceeding.
Thank you. 