Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 39
Boiling and Condensation
Good  morning.  So,  till  now  we  have  done  all  the  modes  of  heat  transfer  that  is
conduction, convection and radiation and as far as practicable we have done lot much
problem solution so, that understanding becomes easy. Now, we will come to boiling and
condensation, ‘right’. This is also a very important thing in the heat transfer that is
boiling and condensation. The greatest example we give is that when you are making tea
at home, ‘right’, when you are making tea at home. 
So, you are giving some heat to the container and after sometime that liquid that is water
boils. The moment it is boil you put the tea and then you get the tea, ‘right’. This is one
example. Another example is that while you were boiling if you by chance put something
on the top of the container then you would see that before putting that on the top of the
container there was no water or nothing on there that lid. But, the moment you have put
that lid on that after boiling when everything was over when you take out you see that lot
of liquid coming out from the lid.
Where from it came? Those vapors came in contact with the lid and they condensed,
‘right’. So, both the phenomena in heat transfer is very widely utilized and we look into
the  from  the  angle  of  heat  transfer  because  this  is  our  thermal  operations  in  food
engineering theory and applications, ‘right’. 
So, till now we were doing theories as well as and when we could we have given some
example.  So,  that  is  what  we  are  doing.  Now,  we  will  do  with  boiling  and  then
condensation or this condensation and boiling is the our 39th lecture class, ‘right’. Our
lecture class is now 39th and we are coming to boiling and condensation, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 03:09)
If you take graph of q/A that is heat transfer rate per unit area, ‘right’. So, there is flux
per unit area that is W/m2, ‘right’. If you take that versus ΔT and now this ΔT is that you
have  this  container,  ‘right’,  you  are  heating  by  some  means,  ‘right’.  So,  this  has
temperature T of the heater and the wall will also attain a temperature depending on the
material ‘right’. If it is stainless steel one, if it is copper another if it is aluminum another
because the conductivity of the materials are different, ‘right’.
 (Refer Slide Time: 04:21)
So, depending on what material you are taking that delta T will be this that is T w minus
we assume since it is under boiling. So, boiling temperature is 373.2 K, ‘right’. So, T w is
373. So, this should not be then centigrade this should be Kelvin T w - 373.2 K, ‘right’
because, if it is centigrade then it should have been T w - 100 °C because 373.2 K is 100
°C, ‘right’. So, either ΔT is T w - 100 °C or Tw -373.2 K, ‘right’. Please do this correction
this is Kelvin ok.
Now, if we have a plot here this is called log log plot. So, then we see that the q / A is
increasing reaching a maximum then falling and then again going up, ‘right’. This is the
typical boiling curve again and again the ΔT is T wall minus the boiling point of water that
is 100 °C. 
So, if we plot that versus q/A in a log log plot then we get this nature of the curve,
‘right’. This nature of the curve has different zones, one is that zone A within this delta T
that is between 1 to 10 almost, ‘right’, between 1 to 10 then between 10 to 1,000, ‘right’,
between 10 to 1,000 this is B to C. So, rather between 10 to 100 it is B and between 100
to 1,000, it is between 100 to 1,000 it is the C that is this zone, ‘right’.
Between 100 to 1,000 it is C and more than 1,000 to say 104 10,000 it is again D that is
q/A or the flux is varying increasing in the zone A again increasing in the zone B coming
to a maximum in the zone B and C junction and then dropping and the zone C, ‘right’
and again increasing in the zone D, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:44)
So, where if we look at how what the zones A B C and D are said that the zones are like
this, zone A where the temperature difference is 1 to 5 we that is why it was a little
shaped, ‘right’ between 1 to 5 and the residing for this 1 to 5 is heat transfer is by natural
convection, ‘right’. 
So, again we give that example we have this container with water and you are heating.
So, in the beginning what is happening few droplet us there coming, ‘right’. So, that time
it is zone A and the difference between the; difference between that wall and the and the
boiling point is between 1 to 5 °C.
Now, ΔT is same in centigrade and in Kelvin, ‘right’ ΔT is same in centigrade and in
Kelvin that you know, ‘right’ because in centigrade T 1 whatever it be that you make plus
273 and T2 that also you make plus 273. So, when you are making ΔT that is T 1 - T2 and
both these 273 goes out. So, that is why that tells the value, ‘right’ T the value of ΔT that
is T is same in both °C and Kelvin, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:35)
So, if that be true the heat transfer by natural convection is occurring in that, ‘right’
because here this boils are coming. So, by burn see the hot fluid is going up and cold
fluid is going down. So, there is a convictive current and that is called pre boiling or pre
convection  or natural  convection,  ‘right’  very few  bubbles  are  released  and do not
disturb the natural convection process.Now, do not disturb the natural convection process meaning that one bubble has formed
here, it is going up and in this process there is no reverse direction of the cold fluid that
is coming down, ‘right’. So, this is how you are not disturbing the natural convection
process heat flux is between 104 to 5 × 104 that is 1 × 104 to 5 × 104 W/m2. So, that is the
heat flux.
Next zone we have seen was zone B ‘right’ and in zone B the temperature difference is
somewhere 5 to 25 either degree centigrade or Kelvin, ‘right’ zone B the temperature
difference is somewhat 5 to 25 °C and the temperature could be in degree centigrade or
in Kelvin, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:38)
In this what is happening this is called nucleate boiling, ‘right’. This is called that was
natural convection first then this is called nuclear boiling. So, these increased rates of
bubble production add to the circulation. Heat flux is between 5 × 104 after this and 106
W/m2.  So, 5 × 104 to 106 within this the heat flux is there W/m2, ‘right’.
The value of h also varies between 5,700 to 57,000 W/m2°C so, high value of h that is
5,700 to 57,000 W/m2°C that is h that is the heat transfer co-efficient. So, what is
happening again that in this water which we add you were giving some heat, ‘right’ and
in the pre boiling pre convection some were there. Now a lot many after sometime when you will see that lot many bubbles are being
formed and these bubbles are going and there is a virtually a convection as well as by
means not free, but a little forced that liquid because of the boils see is going up and
down that is happening frequently and the heat transfer flux or flux is to the tuned of 5 ×
104 to 106 with a high heat transfer co-efficient of 5,700 to 57,000 W/m2°C, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:05)
Then we come to the other zone that is C that zone C that where the temperature
difference is between 25 to 100 °C or 25 to 100 K. When it degree centigrade it is said
degree Fahrenheit it is also said, but it is never degree Kelvin, it is only Kelvin no degree
is put there. ‘right’. 
So, 25 to 100 °C or 25 to 100 K no degree, ‘right’, ok. Here what is happening transit
this is called transition boiling that is zone C. If you remember we had gone this way
came back this way went like this and this was zone C, ‘right’ this was our zone C where
this is called transition boiling, ‘right’.
Bubbles are formed quickly and coalesce to form a layer of insulating vapour. So, what
is happening actually? So, we had again this container and we are heating, ‘right’ and
this was our water, ‘right’ and what is happening when you were heating like this. So,
this  liquid droplets are formed, ‘right’ continuously on this and it appears  that this
bubbles coalesce, ‘right’ means they one with other the for they like I do not knowwhether you are reversing or not that the thermometer which you use that contains
mercury, ‘right’. 
And, by chance if you had this experience ever you should not, but if it got broken,
‘right’ and that mercury is on the floor or somewhere and they split. Now the moment
you bring those mercury droplet us close to each other you will see if the droplet is here
and where close to each other. So, they will pull or they will have a force by which they
equalize or for from this molar to a bigger one. This is called coalesce, ‘right’.
So, the same thing is happening here also that this bubbles they are coalescing and
forming a film layer, ‘right’ forming a film layer. So, bubbles are formed quickly and
coalesce to form a layer of insulating vapour. Now the thing is that these bubbles already
are formed and they are made some little vapour and this vapour now you are heating
and rest of the liquid is here. 
So, they are not getting this heat directly because these bubbles are not then going,
‘right’ they are coalescing, they are forming this film, ‘right’ and this film in turn is
acting as a as insulating material for the heat to be transferred, ‘right’. That is why this if
you remember there was this depression, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:06)
This depression was only because of that, ‘right’ and that layer is being formed here and
we are getting this, ‘right’. So, bubbles are formed quickly and coalesce to form a layerof insulating vapour and heat flux drops and is between 106 to 7 × 105 W/m2 that is again
and again this is the nature, ‘right’. So, from here it dropped ‘right’ this is the zone C,
‘right’. So, it drop this was our q / A or small q / A ‘right’ and or q / A and this was our
ΔT, ‘right’.
So, we say that the temperature difference is somewhat 25 to 100 °C, bubbles are formed
the coalesce and they act as an insulating material. The vapours are formed they act as an
insulating material like this, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:30)
So, heat flux that drops and is between 106 to 7 × 105 W/m2 ‘right’. So, that dropped like
this, ‘right’. So, this is from 106 to 7 × 105, ‘right’. So, this decreases because of that it is
forming and that is called transition boiling it is forming a layer of vapour which is
acting as the insulating material or insulation against the heat to be transferred, ‘right’.
Then that D which was again like this and this ‘right’. So, this zone we said again it is
increasing, ‘right’ this zone again it is increasing and this is called film boiling, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 20:35)
So, the film was produced here and now because they are this heat transfer has become 5
that is your q/A q/A that has gone very high like this, ‘right’ and this is increasing ΔT
also got increased. So, this is between 100 to 1,000. So, lot of heat is being supplied and
this layers which were formed now they are so quickly disappearing and there is a real
dancing of the bubble and this is mixing and that is how this is called film boiling,
‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:28)
This  is  called  film  boiling  bubbles  detach  themselves  regularly  and  rise  upwards
radiation through the vapour layer prevails and q/A and h both increased, ‘right’. So,
again this has gone up so, q/A. So, this has increased and ΔT is also very high to the tune
of 100 to 1,000, ‘right’.
So, if we look into the total system that what is happening during bubbling. I tried my
best to convince you or to give you example through the daily what you come across
experience, ‘right’ that making tea like that, ‘right’ if you watch then you can easily
make this difference, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:47)
So, initially when you have given for making tea to water to boil initially the droplet us
were formed very low, ‘right’ like that few droplet us were formed and the ΔT there is
between 1 to 5 or 5 to 10 within this range, ‘right’. And, we said there that q/A was also
very low few drops are formed and there is a natural convection which is happening in
that, ‘right’ and we had said that this zone that was zone A and this zone we said to be
nothing, but due to natural convection, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 23:39)
I put this again before. So, this is called natural convection, ‘right’ and this is how it was
and the ΔT is between 1 to 5 or a little more, ‘right’ and natural convection q is also very
low it was set between somewhere 104 in 10 to the power somewhere 5 if we are correct,
‘right’. It was 104 to 5 × 104 ‘right’ ΔT was 1 to 5, ‘right’. 
So, if there be true then we can say that we can say that 5 × 104 this much W/m2 was the
heat 104 to 5 × 104, ‘right’. So, this picture you keep in mind all the time we are not able
to go and I mean go back and come back. So, to and fro is difficult here. So, these picture
if you remember that they are making like this like that and this, ‘right’ out of which we
have made 4 zones and one we call A second we call B third we call C and fourth we call
D all these 4 we had given the example of making T that which you are heating with
water in some container, ‘right’.
This example we have given. So, and there are 4 different distinct steps for boiling and
they are A that is natural boiling or natural heat transfer, ‘right’ natural convection heat
transfer very few bubbles are formed then B that is within 5 to 25 this is called nucleate
boiling where the rate of bubbles formation are increased heat transfer also heat transfer
co-efficient also goes very high around 5,700 to 57,000 and the flux is around 5 × 104 to
5 × 106 then suddenly it drops. 
Because, these bubbles coalesce and forms a layer, ‘right’ and that layer the vapour
layers acts as the insulating material or insulation. And, the heat transfer is reduced and itcomes down from 106 to 10 to 105 or 7 ×105 precisely it is reduced and the and the flux
reduced to that level and this is called transition boiling
So,  after  transition  boiling  again  the  this  bubbles  which  you  have  formed  which
coalesces now they breaks and moves very fast and that is what we said that dancing of
the bubbles in the liquid and that is happening and lot of heat transfer take place and q by
A that is flux that goes up from that 105 which was down to now gradually again up,
‘right’. So, this is the boiling heat transfer mechanism, ‘right’. So, with this since our
time is over I do not say the time is I mean time is still there it is over we have extended,
but still you look at and see the food zones of the bubble heat transfer or boiling heat
transfer.
So, next we will go into the more some more detail or mechanism or heat transfer
equations.
Thank you.