Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 42
Condensation (Contd.)
Good morning. So, in that Condensation class, the last class we had come to the point
that dv dy was (ρl - ρv) / (δ – y) and that expression, ‘right’. And we will start from there
ok. So, this is our condensation continued class and lecture number 42, this is sorry
lecture number 42, ‘right’, which we can underline like this, ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:04)
So, in lecture number 42, we will start with that the expression which we had given
earlier as this, ‘right’ which we had given earlier as this that dv dy is g × (ρ l - ρv) /µl × (δ-
y).(Refer Slide Time: 01:30)
Start from there of course, the individual terms we know new term came up with that is
the δ is the thickness of the condensate layer at the position x at any position if you
remember we said that this was wall and this was the flow of the condensate, ‘right’ at
any position x, ‘right’, this is the x and y direction, this is y, this is x. So, at any position
x, ‘right’, the thickness is δ that is what we are saying the thickness is δ. And µ is the
viscosity  of  the  liquid  and  subscripts  l  and  v  refers  to  liquid  and  vapor  phase
respectively, ‘right’.
So, and we are assuming in the case of zero shear stress, ‘right’ that is τ = 0, in the case
of zero shear stress at the liquid vapor interface, what is the liquid vapor interface?
Liquid vapor interface is this, ‘right’, this is that because this side it is vapor, this is
liquid which is coming in contact with this cold surface, ‘right’. So, this is vapor. 
So, at this liquid vapor interface say at x, so we can take it here, ‘right’. So, at the liquid
vapor interface like if we take that shear stress is zero, ‘right’ and this is assumed to be a
stationary. So, we are assuming in this case that zero shear stress at the liquid vapor
interface because vapor is assumed to be stationary at that point or as such. At the wall
surface liquid velocity is zero, so, v is 0 again this is the wall, ‘right’ this was our fluid or
the condensate.(Refer Slide Time: 04:10)
So, the liquid which is at the wall so we normally say that it is clinging to the surface
clinging it is clinging to the surface, ‘right’ attached fully, ‘right’. It is now allowing to
move, so that is what we call clinging to the surface, ‘right’. So, if that be true, then the
velocity v is 0 at y is 0, which one is y? 
Again the wall so this was the fluid or condensate and we said this was x-direction this
was y-direction. So, y is 0 is this, ‘right’. So, v is 0 at y is 0, then that equation which just
now we had shown that equation which just now we had shown, ‘right’ like this one that
dv/dy g (ρl -  ρv) / µl × (δ – y).  
So, if we look at this equation, if we integrate that equation/ ‘right’ with the boundary
condition that boundary condition is what v = 0 at y = 0, then the velocity distribution in
the condensate that can be written as v(y) = g (ρ l -  ρv) / µl ×(δy – (y2 / 2)), ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 06:02)
From there we can say that the equation which we had, it was dv dy and it was (ρ l -  ρv),
‘right’ over µl, ‘right’ into δ × g, ‘right’ times (δ – y), ‘right’, (δ – y), this was our
expression, ‘right’. So, when we integrated this, ‘right’, when we integrated this we have
integration constant c, ‘right’ and the value of the integration constant and subsequently
using that we get the velocity distribution v(y) is g (ρ l -  ρv)/ µl ×(δy – (y2 / 2)), ‘right’,
because it was dv/dy.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:04)
So, dy was integrated. So, this side it would have been y2 / 2 that is what is coming,
‘right’. And this is nothing, but; this is nothing but expression for a parabolic flow of the
fluid. So, v (y) is a parabolic in nature and that is how it is coming like this, ‘right’. So;
the mass flow rate of the condensate m(x) through any axial position x per unit depth of
the plate that can be written as. 
(Refer Slide Time: 07:54)
This can be written as m (x) = 0 to δ m (x) = 0 to δ ρ l v dy ‘right’ 0 to δ ρ l v dy, ‘right’,
which we can rewrite is equal to 0 to δ ρ l v already got in this form g × (ρ l – ρv) / µl into
(δ y – (y2/2)) × dy, ‘right’. So, dy was there, v we substituted, ρ l we take took and this is
between 0 to l integration, ‘right’. 
So, it is a definite integral and we get m(x) = g ρ l × (ρl – ρv) × δ3 / 3 µl which we turn to
with the equation m, ‘right’. So, we got the expression m (x) for in terms of δ and rho’s
in terms of del rho’s and g we got the expression for m (x).(Refer Slide Time: 09:23)
At the wall for area dx times  1 at the wall for the area dx times 1 m2, the linear
temperature distribution is assumed and the heat transfer becomes, because we have said
that dx times 1 that is the wall area, ‘right’. So, this was wall and this is x and the other
side this side is taken unity, ‘right’. So, that means we can say that this unit is like that. 
And here we say that in this area, the linear temperature distribution is assumed and the
heat transfer then we can write q x = -k dx × 1 that is the area dT dy at the position y = 0,
‘right’. So, this we can rewrite that this is k l kl dx × (Tsaturation - Tw) / δ this dT dy is T saturation
at the point y = 0. I repeat where the point y = 0 is this point, ‘right’. 
So, there we are saying that this is T saturation dT means (Tsaturation - Tw) since y is 0. So, we
can write here it is equal to δ, ‘right’. And since it would have been T w - Tsaturation, but with
the negative, so (Tsaturation - Tw), ‘right’, so it is kl dx (Tsaturation - Tw) / δ.
In a dx distance that is vertical this was our x direction so in a dx distance the rate of heat
transferred is qx. Also, in this dx distance the increase in mass from the condensation is
dm, ‘right’, because we saw that this curve was like that. So, whatever mass was here
mass is more at this place and mass is more at this place, so it is gradually changing,
‘right’. So, we are saying in a dx distance, the rate of heat transfer q x. Also, in this dx
distance, the increase in mass from the condensation is dm, ‘right’.So, earlier equation which we wrote as m we can rewrite that dm is equal to d of m; m is
g × ρl × (ρl - ρv) × δ3 / 3 µl, ‘right’. So, this we can write that g (ρ l - ρv) into since it is d of
that d dm of this, then this becomes δ2 d δ / µl, ‘right’, differentiating d with δ is a δ if we
differentiate it becomes δ2 d δ, on integration this gives δ3 ‘right’. So, this is δ2 d δ is dm,
‘right’. So, again we got equation which we need to integrate, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:33)
Where, dm is the representation of the rate of condensation over the distance dx per unit
depth  of  the  plate,  ‘right’,  again  unit  depth  is  that  third  dimension  which  you are
referring to. So, this is y and this is that third dimension is unit, this is x, ‘right’, so that
we are referring to. 
Since  the  condensate  b  thickness  since  the  condensate  thickness  not  b,  since  the
condensate thickness increases by d δ over the differential length of dx, the rate of heat
released dQ associated with the rate of condensation dm is dQ equal to h f  g into dm,
‘right’. This we write with the equation H. Of course, h f g has to be said where h f g is the
latent heat of condensation, ‘right’ this we have we also used in the previous class h f g for
latent heat of condensation or vaporization whatever we call. 
The amount of heat released dQ over the area dx times 1 must be transferred across the
condensate layer of delta thickness by conduction which we have assumed, ‘right’ in the
assumption number 6, ‘right’. So, therefore, we can write that dQ is k l (Tsaturation - Tw) / δ
times the area that is dx × 1, ‘right’. So, we got also dQ in terms of dx, ‘right’. (Refer Slide Time: 15:53)
So, we can say of course, the new term which has come up in this is the k that is the k l is
the thermal conductivity of the liquid, T sat and Tw we have said earlier also are the vapor
saturation and walls surface temperature respectively, ‘right’. So, introducing the term
dQ and dm into the equation earlier we have defined as H we can write that k l (Tsaturation -
Tw) /δ times the area dx × 1 that is equal to g ρ l × (ρl – ρv) × δ2 δ / 4 µl, this equation we
wrote as equation H, ‘right’.
So, we can rewrite this equation as d δ dx because we have here δ and we have dx. So,
we can rewrite that d dx d δ dx is equal to µ l ql × (Tsat - Tw)/ g × ρl × (ρl – ρv) × hf g, ‘right’
times 1/δ3, ‘right’. And the boundary form because this is if we want to integrate we need
a boundary. 
So, that boundary condition that satisfies is δ = 0 at x = 0, ‘right’, δ = 0 x at x = 0 which
is what this was our wall and this was our that fluid which is condensing we said our y is
in this direction, our x is in this direction.(Refer Slide Time: 18:14)
So, and since y is it that this direction, we are taken that element, ‘right’ of thickness l
and that was y δ – y, ‘right’, this our thing. However, here since it is in the y direction, so
at δ = 0 is x = 0, here it is δ is 0 at x = 0 that is the origin, ‘right’. So, if we take that, then
we can say the boundary condition that satisfies is this δ is 0 at x = 0 and integrating this
equation and applying the boundary condition, we can write.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:11)
So, if we apply boundary and integrate, we can write that the thickness δ that we can
write in this form in this way that the thickness of the condensate layer is a function ofthe position x along the plate that is also true. We have shown that this is the T wall T w,
and this was the; this was the fluid which was condensing or liquidity is condensing,
‘right’. So, if this is the x direction, so whatever thickness is here is not the same
thickness here is not the same thickness here. So, this thickness is a function of x, ‘right’,
so, that is what we are saying.
That δx = [4 × µl kl × (Tsaturated - Twall) × x] / [g × (ρl – ρv) × ρl × hf g]1/4, ‘right’, because it
came that your δ was cube and so when it make you it was integrated so it became 4 and
that 4 δ 4 has now become 1/4 in this power, ‘right’. So, the thickness at any position x
in that film is [4 µl kl (Tsaturated - Twall) × x] / [g × (ρl – ρv) × ρl × hf g]1/4.
Now, since we have established a relation for the thickness of the condensate layer, the
local heat transfer coefficient h x or condensation is determined from the heat balance as
hx × dx × 1 × (Tsaturated - Twall) is kl × dx × 1 × (Tsaturated - Twall)  / δx, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:09)
So, if this be true, then by changing the value of δ we can write that h x = kl × a kl over δx,
‘right’.  So,  this  we  can  rewrite  that  now  introducing  the  value  of  del  x  into  this
expression, we get h x is kl / [[(4/g) µl kl (Tsat - Twall) × x] / (g × (ρl – ρv) × ρl × hf g)]1/4 that
is the hx that is the heat transfer coefficient or at a localized heat transfer coefficient h x at
any position x. We had again reminded you that this was the direction of x.So, h at position any position x is the localized heat transfer coefficient which can be
rewritten kl taking inside as {[g × ρ l × (ρl – ρv) × hf g kl3] / [4 µl (Tsat - Tw) x]}1/4, ‘right’
this to the power 1/4 is the rewritten of this ‘right’. This goes up, so 4 µ l (Tsat - Tw),
‘right’ 4 µl this was g × (ρl – ρv) × hf g ×  ρl hf g of course ρl has been taken into that h f g
into this kl that kl has come down. 
So, it is kl, earlier we had 1 k l here to the power 1/4. So, when this k l is going inside, so it
has to be kl3/4 µl (Tsat - Tw) and times k because k has been taken inside k l, ‘right’. So,
this is the hx the local heat transfer coefficient.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:52)
Now, if we have the local heat transfer coefficient we can have an average heat transfer
coefficient like this. The local heat transfer coefficient h x varies with the distance x as 
x-1/4. The average heat transfer coefficient h average over the length 0 to l is in the plate
rather is h average is 1/l 0 to l h x dx or it is 4/3 hx at any x = l and that can be rewritten as
0.943 into [g×ρl×(ρl – ρv) hf g×kl3] / [4 µl (Tsat - Tw)×l] so much W/m2.°C. (Refer Slide Time: 26:13)
For laminar flow, experimental data show that this result is around 20% less than the
experimental data for which a new proposal has come up from the researcher saying that
Nusselt number can be related as this. Hence, the recommendation expression for the
vertical surface in laminar flow is like this N Nu = hL/kl =1.13 [g ρl×(ρl – ρv) hf g×L3] / [µl
(Tsat - Tw)× kl]1/4.
So, h now is average, ‘right’, h is the average heat transfer coefficient not the local and
that is related to Nusselt number as hL/k l this is again not the in the wide number, it
would have been the solid, but here it is the fluid k l liquid. So, hL/kl is the Nusselt
number expressed like this, where obviously, ρ l density of liquid in kg/m3 ρv density of
the vapor in kg/m3, g in 9.8066 m/s2.
L length of the surface in meter; µ l viscosity of liquid in Pa.s; k l thermal conductivity of
the liquid in W/m.°C; h f g latent heat of condensation in J/kg.°C at T sat. All physical
properties of the liquid and h f except hf g are evaluated at the film temperature T f is  
(Tsat + Tw) / 2 that is the average temperature of the saturated temperature of the vapor
and the wall temperature, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 28:05)
So, we can now say the condensation on inclined surface that can be written as h average is
0.943 {[g ρl (ρl – ρv) hf g kl3] sin θ / [µl (Tsat - Tw) L]} depending on whether what is the
inclination to the power 1/4 in W/m2, where θ is the angle of vertical surface with the
horizontal condensation on a horizontal tube, and condensation of course, horizontal
surface that is the angle. 
Now, condensation on the horizontal T will be h a average is 0.725 {[g ρ l (ρl – ρv) hf g
kl3] sin θ / [µl (Tsat - Tw) D]}1/4 so much W/m2, where D is the outside diameter of the tube
in meter.(Refer Slide Time: 29:15)
And since our time is very low we can say that h average over h av vertical / hav horizontal
is 1.3 (D/L)1/4. So, this means, that ΔT that is T saturation - Twall there is the average heat
transfer coefficient for vertical tube of length L and horizontal  tube of diameter D
become equal only when L = 2.7 time 2.8 times D. 
So, when L = 100 D theoretically h av hav horizontal would be 2.44 times greater than that
of vertical edge. So, this is y horizontal tube arrangements are generally preferred over
vertical in the condensers, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:21)
So, hopefully we have come to the end of the class. And we say some more here also a
little just for few seconds that is N Re = 4m / (π D µl), for vertical tube with diameter D.
NRe is 4m / (W µl) for vertical plate with width W. And m is the total kg mass / s of the
condensate active or plate bottom. For laminar flow N Re < 1800; for turbulent flow N Re >
1800. So, Nusselt number we can write 0.0077 (g ρ l2 L3 / µl2 )1/3 and NRe0.4. So, with this
we come to the end of the condensation.
And we thank you.