Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 45
Heat Exchangers (Contd.)
Good morning we are then dealing with the types of heat exchangers, ‘right’. We have
already said a lot about tabular type heat exchanger then plate type heat exchangers.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:42)
So, in our this 45th class we still continue with the Heat Exchangers, hopefully we may
be required to do some more because we have not come across yet the heat transfer
analysis of heat exchangers and there are some more things very important like log mean
temperature difference like number of transfer units or efficiency of the heat exchangers
these things we will do in detail also, ‘right’.
So, maybe subsequently is number of classes we may be requiring to handle it because
our objective is to do as much heat transfer coverage as possible along with definitely
some explanations of the systems some explanation on the operations. So, those things
we are doing parallelly side by side, ‘right’. So, to do these types of heat exchangers we
also can say because of the heat exchangers come to many shapes sizes make and models
they are categorized according to common characteristics. One common characteristic that can be used to categorize them is the direction of flow
the two fluids have relative to each other, ‘right’.
So, as we are saying repeatedly that if we have say a tabular type heat exchanger if this is
the tube van shell. So, if this is happening one fluid and if this is happening the other
fluid flow then we can we call it to a counter current, ‘right’ and if this heat exchanger
we have a liquid is flowing in this direction and the another liquid is flowing outside in
this direction same direction then we call it to be co current, ‘right’.
So, depending on the direction of the flow and many other factors as we said shape, size
make, model all these determine or categorize the types of heat exchangers. So, one such
that on the basis of the direction of the flow of the two fluids with respect to each other
the heat exchangers are also classified ‘right’. And for that there are three categories and
they are named as parallel flow, counter flow and cross flow, ‘right’; parallel flow,
counter flow and cross flow type heat exchangers.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:48)
(Refer Slide Time: 03:54)
In the parallel flow that let us show it in the figure; this is the figure that in the parallel
flow it is like that the fluid is entering through this and another fluid is entering and
going out like this, ‘right’. So, both the fluids are in parallel direction, ‘right’ and in that
case the distribution of temperature of the two fluids will be like this, ‘right’. So, this is
one end that is hot fluid this is the other end that is the cool fluid, ‘right’ and they will
exit in the same direction at different temperatures than their entrance, ‘right’.
So, this is called parallel flow, ‘right’ and if we look at its features that this exist when
both the tube and fluid tube side and fluid and the shell side fluid flow in the same
direction. In this case the two fluids enter the heat exchanger from the same end with a
large temperature difference. As a result as the fluids transfer heat hotter to cooler the
temperature of the two fluids they approach each other, ‘right’, that is why we showed
that this and this  these are the two temperature  distribution  of the fluid this is the
temperature and this is the distance, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 05:50)
So, if that is true then it has to be noted that the hottest cold fluid temperature is always
less than the coldest hot fluid temperature what does it mean that again if we look at the
temperature distribution. So, we said this was the inlet of the hot fluid, this is h inlet and
this is h outlet and this is cold inlet and this is cold outlet, ‘right’. So, what we said to be
noted that the hottest cold fluid, ‘right’, this is the cool fluid that is the hottest air, ‘right’
is always less than the coldest hot fluid that is this is the hot fluid is coldest point is here.
So, that is always higher than the outlet of the coldest hot fluid, ‘right’. So, this you have
to keep in mind that this temperature can never be less than this temperature, ‘right’. So,
this is the basic feature of the co current heat exchanger.(Refer Slide Time: 07:22)
Then if we look at the other that is called counter current before we go into the features
let us look into the flow pattern. Flow pattern is like this one fluid is moving this way
and the other fluid is moving this way, ‘right’.
So, the two flows are in opposite direction that is why it is called counter current, ‘right’
and if we look at the temperature distribution. So, this is like that and this is like that,
‘right’. So, this is the outlet of the hot fluid, inlet of the hot fluid and this is the inlet of
the hot cold fluid and outlet of the cold fluid, ‘right’ and this means that the inlet of the
hot and cold fluid are not from the same direction in the opposite direction. Similarly, the
outlet of the hot and cold fluid and again not on the same direction, but from the opposite
direction or in the reverse direction or reverse point, ‘right’.
So, if that be true let us look into the features of this counter current heat exchanger and
that says counter flow as we have just seen exist when the two fluids flow in opposite
directions each of the fluids enters the heat exchanger at opposite ends because the
cooler fluid exist in the counter flow heat exchanger at the end where the hot fluid enters
the heat exchanger the cooler fluid will approach the inlet temperature of the hot fluid.
Similarly, counter flow heat exchangers are the most efficient of the three types that is
co, counter and cross, ‘right’. So, out of these three counter current is the most effective
or efficient, ‘right’. As we said here that because the cooler fluid exist the counter flow
heat exchanger at the end where the hot fluid enters, the heat exchanger the cooler fluidwill approach the inlet temperature of the hot fluid and vice versa the reverse is that this
is that cooler fluid inlet approaches the outlet of the hot fluid.
Similarly, the hot fluid inlet is approaching the cold fluid outlet, ‘right’. So, that is the
vice  versa and  this  is  the  most  efficient,  then in contrast  to the parallel  flow  heat
exchanger the counter flow heat exchanger can have the hottest cold fluid temperature
greater than the coldest hot fluid temperature, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:10)
Unlike  in  the  parallel  flow  if  we  remember  we  said  that  this  is  the  temperature
distribution, ‘right’. This is temperature and this is the axis, axis means distance, ‘right’
and we said if it is the a temperature inlet of the hot fluid this is the temperature of the
hot fluid out and if it is the temperature of the cold fluid in and if it is the temperature of
the cold fluid out then this T co will always be less than T ho, ‘right’.
This Tco will always be less than T co whereas, in the counter current if it is again T and if
it is again X that is temperature versus the distance of the heat exchanger. We said that if
this is 1 the other one is like that; so, it is always that as we said here the hottest cold
fluid, ‘right’. So, hottest cold fluid is this the hottest cold fluid temperature is greater
than the coldest hot fluid is this.
So, this temperature is less than this temperature; that means, the cold fluid can approach
the inlet of the hot fluid or the vice versa the hot fluid can approach the inlet of the coldfluid. So, this is a big achievement and that is why the performance of the counter
current heat exchanger is much much better compared to that of the co current or even
the cross flow ok.
In many operations it may not be feasible that you always have two cylinders like that or
two tubes like that and you allow one fluid to flow like this and in other case you allow
the other fluid to flow in the opposite direction. It may not be always possible, ‘right’. It
may not be always in the all the cases possible; so, in that case the third option came
comes in that not only they co not only the counter, but also some other which is referred
to as the cross flow, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:05)
So, that we would look at; so, how does it look like let us look into first that the cross
flow liquid or heat exchanger is like this that you have a fluid which is flowing like this
and another fluid perpendicular to this flow of the fluid that is flowing like this, ‘right’.
So, this type of flow is called cross flow as if this flow is crossing this flow, ‘right’.
So, that is why this is named as cross flow, ‘right’. So, one fluid is getting perpendicular
to the other fluid in terms of its flow pattern or flow arrangement, ‘right’. And if we look
at the temperature distribution temperature distribution is like this, this is for the hot fluid
and this is for the cold fluid. And in this case also the hottest of the cold fluid cannot be greater than the coldest of the
hot fluid, ‘right’ like in the co current, but in the counter flow we had seen that the
temperature of the hot fluid can be or the if the temperature of the hot fluid can be closer
to the temperature of the cold fluid in terms of inlet and outlet, ‘right’ or vice versa.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:01)
So, if we look at from this the features of this cross flow type of heat exchanger. We see,
just now we saw the flow arrangement and the type of heat exchanger is physical
appearance, how it looks like that when one fluid flows perpendicular to the second fluid
this is called cross flow heat exchanger. That is one fluid flows through tubes and the
second fluid passes around the tube at 90° angle. So, that is what is cross flow so, this
and 90° this.
So, that two flow are crossing each other that is how the name has come to be cross flow,
‘right’. Cross flow heat exchangers are usually found in applications where on or one of
the that one of the fluids exchanges state that is there is a two phase flow one of the fluid
is exchanging the phase, ‘right’; so, this was like this ok. So, it could be that this liquid is
exchanging the phase; that means, it came it to be liquid and exit is in the gas whereas,
this is in the same liquid, ‘right’. 
In that case this can be also said to be a cross flow ofcourse, it is not that if it is
exchanging the phase is said to be cross flow exchange of the phase can also happen in
many other cases, ‘right’, but this is that where you if we have a cross flow it can also beassociated in most of the cases along with the change of the phase of one of the fluids,
‘right’. So, an example is steam systems condenser, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:52)
So, again if this was the cross flow, ‘right’; of course, this is not there so, you should
redo that if this was the cross flow, ‘right’ and in that case if steam is passing through
this. So, steam will condense in it and thereby exchange the heat and it will get from
vapor to liquid conversion, ‘right’. 
So, that is how the steam is being utilized in the condensers, in which steam exiting the
turbine enters the condenser shell side and the cool water flowing in the tube absorbs the
latent heat or heat from the steam condensing into a condensing heat into water. Large
volumes of vapor may be condensed using this type of heat exchangers, ‘right’, this is
what we said steam to liquid or it can be the reversal. So, that liquid to vapor that also
can be one example, ‘right’.
So, where we have the cross flow it is likely that the cross flow may be associated with
the change of the phase of the one of the fluids, ‘right’. So, now let us look into the
temperature distribution, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 20:39)
So, comparison of this types of three types of heat exchanger if we look at that heat
transfer in a heat exchanger is by conduction and convection. The rate of heat transfer Q
in a heat exchanger is calculated using the equations which are coming as follows,
‘right’. Each of the three types of heat exchangers that is co, counter and cross, ‘right’;
co, counter and cross, ‘right’. Each of the three heat exchangers has advantages and also
disadvantages everywhere if there is a light there is also a dark.
So, some good or some bad is always associated, ‘right’, if there is a good there has is
also a bad and that is inevitable. So, here also when you are saying that you have some
good thing you may have some bad also, ‘right’. So, that if you look at then you can say
that each of the three types of heat exchangers has advantages and disadvantages, but of
the three the counter flow heat exchanger design is the most efficient when comparing
heat transfer rate per unit surface area.(Refer Slide Time: 22:38)
The deficiency of a counter flow heat exchanger is only due to the fact that the average
delta T that is the difference in temperature. The average that is the deficiency of the
counter flow heat exchanger is that the average ΔT between the two fluids over the
length of the heat exchanger is maximized as, of course, we have shown earlier, ‘right’.
Where we showed that this is the counter flow, ‘right’ which showed this that this is the
counter flow and one fluid is moving this way and the other fluid is moving this way,
‘right’. So, that is the counter flow ok.
So, if that be true then it is true that the that the between the two fluids the length of the
heat exchanger is maximized ok. Therefore, the log mean temperature for counter flow
heat exchanger is larger than the log mean temperature for a similar parallel or cross flow
heat  exchanger.  So, this  is  one  disadvantage  associated  with  the  counter  flow  heat
exchanger, ‘right’.
So, here I repeat that the efficiency of a counter flow heat exchanger is due to the fact
that the average delta T that is the difference in temperature between the two fluids over
the length of the heat exchanger is maximized, ‘right’. And therefore, the log mean
temperature for counter flow heat exchanger is larger than the log mean temperature for
a similar parallel or cross flowed, ‘right’.
So, then we can write that equation Q = say U o × Ao × ΔTlm’s this is not D this is ΔT lm,
‘right’. So, that it did not take that symbol. So, it is ΔT lm so; that means, that ΔT lm is thelog mean temperature difference, ‘right’. So, ΔT lm we should write it in better way ΔT lm,
‘right’. So, that log mean temperature difference that is true for parallel and counter and
cross flow all three flows, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:35)
So, if we look at this ΔT lm that is like that this is (ΔT 2 – ΔT1) / (ΔT2/ΔT1). Now it can also
be that ΔTlm can be equal to (ΔT 2 – ΔT1) /  ln (ΔT2/ΔT1). The only thing which you need
to do that what is ΔT 1 and what is ΔT2, that you should define, ‘right’. It is not always
that this ΔT1 meaning Thi  - Tho or ΔT2 is always Th or Tci - Tco, ‘right’. This is not or the
reverse vice versa T co - Tci this is not always, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 26:58)
So, that you have to clearly say which one is the ΔT, but it can be like this that ΔT 1m is
(ΔT1 – ΔT2) / ln(ΔT2/ ΔT1) or ΔT1m can also be written as (ΔT 1 – ΔT2) / ln(ΔT1/ΔT2),
‘right’.
So, in some of the; in the same operating conditions operating the same heat exchanger
in a counter flow manner will result in a greater heat transfer rate than operating in
parallel  flow  that  is  one  that  we  have  already  said.  In  actuality  most  large  heat
exchangers are not purely parallel flow or counter flow or cross flow; they are usually a
combination of the two or three types of heat exchangers, ‘right’. 
It can that is what in plate heat exchanger we said many times that the depending on the
flow pattern it can be counter, it can be co or it normally these two in that plate heat
exchangers. But, in some cases you may have both these two and the third one that is
cross flow also absolute heat exchange with the counter or co may not be in one heat
exchanger, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 28:35)
Similarly, we can say this is due to the fact that actual heat exchangers are more complex
than the simple components as we have shown, ‘right’ which are idealized figures and to
depict each type of heat exchangers which we have just shown in three pictures. 
The reason for the combination of the various types is to maximize the efficiency of the
heat exchanger within the restrictions placed on the design and this is the restriction
involved are size, cost, weight, required efficiency, type of fluid, operating pressures,
temperatures  and  all  help determine  the  complexity  of the specific  heat exchanger,
‘right’.
So, this is what is about the three types of heat exchangers that is co, counter and
parallel. So, we are coming to the end of this class because time is over, but please look
into this and next we will do the heat transfer analysis for co current, counter current and
the cross flow. And we will also do the heat transfer unit that is net NTU net transfer unit
and that will determine the efficiency of the heat exchangers, ‘right’.
Thank you.