Thermal Operations In Food Process Engineering: Theory And Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 46
Heat Exchangers (Contd.)
Good morning. We are handling with Heat  Exchangers  and we said that, there are
different types of heat exchangers which  are in used in industry in nature and  also we
said that heat exchangers are those  who where you are exchanging heat, but as  such
everywhere it is being exchanged  whereas, there is a temperature  difference there is a
exchange of heat. So, in that case everything is not said  to be heat exchanger, the reason
we had already said in the previous class, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:35)
Now, we were comparing the types of heat exchangers and if in this continuation class of
heat exchangers in the 46 class. We now come to that we are comparing that types of
heat exchangers, ‘right’. So, heat transfer in heat exchangers is normally by conduction
and also it can be by convection, ‘right’. 
So, if it is by conduction and convection, the rate of heat transfer normally again the
radiation heat is more or less encountered in this type of heat exchangers, ‘right’? I am
not saying radiation is not there in the heat exchangers are not at all, but normally whichwe come across there these heat exchangers are the mode of heat transfer is primarily by
conduction and also by convection, ‘right’.
So, if Q is the heat transfer and this is in an heat exchanger this is usually calculated with
some equations which we will be we have already said that Q = U A ΔT. Or if it is not U,
U is the overall heat transfer coefficient sometime we will come into that or it can also be
h A ΔT, ‘right’, this is simply from the Newton’s law of cooling.
Now,  each  of  the  three  types  of  heat  exchangers  which  we  have  already  said  has
advantages  and  also  disadvantages.  But  of  the  these  three  the  counter  flow  heat
exchanger design is the most efficient when comparing with other type of heat transfer or
comparing heat transfer rate per unit surface area; that is q over m2 or rather this q capital
Q over m2 which is equal to small q, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:59)
So, this small q is capital Q over m2 by default we said that generally this is followed that
capital Q is the rate and this is the flow heat flux ok.(Refer Slide Time: 04:35).
So, the efficiency of a counter flow heat exchanger is due to the fact that, the ΔT, that is
the difference in temperature. This ΔT that difference in temperature between the two
fluids, ‘right’, over the length of the heat exchanger is maximized, ‘right’. Now, which
we have already shown, ‘right’, sometimes we will change it and show you that when we
drew it.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:55)
Somewhere this weight came up, so some time will show you there ok.So, in this we have shown that counter current heat exchange and that the log mean
temperature for counter current. The log mean temperature difference for the counter
current, ‘right’ for the counter flow or counter current heat exchanger is larger than the
log mean temperature for a similar parallel or cross flow heat exchanger. This also we
will show and we said the one Q which is we had said just now h A ΔT, but since the
difference between them is more or less significant.
 (Refer Slide Time: 06:05)
So, the average ΔT is T + T 1 + T2 / 2 this is the average this average is not used, rather
log mean temperature difference; that is q = h A ΔT lm or Q = U A ΔT. Now this you can
be Uo based on outside area also based on outside, this also can be U i Ai depending on
the situation, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 06:35)
So, that is why I simply wrote that Q = U A ΔT lm, ‘right’, this is generally followed.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:55)
Now if we look at what is ΔT lm, ‘right’? So, ΔTlm is the log mean temperature difference,
which we can write as ΔT lm is equal to rather lm is equal to (ΔT 1 – ΔT2) / ln (ΔT2/ or if it
is ΔT1 - ΔT2.(Refer Slide Time: 07:21)
Then it should be, it should be ΔT lm we are saying (ΔT 1 - ΔT2) / ln (ΔT1 / ΔT2). The thing
is that if I start with 1 then, this numerator also 1; if I start with 2, then this numerator is
also 2. So, this only we have to keep in mind, ‘right’. So, and what is that ΔT 1 and ΔT2
that we will tell depending on the flow, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:03)
You if you remember, we had said that this was for co-current, ‘right’. So, if it was hot
inlet and it is if it is hot outlet T rather T hot outlet. If it is for T cold inlet, if it is for T
cold outlet then you can define these ΔT 1 and ΔT2 with this for this is the ΔT, you can tellit to 1 you can tell it 2 and this is the ΔT. Again you can tell it to 1 or you can tell it 2
whatever you the way you like, but this is the ΔT  this is the ΔT, ‘right’.
This is not that the ΔT is between this and that or between this and that, ‘right’. So, this
ΔT is are to be properly defined then you have the solution, ‘right’. Now in the same
operating conditions, operating the same heat exchanger in a counter flow manner will
result in a greater heat transfer rate than operating in a parallel flow. In actually most
large heat exchangers are not purely parallel flow, counter flow or cross flow, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:49)
This is the fact that actually which I had also said in the plate heat exchanger if you
remember, ‘right’ where we had plate heat exchanger and the flow are were like this,
‘right’. So, we said depending on the flow pattern, you have co currency or counter
currency, ‘right’. They are usually a combination of the two or all of them that all three
of them, ‘right’, ok, if that be true.(Refer Slide Time: 10:25)
Now let us come into what we mean by Δ or some more some more information are
there regarding the comparison; that why this was that why ΔT I mean that counter
current had the maximum efficiency this is due to the fact that. In actual heat oh no this
is not that why it is that, we said that in actual case only counter current or only co
current or only cross flow these are not actually happening.
In actual case it may be combination of two or all three of them are there, ‘right’ and
why that that is what we are saying here; that this is due to the fact that the actual heat
exchangers are more complex than the simple components as we have already shown,
‘right’ and they are called idealized figures, ‘right’. And to depict each type of heat
exchanger ok, that counter current co current whatever we had said so there it is that
more or less idealized, ‘right’.
The reason for the combination of the various types is to maximize the efficiency of the
heat exchanger within the restrictions placed on the design. That is size, cost, weight,
required  efficiency,  type of fluids,  operating  pressures  and temperatures  all  help  to
determine the complexity of this specific heat exchanger, ‘right’ all help to determine the
complexity of a specific heat exchanger, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 12:41)
So, one method that combines the characteristics of two or more, heat exchangers and
improves the performance of our heat exchanger is to have the two fluids pass each other
several times within a single heat exchanger, ‘right’. So, this is how the complexity can
be introduced that, one of the methods to combine the characteristics of two or more heat
exchangers and improves the performance of a heat exchanger is to have the two fluids
pass each other several times within a single heat exchanger.
When a heat exchangers fluids pass each other more than once, a heat exchanger is
called a multi pass, ‘right’. So, we have a heat exchanger, if a fluid is passing multiple
times through this, ‘right’ and maybe this is the shell and these are the tubes, ‘right’. So,
in that case it can be said that the actual thing is, the fluid is coming in contact multi
times in different directions, ‘right’ and that is what we call multi pass heat exchanger,
‘right’. So, if the fluids pass each other only once the heat exchanger is called a single
pass heat exchanger which we have till now shown, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 14:45)So, if we look at how it looks like, it looks like this, ‘right’ it looks like this that a single
pass is you see the fluid is coming through this, ‘right’ and going out through this one
fluid, so it is coming and going out through this. And the other fluid which is coming
through this, ‘right’ just after coming over here it is getting distributed, one it is going
through this another it is going through this, ‘right’. And this is this is the outer and the
inner one is coming like that. Let us remove them, so inner one is coming like that,
‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:37)
So, this way it is coming and going out this was the entry and the other two they are
going this way and this way. So, basically we have one fluid is flowing this way and
another fluid is flowing this way. So, this is called single pass because, they are coming
across only once, ‘right’ in one direction whereas, had it been like this that we said
earlier also if baffles are used for changing the directions, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:25)
So, in that case we have one fluid entering through this and exiting to this, ‘right’, this is
that fluid ok. And the design is such that we have placed baffles in different ways,
‘right’, we have placed baffles in different ways like this we have placed the baffles,
‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 16:59)
So, if the baffles are placed and the other fluid is moving this way, ‘right’ the other fluid
is moving this way. So, it is coming like this and I usual and it is also going like that
going in this way, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:19)
But with this we have with this fluid say fluid one we have no directional change, ‘right’,
but with fluid 2, which is coming from there and exiting from here we have a lot of
changes due to the baffle, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 17:43)
So, when it came as it is it is coming like this coming going like this again coming like
this going like this coming like this going like this, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:05)
So, similarly that actually should have been it should have been like that, it should have
been coming like this way, going like this way and again coming like this way going like
this way and again coming like this and exiting, ‘right’. Then you see how many times
they are coming across with this as many times they are coming across so this is calledmulti pass, ‘right’, so this is called multi pass ok. And; obviously, the direction of the
flow or how many parallel how many counter diodes is to be determined.
But here we are not determining because this is not the one where we are doing any
problem with this; this is just to identify how a single pass and a multi pass are looking
at, ‘right’ how a single pass and multi pass are looking at, ‘right’? So, this is a single and
multi pass heat exchanger which we have just shown and explained how it is operating,
‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:33)
Then, we come back to the log mean temperature difference, ‘right’. In many cases if it
is a curvilinear, since drawing with this mouse was a or is very difficult unless it is a
straight line, ‘right’; if it is a curvilinear so, there could be a little not absolutely book
type figure, but doesnt matter it is understandable.(Refer Slide Time: 20:13)
So, here we forgot to give you this direction, ‘right’, so this is the direction and in this
case this is the direction, ‘right’. So, you see the log mean temperature difference which
were discussing discussing and here we have a plot of temperature versus length of the
heat exchanger, ‘right’, the just now which we had shown you that length of the heat
exchanger which is this, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:59)
So, this length of the heat exchanger means that how much heat is getting exchanged in
this length, ‘right’? So, we have a plot of this temperature versus this heat exchanger,‘right’. So, it will not be here, here, here every where the same temperature, so that is
why it is being plotted.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:33)
And for parallel and counter flow, we have shown this that we have fluid entering a hot
fluid interning at T h1 and leaving at Th2 and the flow is parallel and the cold fluid is
entering at Tc1 and exiting at Tc2, ‘right’, so this is the direction of the flow. So, then if we
plot T vs length, the curve which you will get is like this.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:09)
Whereas if you have a hot fluid is entering at T h1 like this and it is exiting at T h2 so, this is
the direction of the flow and a cold fluid actually it should have been T c1. So, by cut and
paste it made the mistake and if it is T c2, ‘right’, so in that case this is the flow direction,
‘right’.
So, it is in a 1 and 2 we normally denote, 1 equal to inlet and 2 is equal to outlet, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:57)
So, if two 1 and 2 is inlet and outlet, then it should be T c1  and it should be T c2  and the
direction of flow should be like this, ‘right’; and in that if we have a plot of T vs length,
‘right’, T vs L of the heat exchanger you have a plot like this, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 23:25)
So, in all the cases we can use overall heat transfer coefficient U for the over why
overall? Because in this heat exchanger which we had shown also earlier that one fluid is
coming like that and another fluid is going away like this, ‘right’. So, if this is that and if
that be true, ‘right’, then they say this is T h1 and this is Th2 and this is Tc1 and this is Tc2.
So, what will happen we will have heat transfer coefficient between these two at this
wall at this side wall at this side wall, ‘right’. So, there will be ah i there will be aho and
there will be a resistance due to the metal, ‘right’ that is resistance due to the metal that
also will have.
So, all this put together will make this U, ‘right’ of course, this overall heat transfer
coefficient as of now we have not said we will come across afterwards. Now do with this
preliminary of the overall heat transfer coefficient.(Refer Slide Time: 24:53)
Let us tell the dq = U × (T hot - Tcold) × dA this is what we have taken one section, ‘right’,
this is what we have taken a section. So, dq = U × (T h - Tc) × dA, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 25:29)
So that we can write and from there if we further analyze then we can say that, dq is
nothing, but -mh Ch dTh and is also equal to m c Cc dTc, where h stands for hot and c
stands for cold fluid, ‘right’.
So, that m C dT that equation will also hold good that is equal to dq, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 26:05)
And earlier we have shown that dq who was equal to U A ΔT, ‘right’.
 (Refer Slide Time: 26:17)
So, using these two relations we can we can write that d T h from here is -dq over image
why it is minus one is minus and the other is plus. That means, if one dq is negative
means it is giving away the heat; and another is sorry another is receiving that and that is
what is plus, ‘right’.So, who is having who is receiving and who is we were giving away this can be minus
and plus, ‘right’. By convention, we say that the hot fluid which is giving away that is
dTc and sorry that the hot fluid which is giving away is da dT h normally with the negative
and the cold fluid which is receiving, ‘right’, so that is with the plus then, dT h = -dq / mh
Ch dTc = dq / mc Cc, ‘right’.
So, this is the heat capacity hot this is heat capacity cold fluid, ‘right’. Then we can write
dTh - dTc that is that equal to d(T h - Tc) which can be written as -dq which we have
already said there times (1/ m h Ch) + (1/ mc Cc), ‘right’, 1/ mc Cc. So, we can rewrite this
as d(Th - Tc)/(Th - Tc), ‘right’ that this h and c; obviously, will be with the different inlet
and outlet from that this is appearing to be identical it cannot be it cannot be made I
mean taken out like this.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:43)
Because inherently there is one outlet inherently there is one inlet or one and two things
are there. So, this is what we are writing, so that is equal to - U 1(1 / mh Ch + 1 / mc Cc)
dA, ‘right’. So, today our time is up, so let us stop it now we will do in the next class
subsequently, this analysis of the log mean temperature difference, ‘right’. So, log mean
temperature difference we have not completed in the next class we will do that the
continuation of the log mean temperature difference.
Thank you.