Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 41
Condensation
Good morning. We have done already boiling, ‘right’. Boiling is one of the very basic
unit operations; and hopefully in many of places, it is used. I give you one more example
which I already had given others. Like you have seen that in typically refrigeration units,
‘right’ that in the evaporator coil, these liquids they come and then get boiled off, ‘right’.
Because the boiling point of the liquids is minus maybe 30, maybe 40, maybe 50 or even
more so that depends on the liquid which is being used. So, there once you are boiling, I
mean once the refrigerant is going in and coming in contact with comparatively higher
temperature that moment it boils up, ‘right’. So, that is one of the great example, ‘right’.
Similarly, other examples we have already given.
Now, I started with that you are making tea and for that you are boiling water, ‘right’.
And I gave the example that you are also putting a lead on that, and on that lead these
vapors are getting condensed, ‘right’. So, how that condensation is taking place, how we
can do the heat transfer analysis that we will now look into. What we are now doing is
that lecture number 41, and that is for Condensation, ‘right’.
So, in this  condensation, we will try to tell, I give you one more example for the
condensation other than that tea making, this is commercially done, ‘right’. So, you have
a calandria, ‘right’ and this side you have cold fluid and this side there is a flow of the
liquid  coming  in,  ‘right’.  And  this,  this  is  what  at  a  concentration  of  C A1 to  a
concentration of C A2 is being concentrated, ‘right’. So, this is called evaporator. So, in
the evaporator this kind of thick film they are moving in vertical desert called calandria.
So, in the vertical calandria and heat transfer takes place in that. So, this is one example
which is commercially applicable, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 03:48)
So, let us look into that how first we take picture that this is drawn with me of course that
we are taking that the one which we said a vertical wall, ‘right’. So, this is the vertical
wall and there is a flow of the fluid, and the flow is like a parabolic flow, ‘right’ that in
pipe flow also you have seen that flow can be parabolic, ‘right’.
So, we assume that from this point and we are taking that x, y at this point ‘right’; y is in
this direction and x is in this direction, ‘right’. And we tell that in this point that τ is µ l dv
dy, ‘right’. So, since it is there not visible τ is µ l ‘right’ µ liquid δv δy, ‘right’. So, this is
τ that is the shear force which is acting, ‘right’. So, at this point, this is the 0, 0, or this is
the  coordinate.  And  we  are  considering  this  flow  of  the  fluid  which  is  at  certain
concentration, and during this process it becomes more and more concentrated, ‘right’.
So, in that we have taken a volume element like this, ‘right’; a volume element we have
taken and this volume element is having this also ‘right’ and that thickness is dx, ‘right’.
And the condensate which is this entire thing is the condensate, ‘right’. This condensate
is moving. And we take a thickness of δ, ‘right’ in the y-direction, ‘right’; in the y-
direction, the thickness of the film is δ. And we take a small thickness, ‘right’ which is
equivalent to dδ that is between this and this, ‘right’ that we have taken between this and
that.
And we magnified this part here, ‘right’; we magnified this part here as this is the unit
thickness this other dimension, ‘right’, other dimension is the unique thickness as wehave seen that this is coming like this fine and we have taken that this got shifted a little
bit, because this was arranged. So, this is the thickness which we are telling is δ-y, ‘right’
δ-y and in this, this is the dx thickness, ‘right’. So, our volume element is that dx for this
dimension, δ-y for this dimension, and unit thickness for this dimension.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:46)
So, that is the volume element, so that is dx (δ – y) × 1, this is the volume element,
‘right’. Then one more thing we have to say in this is that we assume that outside this is
the saturation temperature T saturation, ‘right’. Wall of this is at T w , ‘right’ and the element
which we have taken is here, ‘right’ so, in this we can make this assumption that (ρ l -
ρv)×( δ – y) ×g ×dx, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 08:43)
So, this is the volume element; volume is your ( δ – y) × dx × 1 that is the volume,
‘right’, and (ρl - ρv) is the density difference that is in this, this is m3 and that is kg/ m3,
‘right’, and g is m/s2, ‘right’. So, we get kg/ m3 that m/s2; this unit we will utilize a while
and that is applicable at this point, ‘right’.
So, let us then proceed to the solution, ‘right’. Again our this shear stress is τ µ l δv/δy,
‘right’; obviously, that is - µ l δv/δy and the wall temperature is T w that is what we have
said, and the volume element we have taken fine.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:12)
So, we know that this flow we will find out what is the temperature distribution, what is
the heat transfer coefficient, etcetera we will find out. So, to do that, we keep this thing
in mind that our volume element is this having (δ – y) in the y direction, in x direction dx
and the third dimension is unity or unit thickness, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:35)
So, as we said just now that physical situation if we elaborate that the physical situation
is like that. We have a pure vapour that is without the presence of non condensable gas,
‘right’, we have pure vapour without the presence of non-condensable gas is condensing
on a flat plate by bringing it in contact with cold surface. When the liquid wets the
surface, the condensation occurs in the form of a smooth film which flows down the
surface under the action of gravity.
The presence of the liquid film over the surface constitutes the thermal resistance to heat
flow. The thickness of the film is zero at the top of the wall and increases its thickness as
it flows downward because of condensation. Heat is transferred from the condensing
vapour at Tsaturation, through the liquid film, and to the wall at the wall temperature of T w
°C by conduction, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 12:22)
So, if this is known, then we can do the analysis like this with certain assumptions, and
assumptions are valid assumptions like this. That the plate is maintained at uniform
temperature Tw wall temperature that is less than the saturation temperature T sat of the
vapor. This is first assumption that is the plate is maintained at a temperature T w which is
less than the saturation temperature of the vapour or T sat, ‘right’.
Then the vapour is stationary or has less velocity for which it exerts no drag on the
motion of the condensate. I repeat, the vapour is stationary or has less velocity for which
it exerts no drag force on the motion of the condensate. We will make the drag force,
because this was the wall, ‘right’ on which this was our vapour condensing, ‘right’. And
since the flow is very less, ‘right’, it can be assumed at pseudo study few things like that,
‘right’. So, it has very less velocity for which it does not exert any drag force; otherwise
drag force would give the opposite direction of the flow some force which we are
neglecting.
Then the downward flow of condensate under the action of gravity is laminar that is also
a very vital point. That you have this vertical plate and you have this flow of the
condensate, ‘right’, it can happen. That since if it is acting with gravity g, then it can
happen there could be a mixing of the condensate, ‘right’, and that may cause maybe a
little turbulence or maybe something like that. But we are assuming that this condensate is flowing in a laminar flow. So, the layers they
are not mixing, there is no mixing of the layers, ‘right’, this is what we are assuming,
‘right’. So, the downward flow of the condensate under the gravity is laminar. This is
another assumption.
Then the flow velocity associated with the condensate, the flow velocity associated with
the  condensate  film  is  low  resulting  to  negligible  acceleration  in  the  concentrate  a
condensate layer. The flow velocity associated with the condensate film is low resulting
to negligible acceleration in the condensate layer, ‘right’. 
So, there is no since velocity we are issuing to be very low, so acceleration due to the
gravity that will not take place. In other word, this is also coming as per that the flow
regime is laminar that is your, the fluid layers are laminar; there is no mixing of the fluid.
So, with this let us go to the solution that we have assumed these things.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:42)
And now, one or one or two more are there that is fluid properties are constant. We have
seen by this time a lot that the fluid properties is a function of temperature basically,
‘right’, fluid properties is a function of temperature. So, obviously, since the condensate
will come from there and this T is T w and which is constant we have said, and then it is
likely that from here to there, there may be a temperature change during the flow of the
fluid. And during this process, the property values are not changing that is under steady
or constant those property values are constant.Heat transfer across the condensate layer is by purely by conduction; hence the liquid
temperature distribution is also linear. Since it is a liquid or fluid, we are likely to have
that this wall and the condensate is flowing like this. So, there could be a convection if at
all in heat transfer, but since the flow is laminar, the velocity is very low all these
assumptions we have made, we also can say that the heat which is being transferred like
from here to this point, this is only by conduction through the fluid, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:42)
So, only conduction through the fluid, there is no convection or radiation it in this,
‘right’, so that is another very basic assumption. (Refer Slide Time: 19:03)
So, if these assumptions are made, and now if we look at then we can say that film heat
transfer coefficient which we have to find out that can be determined like this. Equating
the heat transferred by conduction to that from condensation of the vapour; basically,
what is happening you had this T w or wall temperature, ‘right’, and the fluid is now
moving like this, ‘right’. And, what is happening that because of this low temperature of
the fluid of the wall, this is condensing at this point and gradually is dropping down,
‘right’ gradually is dropping down. 
Now, while it is doing it at any moment, we have a thickness like this, ‘right’. And this
wall temperature has to be propagated to this upper layer or free end of the fluid, who
will conduct we will transfer this, this is by conduction. So, how it is happening, at this
point that fluid is giving away the latent heat of condensation, ‘right’ to the wall and
thereby the conduction is taking place. 
So, the equation will be in terms of the heat transfer by conduction to that from the
condensation of the vapours, a final expression can be obtained for the average heat
transfer coefficient over the whole surface, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 21:05)
And that is obvious that again and again we are showing that this is a T wall. So, the heat
transfer coefficient whatever was seen here, ‘right’; whatever was here that can be said
as local heat transfer coefficient h x, ‘right’. And this is corresponding to that x = x, but at
x is = x + Δx, this h will be then h x + Δx at that point, ‘right’. So, if we look at like this,
there will be different h s for different xx. So, we can make average of all these x, x =
maybe 0 to x = x or something of that boundary we can put, and make an average h
average, ‘right’ that is our goal.
Now, to do that from the figure which we have already shown it is seen that the vapour at
Tsaturated is condensing on the wall whose temperature is T w °C. The condensate is flowing
downward in laminar flow, ‘right’. So, as it has been shown in the figure let us take as
we have already shown in the figure that let us assume unit thickness which you have
already shown.(Refer Slide Time: 22:53)
If you remember that while we said this was Δx, this was δ-δ, ‘right’, this was y-δ, this
was  Δx  and  the  third  dimension  which  we  said  that  was  unity,  ‘right’.  The  third
dimension was unity. So, we are assuring that thickness of the film element, ‘right’, unit
thickness of the film. The mass of the element with liquid density ρ 1  is (δ – ρ)×dx×1,
‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 23:50)
So, δ ρ y sorry not ρ δ - y because we had taken this one not y - δ δy, because y is at any
point and δ is the total thickness which we had taken, ‘right’. So, this was δ and this is ata y. So, δ - and y was the entire, ‘right’ this was that y was for the entire thing, ‘right’ we
so that we are assuming, that if it is so then the liquid density ρ l and the volume is (δ –
y)dx ×l. So, in that density is ρ l, so that means, the element with liquid the mass of the
element, because this is in m3, ρl is in kg/m3, so that comes to mass kg, ‘right’. 
The downward force on this element is the gravitational force minus the buoyancy force,
‘right’, because a gravitational force is acting on that and the layers which are like that
that is the buoyancy force, ‘right’. So, this will be equilibrium of the downward force on
this element is the gravitational force minus buoyancy force, ‘right’. This means that δy
(δ-y) × dx × 1 × (ρl - ρv) × g, this is the thing which is acting, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:47)
So, because the gravitational force is that volume (δ – y) × dx × 1 that times ρ l × g that is
the gravitational and minus that for the vapour it was equivalent (δ – y) × dx × 1 × ρ v,
‘right’. So, we take (δ – y) × dx × 1 as common, then we get ρ l  × ρv and g common so
that comes to (δ – y) × dx × (ρ l  - ρv) × g, where ρv is the density of this saturated vapour.
So, we can say the viscous shear force at the plane y is µ l dv dy × dx × 1, ‘right’. So, dx
× 1× dx was this, and 1 was that thickness, ‘right’, so that means, this 1 ok. So, this is µ l
dv dy dx × 1. So, if we equate these forces, then we can write (δ – y) dx × (ρ l – ρv) × g,
this is equal to µl dv/dy × dx into of course 1 which is not written, ‘right’. So, we get dv/dy is [g × (ρ l – ρv) / µl]× (δ – y),  ‘right’. So, we have that the gradient –
velocity gradient as dv dy is [g × (ρ l – ρv) / µl] × (δ – y), ‘right’. So, subsequently this
velocity gradient we shall utilize ‘right’, but obviously for this class it is for half an hour
and our time is almost over. So, we cannot proceed further.
And next class, we will start with this dv/dy, ‘right’ as g × (ρ l - ρv) / µl × (δ – y). This
expression we shall start within the next class and today we make it a day.
Thank you.