Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 43
Heat Exchangers
Good morning. So, we have completed boiling condensation and earlier all kinds of
transfer of heat, ‘right’ by conduction, convection, radiation all the modes. Now we
come to a very vital of course, all are vital I do not say that this is the vital and that is
not. So, all our vital and in this thing what we would like to say that heat exchanger
because when you are dealing with anything where exchange of heat is there; so, that is
nothing, but an heat exchanger, ‘right’. So, we come to the lecture number 43 and we
start Heat Exchanger, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:26)
So, to do this let us take, but before we go to the heat exchanger; let me give some
preamble of this is that, heat exchanger is anything where you are getting a exchange of
heat, ‘right’. Suppose this bottle, if it would have been a either cold or hot whatever. So,
if it is cold, you are getting in your hand some cold and if it is hot, then you are getting
when you are holding you are getting it very hot, ‘right’. This is also a heat exchanger
obviously, but; obviously, this heat exchanger has no application.So, anything which is exchanging heat is a heat exchanger, ‘right’; is a heat exchanger,
‘right’ and one of the best heat exchanger is our heart. The nature has made such a
beautiful heat exchanger that so, compact which will come across we will come across
also sometime that the heat exchanger is really a subject where anywhere the exchange
of heat is happening that we will take care off; that will be taken care of, ‘right’.
So, in any processes whether of course, if it is a thermal process; if it is non thermal
process; obviously, that heat exchange does not come into picture; but if it is a thermal
heat exchanger, then you have lot many things to know, ‘right’. And that is why in many
books, you will see the type of handling is different, ‘right’. And the definition of the
heat exchanger or the distribution or classification of the heat exchangers, they are also
varying from book to book, ‘right’.
However, keeping in mind that majority of our students are from the food including the
chemical background or including the mechanical background so, we are handling with
the  food. So, we would  like  to  differentiate  or  we  would  like  to  classify  the  heat
exchanger  keeping  that  thing  in  mind,  ‘right’.  So,  let  us  start  that  what  is  a  heat
exchanger. A heat exchanger is a component that allows the transfer of heat from one
fluid or liquid or gas to another fluid in a heat exchanger to another fluid, ‘right’. In a
heat exchanger, there is no direct contact between the two fluids, ‘right’.
In this regard, let me also tell you in some of the processes, you may come across that
you have a container where you are directly putting steam, ‘right’. So, you are directly
putting  steam  in  that  for  warming,  for doing  thermal  operations  whatever  it  is  the
process. In that thing, if you are looking at then this is not considered to be a heat
exchanger  because  the  liquid  is  coming  directly  in  contact  with  the  steam  flash
evaporation, ‘right’. 
So, there it is not a heat exchanger by definition. Yes, heat exchanger always where there
will be exchange of heat is considered to be heat exchanger, but here also it is consider it
is heat is exchange, but it is not in it is directly in contact. So, we cannot tell it to be a
heat exchanger, ‘right’.
So, in a heat exchanger there is no direct contact between the two fluids. The heat is
transferred from the hot fluid to the metal isolating the two fluids either metal or the
container. It generally metal because if you it is a heat exchanger; if you take a nonmetal,then that nonmetal becomes an insulator. So, heat exchange will be reduced that has no
meaning. So, that is why specifically we writing that metal isolating that two fluids and
then to the cooler fluid.
So, from the hot fluid to the metal and then to the cold fluid that is how it is being
propagated. So, hot fluid and the metal and the cold fluid, ‘right’; this is how q is
following, ‘right’. So, heat exchangers are in processing industries are like the hearts of
living beings like a living being cannot survive without the heart, ‘right’. Living being; I
mean macro level not the micro, ‘right’ whose heart is there; if heart is not at all there,
then how could that be.
So, a living thing we are having heart; in that, the heart is considered to be the most vital
one, ‘right’. Similarly the in industry, a heat exchanger is also is considered to be the
most vital one, ‘right’. When micro organisms are destroyed for preservation of food
materials both, heating and cooling operations are involved in it and in both the cases
heating also and cooling also are done with the help of heat exchangers, ‘right’. Heat
exchangers perform these operations.
 (Refer Slide Time: 08:23)
So, if we from this definition of heat exchanger, ‘right’ let us go into that types of heat
exchangers,  how  many  types  of  heat  exchangers  we  normally  come  across  in  the
industry. Number 1, direct contact between two immiscible fluids, ‘right’; so, direct
contact between two immiscible fluids, you remember the other one which I said thatwhen you are flushing with the steam, this was also water, ‘right’. So, there it is not
immiscible.
So, if it is immiscible fluids, ‘right’ like air and water. Air is obviously, soluble in water,
but in very very low quantity; solubility is very low, ‘right’. So, that can be assumed to
be a immiscible  air  in water, ‘right’.  So, between two fluids which are in directly
contact? 
For example, cooling towers, ‘right’; cooling towers, you will come across in most of the
big buildings where it may be that that cooling tower is in front of the building and a
picture as you are seeing here things like that there is a pond and there are some beautiful
sprays and that many many cases beautifies that building, ‘right’ that is also there.
But; however so, when this two immiscible liquids for example, cooling towers is there,
then jet condensers for water vapors etcetera. They are used when two immiscible fluids
are directly in contact, ‘right’ or it can be indirect contact also. So, two fluids are indirect
contact means one fluid is flowing like this and the other fluid is flowing within this,
‘right’.
So, this is one fluid and the other fluid is flowing like that. So, in that case, it is not
coming in direct contact. So, in terms of contact of the two fluids which are exchanging
heat, it can be first divided whether it is in direct contact or it is not in direct contact,
‘right’. 
So, in that if we look at the cooling tower, ‘right’; in most of the cooling tower, you will
see that a draught of air is going from the bottom and liquid is being spread from the top,
‘right’. And there is a liquid through which this air is going in and coming in contact
with the droplets of the water. And there the water is giving away the latent heat of
vaporization to this water or air, ‘right’ and then this air goes out to that.
Thereby the temperature of the water is gradually going down which is maybe this cold
water may be used in many many other heat exchangers, ‘right’. For example, in our
institute there is one cryogenic engineering center where we have liquid nitrogen liquid
helium they are being produced. So, lot many heat exchangers are there. In that, this
there is outside the one cooling tower like this and that cooling tower cools the air. This
cold air is utilize in those heat exchangers, ‘right’.So, the and there it may be in this is air it is directly indirectly in contact they are also;
this is air it is in direct contact and there it may be in not in direct contact, ‘right’. So, this
type  of  heat  exchangers  are  very  useful  where  heat  is  being  accessed  by  the  two
immiscible fluids; in this case water and air, ‘right’ ok.
So, we are not going of course into detail of the description of the cooling tower because
if we put our mind into that, then the general approach or the idea of the course that the
exchange of heat thermal that we are not able we will not be able to cover. So, we are not
saying how these things are being constructed. It is true that in operation this air is
sucked in and then that exchanges heat with the liquid or water droplets which are
coming from the top. 
And these air goes out exchanging the heat along with some vapour which is formed due
to the latent heat of vaporization of water which it gives to the remaining water and this
air water, they are the two fluids which are exchanging the heat, ‘right’; this is in cooling
tower.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:40)
Similarly, other heat exchangers which you come across very very frequently is that is
the indirect heat exchanger ‘right’ and known as surface heat exchangers in this type of
heat exchangers; the hot and cold fluids are separated by a impervious surface. For example, automobile radiators; in the car radiator that is also another very very great
example of heat exchanger where the engine heat is car engine heat is being dissipated or
is being exchanged through a car radiators where a cold fluid is inside and the hot fluid is
outside or they are exchanging the heat and thereby cooling the engine, ‘right’.
So, this is the of course, the radiator not the engine, ‘right’. So, car radiator is another
great example the earlier one for direct contact. We had shown you the great example as
a cooling tower and here for indirect exchange where it is the car radiator, ‘right’. These
are the two great examples for the two cases, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:25)
So, if we look at further, then we see that the classification by construction also can be
done, ‘right’. The type of construction which is there based on that can be classified as
the tubular type or plate type or plate and fin type a tube and fin type and regenerative
heat  exchangers,  ‘right’.  So,  they  are  based  on  the  type  of  construction;  the  heat
exchanger is classified, ‘right’. 
In the tubular heat exchanger, this is manufactured in many sizes and flow patterns or
flow arrangements and types also. This can accommodate a wide range of operating
pressures and also temperatures  tubular type heat exchangers. The reasons for their
widespread use in engineering applications are there ease of manufacturing and relatively
low cost, ‘right’. Like as I gave the example our heart, ‘right’, our heart is one of the
great example of the heat exchangers this is done by the nature.Now, if you want to replicate it; number 1, it is still now it is not it could not have been
possible by any engineering anywhere in the world, ‘right’. Nature has made such a
beautiful thing which is yet not possible to replicate, but assuming if it could be then the
cost would have been so high that the application could be virtually negligible.
So, if we do something, you also have to look into the price; cost. So, that is there one of
the vital reasons, why the tubular heat exchangers are commercially very widely used,
‘right’ because of two reasons. Number 1, it is very easy to manufacture and number 2,
the cost of manufacturing is comparatively means comparison to others; other type of
heat exchangers it is so, not so costly, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:26)
Then after the tubular tab that tubular we can say shell and tube is one of the best
example. So, shell and tube heat exchangers are like this is the most basic and the most
common type of heat exchanger is the in construction is the tube and shell as ok. We will
be showing in a picture or figure which is drawn afterwards it is shown. So, this type of
heat exchanger consist of set of tubes and in container called a shell. So, set of tubes and
in container with a shell, ‘right’.
So, outer one will be the shell and the inner ones are the tubes. So, that is why it is called
shell and tube, ‘right’. The thing is like tortoise that is if they have a shell, ‘right’; those
kind of thing which there is a coating outside, ‘right’ whereas, inside is very very I mean
preserved or it can be said that safe. So, here also from that point of view or angle, thishas come that the shell is from the outside and the inner things are made of many tubes
and that is how the tubes are safe or tubes are not under threat of any damage. So, that
can be because of this shell which is protecting it; so, that is how it is shell and tube heat
exchanger, ‘right’.
The fluid flowing inside the tubes is called the tube side fluid and the fluid flowing on
the outside of the tube of the shell is called shell side fluid, ‘right’. At the ends of the
tubes, the tube side fluid is separated from the shell side fluid by tube sheets, ‘right’.
Example  we  said  that  we  will  show  the  picture  and  that  comes  like  this  perhaps
afterwards, it will come let me tube and shell this is one, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:14)
This is a commercial one, ‘right’ tube and shell we will go back to that, but before that
you see number of tubes are there and this outside one is the shell, ‘right’.
 (Refer Slide Time: 22:17)So, tube and shell that is what? Yes there are different aspects also; drain flow, support
plates, then steam if it is one fluid is steam and if the other fluid is may be water, ‘right’.
So, drain outlets or all these are part of the construction of the bigger heat exchanger,
‘right’.
So, of course, this is a commercial one, ‘right’. Hopefully we will show you afterwards;
another flow diagram picture afterwards, ‘right’. So, if we go back to that ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:23)
This  is  due to  the  economy  that  is  which  we  said that  low  cost  because  the  heat
exchanger tubes can be made to withstand higher pressures than the shell of the heat
exchanger for a much lower cost, ‘right’. So, high pressures also you can utilize. 
The support plates shown in that figure also acts as baffles to direct the flow. Baffle
means so, you have a flow like this. So, if you have a baffle like that so, what will
happen? This will come and then go like this, ‘right’ so; that means, it is acting as a
barrier, ‘right’; baffles are nothing but barriers, ‘right’.
So, these baffles to direct the flow of the fluid within the shell back and forth across the
tubes. The tubes are rolled and press-fitted or welded into the tube sheet to provide a leak
tight seal. Obviously, if the tubes which you are using if there is some leak then there
will be mixing of the fluid of the tubes or maybe with the shell which is not desirable.
So, that is to be prevented by properly making leak tight or the leak should not be there
or leak  proof it  should  be. In systems  where the  two fluids  are  at vastly  different
pressures; the higher pressure fluid is typically directed through the tubes and the lower
pressure fluid is circulated on the shell side, ‘right’.
Since these tubes  which we are referring to they are made of maybe whatever the
material of construction, you take depending on what you were processing or what you
were doing you are use induce. By that you are doing it, but as we said that they are
made in such a way that they are very sturdy, ‘right’. So, they can take care of high
pressure. So, ‘right’ p at any higher pressure.
So, that tubes assembly are within a shell and shell is 1. So, that is why the pressure
which P can or P shell can withstand is much less than P of the tube, ‘right’. So, that is
why shell side pressures are much low compare to that of the tube sides. So, when you
are using high pressure that should be in the tube side. The character of the fluid may be
liquid to liquid or liquid to gas or gas to gas. So, exchange of heat can be neon of those
fluid.
Fluid as we said earlier also it is nothing, but are there a liquid or gas, ‘right’ or maybe
vapors, ‘right’. So, it can be a liquid liquid, liquid gas or gas gas heat exchanged. Liquid
to liquid are most commonly used both fluids are pumped through the exchanger. Hence
heat transfer on both tube side and the shell side is by forced convection.Obviously afterwards also we will see that there is a much we have we know that much
difference between the forced convection and natural or free convection which we have
said earlier also. Due to high heat transfer coefficient for liquid flow; generally there is
no need to use fins, ‘right’. Earlier we also had shown while fin were being taught that
when you are going to apply fin, ‘right’. Liquid to gas and also common to in use,
‘right’; liquid to gas is also a common in use. Fins are commonly used on the gas side
because the gas is having less conductivity or less thermal coefficient or heat transfer
coefficient.
So, that is why the fin at all between liquid and gas; if fin is to be use fin should be on
the  gas  side.  Gas  to  gas  has  limited  uses  such  as  exhaust  gas  and  air  preheating
recuperators. For gas turbine systems cryogenic gas liquefaction systems gas to gas may
be used, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:23)
So, we then come to that this one; we then come to that this is the our heat exchanger or
tube shell and tube heat exchanger where we had shown you as the commercial unit one,
‘right’. So, today our time is over. So, we will continue heat exchanger in subsequent
classes and yeah, we will try to do the heat transfer analysis also. We will do of course,
and today we finish it here.
Thank you.