Thermal Operations In Food Process Engineering: Theory And Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 56
Preservation by High Temperature Processing (Contd.)
So, we had in we had been doing of course, let me wish a good morning to all of you that
we had been  doing that  how  the Preservation  can  be made  with the  help of High
Temperature  Processing  right.  So,  we  come  to  lecture  number  56  and  this  is  the
continuation of the previous class right.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:01)
So, earlier we have seen even pasteurization, but there are also some methods like ultra
high temperature pasteurization or called ultra pasteurization where the temperature is
made or brought to 138 °C for 2 s right, where all the vegetative organisms are killed
and, but the spore formers are not being able to killed and product must be refrigerated
after the pasteurization process and it is said that it is nearly sterile, but not.
Filler may not mean aseptic standards and shelf life could be around 3 months. You will
see that in the market earlier it was much more visible but because of the sale etcetera it
might have been withdrawn or, but a nowadays I also see very less in number but still
available that triangular shaped like tetra pack similar kind of pack milk products used tobe in the market and that they are normally the milk which you buy in polythene packs or
pouches their life is for 48 h around maximum if it is kept all time at 4 °C.
If in the summer if it goes up then there is all likelihood that it may go wrong or it may
curdle during heating. But, this type of ultra high temperature treated milk they are for 3
months easily they can be kept. Longer shipping distance if it is then it is very useful and
products like cream special speciality dairy products here depending on your requirement
different dairy products are formed becoming more popular for milk nowadays.
Ultra high temperature that was ultra pasteurization; ultra high temperature in that UHT
aseptic fair process is being followed and all pathogenic and spoiler organisms including
spore  formers  are  killed.  Thermophilic  organisms  may  survive  there  is  a  chance;
commercially sterile product – these are called commercial sterilization or commercial
sterile product and the temperature range is 140 °C roughly around 284 °F right 140 °C
for 4 s right where the shelf life could be between 1 to 2 years or even more.
So,  when  you  are  using  UHT  milk  processing  that  covered  under  some  rules  and
regulations. For example, we had given some example of 2 and 21CFR108, 21CFR113 –
114 etcetera.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:48)
Aseptic processing – obviously, from the word aseptic it appears that you are keeping the
surrounding also organism free right. So, a continuous thermal process in which theproduct  and  container  are  sterilized  separately  and  brought  together  in  a  sterile
environment and components required for this could be from deaerator, heat exchanger,
hold  tube,  cooling  unit, back pressure  device,  packaging  unit  etcetera.  Temperature
which could be utilized is in the in the temperature range of 125 to 140 °C.
In many cases hot fill that also extends the life. Perhaps I gave this example also that
when this jam, jelly, marmalades are being prepared their temperature at almost at the
endpoint is around 100 – 304 °C and the container where it is kept say this is the
container for keeping that and this is not sterilized; cleaned perfectly, but not sterilized
why because you are putting that jam, jelly, marmalade at the hot condition.
Because if jam, jelly, marmalade they are they are forming gel before putting or before
transferring to the container then it cannot be it has become almost a semi-solid or a solid
almost. So, it cannot be transferred and like that. So, the flowability will be lost. So, it is
transferred at this hot condition and since it has maybe from the thermal point of view
very high specific heat so, or heat capacity. So, it can withstand or it can hold that
temperature or that heat rather for a longer period and by which the container gets more
or less sterilized. So, that is what is hot fill.
Fill  processed  on  product  in  unsterile  container  acid  or  acidified  product  where
sterilization is done. Shelf stable product – it is a shelf table product; low acid product
such as pasteurization; refrigerated product – for example, hot product around 90 °C
sterilizes container. Invert container for 0.5 to 3 min; sterilized neck area; cooling of the
product is also done simultaneously. So, that cools by air or could be by spray of water.(Refer Slide Time: 08:12)
Packaging could be done in glass or plastic with vacuum panels. Needs to withstand
vacuum during cooling; a smooth finish needed for good level applications PET or PET
PEN with UV coating; steaming closures for softening closure for temperature evident
band not needed anymore. Shelf stable product – these products are self stable; sodium
benzoate or potassium sorbate may be used as the preservatives for the products like fruit
juices right say snapple or jam, jelly, tomato based sauces, isotonic some say gatorade
etcetera are some of the examples of the products.
Then under minimal processing or minimal processed food we can say preserve the
original  wholesome and fresh nature of food product where whose flavour, texture,
safety, nutritional value having or other flavour texture etcetera and safety nutritional
value all are well protected. But, by subjecting it to mild processing conditions where
traditional minimal processing also can be done, but for which the basic things like
cleaning, washing, trimming, coring, slicing, shredding etcetera and then peeling are
required then peeling and sliced potatoes peeled and sliced potatoes are also used for this
minimal  process food; shredded lettuce  and cabbage, washed and trimmed  spinach,
chilled peach, mango, melon, vegetables, snacks such as celery and carrot stick and
cauliflower and broccoli flowers are or broccoli florets are some of the examples of the
products.(Refer Slide Time: 10:59)
Packaged mixed salads also under minimal processed food where minimally really it is
processed. So, that the both the quality and the flavor excel everything are retained.
Cleaned and diced or onions, peeled and cored pineapple, fresh sauce, peeled citrus
fruits, microwavable fresh vegetable trays. Other minimal processing methods could be
thermal where microwaves RF – RF we have already said, infrared, ohmic sous vide.
Non-thermal; irradiation, high pressure, pulsed light, PEF that is pulsed light, UV, right
then ultrasound, antimicrobial agents, oscillating magnetic fields, plasma. So, all these
methods either singly or in combination can be used for this type of minimal processed
food right. So, where processing is done minimal.(Refer Slide Time: 12:30)
So, if we then summarize that whatever we have said here that pasteurization where
HTST is done 72 °C for 15 s, least processing is required where cooling it is done to 8
°C. Then pasteurization at high temperature short time right HTST not HH it is HTST
not HH that was by mistake. So, HTST where 89 °C for 1 s and 100 °C for 0.1 s in cases
just earlier we has said where again cooling is done to 8 °C.
UHT – ultra high temperature  pasteurization  or that  can be associated  with aseptic
packaging also commercial those could be said commercially sterile right around 140 °C
for 4 s heating is done. Then longest shelf life we have where cooling to 21 °C. ESL or in
that we said extended shelf life that is includes ultra-pasteurization around 138 degree
Centigrade for 2 s. Anything in between pasteurization and UHT, where cooling to 8 °C
is required.
And, hot fill we said 90 °C for 30 s to 3 min hot filled. Examples we gave that jam, jelly
when it is hot is being filled. It maximizes benefits of pasteurization and UHT mainly for
acid or acidified food. Jam, jelly are also in the bracket up acidified or acid food right.
That is why little less temperature around 90° we said right it could be good enough and
for acid or acidified products we need to cool it back to 21 °C right.(Refer Slide Time: 15:22)
Then we come to canning operations. So, in the canning let me since we have a little
time not here I do not say that we have little time means for this class yet some more
time we have. Since I am not teaching caning separately except some fundamental things
in related to heat transfer that if you look at any can that can cans are made like from a
sheet; this is a sheet, this is another sheet right.
So, you assume that a part of that sheet you have taken and according to your size of the
can right and in the cans there is no heat seal, there is no welding or brazing things like
that. So, then how they become leak proof? Absolutely because can stay for maybe after
the canning process it stays for 1 – 2 years. So, how could that be because yes there is no
such heat treatment as such for making the container. So, for the container there is a
sheet. So, this is also that sheet the end of the one where you are making that can. So,
you fold it like this right.
So, you have met one sheet at one end at this fold another sheet also right another sheet
also. Oh sorry, another sheet also. So, you have this sheet and now from their you have
made it that this sheet and from here you have bent it like this. Another one which you
took like this, and again you have made that bend, right. So, when you have made these
two bends then you make like this. This is one fold one this is another not fold this is one
one side or one one unit. This is another unit second, this is the third unit and this is the
fourth.So, whole layers are there right 1 layer, 2 layer, 3 layer, 4 layer. These four layers are
made like this and once they are like that then it is highly pressed right. So, this one, it is
like this, and the next one that is like that, they are highly pressed right. So, that I mean
the pressure by that this two come very close and the this is called seaming s e a m i n g
seaming of the cans are done right.
So, if somebody teaches you caning that time you will also come to know. However, for
the caning operations normally done receiving the raw products and packaging materials;
then  separation  of  the  edible  portion;  then  washing;  then  size  grading,  inspection
etcetera; then blanching and peeling are done; then it is again size reduced – size reduced
means cut into pieces etcetera etcetera depending on what you are canning right.
Then cleaning of can and the lid very basic, after that it is filled, filling; then pulling,
vacuum and then closing. When the entire can is closed like this end like this end and
you have the materials inside. So, this is called dud detection means which you cannot
see with your naked eyes maybe there is a there is there is a process by which this duds
are detected right. And, then container coding after of course, before that you have
already canned and this cans can is made to code, so that you know which can is utilized
or which can is still staying back. So, that is the companies code and that is being used
and this process then done for thermal right.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:47)
This process is then done that for this canning what you do you know the pressure
cooker right. So, similarity autoclave also you know right, similarly the big big or units
of those kind of thing, these small cans duly sealed they are put there then under this
high pressure may be 1 atmosphere or 2 atmosphere depending on the time temperature
requirement of the product etcetera this is done right.
And, at this high temperature of 121 are the yesterday in the last class last last class we
had said 121.11 °C right that is used for this is called 15 psi right gauge corresponding
pressure; actually it is 14.7 psig, but we offer all practical purposes we tell to be 15
because 14.7 is very difficult to gauge it from the dial right. So, it is made 15° 15 psig
which corresponds to 121 °C and at that temperature 15 min is kept and that those cans
are kept at 15° min at 121 °C then the cans becomes sterilized right.
Now,  these  sterilized  cans  are  then  cooled  and  then  it  is  absolutely  no  organisms
officially; officially means what you what I should say theoretically there is no organism
or rather  other  we can say not theoretically  sorry, practically  there  is  no organism
because you have made maybe 12D 12 log cycles or maybe 15D or that depends on your
system and what are the contents right whatever you make 1D is 1 log cycle right. So,
12D 12 log cycles 15D 15 log cycles you have come down. In none of the things as I
said earlier there is no number ln of that number will become equals to 0.
So, theoretically we cannot bring it that the all organisms are killed and there is no
organism or zero organism, but we can come close to the 0 like maybe 10-5, 10-6 that is
out of one 105 right out of 105 number of cans one can probably could be there is a chance
of not being sterilized right. So, that is why we use higher D may be 12 may be 14 or 15
things like that D right so much so much heat treatment is done.
Now, to do all these type of whatever thermal  thermally  rather processed food for
extending the life, we have discussed. There are many equipments to do that right.
Normally, blanching is done with steam jacketed kettle right. You remember, we had
done with that problem of boiling we had done it. So, in steam jacketed kettle steam is
introduced, material is inside for 2 to 5 minutes, for 2 to 10 min obviously, and 75 to 95
°C this is done right.
Then, we have then we have fryer – the frying is done. Generally, maybe in this shaped
containers you can have your oil, oil is then boiled around 150 to 160 °C and your thingscan be fried, right that is called fryer. Then boiling pan and kettle, kettle is just said like
that right; boiling pan you also have seen many pans are being used for heating that is the
boiling pan.
Then convection oven yeah that there are many ovens nowadays available including
microwave oven right, in that microwave there is also some provision of convection
right. So, convection oven or some heaters are used, some pans are being used rather
some fans are being used and then that whole thing can be used for heating right that is
called convection.
Freezing equipment – yes, there are many freezers right; primary, secondary, tertiary
freezers are there, they are utilized. Then thawing equipments – once the material is
frozen right. So, this frozen material can stay for a long period, but before consumption it
has  to  be  thawed.  So,  for  the  thawing  commercial  thing  there  are  some  thawing
equipments available.
Then of course, the fundamental is the heating and equipment. Of course, in all of them
in side by side we have said that the requirement of the heating equipment right. We
have said heating and those heating equipments are utilized right.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:55)
So, we come types of heating equipment are direct contact. There are direct contact
where steam injection or steam infusions are done indirect contact other than plate ortabular or S and T or SSHE that is scraped surface heat exchanger etcetera. Retorts
which you have just said about canning using hot water or steam or steam air or for
heating rather. Batch if it is through agitation none or axial or end-over-end, with or
without right with or without baskets or crate. Then continuous with agitation maybe
conventional hydrostatic units are used.
Plate series parallel or series plate series separately or parallel separately a combination
of series parallels are used; tubular double tube or triple tube or multi tube tubular heat
exchangers is used; shell and tube single pass or multiple pass cross flow etcetera are
used. Scraped surface heat exchanger SSHE in many cases are also used. Alternative,
novel,  energy  emerging  technologies  may  be used  and microwave,  radio  frequency
heating are some cases used. Uses electromagnetic radiation; polar molecules heat up –
ohmic heating. Electric current in food causes heating ions in food that causes also
heating right.
So, with all these now let us come to the end of this class and perhaps the different ways
of extending the life with the help of thermal processing we have tried to explain and you
also studied thoroughly.
Thank you.