Thermal Operations In Food Process Engineering: Theory And Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 58 
Distillation (Contd.)
Good morning.  We  have  been  discussing  on  Distillation  right  and the  as  you  said
distillation is a big unit we may need some classes. So, today in 20 sorry, in 58th lecture
on distillation, let us look into some more aspects of distillation because basically this is
made of this is from McCabe–Thiele method by enlarge, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:56)
So, here you see we have given a graph or we have given one diagram. There we have
said that you see in the previous class we were discussing with different types of caps.
So, bubble cap was one of (Refer Time: 01:28), right.
Different  in the  trays, different  vapour liquid when they are coming across  so that
interaction is being done in the different these are called different plates or sieves or
whatever we call it right. So, there we are putting on stage that is also one tray also. So,
there we said that there is outer weir through which the vapour they go up like this and
the liquid that comes down, right. So, like that this is also outlet weir right.So, if these be the active tray, then this perhaps we may follow for some time because
from the revalet down below these vapours are coming from the revalet down below
these vapours are coming and crossing the different layers different trays right. And
while it is doing so, the liquids which are coming they are in contact with this vapours
so, heat is getting exchanged right.
So, what happens hotter vapour they transfer heat because they are at higher temperature
and we know from higher to lower temperature it is being transferred and liquid that
receives the heat right and by this process when the vapour is transferring heat to the
liquid some vapour is forming also liquid. So, the liquid which actually is coming down
if it would have been L now it is f L + a little ΔL right whereas, the vapour which got
evaporated because of the transfer of the heat with the liquid right because liquid is at the
higher temperature.  So, liquid has given the heat to the vapour rather a liquid has
received some heat. So, that is vaporizing. So, that vapour is now going out.
So, both liquid and vapour they are under heat transfer right. Some vapour condenses to
liquid that we just said and the condensate then becomes richer in the less volatile
components. Now, condenser means the liquid which is coming out right. So, what is
happening we earlier we said if it is a binary mixer A and B right and if A is more
volatile and B is less volatile that volatility also we discussed right, may be some more
we will be discussing. So, that if A becomes more volatile and B is less volatile then
when the vapour is going and it is condensing back to liquid; so, it is the less volatile
component is more in the liquid that the more volatile because more volatile has already
gone into the vapour, right.
So, it becomes richer in less volatile component right and that is the condensate is a less
volatile components and heat input from the vapour is more liquid boils off and that
liquid which on boiling generate more vapour and that goes to the next tray and that tray
it is richer in more volatile components, right. So, more volatile is going from the lower
to the higher trays and less volatile component is coming back from the higher to the
lower trays, right.
So, and by that process separation takes place and low boiling components they are low
boiling components, they are getting separated and there is higher boiling component
both. Low boiling is coming to the low boiling means boiling point is low so, that means,that is more volatile so, that is going up and less volatile or higher boiling that is going
down right. So, this way the trays are under heat transfer, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:05)
And, there can be some more effectiveness of the heat trays can be increased by saying
that a tray is like a mini-column because in the whole column what you are doing
number of trays you have; in all the trays there is a change of heat and exchange of the
mass also. And in that process more volatile is going up less volatile is going down,
right.
So, that means, and that is happening in each of the trays this tray this tray this tray each
of the trays it is happening. So, if it is happening in each of the trays then we can call
each of the trays because collectively also that is doing. So, each of the tray is like a
mini-column  right  where;  that  means,  more  number  of  trays  more  separation,  less
number of trays less separation that is obvious.
And, if we see the design of the tray where overall separation efficiency is also a factor
and, that can be maximized with less energy usage and lower construction cost and
supplementing with the packaging materials like this. These are the packaging materials
which helps to exchange the heat or exchange the more volatile and less volatile right,
and these we can see in other this is one type.(Refer Slide Time: 09:03)
Other two types are like that packing materials right. So, that is the passive device which
increases the interfacial area for vapour liquid contact like in our heat transfer also we
had increased the surface area by putting pins. So, here also by putting these kind of
packing material, you are increasing the interfacial surface area and thereby increasing
the vapour liquid contact, right.
So, without causing excessive pressure drop, that is again a fundamental thing because
you have so many trays in the columns. So, vapours are going up and liquids are of
course, are coming down; liquid coming down may be assisted by the gravity if it is a
vertical column there are many types if it is a vertical column then that is assisted by the
gravity.
But,  the  thing  is  that  while  doing  so,  if  while  we  are  increasing  the  a  passive  in
increasing the heat exchange of heat or mass with the vapour and liquid both and there
we are introducing this kind of packings, we have to also keep in mind that there should
not do or cause any pressure drop, right.
It is not possible that any pressure drop that should not cause pressure drop which is
beyond the; I mean, beyond the acceptable limit such that if there is a so much pressure
drop then you have to make by sum means that vapour has to go up, right. So, it cannot
be that pressure drop will be high by introducing that this kind of packing and then youwill be in trouble. So, packing will assist interfacial area increment, but pressure drop has
to be minimum.
This is important because a high pressure drop would mean that more energy is required
to drive the vapour up to the distillation upper side or that is in separation columns, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:49)
So, if that be true, then let us look into this part that a tray column that is facing
throughput problems may be de-bottlenecked by placing a section of trays with packings;
if there is a separation problem this may add up this separation technique, right.
Packing provides extra inter facial area which you have already said for liquid and
vapour to interact. And, efficiency of separation is increased for the same column height
right; without increasing the height of the column we can increase the efficiency of these
plates by introducing these packing materials, right.
So, packed columns are shorter than columns with trays; obviously, because you were
increasing more interfacial area or more service area to interact with the vapour and
liquid. Packed columns are called continuous-contact columns while trayed columns are
called staged-contact columns because of the manner in which the vapour and liquid are
contacted, right.(Refer Slide Time: 13:13)
Then, we look into this part that, if we look the reboiler right reboiler is one where this
liquid is being boiled and then fed to the column right that is what it is being done. So, if
this is the reboiler there is a steam coming in and from there the vapours are going out
and some bottoms that may come out as the product right. This is more prominent in this
that some bottoms are coming.
So, in this reboiler, this called kettle type reboiler steam is being introduced; steam is
condensed right and your this liquid after boiling it is coming to the column yes, some
vapours are also being introduced because when you are boiling some vapour also is
formed. So, both liquid and vapour they are getting induced of course, it is mostly
vapour because that feed which will come that will come as the liquid. So, more liquid is
vaporized through this and that vapour is allowed to go out and this vapour will have
more rather temperature than the feed temperature of the liquid, right.
However,  there  are  number  of  designs  of  reboilers,  they  can  be  regarded  as  heat
exchangers that are required to transfer heat, transfer enough energy to bring the liquid at
the bottom of the column and that at the to the boiling point, right. So, another thing
which is also very much required is called volatility, right.(Refer Slide Time: 15:26)
Out of that if we are saying that it is a binary mixture then out of the two, one A and B,
the A is more volatile if than B then we can say that if A is more volatile than B, then we
can say the volatility of a is more than that of the B; so, A will separate earlier than that
of B if it is multi component then that is much much easier. So, that will be dictated by
this diagram and this is called your, this is called boiling point diagram, right.
So,  boiling  point  diagram  if  you  look  at  if  it  is  A  and  B  right,  then  equilibrium
compositions are available from here. In a liquid mixture whatever is there vary and that
vary with temperature at a fixed pressure right. A liquid mixture containing the two
components A and B there is a binary mixture, if we look at that then we see that at this
point right and this is said mole fraction right X earlier we have said X A, YA, where XA is
the liquid mole fraction and Y A is the vapour mole fraction right.
And, if the mole fraction of A = 1; that means, it is all with A and it is at the boiling
point and its boiling point is somewhere like this right whereas, if the mole fraction is 0
like here so, it is the point where it is the B at its boiling and that is corresponding to this
A 110 and here it is somewhere you said 88, 89 whatever is coming right.(Refer Slide Time: 17:42)
Now, really what is happening that let us look into the next where we have taken this that
there is a, ok here.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:47)
So, there is a; these are two curves one is called dew-point curve and another is called
bubble-point curve. Obviously, dew-point curve is corresponding to the vapour because
the vapours the point r condenser condensing and bubble point curve means bubble is
being formed that is at boiling so, this is the liquid. So, this curve is for the liquid and
that curve is for the vapour, right.And, if we this part is called sub-cooled portion and this part is called super-heated
portion. So, a portion of sub-cooled portion if you take right say at a point a you have
taken 0.4 mole fraction and this is denoted as A, right. So, the from this the bubble-point
that is point B where A is getting boiled off right, is getting boiled and it becomes an
equilibrium right where the point C this is in equilibrium with the vapour and the liquid
this is in equilibrium, right.
And, that the mole fraction of A at the point C is somewhere 0.8, right. So, from 0.4
mole fraction you have come to the mole fraction of 0.8. So, this is approximately 50%
richer in A than the original liquid. So, you started with 0.4 came to 0.8, so, it is 50%
richer. This is how the concentration curve or it is simply called your so, this is simply
called your boiling-point curve right so, that can be used for the separation technique,
right.
So, the difference between the liquid and vapour compositions is on the basis of is the
basis for the separation of the in distillation, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:30)
Then let us look at the other part that relative volatility which we I was saying earlier a
little that relative volatility between A and B right so, that is because of the boiling point
difference, right. Boiling point difference says the relative volatility or how easily or how
quickly one can be separated out from the relative volatility we can judge right. A
particular separation how long it will take or which one will separate first which one willbe relatively quicker or which one will be more. So, that can be accessed from the
relative volatility between the two components A and B, right.
So, if we will look at the relative volatility of component A with respect to component B,
then we can define it like this α AB, where αAB is the relative volatility = y A/ xA that is the
vapour mole fraction in the vapour of A vapour state of A by mole fraction of the A in
the liquid state divided by mole fraction of B vapour of B by mole fraction of the liquid
in B. So, it is that the relative volatility which will tell the value right.
So, where yA is the mole fraction or of the component in the vapour for and similarly x A
is the mole fraction component of A in the liquid form, right.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:27)
So, if that be true if we know the relative volatility, we can then utilize this vapour liquid
equilibrium or VLE right that Vapour Liquid Equilibrium curve this we can utilize for
the separation technique. The height of the distillation columns that can be determined
by the vapour liquid equilibrium data for mixtures of A and B, right. This is called
boiling point diagram from the boiling point diagram we can get it right and this is called
the equilibrium lines.
So, vapour liquids if we plot that mole fraction of vapour of the component A, mole
fraction of liquid of the component A, then we can plot and this is the separation line orthis is the straight line or called 45 degree line right, which we can utilize for the
separation technique.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:33)
But, that earlier we have seen that if we had x and y right of A of course or both of A and
we have seen that there is a this teen good vapour liquid relationship right, that is easy to
separate. But, if we look at these two curves you see the curve is like this, this curve is
like that.
So, the vapour liquid relationships are your equilibrium lines are not that simple or so
easy by which we can because in some portions you will see when you are doing in
McCabe-Thiele or number of stages you were determining that time they will become
more difficult for the separation, right. Whereas, this was much more easier for the
separation to take place.(Refer Slide Time: 24:47)
Even more, it is even was when you look at this other curve like this is called azeotroope.
You see the equilibrium curve right, this equilibrium curve an azeotrope is a liquid
mixture which when vaporized, produces the same composition as that in the liquid right.
So,  this  is  the  difficulty;  when  you have  an  azeotropic  mixture  or azeotrope,  then
whatever composition you had in the liquid as A B after separation in the vapour also
you will get the same composition in the A B. So, it is very difficult to separate why you
said that equilibrium curve like this the equilibrium curves is bisecting the diagonal,
right.
So,  this  diagonal  is  being  bisected  by  the  equilibrium  curve  and  they  are  called
azeotropic mixtures right and this point is azeotrope, where the liquid and vapour is
difficult to separate, right.(Refer Slide Time: 25:59)
For that what is needed that you may have to add some external substance or some by
other trick you have to shift that azeotropic point to a more favorable positions, so that
the separation can take place, right. This can be done by with some addition of some
external substance right and that is what is known as extractive distillation, right.
Additional component appears mostly at the bottom of the column and the operation is
called extractive distillation; whereas, azeotropic distillation is that where appreciable
amounts  at  the  top of the column  of the additional  component  appears. Additional
component appears at the top of the column and that is called azeotropic distillation or
the reverse if it is on the bottom part or bottoms then it is called at the or it is called
extractive distillation, right. So, azeotropic separation is a very difficult job right.(Refer Slide Time: 27:12)
And, we have seen that VLE data right or vapour liquid equilibrium data that is a mixture
of the two components and that is the basis for the separation, right. And, this vapour
liquid equilibrium characteristics depends or that is on the characteristics on which your
separation will take place and you can predict or you can know from the from the shape
of the equilibrium curve, as we had shown earlier someone is like this or someone is like
that instead of like this. So, from the shape of the equilibrium curve it is very easy to
predict that how long how good the separation will be right.
Now, we have come to the end. So, perhaps we will complete it in the next class.
Thank you.