Thermal Operations In Food Process Engineering: Theory And Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 54
Thermal Death Reaction Kinetics
Good morning. We have done a lot of heat transfer, heat transfer analysis from various
angles right from the basic to a very complicated of NTU for heat exchangers we have
done right. Now let us look into because we are coming to the end of the course, only
few lectures are left. So, we should also look into some of the applications right. There
are many major applications for food and other in all industries because heat transfer is
one of the basic in most of the industries; I do not see in all industries, but in most of the
industries thermal is a part, a non-thermal is any industry oriented work non thermal it
may not be so much, but thermal is always associated.
And of course, in such a short course around say 30 in 60 lectures, it is just not possible
to cover everything in detail right from the basic. So, that is why I decided that if the
basic is strong, then you can handle any situation anything which you will come across
right.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:11)
So, let us do today on this that lecture number 54 this Thermal Death Reaction Kinetics
or thermal death time things like that right so; obviously, the word thermal and death is
associated with microbes right.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:39)
So, microbes whose death kinetics; obviously, we are not going to do the kinetics of the
death, but definitely we shall handle something related to the thermal where temperature
at least is associated right. So, if temperature is associated we have come across by this
time how to handle different temperatures or transfer of heat through those these we have
come across. So, to look into that; let us look some think like that sterilization right. The
word itself sterilization tells that the product is absent from the microbes sterile right.
Obviously the word sterile and sterilization they are not identical; had it been identical
then there would not have been two words, but sterile usually is associated with the non-
vegetative  earlier  vegetative  cells  are  all  destroyed  whether  it  is  pathogenic  or
nonpathogenic whatever there all destroyed, but in sterilization it is all the organisms
which are destroyed. But common concept is that all the organisms are destroyed means
there is no organism right, but mathematically it is not possible to bring it to 0. It is never
possible to bring it to 0 why and how that is what is our point of concern right.
So, let us look into that. Sterilization which is a first order reaction; obviously, if you ask
me again need to go into the detail of the reaction orders; first order kinetics, secondorder kinetics, 0th order kinetics those I am third order kinetics I am we are not going to
do that the first order is the very simple one right.
So, the rate of the reaction in each moment is proportional to the amount of the microbes
still to be degraded. If N be the if N is to indicate the number of microorganism present
in the system at any given moment the variation of this number as the function of chosen
time t of exposure to the selected sterilization temperature that can be written as dN dt
right dN dt = -k N where N denotes the number of organisms present in the system at any
given moment  and t is the time  of exposure how much time  it is  exposed to that
environment right.
So, this  dN  =  -k N, why minus  because  as  the  time  is  progressing  the number  is
decreasing that is why it is negative that everywhere we have seen in heat transfer also
we have seen that minus k dt dx right. So, they are also we have seen as the x is a
progressing temperature is decreasing right. So, that is the same thing here also number
is decreasing as the time is progressing that is why negative and k is a proportionality
constant right for k is a constant which is typical of the species and conditions of the
chosen microorganisms. 
Obviously, this k is not fixed or a constant it depends on the species organism which you
have taken as well the environmental conditions all put together that k is a constant right.
This seems to be obvious for dry sterilization because dry sterilization means you are by
some means you are heating where there is no moisture; it is all dry heat which we called
dry heat right, but less rigorous for steam sterilization. 
So, if you are using steam as the medium for sterilization this may not all good right in
which is a water vapor molecules also seem to take part in the reaction like reaction
means in this the this is in degradation of the numbers. Actually this bimolecular reaction
is of the first order since the steam is present in high excess, all the reaction long and its
concentration may be regarded as constant. The above expression can be developed as
dN / N that dN / N = - k dt this is rearranged and rewritten as dN /N = - k dt.(Refer Slide Time: 09:21)
By converting from base e or this is dN /dt right. So, by converting base e or that is
called Naperian logarithms which are less practical in this specific case to the base 10
logarithms, the following is obtained that is log N = - k t where - k t plus of course,
constant log N = - k t plus the constant where k is that this k = K / 2.303 right 2.303. Due
to the shift from the base e logarithm to the base 10 with this change of k to k / 2.303 is
required this is small k. 
If you remember earlier it was capital K. So, that capital K is impressed by small k with
K /2.303 because we shifted from l N to this log 10 base right this is 2. At some 0, the
following is also true at time t = 0 N is N 0 and log N0  is equal to constant right.
Therefore, log N = - k t + log N 0  that is that N0  or constant value right. So, this can be
rearranged that log N /N 0 = - k t or we can again rewrite it as N / N 0 = 10-kt where again k
small is equals to capital K / 2.303 where capital K was related to that N right.
So, N0  is the initial number of microorganism, N is the number of microorganism after
the exposure time, t t is the elapsed exposure period or which can be told as the elapsed
time for sterilization time and k is small k is the reaction rate constant which depends on
the space species and conditions of the microorganism taken or chosen.
Hence, it can be calculated that the required it can be calculated that the time required to
reduce the microorganism concentration to any preset value is the function of its initial
concentration that is what we see that the time required this. That is this the time requiredto reduce the microorganism concentrations from a preset value preset value is N 0 is the
function of its initial you know preset value means whatever you want to do that is N not
N0 is a function of the initial concentration right initial concentration is this. This is the
preset one right. So, this N which you want to and this is a function of which was
originally present right. 
(Refer Slide Time: 13:47)
So, from these we can now look at the sterilization reaction is therefore, either and all or
nothing process nor a potential barrier process as we used to think off right because, we
said that N / N0 right. So, this is the set value which you want to correct and it can never
be 0 is a function of N 0 that is whatever was the initial. For that a new term has been
introduced as called D-value or decimal reduction time.(Refer Slide Time: 14:48)
The D-value is defined as the decimal or decadal decimal or decades from that decadal
one decade is 10 right. So, decadal or decimal reduction or decay whatever we call time
that is it is the time required at the specified temperature t to reduce the microbial
population being considered by one logarithmic cycle or value. That is from 100% to
10% of the initial value right. This is that 100% to 10 % of the initial value right.
So, it is 0.9 z value or temperature coefficient another terminology is that the z value is
defined as the temperature coefficient of microbial destruction that is as the number of
degrees of temperature which causes a tenfold variation of D or more generally of this
sterilization rate.(Refer Slide Time: 16:21)
So, we defined two terminologies. One is D and other is z value and if we look at for
different value of z and F for typical microorganisms for different microorganisms, we
see that if it is the microorganism that is clostridium, botulinum is one whose D 121 is 10°
right. Whereas, Giobacillus stereo stearothermophilus right that value is 2 D 121  and z
value is 6 bacillus subtilis whose D 121  value is 0.5 in minutes whereas, z value is 10 °C
bacillus megaterium D value is 0.04. 
Whereas, z value is 7 and clostridium sporogenes is 0.8 to 1.5 whereas, z value is 13 °C
and clostridium histolyticum is 0.01 d value whereas, z value is 10 °C(Refer Slide Time: 17:56)
So, with all these it is apparent that depending on the microorganisms the value of d or z
are varying right both D and z are functions of the microorganisms and the environment
because here we have said it is D 121 it could have been any other right. So, D 110 that would
have different z value or D 131 that would have another z value which says that as we said
in the beginning that depending on the species  that is which one we are taking or
depending on the environment dictates by this that this 121 corresponds to what pressure
and what pressure of steam etcetera that will dictate this and then the z value also
changes right. So, this is a unique thing which you have learnt.
Now so, f0 or equivalent exposure time another parameter we are bringing in where D
value is a function of the exposure time, T in saturated that is condensing why because if
this is a steam heat transfer we have already done.(Refer Slide Time: 19:41)
So, if this is this is steam so, when it is giving away its latent heat of condensation. So,
from the steam vapor it becomes liquid water at the same temperature 100 °C.
And this is what we have we know is condensation. We have found out what is the
condensation  heat  transfer  coefficient  etcetera  right  condensing  vapor  heat  transfer
coefficient etcetera. Steam conditions for each different microorganisms are different.
So, that is why D is a function of D T. So, on the basis on the basis of the definition of
coefficient z it has also to be D is function of D T - z = DT × 10. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:47)
So, we can say that the obvious condition that D = D 0. If T becomes T 0 then the
mathematical function which satisfies this relationship is D = D 0 × 10(T0 – T)/z right. So, if
D = D0 when T is T0, this situation mathematically satisfied from the is satisfied from the
relation that D = D 0 × 10(T0 – T)/z right. D0 is the D value at the temperature T 0 for a given
microorganism.
So,  now  let  us  now  calculate  the  time  interval  required  to  obtain  at  a  constant
temperature T0, the same reduction of a microbial population obtained at the actual
exposure time T right; obtained at the actual time exposure not time sorry temperature T
right. Just by looking at this T then I thought that I mispronounced and it should be
pronunciation  should be t, but  temperature  what  temperature  continuously  which  is
continuously variable over a certain time interval of small T. 
It has; obviously, to be like this that integration between 0 to T 0 D N at T0 / N t= 0 to T D
N T/ N value right. So, D N T 0 over N between 0 to T 0 value integration is equals to 0 to
T D N T / N value right. So, this means that 0 to T 0 D T0 right 0 to T0 D T0 / D0 = 0 to T
D T / D right. So, this is rewritten in this form that D of T 0 over D0 between 0 to T0  and 0
to T D T / D which we have already seen earlier right.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:58)
So,  from  this  we  can  say  that  D  value  is  variable  with  the  actual  exposure  time
temperature  and  is  given  by  the  expression  say  a  which  was  earlier  shown  thattemperature a expression was shown earlier right. This we can say here. So, this was here
that b = D0 ×10(T0 – T)/z  that is true for this temperature for this expression right.
So, we can write that D value is a variable with the actual with the actual exposure
temperature and is given by the expression a, but D 0 e is as T0 = 0 to T D 10(T - T0)/z to dT
right. So, this is for relation B and D 0 is a constant. So, we can write that it is we can
write that T0 is 0 to T 10(T - T0)/z to dT. So, it is thus possible to calculate the lethal effect of
the exposure of microbial population to a variable temperature T by relating it to a
hypothetical sterilization performed at a constant temperature T 0 for the time small T 0.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:08)
If the constant reference temperature is assumed equal to 121.11 °C corresponding to say
250 Fahrenheit. This 250 Fahrenheit converted to 121.11 °C because conversion of
degree Fahrenheit to degree centigrade is that decimal association right. And, the z value
equal to 10, the equivalent time is given by this expression B right and this is named as F
0. So, F0 is equals to 0 to T 10(T- 121.11) /10  times dT here only that T 0, we have taken as
121.11 correct for the F 0.(Refer Slide Time: 27:21)
So, F0 is the equivalent exposure time at 121.11 °C of the actual exposure time at a
variable temperature calculated for an ideal mechanism with a temperature coefficient of
destruction equal to 10 °C. F 0 means the equivalent amount of time in minutes at 121 °C
or 2 250 Fahrenheit which has been delivered to a product by the sterilization process. If
we assume that if we assume a sterilization lasting 15 minutes constantly at 121 °C, we
then obtain F0 = 15 × 10(121 – 121)/10. So, this becomes 1. 
So, it is 15. So, 15 minutes which is according to the definition of F 0 right. So, and that is
if that then from there we can also say that there is a lethal rate there is a term called
lethal rate. Due to the exponential expression of the calculation of F 0 so, calculation of F 0
is not immediate tables have. Therefore, been developed which list the so, called lethal
rates  that  is  the  equivalence  coefficient  allowing  to  compare  the  exposure  at  the
temperature T to the exposure of for this same time at 121 °C. Lethal rates may also be
regarded the F0 values for single unit time right.(Refer Slide Time: 29:30)
So, we can see it from this that this is the table where we can say that the lethal rates are
like that for different temperatures right. It is assumed that at z = 10 °C. Therefore, F 0
values are calculated by its rigorous definition at 121.11 °C corresponding to 250 °C
right and these are those values. So, here we see ninety then plus 0 is this when a 0.1, 0.2
like that up to 0.9 the values are there. So, rigorous 90 to 130° the lethal rate values are
given right.
(Refer Slide Time: 30:33)
So, if that be true, then we can say that in condition of saturated steam for reference
temperature of 121.11 °C, z is 20 °C and for the temperature values between 90 to 130
°C with intervals of 0.1 °C is like this right. 
So, we have seen what is the z value and similarly another one; z values are assumed and
12 as z values are assumed as variable between 7 and 12 and different equivalent times at
121 °C are calculated on such a basis it is in interesting to notice how much the variation
of z value considerably influences the lethal rates when T varies T varies. Now sterile
which is free from viable microorganisms  which I said earlier and sterilization any
physical  or  chemical  process  which  destroys  all  life  forms  with  special  regard  to
microorganisms including bacteria and sportiness forms right.
(Refer Slide Time: 32:01)
So, with this perhaps we come to the close of the thermal death time or death rate
whatever we call. We have not shown you specifically the different rates right or the
temperatures,  only  we  have  said  about  the  temperatures  and  time  right.  So,  that
temperature you can bring yeah with the pressures like add to 1 atmosphere pressure g it
is 121.11 degree centigrade ok.
Thank you.