Thermal Operations In Food Process Engineering: Theory And Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 55
Preservation by High Temperature Processing
Good morning. Virtually we have finished the analysis of heat transfer right and now, we
are looking for the application and first let us look at Preservation by High Temperature
right.  It  is  our  lecture  number  55.  So,  we  are  looking  at  Preservation  By  High
Temperature Processing.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:00)
So, when we will look at that first we see that for this is of course, not little thermal, a
little on the basic of the food which you would like to first give you otherwise you will
mix up that everybody the that I told one story one day that one dumb fellow saw
somebody that a hot iron was dipped into water and saw that hot red I mean red hot iron
rather was dipped in water and that irons in no time was cooled. So, when you went back
saw somebody at home was also sick highly high fever. So, thought that if can be dipped
into water, then the temperature or fever will go off or heat basically it was heat thought
of. So, there was that is not desirable.
So, that is why though we have said all about the heat transfer, but where to apply which
because they are dependent on the temperature. So, to do that we should also know someof the basic things like the classification of food based on the pH that is acidity based on
the pH or acidity food can be classified in different zones and obviously, their treatment
also will be varying accordingly right.
For example, low acid pH is generally considered when the pH is greater than or equal to
4.6. Acidic food is considered when pH is less than 4.6. Examples are given many
examples are there. One of the organism is clostridium botulinum right so, that is also
yes having some tolerance on the acidity. So, others for example, if it is low acid food
where the pH is greater than 5.3 some examples of those foods are given here like red
meat, poultry, seafood, milk, corn, peas, then beans lima beans one kind of bean then
potato, cauliflower, then these are some of the examples of the low acid food whose pH
is greater than 5.3.
Medium acid which is between 4.5 and 5.3 pH is between 4.5 and 5.3 right. Examples
are example of the foods which come within this bracket are spaghetti, soups, sauces,
asparagus,  beets,  pumpkin,  spinach,  green  beans,  turnip,  cabbage  etcetera  right.
Similarly, acid food medium acid then acid food whose pH lies between 3.7 and 4.5 right
they are acidic food or acid food right; food having high acidity. For example, we can
say tomato, pear, fig, pineapple, apricot, yogurt, white cheese, beer etcetera.
Then high acid food whose acidity is very high based on the pH less than 3.7 because the
acidity we also can directly measure in terms of pH right. So, within this pH range you
can say the extent of acidity right because we know the neutral is 0 sorry neutral is 7
neutral is 7 right. So, below that is acidic, above that is alkaline. So, below that when it is
coming that thinks of acidic range it is like that. So, those we which are highly acidic
whose pH is less than 3.7.
For example, sauerkraut – sauerkraut is one which is popular in the western countries
made from cabbage fermented  right; pickles  again a little  fermented and there also
acidity is very high; then berries – many berries are very very what should I say when
you are you are you are taking those berries you feel very much acidic right you feel very
much savoury. So, those are because of the high acidity berries.
Then citrus fruits – many citrus fruits also you will see that that is why when seniors at
home they buy such kind of foods they ask whether it will be sweet or sour before asking
before buying this is asked right. So, citrus fruit also come under that category. Thenrhubarb, wine, vinegar, plum, then currants, apple, strawberries, peaches etcetera there
are many more. So, we have given the example quite a lot. So, there are many more and
this is how acidic food is classified right.
So, another classification also can be made of the food that is based on the moisture
content which we know moisture content is also synonym of a w right. What is a w; a w
is that hopefully you know that it varies up to 1 right. So, that is water activity. I was just
waiting whether you could recollect or not. So, water activity right. So, high moisture
foods for example, 50 plus minus or 50 plus percent they are called generally high
moisture maybe between 70 to 99 % right.
For example, fruits, vegetables, juices, raw meat, fish, intermediate moisture etcetera
right. Then for intermediate moisture foods for example, moisture content varies within
15 to 50 %. So, if it is between 15 to 50 % the examples are bread, hard cheese, sausage
etcetera. Then low moisture foods whose moisture content could be between 0 to 15
percent right and the examples of those kind of foods it could be dehydrated vegetables,
grains, milk powder, dry soup mix etcetera.
Out of which perhaps during this course I had also given many times when examples
were given, but still maybe a recapitulation or maybe a repetition also, but still it is better
you know you do not forget that is grains and I get this example that at home you ask
your seniors not nowadays in 2000, when it was in 90s. So, mid of 90s or earlier or
maybe post even 18 19s means I mean 1990 or earlier to that people used to buy lot
many lot many quantity of your rice and they used to keep at in I mean at home
somewhere and that used to be taken throughout the year or maybe because that time it
was seen that maybe as certain point price of rice was lowest, when it was bought in bulk
and gradually afterwards it went up. So, then made lot of savings.
But, savings was not in many cases primary goal it could have been that availability. So,
all whatever be the reasoning it was, but nowadays since people have very small got
small family etcetera etcetera so, for that people do not buy so, large quantity in at a time
but the thing which I would like to highlight here is that rice is one such low low
quantity of moisture where which is less than required water activity level for organisms
to grow. So, that is why rice could be kept for a long period. So, rice is one such.Then, milk powder baby food; every house there will be some baby coming up or has
come or yet to come. So, people have this experience this baby food or dry milk powder
they do have moisture content of around 2.52 at the most 4, but generally it is 2.5 ±
because if there is any moisture content which is suitable for the organism to invade and
since it is being fed to the very very infant or young then it will be detrimental.
So, that is why that moisture content is around plus minus 2.5 because we take an
corresponds to what is the water activity which we said moisture content or a w that is
water activity right. And, in the beginning we had said water activity between between
point between between rather up to 1 up to 1 point that is maximum between 0.9 to 1 is
favourable for bacteria, 0.8 to 0.9 favourable for yeast and 0.7 to 0.8 is favourable for
more to grow.
So, anything less than 0.6 could be said more or less sip or even if it is lower than
absolutely it is sip right. So, that if you keep in mind that if you are very much if you are
very much concerned then make it as low, but obviously, the lower you have to pay for
that.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:17)
Now we come to that importance of water activity right a w unfortunately it has gone out
it should have been subscript right this is a w that is a suffix w. So, honey at 20
%moisture content is shelf stable. You see the problem honey at 20 % moisture content
is self stable while potato at 20 % is not.What a beautiful thing that in one case one food is very safe as far as stability of the food
is concerned. 20 % moisture content is also there, but in other case they are also 20 %
moisture content, but that is not favourable for consumption or it does not I do not mean
that favourable for consumption it does not last for long under the same condition that is
room temperature or similar right why?
Then it comes to that question of water activity a w right. Since a w though both are
having 20 % moisture, but the water activity level for and water activity as we said
earlier is the it means that how much water is available for the organisms to grow or that
what  we  call  free  moisture  things  like  that.  So,  how  much  moisture  can  be  made
available to the organisms for their growth or multiplication. So, that is indicator for
whatever activity is that indicator right.
So, this is the very very vital thing that water activity level has to be lower than the level
where organisms any be it bacteria yeast or more, it is not that food material got bacterial
infection is very bad and another food material got fungal infection is not bad both are
bad because we are not going to take them, we are not going to consume them right. So,
it is obvious that the level of water activity will dictate how long the life of the food
material will be.
Some processes which are associated to increase the shelf life or stability of the food are
like this one very simple blanching right where mild heat treatment around 90 °C for few
minutes are done right. Heating medium is water or steam; purpose is to inactivate
enzymes, reduce microbial load and wilt vegetables for efficient packaging into cans
right.
Then another method of extension of the life is pasteurization. Some spoilage organisms
may survive in this because it is not that in the previous class we are said that thermal
death time or thermal death candidates of course, I do not claim that we had done it
absolutely thoroughly, no. We had given some peripheral knowledge from where we
could see that the organisms which are or which are killed totally then they could be said
sterile or sterilization right.
So, but even sterile we have seen that there could be some organisms still surviving, but
sterilization it is likely that very minimal and we also came to this level that it cannot be
0 because all are coming down under log cycle. So, there is no number taking the log ofthat will become 1 or 0, not 1 will become 0 right no number with log comes to 0. So,
whatever  minimum  number  you  can  think  of  if  you  make  it  will  never  be  0,  but
approaches 0 and that is why that whenever you are doing 12 D  to 15 D or whatever so,
that time it comes to that level that how many number of survivability of the organisms
could be or possibility of the organism survived could be there right.
So, like that whenever you are doing it for pasteurization then there the purpose of
pasteurization is to kill the pathogenic organisms absolutely primarily that. So, in that
case non-pathogen, for example; spoiling organisms also can be survived. So, there may
be some spoiling organisms though there is no harmful or medically harmful or health
wise harmful organisms are there but still spoiling organisms spoil of the food material it
may survive.
However,  all  vegetative  pathogenic  organisms  are  inactivated  excluding  non-spore
former; public health significance is like that. Earlier target was it is a public health
significance what of that, earlier target was mycobacterium tuberculosis and which was
done with HTST or high temperature short time – target where vegetative state up
coxiella coxiella buranti; sorry burnetti coxiella burnetti or not burnetti right may be
which can lead to Q fever right.
Similarly, other spoilage organisms that can grow at room temperature are normally
destroyed right. This is another one that it could be 15 s spores 72 °C 7 or rather at 72 °C
for 15 s normally HTST has done. An equivalency batch equivalent batch type it could
be for 30 min at 63 °C that is called that is the one was HTST high temperature short
time it is low temperature long time LTLT right.
So, if milk product has more than 10 % fat it condensed or is sweetened increased
temperature by 3 point °C and then it could be first raise better for eggnog you can use
69 °C for 30 min or 80 °C for 25 s or 83 °C for 15 s; shelf life roughly around 3 weeks
and for HTST 89 °C for 1 s to 100 °C for 0.1 s.(Refer Slide Time: 24:35)
Extended shelf life, another thing – ESL right. This is shelf life is between that of
pasteurized  and  UHT  product  often  called  minimally  processed  and  refrigerated.
Advantages  are  that  longer  distribution  cheap  cheaper  than  UHT  that  is  ultra  high
temperature. If ESL that it extended shelf life process is to be closer to pasteurization
then use filtration or centrifugation to remove spore formers.
And, these may constitute around 1 to 2 % of the product volume. So, that is removed.
Sterilize this and mix with original product and or products whatever. For example,
products like lunch meats, cured meats, seafood, salads, fresh pasta, sauces, entrees; or
organisms of concern are mesophiles and psychrotrophs. Obviously, mesophile which
are of the middle temperature zone and psychrotrophs of the low temperature zone, we
have told earlier if you recollect.
ESL categories for example, cook-chill it is cook and then chilled. So, cook food is
packed hot and blast and blast chilled right or it is chilled with blast of cold. Vacuum
packaging could be a greater one. Remove air prior to sealing because if air is there;
there is a chance of oxidation. Sous vide yeah, is there and raw product is vacuum
packed  partially  cooked  chilled  to  below  0  °C.  Food  service  their  retail  market
sometimes modified atmosphere packaging or MAP is also used or maybe gas flushed
and sealed may use active or passive control which could be later on.So, there are many such processes which we could not finish in this class, maybe in the
subsequent classes we will try to finish it up but the thing is that wherever extension of
the life is associated mostly it is with the respect to the thermal processing right and you
are applying heat and the way you can that depends on the process as we said for
different processes different time temperature combination.
It is not only temperature I said earlier also, again I repeat or again I put the stress that it
is  not  temperature  alone  it  is  time  and  temperature  both  together  is  acting  on  the
organisms right. So, today we have come to the end of this class, perhaps there is no
more time. So, let us call it a day and in the next class we will look at some other
processing through the thermal process right.
Thank you.