Thermal Operations In Food Process Engineering: Theory And Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 59
Distillation (Contd.)
Good morning now we come to finish that Distillation and we have already seen that
vapour liquid equilibrium curve is the basis for the separation technique to adopt right.
And this is the 59 class on the topic of Distillation and it is being continued right.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:59)
And if we remember, that where we finished in the last class we had said that the vapor
liquid equilibrium curve is the basis for the separation of the and where the curve nature
of the curve right. So, this was one nature or this was another nature or this was another
nature right as well we had seen with the diagonal this intersection of the vapour liquid
equilibrium curve was there for isotrope. So, from the nature of the curve you can
understand how good the separation will take place or how easy it can be done.(Refer Slide Time: 01:47)
So, to do that to make the design of the column there we have already said trays and
other things all these. We have said boiling point diagram also from there we are getting
this vapour liquid equilibrium curve right. And this we can say that by the method called
McCabe-Thiele graphical method we can easily determine; how many number of trays or
how many segments are required for the interaction of the vapour liquid.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:17)
Earlier he said each tray is acting like a mini column because, in each tray the same thing
is happening that vapour is going up liquid is coming down. There is a exchange of heatexchange of mass both and there by separation is taking place right. So, here with the
McCabe Thiele graphical method from the VLE plot we can determine the number of
stages required and the separation of a binary mixture is feasible to do or feasible to
work out right.
Obviously some assumptions are also associated, you can assume that constant molar
overflow right. There is a first assumption is that there is a constant over constant molar
overflow at the constant molar overflow, means that molar heats of vaporization of the
components are roughly the same. Molar heats of vaporization of the two components
are same roughly number 1, then heat effects that is heats of solution or heat loss to and
from the column etcetera that is negligible right.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:07)
Because, if you are giving from the reboiler, some heat Q to the liquid there by the
vapour and before it is coming in contact with the liquid. If lot of heat is being dissipated
through the column then you are losing lot of energy, so that is not being accounted for.
So, assumption is that heat effects that is heat of solution and in many cases heat of
solution can be endothermic or exothermic right. Since, it has come and I am just saying
heat of solution can be exothermic or can be endothermic.(Refer Slide Time: 04:53)
Example that you have done with sulphuric acid H 2SO4 you have put if we put water add
to that and if you are holding that test tube you and acid and put the water you cannot
hold that test tube for a long time, because it becomes very very exothermic highly right.
So, that is exothermic, so that heat of solution we are neglecting. Similarly the reverse
endothermic you know ammonium chloride you put in water and you will see that your
test tube has become cold, so that is called endothermic.
So, it is neither endothermic nor exothermic heat of solution heat lost from the or to the
heat  lost  or  gained  to  and  from  the  column  is  also  negligible  that  is  the  second
assumption and third is for every mole of vapour consists a condensed 1 mole of liquid is
vaporized right. So, if 1 mole of vapour is condensed then 1 mole of liquid is vaporized
that is also that is why it is being said that constant molar overflow. That if every mole of
liquid is vaporized, so 1 mole of vapor is separated or condensed right, so this is the
assumption on which the entire this graphical method is resting on.(Refer Slide Time: 06:44)
So, design procedure is that first you know that Rayleigh diagram that is vapour liquid a
liquid diagram. So, from there you draw that vapour liquid diagram we will show you
afterwards in a bit better one. So, you have this is Y this is X, so you have that vapour
liquid diagram right and you have this operating line and this is not the operating line
this is the diagonal.
So, you know what is what are the things you need to know? You need to know at what
fraction mole fraction your liquid is coming in right. At what mole fraction your liquid is
coming in or at what mole fraction your vapour is going out or at what mole fraction
your feed is coming in right. So, these are the some of the things which are known right
or predetermined right, then only you can you this you know the starting point, you know
the end point and also you know where the feed is being done right.(Refer Slide Time: 07:59)
So, this entire thing is dependent on the mass balance relations right between the liquid
and the vapour phases in the column right. Mass as well as heat balance one operating
line  or  bottom  stripping  section  and  one  for  the  top  that  is  called  rectification  or
enriching section are known or you have to construct right. And, then constant molar
overflow assumption is also we have taken earlier and that ensures the operating lines
right.
And the operating lines become straight, because it is under constant molar overflow that
is why operating lines if they would have been like this or curvilinear it will be very
difficult or clumsy. So, that is why if this assumption is very valid that the operating line
which you will see now is straight or to make it straighten you have assumed that this is
to be constant molar overflow ok.(Refer Slide Time: 09:29)
That means, what you said if 1 mole of liquid is vaporizing then 1 mole of vapour is also
condensing to liquid ok. Then from this you see what we can say that this is a vapour
liquid diagram that is this line right. So, a vertical line is produced until it intersects ok,
from there what you do is that you know that what is the liquid concentration liquid as a
0.8 right mole fraction. So, you are you are starting with that 0.8 mole fraction. So, make
a vertical line like this which is intersecting with the diagonal at this point right and this
leads the vapour liquid equilibrium line into two hubs one is the rectification and a
another is the or stripping right.
So, this is these are the two which are associated with this right and as we see from here
that that part of it is refluxed right. So if you look at the other part, so this is one diagram
right another diagram is this side, that if you see that we have taken this tray l portion
right this is the nth and (n – 1) maybe after this is (n + 1) tray right. This is a condenser
and from the condenser part is taken off as the distillate, so you know what is the mole
fraction of the distillate and a part of liquid is refluxed as L right.
So, the reflux ratio r is nothing, but r / (r+1) where r is the ratio of reflux of L or liquid to
the distillate right that is which is coming out as D right. So, this is the liquid mixture
and this is the distillate which has come out with that mole fraction which you want right
and you have made this vertical line which is intersecting here at this point and now with
a slope of R / (R+1).This is the slope with the slope of R / (R+1) you had made this line operating line right,
operating line of the enriching section that upper half is called enriching section and
bottom half we said it is the stripping section. So, in the enriching section with this R /
(R+1) we have made this operating line right. So, once we know that then and also we
know the reflux ratio that is R right, the slope is R / (R+1) ok. Which tells that how much
part is refluxed and how much part is going out as the distillate right, so from there
distillate means which is the output.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:25)
From there we can now say that this is again that the stripping section line again this is
that reboiler right and we are this is bottom coming out and the vapor is being fed
through the reboiler and vapours are going over and liquid is coming from there. So,
vapour rate is Vs right and in this stripping section the operating line we have to find out
which is the bottom product composition right. Bottom product composition is X B right.
So, if we know that bottom product composition here.
So, we go vertical to that which is intersecting with the diagonal that is the beginning
right, from where we do the diagonal line with there as a slope that is L s / Vs. So, the
slope is here Ls / Vs right and we can this L s / Vs from there this slope we can draw this
operating line which is intersecting with the equilibrium line here. And if you remember
earlier we had taken just their 0.8 as the X D right and this vertical with a with a slope of(R+R) / (R+1). We had made this that is the operating line for the enriching section and
this is the operating line for the stripping section.
 (Refer Slide Time: 15:25)
So, once we have both the operating lines for enriching section sorry and stripping
section, we can say that this is what is for the nth tray we are not now considering earlier
we had shown if it would have been column, if reboiler would have given from there
right reboiler has given it vapour and this is going like this and the liquid is coming like
that from the feed right. Feed was made like that till now we have not told where the feed
is being made right. But we are saying that they are interacting with the different trays.(Refer Slide Time: 16:09)
And, we could have by this time we could have made that X A and YA we could have
made that vapour liquid equilibrium line and d and with this diagonal of 45° line from
there this was our output right. And, R / (R+1) we have made this operating line for the
enriching section and we also have made this for the stripping section where it is X B and
where it is XD right. So, this much we have done now in between the column.
(Refer Slide Time: 16:47)
So, we have we do not know how many trays are there. So, there could be capital N
number of trays out of which say small nth tray this is (n+1)th tray, this is (n-1)th tray we
let us look at those trays right and that is what we have given here right. 
So, if we that what is actually happening that in the stage nth or nth tray the vapours
which are coming they are (L n + 1) Xn from l (n+1) and (X n+1) liquid and vapor is going
out from this as Vn and Yn. Whereas, the liquid which is coming out from here is L n and
Xn and the vapour which is going in is the (V n-1) and (yn-1) from the previous tray (n-1)
and it is also from the after tray there is (n +1) right.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:59)
This is exactly we have made this for this picture that we have this equilibrium line right,
we have operating line right and this is the nth right. So, this corresponds to (n-1) or (y n-
1) xn at this point this point y n × (xn+1) right. And, this point is y n xn right and if we then
look at the entire thing.(Refer Slide Time: 18:39)
Then we see that the nth stage is in the column we are looking at and L s are liquid flow
and Vs are vapour flows for all the trays right; so, whether it is L n Vn or (Ln + 1) (Vn+1)
or (Ln – 1) Vl sorry (Vn – 1). Whatever v all L s and Vs are liquids and reverse right and X
and Y did all the liquid and vapour components that is the mole fraction this component
is called in terms of mole fraction right.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:23)
So, that mole fraction you know and then subscripts denote the origin of the flows or the
components where from it has started.(Refer Slide Time: 19:37)
If it is from n if it is n then from the nth stage, if it is (n – 1) then from the (n-1)th stage. If
it is (n+1) then from the (n+1)th stage right. So, (n – 1) from the stage below the stage n
and (n+1) from the stage above the stage n, where both are in equilibrium with the n
right, (n+1) is also in equilibrium with n and n minus is also equilibrium with n.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:15)
So, both this so this and that this is a nth this is (n+1)th and this is (n-1)th. So, these are in
equilibrium right. So, once we know that X n and Yn lie on the equilibrium line, where
vapour  without  changing  composition  horizontal  line  on  the  VLE  plot.  And  itsintersection with the operating line that is the composition of the liquid on the tray (n+1).
Composition of the vapor above the (n+1)th tray is also there and intersection of the
vertical line from this point to the equilibrium line that we get as the where is the
composition in the nth + 1 or nth tray right.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:13)
Now, if we look at the overall then comes like this, that graphical construction we can
say that this typical drawing we have made for 7 number of stages or theoretical stages
right.  By  the  McCabe  Thiele  method  we  have  plotted  this  VLE  or  vapour  liquid
equilibrium line right and we have come to know what is the XD we have come to know
what is the XB right. 
There is a mole fraction this is the mole fraction of our vapour composition this is the
liquid composition in terms of mole fraction. You see both are varying between 0 to 1
because it is mole fraction which varies between 0 to 1 right.(Refer Slide Time: 22:13)
And we have come across that what is the end point that is X D distillate mole fraction is
so much and what is the mole fraction from where we started that is X B that is boiling
right boiler or reboiler right. And we have found out from this point what is reflux and
what is reflux ratio right.
And from there R / (R+1) this slope we have plotted this and then from this point we
have plotted Ls / Vs that is that liquid right. We have seen what is the slope of this line
accordingly we have drawn it right and then we also know another thing which is called
feed or what is the feed condition.(Refer Slide Time: 23:15)
So, corresponding composition at the feed except that we have plotted we have drawn
and from there a vertical line on the on the diagonal is the beginning and from there this
q line we have drawn and this is called q line or feed line right this is called q line or feed
line right which will come afterwards maybe a little bit more.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:49)
 (Refer Slide Time: 23:53)
Because depending on what is the q value whether the q=0, q =1, q > 1, q <1 all these
will dictate the nature of this q, where it will meet with the intersection. So, the in
normally once you get it and once you have this operating line two operating lines
intersecting that point is joined with the with the feed composition in the in the diagonal
and that is the q line and that tells where actually the feed tray should be resting on right.
So, we have seen that with this method of McCabe Thiele, we have proceeded found that
number of stages required are 7.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:49)
But actually it will be (7-1) the reason being we had originally that reboiler right. So, that
reboiler is also acting as a separation stage because, you were heating in the reboiler that
is also a heat exchanger. You are heating with the steam or whatever heating medium
and there you are separating both the liquid component at the vapour component, so that
you are using as the separation unit right. So, once you know that then you are very
much sure that this reboiler is also acting as one of the stage.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:41)
So, if by the graphical method you get 7 number of stages, then actual stage required is
(7-1) is 6 because reboiler is also acting as a separation separating stage right.(Refer Slide Time: 25:57)
So, we were talking about q line right, the actual number trays is given by the formula
like  this  which  we  have  just  said  number  of  theoretical  trays  over  tray  efficiency.
Normally efficiency is also a factor, because it may be that you have drawn 7 trays are
required. But efficiency is low. So, X D you need, but it is not coming it is coming less
than XD because tray efficiency you have not considered.
So, if you consider tray efficiency normally it varies between 0.5 to 0.7. So, that will
give you how many number of trays you need, if it is the additional trays then up to 10%
you  may  add.  But  to  accommodate  the  possibility  that  the  column  may  be  under
designed. See if the column is under design then you need the rather your rectification or
your separation will be less, so that is why a little more around 10% or even more extra
is given.(Refer Slide Time: 27:03)
Now a vital thing which you are talking about was this that the q line that is the feed line
right. So, feed is intersecting here we said here that was the X F sorry that was the X F right
this point was XF feed composition. So, from there the vertical point it is intersecting
here.
So, it can be that because we do not know what is the q slope right, we have we know
that what is the slope for enriching section, we know what is the slope for the stripping
section, so we could easily draw. But what is the slope for q line that is not said. So,
normally it is that if q = 0, that means saturated vapour that means q line will be dictated
by what is the feed condition.(Refer Slide Time: 28:09)
So, you will be said that feed is at this temperature or at the boiling point or whatever it
will be said. So, q=0 corresponds to saturated vapour, q =1 is corresponds to saturated
liquid right. So, both at the phase at the same temperature, but the different phase in
equilibrium as, that is the temperature curve. At which in the becoming equilibrium right
or boiling or condensing temperature, q can be between 0 to 1 where mix of liquid air
vapours are there. So, you have both liquid vapour together as the feed or you can be q>1
so there means it is a sub cooled.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:09)
If you remember in that boiling point diagram we had said this is the superheated region
and this is the sub cooled region. So, that is the sub cooled liquid and if q < 0 then it is
superheated vapour. So, the how you are defined with that feed condition that will tell
whether sleep is q > 1 = 1 between 0 to 1 = 0 or < 0. Accordingly your this slope will be
decided and you can find out the q line right. So, once you have determined that what is
the feed point feed line then you have determined the entire number of this.
(Refer Slide Time: 29:59)
So, the purpose of a distillation column is determined by the many factors, for example
feed conditions. Whether the state of the feed were at what state it the feed is being made
composition of the feed, then trays elements that can severely affect the VLE that is
vapour liquid compositions right. Vapour liquid composition of the mixtures if there are
trays elements as the your as one of the rather.
If the there are stress element has one of being what we say that it has become I mean
that trays element. If that is present as the external material or internal liquid and fluid
flow conditions and state of the trays weather packing or what is the weather condition
all will dictate how the performance of the column or distillation tower will be there
right. So, with this we have come to the end of this distillation and hopefully you could
make it and you can now draw and find out from one to other and this is a graphical
method. So, it takes time and you can do it at home also ok.
Thank you.