Thermal Operations In Food Process Engineering: Theory And Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 57
Distillation
Good morning. We are now coming to another a very important Thermal Operation,
Distillation. Of course, this is lecture number 57 right.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:51)
So, distillation when we are talking about obviously we would like to go a little detail,
but since our number of classes remaining are very very less so, we will try to finish up
quickly if possible right. But, it is such a thing which normally in an undergraduate level
in most of the colleges are not being taught or in post graduate also since it involves both
heat and mass transfer right and the process is also so complicated that it is not that easy
a subject or a topic ok.
Let us look into in detail that when we are talking about distillation, distillation is the
most common separation technique. When two immiscible liquids are there you can
easily separate them, but when there are two miscible liquids then this is obviously, a
liquid-liquid  separation  this  comes  under  the  unit  operation  called  liquid-liquid
separation. So, two liquids are having are together. So, they have formed a solution or
whatever, now they are to be separated right.And, one of the best method is this distillation right because if you do evaporation then
what will happen both along with both the fluids means which are miscible A and B if it
is a binary liquid A and liquid B if it is binary then they can also come out. So, when you
are condensing again they are mixing, it is not desirable. That is why distillation is the
most common separation technique. It consumes enormous amount of energy both in
terms of cooling and heating requirements because both heating and cooling are done
simultaneously. It is not only heating it is also cooling required.
Hopefully,  in  most  of  the  colleges  in  the  laboratories  you  might  have  seen  steam
distillation unit that is very small apparatus a glass apparatus right, but when the there
you  are  not  separating  many  things  steam  distillation  you  are  doing  an  early  one
component can be separated out and that is taken into that right. But, it can contribute to
more than 50% of the total operating cost of the plants. So, it is also cost involved. 
The  best  way  to reduce  operating  cost  is  of the  existing  units  is  to  improve  their
efficiency  and  operation  via  process  optimization  and  control.  To  achieve  this
improvement, a thorough understanding of the distillation principles and how distillation
systems  are  designed  is  very  much  required  or essential.  There  are  many  types  of
distillation  columns, each  designed to  perform specific  separations  and each  design
differs in terms of the complexity. As we said that distillation process is really a complex
one. So, we must understand it thoroughly.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:08)
One way of classifying distillation this is done by columns right. So, number of things
are there so, we will also look into in detail that. So, that is why it is called column. So,
one of the classifying way of classification of distillation column type is to look into at
how they are operated. So, we have batch type, as I said there steam distillation and
continuous columns both.
So, for batch type problems are very less, but for if it is a continuous one then continuous
columns can be further classified according to whether it is if it is for binary column that
if it contains only two components that is why binary; multi component columns whether
the feed contains more than two components then it is multi component; multi-product
column multi component was there from A, B, C you may have to separate A a multi
component, but multi product. So, you have A B C D out of which you want A and B to
be separated. So, it is multi product column also there where column has more than two
product streams out. 
Extractive distillation where the extra feed appears in the bottom product stream if there
is any extra feed you will see there is a bottom. So, in that bottom there is the product
being stored. So, along with that the extra feed is also coming to that. Azeotropic that is
one of the worst of the distillation separation if the mixture becomes azeotrope meaning
where the extra feed appears at the top of the product stream that was on the bottom this
is at the top right. Obviously, we have to also look into in a little detail when we are
coming to azeotrope will come. (Refer Slide Time: 07:51)
Tray: tray column is where the trays of various designs are used to hold up the liquid to
provide  better  contact  between  vapour  and  liquid,  hence  better  separation  etcetera.
Packed columns – where instead of trays, packings are used to enhance contact between
vapour and liquid. The main components of the column are a vertical shell where the
separation of liquid components is carried out. 
Column internals such as trays or plates and or packages or packings which are used to
enhance  the  component  of  the  separations.  A  reboiler  to  provide  the  necessary
vaporization for the distillation process, that is called reboiler where the vaporization is
initiated. (Refer Slide Time: 09:13)
A condenser to cool and condense a condenser to cool and condense the vapour leaving
the top of the column. A reflux drum right reflux means some product which has come
and again being fed that is called reflux. So, a reflux drum to hold the condensed vapour
from the top of the column so that liquid reflux can be recycled back to the column right.
So, this is a typical diagram of distillation apparatus or system right. As we said it has a
reboiler where the boiling or separation of the vapour or vaporization is initiated right.
So, this is by which the heating device is there. So, that is coming through this and going
out, reboiler is here. From there it is going from this tank it is coming here, then going
again getting vapors getting fed. So, liquid is this is the feed and the feed is normally in
the liquid phase. 
So, not normally it is in the liquid phase. So, that liquid comes to the reboiler and then it
is vaporized and these vapors are then fed into that column right. So, this is called
stripping section. Below the feed that is called stripping section, this one is stripping
section; above the feed it is called rectification section right. This is called enriching or
rectification  section,  below  is  stripping  section  right.  So,  that  vapour  is  condensed
through a condenser and that condenser is accumulated here or called reflux drum from
where a part is reflux through the valve or fed back and a part is taken away as the
distillate right.So, that these things we have said in words quickly we go through. The vertical shell
houses the column internals and together with the condenser and reboiler constitute a
distillation column. A schematic of a typical distillation you need to with a single feed
and two product streams right one was coming out from there and the other from there
two product streams shown this in this right. 
So, this is what is a very simple way of describing the distillation column right. So, this
is what is called that the one which comes out is the bottoms right. So, this is what that is
why it was not coming. So, this is what is called the bottom ok. So, this is bottoms the
which we said that two streams, one is that this let and other comes out from the bottoms
ok.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:24)
So,  then  we  come  to  this  from  the  earlier  figure  which  we  have  just  shown  the
terminologies which you are used are like this feed that is the liquid mixture that is to be
processed  it  is  mixture  of  the  separating  liquids.  Feed  tray  through  which  feed  is
introduced usually somewhere near the middle of the column right which we have shown
just it was at the somewhere middle of the column; it was the column, it was the feed
somewhere middle right.
The feed tray divides the column into a top that is the enriching section and the bottom
that is stripping section right. And, there is also a reboiler that is the feed flows down the
column and is collected at the bottom. Heat is supplied to the reboiler to generate vapourthe source of heat input can be any suitable fluid, although in most chemical plants this is
normally steam.
In refineries, the heating source may be the output streams of other columns. The vapour
raised in the reboiler is reintroduced into the unit at the bottom of the column. The liquid
removed from the reboiler is known as the bottom product or simply could be bottoms
which  we  are  shown  right.  So,  we  have  described  the  column  in  detail  and  their
terminologies.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:24)
The vapour moves up if we look at even in the previous one also here also that the liquid
is this right coming down and the vapour through this reboiler is going through this up
right. So, liquid with the blue color it is coming down and the vapour is going up. So,
like that it is coming to the reboiler, from the reboiler vapours are coming and then going
through the column this is how it is.
Then, if we look even the upper part then we see that a part of this is the column and
where there is a condenser, there is a reflux drum as a whole we had shown. So, it is
going out as the product, and as part of it is being fed as the reflux. Again, the liquid is
up to when it is refluxed this liquid is coming down coming in across with the vapour
that red right coming across with the vapour and then there is the heat exchange ok.The vapour moves up the column and as it exists as it exits the top of the unit, it is cooled
by a condenser. The condensed liquid is stored in a holding result known as the reflux
drum which is this one right. Some of this liquid is recycled back to the top of the
column  and  this  is  called  reflux.  This  is  the  reflux  which  is  being  fed  back.  The
condensed liquid that is removed from this system is known as the distillate or top
product. So, this is the distillate or the top product not the bottoms; bottoms we have said
which came from the lower part right.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:47)
Thus there are inlet flows of vapour and liquid within the column as well as external
flows, internal flows external flows of feeds and product streams into and out of the
column. The term trays or plates are used interchangeably. Many times plates are used as
trays or trays are being used as plates by default. 
A bubble cap tray has riser fitted over each hole, right riser fitted over each hole and a
cap that covers and a cap that covers the riser. The cap is mounted so that there is a space
between riser and cap to allow the passage of paper which rises through the chimney or
that process right and is directed downward by the cap, discharging through slots in the
cap and finally, bubbling through the liquid on the tray in which it is staying right.(Refer Slide Time: 19:24)
In valve trays, that was for bubble cap, this was for bubble cap these are bubble cap and
this is called bubble cap arrangement in the tray. For valve trays per perforations are
covered by liftable caps, which can be physically lifted. Vapour flows, lifts the caps, thus
creating a flow area for the passage of the vapour. The lifting cap directs the vapour to
flow horizontally into the liquid, thus providing better mixing than is possible in sieve
trays.
Then it introduces another new term called sieve trays. What is that? Sieve trays are
simply metal plates with holes in them. I hope you have seen sieve shakers for separation
of the particles. So, like that there are some holes in the blade. So, it is simply metal
plates with holes in them. Vapour passes straight upward through the liquid on the plate.
The arrangement number and size of the holes are some design parameters how they are
being arranged how many numbers etcetera are design parameters. (Refer Slide Time: 21:11)
Because of their efficiency, wide operating range, ease of maintenance at cost factor,
sieve and valve trays have replaced the once highly thought of bubble capped trays.
Earlier, bubble cap I think I also did during my undergraduate that time bubble cap or
design was meant, but because of this simplicity, because of the cost, because of the
maintenance  operation  everything  all  benefit  sieve  and  valve  trays  they  are  almost
replacing the bubble cap trays in many replications or many applications right.
So, this figure tells that the direction of vapour and liquid flow and across a column
right. So, that if we look at then we can say that from this figure right from this figure.
So, this is how this is being flown right and if the column is there. So, this is another
view for that ok. So, this is bubble cap tray and how the flow is taking place through this
is shown.
So, if we look at so, vapours are moving from this tray right and this is another right. So,
vapour liquid vapour is coming like this, like this going out and liquids are coming like
this, like this they are coming out right going down rather right. So, this is called down
comer this column right, this is called outer weir, this is collective tray area and this is
the liquid this was down comer right and this is the liquid which is coming out and
vapours are going in. This is how the vapour and liquid movement can be shown in the
column.(Refer Slide Time: 23:41)
Each tray has 2 conduits, one on each side, called down comers that is what we have
shown. Liquid falls through the down comers by gravity from one tray to the other below
it. The flow across each plate is shown in the above diagram as we have shown earlier
right and here it is on the right we are showing that how this is being flown right. These
are the different trails and gaps are there. So, we can say this is the down comer and like
that this is coming in ok. This is liquid also and vapors also going out.
A weir on the tray ensures there is always liquid or holdup on the tray and is designed in
such a way that the holdup is at a suitable height, for example, such that bubble caps are
covered by liquid. Being lighter, vapour flows up the column and is forced to pass
through the liquid, via the openings of the each tray. The area allowed for the passage of
vapour on each tray is called the act tree active tray.(Refer Slide Time: 25:30)
As the hotter vapour passes through the liquid on the tray above, it transfers heat to the
liquid, so, there is a vapour and liquid heat exchange. In doing so, some of the vapour
condenses adding to the liquid; so, while it was going so, this was the vapour, this was
the  liquid.  So,  some  liquid  and  vapour  got  the  exchanged  and  a  little  vapour  got
condensed it came out and a little liquid way we came vapour it went up like that right.
So, condenses adding to the liquid on the tray. 
The condensate, however, is richer in the less volatile component than is in the vapour.
Additionally, because of the heat input from the vapour the liquid on the tray boils
generating more vapour. This vapour, which moves up to the next tray in the column, is
richer in the more volatile components. This continuous contacting between vapour and
liquid occurs on each tray in the column and brings about the separation between low
boiling point components and those with higher boiling point. 
So, it is said we are saying that when the vapour is going up and the liquid is coming
down so, there is a mixing of them and there is a heat exchange. So, because of the heat
exchange, some vapour is being formed from the liquid and some vapour is getting
condensed and that is coming up with the liquid. So, obviously, the vapour which is now
coming up is rich in less a high volatile components and the liquid which is now coming
out coming down is also rich in less volatile component right because that is enrichingwith the less volatile with the liquid and high volatile that is going up with the vapour.
So, this way the separation is being done.
And since again the period or the time of this class is almost over so, we come to the end
of this class and we tell it to be a day right.
Thank you.