Thermal Operations In Food Process Engineering: Theory And Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 60
Drying & Multiple Effect Evaporator
Good morning. We have come to the end of this course and we will now deal the last two
things like Drying and Evaporation and in that drying itself and this is the lecture number
60 we are covering Multiple Effect Evaporator as well as drying. A little more we will
talk about multiple effect evaporator, but drying let me tell that already we are on the
verge of the completion. So, drying and evaporation they are in many cases in many
institutes, they are given very high emphasis. So, that almost half or around that of the
course is covered by them. 
So, it is very difficult to cover it in a single class both the things. So, that is why you will
touch upon and a maybe one concentration may go a little up and drying a little less;
however,  in  drying  that  is  what  you  are  that  is  also  a  separation.  What  you  are
separating? You are separating moisture from a leak solid right. So, you will see drying
is always with this solid that solid which contains maybe 20%, 40%, 80% of the moisture
that is being dried maybe to 20%, 10%, 5% depending on your product which you are
aiming at right. 
Whereas, if the other one this is a solid league solid and gas separation or solid and vapor
separation. Whereas, if you are looking at you have a say a sugar concentration; you
have a sugar of 10%, sugar which you want to make 50% in concentration. So, you are
now separating liquid and vapor.
So, they are liquid and vapour separation; in distillation, n we have also separated there it
was liquid and liquid separation from one liquidity another liquid was separated of
course, via vapor formation right. However, when we are talking about drying; drying is
dependent on many many factors primarily on the object which you were selecting its
size, its shape. 
You will see that a small piece if you keep outside in the sun at least during summer hot
summer that will dry up maybe in a day, but whereas, a bigger thing if you keep it thatwill dry up maybe for a couple of days. So, that depends on the product size, shape and
the properties of the material outside properties all these. There are many types of dryers
many out of which tray dryer is one of the; one of the very widely used commercial
dryer.
Then another one very very much commonly used is the spray dryer that milk and the
dried foods whatever milk and dried milk powders which you get mostly on the spray
dryer. And there are there is also one very widely used that is called your drum dryer.
There are many more like vacuum those which material are it is called heat level those
which are heat level or sensitive to heat or temperature. 
They are dried under vacuum drying. So, many types of they are like lyophlizer that is
called  your  where  the  where  you  have  solidified  and  then  you  have  solidified  the
moisture and then we have sublimed right; that is life lyophilization or that is called
drying or freeze drying right. So, freeze drying is obviously, a very costly affair because
they are you what you are doing you are freezing the moisture first and once the moisture
is frozen, then you are eliminating the middle step that is now solidized to vapor water
right; eliminating the middle phase that is the liquid. 
So, dried directly it is called sublimation directly subliming to the vapor that is another
type, but the spray drum tray these are very widely commonly used input industries or in
maybe in all many chemical industries also or many some other industries right. So,
drum is normally used when you have a thick material right not thin means whose
concentration is low right with thick material highly viscous those materials are dried
very easily with drum right.(Refer Slide Time: 06:26)
You have a drum and the drum is let us take this page as that you have a drum right and
heating through maybe your maybe your by this steam or some other heating medium
right. That is given from the inside and the material is traveling along this and the drum
is rotating; drum is rotating right material is traveling along this. So, by the time this
material travels through one and there is a knife that is called doctors knife.
 So, that doctors knife cuts this dried material here and that is separated out; drying is
like that for drum drying. Similarly spray drying is also there where you are making milk
powder and many other right similar kind of materials you are doing. Spray drying tray
drying fruits and residuals are easily are mostly done through tray drying there and you
will see in drying there are n number of drying equations; n number of drying relations
right. So, that is what drying is with right and in vacuum; obviously, the material which
is very susceptible to heat.
So, if you want if you need to heat at say 100 °C maybe that material may be spoiled or it
is susceptible to temperature. So, you cannot raise the temperature to so high. So, what
do you need you need to vaporize it how by lowering the pressure the moment, you are
lowering the pressure the boiling point of that water is all is going down and you can
separate too much at much lower temperature depending on the level of vacuum you are
creating. But that is also expensive because when you are making vacuum. So, it is also incurring
cost however, but maybe there are some material where cost is not the primary thing, but
keeping that material intact is more primary. So, there you can utilize vacuum drying.
So, like that many dryings and this is basically a separation of moisture from the solid
material right; from one moisture content to another moisture content right.
Similarly,  if  we  look  at  another  there  is  called  liquid  and  vapor  separation  that  is
evaporation right. Let us tell a little more on this. So, evaporation is the process the
processing factors which are associated is the concentration of the liquid that is what is
the solute in the liquid at what concentration it is present, then the solubility of that
solute whatever is there, then ten whether it is temperature sensitive or not that material,
then temperature sensitivity of the materials ok.
 Then pressure and temperature both are deep in both are influencing the process of
evaporation and scale deposit if there be any which week earlier term is as the fouling
right which earlier we termed it as a fouling. So, if there is any scale formation or scale
deposit on the material of construction; all these factors are controlling the process of
evaporation right.
(Refer Slide Time: 11:02)
So, by enlarge it can be of two types; one is single effect evaporator normally single
effect evaporator generally many are used for single effect evaporators right; why this is
simple that you have a heat exchanger. So, material is coming in and going out andmoisture is getting separated right. So, that is single effect evaporator, we will also
discuss a little more with diagram right. 
Single effect evaporators and multiple effect evaporator; multiple means more than 1; it
may be 2, it maybe 3, it may be 4, it may be n number of separations right effects. So,
that effect what is that meaning of effect we are also coming to that. Then in that it could
be forward feed multiple effect or it can be backward feed multiple effect right and also
there are parallel feed multiple effect evaporators right. So, out of which most common
is the single effect and also the multiple effect. The in that multiple effect it can be one
sorry 2, 3, 4, 5right.
 (Refer Slide Time: 12:33)
Generally 5 is very widely used one right and this is what is the single effect evaporator.
As I said there will show in terms of figure. So, here you see we have an evaporator; this
is how it is being denoted right, then we have a feed which is at the temperature of T F
and also we are feeding steam both the material to be evaporated is fed that is called feed
and  by  which  it  is  to  be  evaporated  that  is  the  heating  medium  or  steam  added
temperature TS. 
Obviously, this TS is a function of the pressure of the steam P S right that you know from
the steam table ok. Then this internal thing is at T U1 where heat is being exchanged
maybe in tubes or whatever this is typically heat exchanger right and the steam which
has been passed is condensed right and this is at the temperature of T 1 right. It is whichthe  concentrated  product  is  coming  out  and  the  vapor  as  the  pressure  P 1 and
corresponding to that pressure the temperature T 1 is coming to the condenser as the
vapor.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:17)
So, this is also basically your one component you are separating from the other right in
which say if it is a binary A and B; A is the dispersed and B is in continuous right that
we can say that a is soluble or solubilized in B that is why earlier we said the solubility is
also a factor right. So, this is the best way or easiest way to separate normally we do that
right.(Refer Slide Time: 14:56)
Then if we look at this separation, the feed which is dependent on the feed that enters at
the temperature T F; there is a feed temperature. So, the feed temperature again will
dictate how easily or how difficult the separation is then the saturated steam and the
temperature TS that enters this heat exchanger. Basically what we draw that is nothing,
but a heat exchanger right.
There  is  nothing,  but  a  heat  exchanger  this  thing  is  a  heat  exchanger  sorry,  then
condensed team that leaves as the condensed set or a drapes then evaporator that is
assumed to be completely mixed right where this thing was there sorry this thing was
there.  The this  if this  be the  evaporator  there it  is  a mixture  of both liquid  vapor
everything right. It is a completely mix concentrated product and solution in evaporator
that should have the same composition right. 
Concentrated product and solution in evaporator has the same composition T 1 is the
boiling point of the solution at a temperature at a pressure of P 1 and vapor is at the
temperature T1 corresponding to that equilibrium with the boiling solution and pressure
also as we said P1. There is a vapor pressure corresponding to the temperature T 1 you
know both P and T are related.
So, if one is known other is also automatically known right, but this is the vapor pressure
right of the solution at the temperature T 1 and normally it is seen that 1 kg of steamcondensing that is the fundamental how many paddy, how many rice right how much
energy you are giving and how much you are getting. So, you are giving 1 kg of steam. 
So, if 1 kg of steam is utilized, then roughly 1 kg of vapor you are producing 1 kg of
vapor means that if you remember that evaporator which you drew right from there you
are giving steam here feed was there and this is the bottom which is coming out and from
the top we have that condenser right. So, these vapor is that 1 kg of the vapor is coming
out that is being separated from the solution right.
So, 1 kg vapor is getting separated per kg of the steam utilized right. If the feed entering
is nearly its boiling point that is if the temperature of the feed is near to its boiling point,
then only it can be like that right. Otherwise, if the T F is much lower than the boiling
point, then you have to heat it to its boiling point then the vapor will go; then it will
separate. So, lot of things are involved. 
So, there it may not be 1 kg to 1 kg means 1 kg steam utilized and 1 kg vapor separated
that may not be possible. And in all the average heat transfer equation used is q = UA ΔT
where delta T is that TS minus T 1 right T S we said that is the temperature of the steam
and T1 that is the temperature which is in equilibrium at the boiling point or boiling
solution right. So, this delta T and U; U is the overall heat transfer coefficient that
depends on as we said if this is the material. So, you are giving heat by the steam. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:08)
So, if there are some tubes or whatever inside so, that will have one outside that is
outside heat transfer coefficient ho one metallic heat that conduction or resistance due to
the metal and another inside of the tube where your material is there. So, these three will
make as we said the other day overall heat transfer coefficient. So, overall heat transfer
coefficient can be determined on that basis right and that heat transfer is; obviously, as 
q = UAΔT right.
(Refer Slide Time: 20:51)
Then we come to another that is forward feed multiple effect evaporator right because
we saw that there are two types; one is forward feed, another is backward feed right. So,
forward feed means your steam is entering also the direction of flow of the steam and the
feeder are integral or same right. This feed is coming to this evaporator which is at the
temperature T1 like a single effect evaporator where you are passing steam at T S right and
this steam is getting condensed here as the condenser.
Then some portion of the liquid which came here with a concentration of say C 1 has
come out to b or C feed has come out to b as C 1 and that is being fed to the second effect
for further concentration right. Whereas, the steam came here only and it get condensed
here right, but the steam which has produced in the 1st effect we said 1 kg steam produces
almost 1 kg vapor right. 
So, if that be true that 1 kg 1 kg, then that vapor is coming and that is at the temperature
TS steam temperature right corresponding the pressure P 1 right. So, that is being fedinstead of steam to the second effect right. This is the effect that this effect has made
steam has made vapor which is being fed as steam or vapor to the second effect right and
higher concentrated solution, then the 1st effect is fed to the second effect right. And
there by this pressure is less than this pressure right that is why this vapor is getting a ΔP
and it is being then supplying or to fill it up right.
So, high pressure to low pressure it is going and this concentrated through may be some
device you are feeding it to the second effect right. And after this second effect again the
same thing happens, this whatever vapor you have made it in the heat exchanger that is
this is the condensed and this over C 1 now has become much more concentrated as C 2
and this concentrate is being fed to the third effect right and this is being fed whereas, the
vapor which is coming out from there as now is being fed to the third effect right. 
So, that means, you see the temperature here it was T 1 corresponding to the pressure P 1,
here the temperature is T 2 corresponding to the pressure P 2 and here the temperature is T 4
corresponding to the pressure P 3 right.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:43)
But in all the cases P 1 is greater than P2 is greater than P3. So, as the effect is increasing
your pressure is getting decreased. (Refer Slide Time: 25:00)
Similarly the temperatures are also getting decreased because the moment P 1 > P2; that
means, P2 < P1; that means, T1 will be higher than T 2 right or similarly is higher than T 3
right like that things are happening ok. So, this is what and the vapor is coming out to T 3
to  a  vacuum  condenser  and  that  this  steam  condenser  comes  out  and  concentrated
product you are getting at the end right.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:42)
So, if you see that analyze it, then you know that 1 kg of steam in the 1st effect you are
getting and similarly in the 2nd effect is also roughly 1 to 1 kg roughly, but overall almost3 kg water will be evaporated per kg of the steam right. Because you have originally fed
with a steam in the 1st effect and afterwards you have not fed any steam. So, steam
economy is increased and the boiling temperature decreases as the effect is increasing
right because the Ps are getting less right P 3 < P2 < P1 right.
So, it is gradually decreasing. So, temperature is also decreasing. First effect P 1 is the at
most roughly 1 atmosphere absolute pressure and the last effect will be under vacuum
corresponding to the pressure P 3 right much lower than P 1 much much lower than P 1
right.
(Refer Slide Time: 27:00)
So, if we look at the other one backward feed; backward feed is also similar to forward,
but only the things team enters in from one end and the feed enters from the other end
right. So that means, if the feed is at low temperature means it is not at boiling at low
condition low temperature, then that is concentrated product is highly and if it is highly
viscous then it is entering. 
So, the what is happening? As it is progressing the viscosity temperature is increasing so,
viscosity is decreasing. So, from only high viscous to low viscous and ultimately it is
coming out from the other end right. (Refer Slide Time: 27:54)
This way the backward feed is being utilized for maybe a viscous or maybe a cold fluid
which is coming in right. Similarly a parallel flow could be there the overall heat transfer
coefficient U for the evaporator that roughly for steam, it is condensing coefficient is
5700 W/m2.°C metal wall that will have high thermal conductivity of the metal. 
Usually the resistance is negligible and the resistance of the scale on the liquid side that
could be due to the resistance of if there is any scale and the corresponding heat transfer
coefficient will be the inside internal or inside heat transfer coefficient right. So, with
this let us come to the end of this course. Hope you have enjoyed the course, but most
vital is that you should understand and you should try to follow that as much problems
you can solve right. 
You will see the basic thing is as many problems you can solve on your own; that means,
you are understanding the subject, you are understanding the topic more and more right.
It is it was not possible to deal with the all unit operations because of the time constraint
and not or the purview of the course also because many other courses are dealing with
these unit operations. So, there it you may get more in detail, but we have highlighted
many of them. So, that is what I wish that you enjoyed this class and get the best out of
it.
Thank you and all the best.