Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 06
Fundamentals of Food Processing and Preservation Why and how do food spoil
Good morning. In the previous class we had done on different aspects of food and we
wanted to relate it with this course through Thermal Operations. I think a little we have
left over and left over in the sense, left over is not the, ‘right’ word should we have little
more to say about the totality of that concept of the food. So, that you can afterwards
correlate, because that the fundamental things if they are not clear, then in the future you
may be in trouble to relate why and how things are there? ‘right’. 
So, that is why we are in this Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering Theory
and Applications. In this course Fundamentals  of Food Processing and Preservation
which we had continued. Now, I would like to also say that why and how do food
spoilage, ‘right’, why and how food do spoil?
(Refer Slide Time: 01:40)
So, to do that what we need to know the why the food and what is the spoilage? What do
you mean by spoiling of food? The spoiling of food of-course, can be done by many
ways spoilage of food can be done by many ways. But, primarily one side is because of the microbes and that is the most dominant one and
the other side is, may be some other associated with chemical  processes; we had given
you an example that enzymes do act on the food. For example, when you cut apple, when
you cut potato things like that there are some enzymatic browning. 
And which is of course, cannot be said that the food is totally spoiled, but it is also true
that the changes in color and other changes which is not acceptable. So, it may not be
totally spoiled in the word spoilage used, but affectively it is because you will not if you
keep apple cut outside for the day. Obviously, though if assuming there is no microbial
contamination, but still since the color change to black and will not like to have those. 
So, that is equivalent to spoilage, ‘right’. So, in the word spoilage we can say that by the
action of microbes or by chemical actions, if the food materials are not acceptable for
consumption. Then in whatever way, it could be that it is due to the microbes, it got
transformed into some other thing which is not acceptable, it is color got changed or it
texture got changed, anything any change happening with that we can say that it is
spoiled. 
Then how it is being spoiled? If, it is by their organisms in the previous classes we had
also given you some idea about the chemical, biochemical spoilages, ‘right’, if you
remember. 
Now, if you go to those microbial spoilages, then, microbial spoilages are happening
primarily due to bacteria yeast and mold that is the basic microbes. Many other microbes
are also there, but these this 3 types of organisms are of our interest and for that let us
also know a little about how these organisms behave or what they are, ‘right’. 
So, if we look at that bacteria, that is generally the Lactic Acid Bacteria or which we
called  LAB,  which  we  other  day  we  have  said  that  is  lactobacillus  species,  or
pediococcus species or leuconostoc species etcetera or pseudomonas species and many
others they come under the family of bacteria, ‘right’. Fungi they are normally of two
types; one is called both are under the umbrella of fungi and one is mold and the other
one is yeast,‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 05:33)
And how the spoilage microbes enter into the food? It is entering into the food through
contamination before pre harvesting or pre harvest contamination before pre harvest or at
the  time  of  harvest,  contamination  during  processing  or  fungi  and  bacteria  are
everywhere. So, they can contaminate the food material. 
Now, for this I let me tell you your personal and our personal experiences, that those you
are now young very young. So, you do roam over or you do go to different trees and
others. So, you try to get fruits like apple like pears like, papaya or like your orange
guava all these fruits you go to the tree and get it, ‘right’ 
Now, you have notice that, if you take say guava, ‘right’. And by chance it is almost
matured in the tree itself and it got dropped from the tree and if you do not take care,
then because of this drop there are some Bruce’s in the fruit. And these Bruce’s do,
because as I said the other day nature gives it is best protection to it is all everything,
‘right’, that is one side other side also I said nature is the best friend and also the best
enemy. So, best friend is that it gives protection automatically. And the other side is that
it also has many enemies which we can call natural enemies like these microorganisms. 
So,  when  that  Bruce’s  was  there  then  these  microorganisms  which  are  all  over
surroundings they do invade, because for them it has because this microorganisms need
very  little  quantity  of the carbon  source,  hydrogen source, nitrogen  source, oxygen
source or all these. So, food is complete source of all these. So, for them surviving into or multiplying into the food material is not definitely difficult
thing, but what is difficult? If the food material there is no Bruce or things like cut or
things like that, then it be it is not that easy for the organism to invade. To invade it has
to have some places by which it can invade into the food. So, this Bruce and cuts so, they
do help. And since it is micro we cannot see under normal eye or naked eye. So, we do
not know how much minimum Bruce or how much minimum damage is good enough for
the organisms to invade and start acting on that, ‘right’.
Fungi whether it is mold or yeast and bacteria is all over the world and everywhere that
you can say everywhere in the nature. So, it may be contaminated before harvesting or
during harvesting or during is processing. If you have processing the food material then
also I gave example of fruit yes it because you being very young. So, you have this
experience of writing over the trees and getting the fruits by your own hands and we
enjoy that. So, that is why I gave that example, but the all other foods are also alike.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:52)
So, it can be that in vision of organisms can take place due to the Bruce and cuts, ‘right’.
Other causes of spoiling of the food material are ok, like microbial spoilage which we
have already said a little not the only cause of the food quality deteriorations, other
causes are chemical reactions which reduce the food quality, changes in air or light
which could be due to oxidative rancidity, or changes caused by the enzymes in the foodleading to off flavors. And other chemical reactions or interactions all these put together
can also bring the spoilage or the food not acceptable for consumption, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 10:39)
So, what is the factors which affect the microbial growth in the food material? Simply,
we can say that FATTOM and then with the support of P so, FATTOM. So, let us
expand them, ‘right’; F for food for the microbes to eat, A for acid that is the pH. So,
microorganisms grow best at pH near to 7. So, in the no acidic no alkaline, that is in the
neutral zone it is very-very likely organisms grow the best, ‘right’.
As the pH goes lower growth of the organism is lower, that is why I give the other day
this example that drinks like cold drinks they do have the pH around 3 plus minus 3. So,
at that low pH high acid organisms cannot grow, that is why you have seen that these
materials like these drinks, soft drinks are open in the nature, open in the sense they are
not kept inside the refrigerator or somewhere, ‘right’, and nothing happens to that. This
is primarily due to the low pH of the solution of the drink, ‘right’. 
So, they have the pH is very low. So, this statement that has the pH goes down growth of
the organisms is also slower down. Most pathogens do not grow or if at all do not grow
well at pH less than 4.6. So, 4.6 and above the pH is good for the pathogenic organisms,
that is the organisms causing the illness or the disease in the human body. So, it may survive at least for a short period at low pH at the most. Many yeast molds
and spoilage bacteria can grow at pH less than 4.6, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:13)
Yes, for then pH less than 4.6 many bacteria a little then yeast and mold for them it is
easy to survived, for some time and that depends at the there is also said, that the nature
of  the  organisms  are  different  for  different  types  even  same  even  in  the  bacteria
umbrella,  that  different  types  of  bacteria  which  are  psychrophilic,  thermophile,
mesophilic, some could be your halophile some could be other. So, many are there. 
So, second one was the T that is temperature and time so, here it is thermophiles which
are as we said which grows or loves high temperature. A mesophiles which are liking
moderate temperature cool to very warm or hot temperature, psychrophiles which are
loving cold or little cold or slightly warm like that and then psychrophiles that only grow
on the in the during the cold, ‘right’.
Psychrotrophs  mesophiles  or  these  things  are  of  different  types.  So,  that  is  the
temperature  ‘right’ time  of course, required  is  different,  but  if  you are. If you are
allowing refrigeration to be provided, then it slows down or stops the growth of the
pathogen and most pathogens do not grow in refrigerated foods. 
So however, a few pathogens can grow slowly under refrigeration and they are normally
psychrotrophs or psychrophiles, ‘right’. Listeria monocytogenes and may be the otherone which is Yersinia enterocolytica or aeromonas hydrophila or clostridium botulinum
these are some of the really organisms which come under this. Many spoilages microbes
are also psychrotrophs or psychrophiles. 
(Refer Slide Time: 15:57)
Of course, freezing does not kill bacteria, because the other day also we said that if you
have to kill then you have to add the heat, you have the if you subtract heat or if you
reduce the heat or if you extract the heat, then that will not kill the organisms. For killing
it is the best thing is to use the heat source, ‘right’. 
Some may die when frozen, but this cannot be counted on out of several lakhs may be
few if we dies during freezing for some more other reason. So, that cannot be counted
that freezing as kill the organisms. This comes under the before freezing if you take the
microbial count and after freezing if you take the microbial count, there could be a
difference in microbial count and that does not mean that freezing kills, it may be
because of some other reason beyond your control. 
Next is the heat. So, if you are heating like when you are coolly cooking to greater than
or equal to 74 degree centigrade, that kills most of the pathogens. You remember we are
said for pasteurization the temperature is one was 63 another was 72 and the time was
half an hour and 15 seconds. So, it is a whenever you are heating it is not the single
parameter temperature; it is time temperature combination. Yes, but as far as temperature is concerns 74 and above is good enough to kill all the
pathogenic organisms ‘right’. Remember which ones are not killed destroyed normally
spores or toxins; they are normally very difficult to destroy or kill. A food is held on a
hot serving line at 60 degree centigrade pathogens cannot grow or produce toxins ‘right’.
So, if food is held on a hot serving line at greater than equal to 60 degree centigrade,
pathogens cannot grow or produce toxins at that high temperature 60 degree and above,
that is why you might have seen in many restaurants or in  many servings during different
functions, when things are being served for food. So, they have some heating element
down below. 
So, that the temperature is at a little bit high. It is not only that helps you to get the
appropriate test, but also it prevents the pathogens to grow up, ‘right’. Only spores
survive when food is heated or cooked to around 165 Fahrenheit and then held at greater
than equal to 74 degree centigrade, 165 Fahrenheit you convert it into centigrade, you
will see that it is coming around 75, 76 I mean in the range of 70’s, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 19:36)
Then there are vegetative and spore formers, ‘right’ from this figure you see that the
circle is like ok. Like this one this is the spore this is the vegetative cells and this is the
growth and these are toxin which are produced, ‘right’. So, you see these contain some
spore and some vegetative cells, these also do content spores, these do content vegetative
and spore formers and then they are growing and then producing the toxin.So, these way that cycle goes up, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 20:26)
Many bacterial pathogens need time to grow to high enough levels or produce enough
toxin to cause diseases, ‘right’. Generally, 4 hours in the danger zone. And that is why
you will hear that many of the doctors or whenever somebody sick they do say that after
preparing try to consume it within 2 hour. So, this is one of the reason that up to 4 hour
maximum it can survived without any further infection or further deterioration or maybe
that organisms penetration, ‘right’.
So, one of the most common factors leading to food borne illness is due to improper
cooling of improper cooling of leftover foods ‘right’. So, food safety, if we look at the
thermometer then you see that foods hot when it is hot around 60 degree centigrade and
above  is  good the  danger  zone  is  the  temperature  range  of  rapid  pathogen  growth
between 4 to 60 degree centigrade. So, neither very low nor very high is the waste zone
for the organisms to grow in particular pathogens, ‘right’ that is the danger zone. 
And obviously, cold where food is preserved it is best at or below 4 degree centigrade,
generally below 4 degree centigrade.(Refer Slide Time: 22:25)
And by the way that you should also know that in your house hold refrigerator, there is a
freezer cabinet on the top. And this freezer cabinet temperature is somewhere around
minus 10 degree depending on the manufacturer depending on preserving temperature,
but by and large it is around minus 10 degree. And down below that there are many
stacks and down below absolutely bottom there is a holder for fruits vegetables keeping,
that up to that there is a temperature gradient. So, top was minus 10 and down below it is
gradually growing up.
To the tune of max the better the temperature better is the freezing or better is the
keeping quality, but it is not below 4 degree centigrade up to plus 4 degree centigrade,
that you hold refrigerator may have, but yes the higher the height lower I mean closer to
the cabinet freezer cabinet, lower is the temperature. And if the distance goes up the
higher is the temperature, ‘right’. 
So, next one which we have seen the letters O oxygen and this oxygen corresponds to
oxidation reduction, ‘right’ O R potential, ‘right’ O R potential. Generally refers to the
amount of oxygen present and this directly or indirectly helps n pathogens also. Most
bacterial pathogens can grow with or without oxygen. So, if it is with or without they are
called facultative anaerobes, ‘right’.So, it may grow this side with oxygen, it may grow that side without oxygen. So, they
are called facultative anaerobes some food pathogens can only grow when no oxygen is
present which are called anaerobic pathogens, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:42)
Spoilage microorganisms are obligate aerobes pseudomonas species, molds, how do you
think  food  process  or  food  processors  used  the  information  about  obligate  aerobe
spoilage microbes? So, there microaerophiles are also there who have in which lactic
acid bacteria falls or anaerobes where desulfoto maculum species and this is also a which
is responsible for spoilage of the cane and many others.(Refer Slide Time: 25:28)
M stands for moisture where in foods present in two forms bound form or free form
which I said the other day. And it corresponds to a measure of the free water, what are
that is available for the microbial growth that is water activity A w. Aw is simply the
relative humidity of the food at equilibrium with the air around the food. So, A w can
range from 0 no free water to one all free water, ‘right’. 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:04)
Then, most bacterial pathogens cannot grow or produce toxins at A w or water activity
level less than 0.91 exceptions are staphylococcus aureus can grow and produce toxindown to 0.85 water activity level. Bacteria normally multiplied in this way that able 20
minutes is doubling, ‘right’. So, from 1 to 20 minute it becomes 2, then another 20
minutes it becomes from this 1 to 2 from this 1 to another 2, then another 20 minutes this
1 to another 2 this 1 to another 2. 
So,  when  the  time  starts  in  20  minutes  you  have  double  in  40  minutes  you  have
quadruple and in another 20 minutes or whatever you have 6 8 2 4 and 8, 8 numbers like
that ‘right’. So, this way we can say the organisms are growing and you can also think
that organisms the growth is to the tuned 20 minutes per one organism to become double.
This is typically bacterial it is not true for yeast or mold. So, this is just an example for
organisms like bacteria how they are growing? ‘right’.
So, with this let us conclude about the preamble part and yes we have given some idea
about how foods are spoiled, what are the factors, what how it is related to the heat
operations or thermal operations? So, now in the next class we will go to the real part of
the heat transfer ok.
Thank you.