Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 08
One Dimensional Conduction Heat Transfer in Cartesian Coordinate ( Contd. )
So, we come  back again  to One Dimensional  Conduction Heat  Transfer. We  were
developing the generalized equation. And we have made generalized equation in the
form of    that was equal to 1 by alpha in this equation. So,
now  we  go  to  that  lecture  8  and  that  one  dimensional  conduction  heat  transfer
continuation.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:21)
So, we were in this special cases ‘right’. So, for constant thermal conductivity when we
have taken k constant see this is 1 by alpha
not alpha, because k by rho Cp is alpha.
So, it is 1 by alpha del del T of t, ‘right’ where alpha is that thermal diffusivity in terms
of . So, thermal diffusivity of the material in the unit of meter square per
second; so, from here we can see that had it been not constant thermal conductivity, then
the equation generalized equation would have been      
this would have been the generalized equation. And if we have taken conductivity to be
constant that is k is constant then it has come to this form, ‘right’.1 1 1 pnnCT T Tr gr r r k k t t
           
pk
C
1 1 1 pnnCT T Tr gr r r k k t t
           1np nT Tr k g Cr r r t        For steady state conduction with energy sources within the medium, then we can write it
is a steady state. So, del T del r this goes up since this del T del r the rather del T del t
this goes off, because it is steady state; that means, it is independent of time ‘right’ is no
longer time dependent this was unsteady till this point this was unsteady, ‘right’ because
it is time dependent. But, now if it is a steady state conduction heat transfer within the
material there is a energy generation then we can write that equation 
So, this is for steady state without constant thermal conductivity.
Now, for steady state conduction heat transfer with the energy generation within the
body, but thermal conductivity is constant if that be true then 
this is a another special case.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:41)
Third special case could be for steady state heat conduction with no energy generation
that is g is 0 and steady state. So, ‘right’ side is also 0. So,         and for
steady state heat conduction with no energy generation within the medium, with constant
thermal conductivity then you can write         . In most of the cases you deal
with this equation where if n is 0, then it becomes d/dx instead of r d/dx and this
becomes  
 that is in turn we can write  
  and that is where no energy
generation constant his thermal conductivity and steady state and geometry is rectangular
coordinate system, ‘right’, then it becomes like that, but if it is n is equal to 1. 10nnd dTr k gr dr dr    
1 10nnd dTr gr dr dr k    
0nd dTr kdr dr   
0nd dTrdr dr   Then it becomes d/dr of rdT/dr is equal to 0 again there is no heat generation and the
steady state and constant conductivity and the geometry is rectangular coordinate system.
If it is spherical coordinate system then your n becomes 2 then it is d d r of r square d T d
r  is  equal  to  0,  where  there  is  no  internal  energy  generation  steady  state  thermal
conductivity is constant and the body is spherical in system spherical coordinate system,
‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:57)
So,  this  if  this  be  true  then  if  we go  into  this  three  dimensional  one,  we are  not
developing it, but three dimensional equations we can write for rectangular system where
the coordinate is x y z and T is a function of x y z, then 
You remember in the previous slide we had written wrongly by typographical mistake it
was alpha del T del t, but it is 1 by alpha del T del t, I said it to be corrected. So, you
please note it.
For cylindrical system where r theta z, ‘right’ and T is a function of r theta z and also
time T, then  And for spherical system where the
coordinate is r theta phi or r phi theta and T is a function of r phi theta and time t, then it
is2 2 2
2 2 21 1T T T Tgx y z k t          
2 2
2 2 21 1 1T T T g Trr r r r z k t               
222 2 2 2 21 1 1 1T T T g Tr Sinr r r r Sin r Sin k t                           (Refer Slide Time: 09:07)
So, we have seen that one dimensional conduction heat transfer basic equation how we
can develop it? And from there we have come to the three dimensional what is the 3
coordinate  system equations, ‘right’. Three  dimensional  equations  also we have not
derived, but we have shown how the equations look like, ‘right’.
Then comes when you are solving it, ‘right’, it is a differential equation. So, when you
are solving it you need to have boundary condition, if it is ∂2T/∂x2; that means, you can
or you can get T on double integration, ‘right’ on double integration you can get T. So, to
get T you need to have boundary condition. 
And this boundary conditions are to be also understood and they are to be, rightly
specified, ‘right’. So, boundary conditions there are three types, ‘right’; one is called
prescribed  boundary  condition  or  boundary  condition  of  first  kind,  then  prescribed
boundary condition of second type and condition that is boundary condition of second
kind and the third one is boundary condition or prescribed boundary condition of third
type or boundary condition of the third type, ‘right’. 
So, if that be true then, let us take a body as it is shown here in the picture, ‘right’ we
have drawn it that we have two this is two sides. So, our x direction is this. So, other two
dimensions are much bigger than this dimension. So, that is why it is one dimensional,
‘right’. So, bound this is called boundary condition of the first kind or prescribed temperature
boundary  condition,  ‘right’,  prescribed  temperature  boundary condition;  that  means,
boundary condition is defined in terms of temperature, ‘right’. If it is that if the both
boundary means both the sides of the body, if the body is like this. 
So, this side of the body is one temperature boundary condition and this side of the body
is another boundary condition and the body is like this, ‘right’. If this be true which we
have drawn here we can say that T(x,t)| x=0=T1, that is one boundary and the body is two
sides, other two sides infinite or very large compared to the one through which heat is
being conducted and that is the x direction, ‘right’. And this is 0 to L the two sides, one
side x is 0 and the other side x is L, ‘right’. 
So, one boundary can be T(x,t)| x=0 ≡ T(o,t) = T1 and the other side is T 2 is equal to T(x,t)|
x=L  ≡ T(L,t) = T2  . So, this is called prescribed boundary condition of first kind or the
prescribed temperature boundary condition.
The plate is subjected to a prescribed boundary condition at both surfaces and can be
written as T(x,t)|x=0 ≡ T(o,t) = T1,  ‘right’. And this is equation number 1 and T(x,t)| x=L ≡
T(L,t) = T2
(Refer Slide Time: 13:45)
This is these are the two boundary equations we got in terms of temperature T 1 and T2,
‘right’. So, second type is boundary condition of second kind or called proscribed heatflux boundary, ‘right’, prescribed heat flux boundary. So, heat flux is what watt per
meter square, ‘right’, or any flux is that thing per unit time unit area per unit area is that
thing or here it is watt per meter square. So, any flux is that thing it is energy so, Joules
per meter square per second per unit time is the flux.
So, watt that is joules per second per meter square, ‘right’. So, that is the flux. So, here
we are providing prescribed boundary condition of the second kind or prescribed heat
flux boundary condition, ‘right’. If, it is heat flux it is q 0 that is watt per meter square or
Joules per second per meter square, ‘right’. Similarly, for the other energy terms maybe
for fluid flow or for mass transfer so, you will see that everywhere flux is there and this
flux is that thing per unit area per unit time is the flux ok. 
So, here it is q0 or watt per meter square that is the heat flux which you are using. And by
the definition of q we have we are we can write that0 0|xTk qx , this is the L and at the
other surface at x equal to L, if it is minus flux and the other side has to be plus flux. It
cannot be the both side is having this side is minus 0 0|xTk qx and this day side also
minus 0 0|xTk qx , then what will happen it will transfer from both the sides and the
temperature will go on increasing and it is unsolvable, ‘right’. Whereas, if heat flux is
coming from one side, it has to disappear to the other side with whatever be the flux,
‘right’. 
So, one is positive if it is positive, then the other side has to be negative or if it is
negative the other side has to be positive. So, that the heat can enter and also exit
otherwise there will be accumulation and if the accumulation is there; that means, inside
temperature will go on increasing, which is beyond solution or unsolvable by normal this
way yes it can be, but in all other different techniques. So, we can write 0 0|xTk qx at
the surface x equal to 0 and at the surface x equal to L, we can write |x L LTk qx , which
we have written here, ‘right’. So, heat supplied by conduction or by flux is (Refer Time:17:31) 0 0|xTk qx and conditions this is called conduction heat flux. Another one heat
supply where it is watt per meter square |x L LTk qx , it is between 0 to L and in the x
direction, ‘right’.
So, when the heat flux is prescribed at a boundary surface, the boundary condition is said
to be of the second kind, ‘right’ the boundary condition is said to be of the second kind.
So, here we have 0 0|xTk qx and  |x L LTk qx  ,‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 18:29)
Then the boundary condition of the third kind, i.e., called convective boundary condition,
‘right’. Here also you see we have taken one object which has two boundaries defined
and the other two sides are much bigger compared to this one. So, that is why we can
consider it to be one dimensional, ‘right’. 
So, here there is a convective fluid in one side flowing at the temperature T 1 with a heat
transfer  coefficient  of  h 1.  So,  this  is  under  convective  condition,  ‘right’.  So,  this
convection is coming to the surface and then this surface is attending your temperature
corresponding to this fluid flow and fluid properties, ‘right’ and which is equivalent to.
1 1 0 0| |x xTh T T kx    equal to 0, ‘right’And this convection heat is then conducted through the body, ‘right’ which is |x L LTk q
x 
 at x
equal to 0 or 0 0|xTk q
x 
 ,‘right’. So, this convection or whatever has come is conducted
and here also this conducted |x L LTk q
x 
at x is equal to 0 is being going out through the fluid,
which is at T1 or rather which is at T 2 here it is of course, it should be T 2, this was T1 h1
this should be T2 h2, because it would be because of cut and paste that error was there.
So, it should be T2 h2, ‘right’ fluid flow we need fluids flowing on the other side T 2 h2,
which we have corrected here of course, 2 2| |x L x LTk h T Tx   
So, this is called boundary condition of the second third kind or convective boundary
condition. Now, the situation is that you may have that all these three are different,
‘right’; one is prescribed temperature boundary condition, second is prescribed heat flux
boundary condition, and third one is prescribed convective boundary condition. And all
these three we have shown in both the sides, ‘right’, but it may happen that you have in
one  side  prescribed  temperature  boundary  condition  and  another  side  it  could  be
prescribed heat flux boundary condition or prescribed convective boundary condition,
that may be one situation, two situations or you may also have one side prescribed heat
flux boundary condition and the other side prescribed convective boundary condition.
So, any combination can happen and but these are the generalized boundary conditions.
So,  when  you  will  face  the  actual  problem,  it  may  be  a  combination,  it  may  be
individually like that or a combination of any three, any two of the three, ‘right’. So, that
is further we will look at, ‘right’.(Refer Slide Time: 22:23)
So, this is what at the surface x equal to L which we have written here at the surface x is
equal to L, we have written that it is equal to     2 2| |x L x LTk h T T
x   
 .
(Refer Slide Time: 22:47)
So, one dimensional steady state heat conduction, ‘right’. So, we were discussing we are
taking a typical case for slab, ‘right’. So, if it is for slab, then we have taken this one
dimension, other two dimensions are infinite or much bigger and this is a slab, where oneside is subjected to a prescribed temperature boundary at T 1, other side is also at the
prescribed temperature boundary condition of T 2, ‘right’ and we have inside T x, ‘right’. 
So, this inside these a function of T is a function of x and it is 0 to L, ‘right’. This we can
write in 2 ways, one in the one which we have written in terms of methodics or it is at
one dimensional heat conduction or theoretically we can write it this way 
          This is that is equal to 0 this is one equation which we have
seen earlier and the other equation is k x is equal to        So, we
can rewrite this one in the form of Here, we also can write in the form
of this Q heat is coming to this surface where the temperature is T 1 and because of this
body there is a resistance equivalent to R equal to L, that is the length over k A where k
is the conductivity of the material and A is the area through which the heat is getting
transferred and it is coming to the other surface at temperature T  2 and the same Q is
going out, ‘right’.
Because, Q cannot be this cannot be created there or when it is a steady state because it is
a  steady  state.  So,  same  Q  will  come  in  and  go  out  of  the  body  ‘right’.  So,  the
temperature was here T 1 and the other face the temperature is T 2 ‘right’. So, we are
taking this solution of this equation that ,‘right’  it  is  not
saying E0 it is E at any x. So, it is 0 and then q x can be written as minus 
             
(Refer Slide Time: 26:45)
2
2( ) 1( ) 0d T xE x
dx k 
2( )( ) /dT xq x k W m
dx 202( )d T x E
dx k 
2
2( ) 1( ) 0d T xE x
dx k 
2( )( ) /dT xq x k W m
dx 202( )d T x E
dx k Then first and second integration of this can be written as   this
is the first integration constant. And on second integration we get 
So, to solve it we need two boundaries, ‘right’, two boundary conditions we need one at
x is equal to 0 and the other at x equal to L this is to be provided. And obviously, these
boundary  conditions  can  be  prescribed  temperature,  of  prescribed  heat  flux  or  a
prescribed convective boundary condition, ‘right’.
So, this is one example we have shown, how we can solve this kind of problem that if
you have a slab and if in the slab that q quantity of heat is coming in where the surface is
becoming T u surface temperature is T 1. And then the heat is getting conducted through
the material going to the other side at T 2 and you are then getting it dissipated that q to
the other side. Corresponding to the resistance of the material, it is R which is equivalent
to L over k and A. So, k is the conductivity of the material and A is the area through
which it is getting transferred, ‘right’. 
So, we started with you look at  we started with that  generalized  equation,  but the
conditions are a steady state and constant conductivity. So, if it is steady state, ‘right’
side is 0 and internal energy generation is E. So, if conductivity is constant k then our
governing equation becomes that is equal to
            So, we integrated it and our we reformulated that       and if it is
a constant E, then E 0 over k and we solved it by integrating first integration we got  
 and in the second integration you got 
So, we need two boundaries to solve it and that can be boundary condition of first kind,
or boundary condition of second kind or boundary condition of third kind, ‘right’. So,
next we will solve it or similar problems, ok.
Thank you.01( )dT x Ex Cdx k  
201 2( )2ET x x C x Ck   
2( )( ) /dT xq x k W m
dx 2
2( ) 1( ) 0d T xE xdx k 
201 2( )2ET x x C x Ck    01( )dT x Ex Cdx k  202( )d T x E
dx k 