Thermal Operations in Food Process Engineering: Theory and Applications
Prof. Tridib Kumar Goswami
Department of Agricultural and Food Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 09
One Dimensional Steady State Heat Conduction
 
So, good morning in the earlier class last class we had finished it up to that conduction
heat transfer through a slab One Dimensional Steady State with say constant energy
generation and constant conductivity. So, we came to the solution after integration of
both the of the differential equation by integrating twice we got two constants C 1 and C2
and we were supposed to solved for C 1 and C2, ‘right’. 
But, we also said to solve the two bound, two constants, C 1 and C2 we need to have 2
boundary conditions, which can be any one of prescribed heat flux boundary, prescribe
temperature  boundary,  or  prescribed  convective  boundary.  Any  one  of  these  or  in
combination we need two boundaries to solve them, ‘right’. So, now, let us do a problem
and solve that ok. So, it is like that in this is one dimensional steady state heat conduction
continuation in lecture number 9, we come to this that the problem is defined like this.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:57)
A  solid  slab  having  constant  thermal  conductivity  of  thickness  L  is  maintained  at
constant, but different temperatures T 1 and T2, at the boundary surfaces at x =0 and x=L
respectively. There is no heat generation in the slab. What is the expression for thetemperature distribution T(x) in the slab? And, develop an expression for heat flow Q
through an area A of the slab. 
I repeat, the problem is like this a solid slab having constant thermal conductivity of
thickness L is maintained at constant, but different temperatures T 1 and T2; that means,
both the sides one side T 1 and another side T 2 at the boundary surfaces at x =0 and x= L
respectively. There is no heat generation in the slab. What is the expression for the
temperature distribution T(x)? You remember we came to the solution that T(x) is equal
to this plus C1 and C2 this was our solution. 
So, C1 and C2 was not evaluated, because boundaries were not given, but now our two
boundaries  are  given  one  is  prescribed  temperature  boundary  and  another  is  also
prescribed temperature boundary, that is boundary surfaces is at T 1 at x =0 and TL at
x=L, ‘right’. As, then we have we have to find out that temperature distribution T(x) in
the slab as well we have to also find out the expression for the heat flow Q through an
area A of the slab, ‘right’. So, we start with that now here what do we have? We have the
our situation is steady state; that means, the, ‘right’ side is 0, then we have no internal
energy generation, because it is not specified unless it is specified, we can assume that no
internal at energy generation. Because at there been internal energy generation or internal
heat generation, then it would have been specified since it is not specified we can assume
that there is no generation of heat number 2 and number 3 is that conductivity k is
constant, ‘right’.
In that case if all these three are true, then we can write the generalized equation from
that for the slab 
The reason being it is a steady state, there is no energy generation and the conductivity is
constant, then we have written like this, ‘right’. Now, we let us go into it is solution.2
2
1
2( )0 0
( ) 0
, ( )d T xx L
dx
T x T at x
and T x T at x L  
 
 (Refer Slide Time: 06:21)
The solution of it can be written that on integration we can write, first integration T(x) is
equal to something this is, ‘right’ and this is C 1x and then T(x) is equal to C 1x + C2,
‘right’. So, if that be true, then we can because first one came as the integration of
d2T(x)/dx2, it became dt/dx is equal to constant C 1 and next integration it came T(x) is
equal to C1x plus C2, ‘right’.
And, we are given at x is equal to 0 that is the boundary at x =0, T(x) =T 1, ‘right’. If, that
be true at x =0 T(x) =T 1, then we can easily write that x =0, ‘right’ that you takes x =0,
T0 is T1, ‘right’. And, then we can write that this x is to 0 means this is 0 and this is T 1.
So, C2 is T1 not 0, it should be C 2 is T1, ‘right’.
And, at x =L, T(x) =T(2), ‘right’. So, we can write this is C 1 is we have now we are
substituting. So, it is C 1 we have to find out, so T is T x is T2; T2 is this equal to this one
becomes C1, C1 L, ‘right’ and this is becoming T 1, ‘right’. So, we can write C 1 is equal to
this is (T2 -T1)/L is C1, ‘right’ because this is not C 2 is equal to 0 this was by mistake it
was written. So, in many cases this may be purposefully made the mistake.
So, that you can identify, because it should it should click you that there is something
wrong in it, ‘right’. So, here I that is why I am explaining that on integration we got T(x)
is C1x + C2 how you got it? We got it from here that d2T(x)/dx2 is 0, on first integration
we got dT(x)/dx equal to C1, ‘right’. And, on second integration T(x) is equal to C 1x + C2,
which we wrote in once in one shot, ‘right’.So, this is on the integration and to solve this two C constant C 1 and C2, we need 2
boundaries. 2 boundaries already given T(x) is T 1 at x =0 and T(x) is T 2 at x =L. So, if
that be true in the first case at x equal to 0, T(x) is T 1, so; that means, here it is T 1 and x is
0. So, this goes off zone; that means, C 2 is T1 not 0, ‘right’ this is T 1.
And, at x equal to L, T(x) is T 2 that is the boundary given. So, we can write and
substituting at x is equal to L, so this is C 1 L, C2 is T1 and this T(x) has become T 2,
‘right’. So, we can write C 1 is equal to this (T 2 -T1)/L. So, we can substitute C 1 and C2
here we get T(x) is equal to (T 2 -T1)x/L+C1, ‘right’. 
So, this x by L came because this C 1 is (T2 -T1)/L. So, (T2 -T1)x/L+T1 is T(x). So, as you
were said in the problem find out the temperature distribution T(x) in the slab, ‘right’.
So, which we have found out that the C at T(x) that is temperature distribution in the slab
is (T2 -T1)x/L+T1, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:01)
Now, we need to find out q to find out q we need to first differentiate that was on first
differentiation integration we get 
2 1 1 2( ); ,dT x T T q T Tor q k
dx L k L    1 2T TAk
L
1 2 1 2
1 2, ,RT T T T TQ AkLLAk
where T T T anL
AkdR     
   Now, let us see another problem, ‘right’. A fluid at a temperature of T e1 with a heat
transfer coefficient h 1 flows over the surface at x =0 of a slab of thickness L. Another
fluid at a temperature of T e2 with a heat transfer coefficient h 2 flows over the surface of
the slab at x =L. Derive an expression for the heat flow capital Q through an area of A of
the slab. 
And, also calculate the heat flow transfer rate through A is equal to 1 m2 of the slab for
Te1 = 150ºC, Te2=25 ºC, h1=300 W/m2ºC, h2=600 W/m2ºC and L is 5 centimeter and k of
the material is 16 W/mºC, ‘right’.
So, this tells that we have a slab and one side is a convective boundary condition and
another side of this slab is the another convective boundary condition where it is a T 1 Te1
or Te1 and this is Te2 with a transfer coefficient of h 1 and h2, then we have to find the
solution and the accordingly was the solution is over obtained the problem numeral can
also be solved, ‘right’.
So, a fluid at the temperature of T e1 with a heat transfer coefficient of h 1 close over the
surface at x equal to 0 of a slab of thickness L. Another fluid at a temperature T e2 with
the heat transfer coefficient h e2 flows over the surface of this slab at x equal to L. Derive
and expression for the heat flow Q through an area A of this slab, also calculate the heat
flow transfer rate through A is equal to 1 meter square of the slab for T e1 is equal to 150degree centigrade, T e2 is equal to 25 degree centigrade, h 1= 300 W/m2ºC, h2= 600 W/
m2ºC, L is equal to 5 centimeter, k is 16 W/mºC. 
So, if you remember in the previous class, we had shown that let me also draw this a
little rate, that we had say this one and we also had say this one and we said that Q is
flowing through this and a resistance over it was there, ‘right’, this was the resistance R,
‘right’. So, and that resistance was equal to L/ Ak, ‘right’. So, now, if we do this solution
on  the  basis  of  thermal  resistance  concept,  if  we  solve  it  on  the  basis  of  thermal
resistance concept, then the solution becomes much easier it is not analytical solution
earlier equation we have done analytical solution.
But, here we can use analytical definitely and that can be having the same answer, but
much more easier because if there is no internal energy generation number 1, number 2
the conductivity is constant, number 3 it is a steady state. So, if all these three are
prevailing, then the electrical resistance concept or thermal resistance concept we can do,
‘right’.
So, the solution is like that, we shall we use thermal resistance concept, because in this
case there is no internal energy generation. As it appears from the figure that the heat Q
is flown by convection from the fluid to the surface of the slab at x=0, by conduction
through the slab and by convection from the surface at x =L to the fluid 2 for example,
this, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:09)
So, one side this fluid is flowing with a heat transfer coefficient of T e1 and at heat
transfer coefficient of h 1, with a temperature T e1 of the fluid coming to this surface.
Surface temperature is T 1 and then it is getting conducted through the material to the
temperature T2 and then getting dissipated through a fluid with heat transfer coefficient
of  h2 at  a  temperature  of  T e2,  ‘right’.  Which  if  we  draw  according  to  the  thermal
resistance, then Q quantity of heat is coming to this place that is here, ‘right’ up to this it
is coming outside. 
And then we have a heat resistance according to the fluid properties that is 1/Ah 1 coming
to the point T1 where it is having a metal thermal or material thermal resistance there is
L/kA. So, like this coming to the point this, where another fluid with their resistance
according to the temperature and environment condition that is that is your h that heat
transfer coefficient, it is 1/Ah 2. So, this resistance coming to this outer side and the same
Q is going out, ‘right’.
So,  this  is  called  thermal  resistance  concept.  One  resistance  is  here,  ‘right’,  one
resistance is here, another resistance is through this, another resistance is through this
these are the three resistances corresponding to 1/h 1, L /kA and 1/Ah2, ‘right’.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:25)
Then, we can solve we can write  1 2 21 21 2 2e e eT TQ Ah T T Ak Ah T T
L    These are the three resistances flowing through the whole system where Q quantity of
heat is flowing, ‘right’.
Now, these three terms if we add by adding the numerators and denominators we get Q is
So, we can get capital Q where, but here we are not finding temperature, because all the
temperatures  are already  given. That ambient  temperature  or outside temperature or
environmental temperature is given, then we are also given that ambient temperature
both side and the surface temperatures are also given.
So, if the temperatures are given then we have to find out the quantity of heat Q flowing
through them, ‘right’. And, we have found out an expression based on the thermal
resistance concept Q has become 
(Refer Slide Time: 26:47)
So, from and this quantification which we have seen that quantification can be written as,
if area of the slab is A, the heat transfer rate through the A can be written as the Q is 2 1 211 2
1 21 1e eT T T TT TQL
Ah Ak Ah   
1 2
1 21 1e eT T
QL
Ah Ak Ah

 
1 2
1 21 1e eT T
QL
Ah Ak Ah

 
1 2
1 21 1,e e
tot
totT T
q
R
Lwhere R
Ah Ak Ah

  So, which if we substitute the numeral values where this A was given as 1, h 1 was given
as 300, h2 was given as 600, and k was given 16 and length was given 0.05, ‘right’. So, 5
centimeter so, 0.05 meter, so we can rewrite that as 1 by 1 into 300 plus 0.05 by 1 into 16
plus 1 by 1 into 600, ‘right’. 
So, these on simplification or calculation comes to be 8.125 into 10 to the power minus 3
watt per degree centigrade per watt, it is not watt per degree centigrade it is degree
centigrade per watt since it is the resistance, ‘right’ degree centigrade per watt. You
remember we had said that this resistance equal to that q is equal to delta T by R, ‘right’,
delta T is in centigrade q is watt and this resistance is the delta T is degree centigrade.
So, resistance becomes equal to delta T that is degree centigrade by q that is watt. So,
degree centigrade by watt is the resistance; so, which we have come across as 8.125, 10
to the power minus 3 degree centigrade per watt.
you will also you should also make yourself this solution or calculations, so, that you can
check whether the number is correct or not because I may also do some calculative
mistake, but through calculation.
So, you do also yourself this will type your problem and see it is solution, ‘right’. With
this we conclude to this class, next we will go may be a continuation of this slab and
another solution some problem solution also to be done. So, that if you solve more and
more problems, you are much better off or you really understand the principles lying
over it, ‘right’.
Thank you.1 2
3
31 1 1 0.05 1
1 300 1 16 1 600
8.125 10 /
150 25, 15.384
8.125 10tot
oLR
Ah Ak Ah X X X
X C W
and Q kW
X
     

 