1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
Lecture 29  
RTS and RTD beverages 
 
The lecture 29 is RTS and RTD F ruit & Vegetable Beverages. 
 
The concept covered in this lecture include fruit & vegetable b everages, their type and 
characteristics, ready to serve (RTS) drinks, squash, cordials,  nectars, crush & fruits syrups, 
their manufacturing technologies a nd formulation, and carbonate d fruit beverages.  2 
 
 
Beverages 
The liquids or foods consumed in the liquid state are considere d beverage. They contain 
stimulant or flavoring agents, which perform some useful functi on in the body, but are not 
essential for proper functioning of the body. The soft drinks o r soft beverages are generally 
used to quench the thirst. However, fruit and vegetable beverag es contain good amount of 
micronutrients and bioactives a nd can be beneficial to health.  
The beverages can be classified generally into two categories, alcoholic or fermented 
beverages, and non-alcoholic o r unfermented beverages.  
 
Non-alcoholic/unfermented frui t & vegetable beverages  
Non-alcoholic beverages include d ifferent products available in  the market like juice, ready 
to serve drink, squash, crus h, syrup, cordial, concentrates, ne ctar, and carbonated beverages.  3 
 
 
Ready-to-serve (RTS) beverage  
It is a non-fermented beverage prepared from mixing edible port ion of a fruit, sugar, water 
and additives for direct consumption. Some fruits have high nut ritional content, but they are 
bitter or astringent like tannins and such other polyphenols ma king them unable to consume 
directly. So, such fruits can be converted into these type of b everage by mixing other 
components and they can be consumed. Sometimes, two or more fru its or vegetable juices 
can be blended together at diffe rent proportions using proper m ass and material balance 
techniques and also properly bala ncing their sensory characteri stics like color, flavor, taste, 
etc. These blends can be made and the blending of fruit juices basically increases the taste, 
flavor, aroma and nutrient properties and also many a times the y give good shelf life because 
the fruits and vegetable like vegetables are generally they are  low acids making them more 
prone to contamination. Proper combination of vegetable & fruit  which has more acid or 
which has more sugar are mixed together and can improve the tas te, aroma, even shelf life 
also because acidity sugar cont ent may help the vegetables.  
 4 
 FSSAI regulations for beverages 
As per the FSSAI guidelines, di fferent types of non-alcoholic b everages are given in this 
table i.e. type of beverage like RTS beverage, it should contai n pulp or juice concentration up 
to 10 %, total soluble solids should be 10 %, its acidity shoul d be 0.3 % and it should contain 
preservative sulfur dioxide up to 70 ppm. Squashes, normally th ey contain 25 % pulp or juice 
concentration, its TSS is 40 %, acidity 3.5 %, and they can hav e a preservative up to 350 ppm 
of sulfur dioxide. Crush contains  25 % pulp, about 55 % total s oluble solids, its acidity is 3.5 
% and it has around 350 ppm sulfur dioxide. Similarly, and pulp s has 100 % pulp and it may 
contain up to 1500 ppm sulfur di oxide. The total plate count of  all these products should not 
exceed to 50 cfu/ml that is 50 colony forming unit and yeast an d mold counts should not 
exceed to 2 cfu/ml and the coliform counts should be nil in 100  ml beverage samples as per 
the FSSAI guidelines.  
 
RTS mango drink 
Mango is the most common tropical fruit found in India. Due to its rich flavor, fragrance and 
taste, it was liked by the peopl e of all age groups and thus kn own as the king of fruits. Mango 
pulp tastes sweet, it is suitable for direct eating and drinkin g its juice. The various ingredients 
for the RTS mango drink are mango pulp, sugar, water, preservat ives, and flavors.  
Water 
Water is the most important component of any beverage. The qual ity of water used to 
manufacture the beverage is of prime importance and much attent ion is given to its treatment 
before use and to its behavior in  relation to the other constit uents particularly t he fruit juice or 
in the fruit pulp. The water shoul d be free from any solid, sed iment etc. The water which may 
be satisfactory for household pur poses may not be suitable for beverage manufacture. 
Generally, extra pure water is used for any beverage preparatio n whether it is RTS mango 
beverage or any such other beverage. The water is subjected to a sequence of pretreatments 
including chlorination, treatment with lime and activated carbo n, coagulation, sedimentation, 5 
 sand filters etc. The purpose is  that it should not contain any  suspended solids otherwise it 
may have unwanted reactions with  the flavoring component, color ing components of the 
juices and can cause problem.  
 
 
Process flowchart for RTS mango beverage manufacturing 
RTS mango juice of various brand s commercially available in the  market are shown in the 
figure. Mango was harvested, ripe mangoes are sorted and washed , followed by pulping and 
extraction of juice as discussed earlier. After getting the pul p or juice of desired soluble 
solids, it is filtered or clarified and then clarified was mixe d with the already prepared sugar 
syrup in the mixing tank. The mixing tank is the most important  stage as it decides the final 
output based on proper materi al and mass balance.  
For example, a pulp having 20 % total solids and want it to mak e a juice having 5 % total 
solids. The total water required to be added can be calculated.  Accordingly, based on the 
sweetness or concentration requi red, sugar solution need to be mixed can be calculated. The 6 
 important thing is that it is not  only just material balance, o ne should also take care that while 
doing the material balance at least sensory characteristics are  maintained to the desired level. 
The rest thing is common for any beverage. After mixing, this R TS mango beverage is 
pasteurized at 80 °C for 10 mi n, then cooled down and sent to t he aseptic packaging line.   
 
These is the process line for developing RTS mango beverage. 
 
Machinery used in RTS mango beverage manufacturing 
These are the equipment which are used for manufacturing of RTS  mango beverage. These 
equipment can be used for others such fruits and vegetables as well like elevator, sorter, 
brush and spray clea ner, peeler, pulper, j uice extractor or jui ce fine filter, pasteurizer and then 
aseptic packaging on it. So, almost all the fruits and vegetabl e juice processi ng and packaging 
line there may be single little bit here and they have some add itional relation depending upon 
the particular characteristics  of the fruit or vegetable otherw ise these are the most common.  7 
 
 
Blended RTS beverages 
In the given table, the literature report for RTS juice blends has been provided. Jayachandran 
et al. (2016) reported that Litchi juice with coconut water and  lime juice (72:27:1) found 
better tasting and better enzyme inactivation than litchi juice . Roy et al. (2016) reported that 
the cashew apple was blended with the fruits like mango, pineap ple and sapota for the value 
addition. Sarkar & Bulo (2017) mixed guava juice with pineapple  in the ratio of 60:40 and 
got best organoleptic and physicochemical properties. Sharma et  al. (2017) blended Jamun 
fruit with sour mango juice to reduce the poor or sour taste of  the mango juice and high 
acidity. Many authors have reported that blending of juices was  much more beneficial either 
in sensory or in nutrition. There are many such even now this b lended RTS beverages are 
available in the market also.  
 
Addition of enzymes 8 
 Enzymes are added sometimes into the RTS juice or blends before  filtration process to 
increase the juice yield as well as to clarify the juice. The p ectinases degrades the 
polysaccharides present in the pulp, making them into smaller f ractions and thus facilitates 
the filtration process. Similarly, other enzymes as well can be  used depending upon what are 
the different contents present in the juice or in the pulp. The  benefit of adding the enzyme is 
many fold for example, there is increased juice yield, improved  juice filtration efficiency, 
improved juice stability and concentration, enhanced juice clar ity, and reduced bitterness of 
the juice.  
 
Addition of enzymes i n blended RTS drink 
The orange juice is blended with  mango juice in 50-50 ratio and  then the pectinase enzyme is 
added in appropriate amount and temperature is maintained aroun d 40 °C for 24 hours i.e. 
proper time is given for the enzyme to act. The suspended polys accharides present in the 
juice are dissolved by these enz ymes and then they brought them  into soluble components 
and hydrolyzed them and then it is removed by the filtration. T hey filled the juices then 
filtered, pasteurized, cool and packaged using either aseptic p ackaging line or other line. 
Squash 
Another category of the fruit beve rage is squash. Squashes are the concentrated fruit juices 
which should at least contain 25 % fruit pulp and should have a  minimum 40 % TSS. So, it 
should be diluted before consumption. Squashes are usually frui t flavored. Earlier, it was 
used for lemon, but now it has spread to other fruits as well. Some of these fruit flavors 
include bael, orange, apple, bl ackcurrant, pineapple, mango, li me, and lemon. They are 
diluted in the ratio of 1:4 before consumption.  
 9 
 
 
 
Litchi squash preparation 
The raw litchis are sorted, graded, and washed before peeling. The first step is the conversion 
of whole litchi into pulp then ci tric acid as a preservative is  added in the pulp the filled and 
packed. Similarly, any pulpy fruit can be used to make squash u sing the standard technology. 
The sugar syrup is prepared separately in a hot steam jacketed kettle. Some precautions 
should be taken care of during the preparation of sugar syrup s uch as (i) crystalline whites 
sugar should be used for prepa ration of the sup er syrup, and (i i) heating of the sugar should 
be controlled so as to avoid browning or caramelization otherwi se it will adversely affect the 
color of the beverage squash.  
 10 
 
 
 
For the preparation of litchi squash, citric acid added sugar s yrup is used and pulp is added 
here and it is mixed and proper mass and material balance was m aintained based on sensory 
as well as FSSAI guidelines. It is followed by filtration, pres ervatives maybe added before 
packaging and then aseptic processing. 
Cordial  
Cordial is another category, it is a juice from which all the i nsoluble material are filtered. It is 
clear sparkling sweetened fruit juice and is prepared from clar ified juice. It should contain 
about 25 % fruit pulp and 30 °Brix TSS with preservatives about  1.5 % citric acid, and 350 
ppm sulfur dioxide. Lime and lemon are the most suitable for co rdial making. They are 
generally blended together w ith wine for consumption.  
 11 
 
 
 
Process flowchart for cordial preparation 
Lemon is used and juice was extracted then this juice is strain ed, preservatives are added. 
These are then clarified, normally it is stored in a container for 10 days. This clear juice 
supernatant is taken and sediments etc. are filtered away and t hen finally strain then sugar 
syrup is added and mixed, preservatives are added and it is pac kaged.  
Crush 
Crush is another product, the process flowchart for strawberry crush is shown. Strawberry is 
sorted, washed, and then crushing was done. The sugar syrup was  prepared separately and 
was mixed in proper proportion according to the requirement to get the desired level of solids 
as well as total soluble solids and then it is pasteurized, fil led and packaged.  
 12 
 
 
 
Nectar 
Some fruits contains high acidity or fruit pulp which hinders t he development of fruit juice, 
and thus they are made palatable  by adding water and sugar and they are known as nectar. 
These include black currants, sour cherries and bananas. It con tains fruit pulp, fruit fiber, and 
pectin along with the sugars and preservatives. Nectar can also  refer to the juice from fruit 
which is too thick to drink as it is. Examples of these are the  juices from apricot, peaches and 
pears. Nectar is thicker than fr uit juice and isn’t as clear or  smooth as fresh fruit juice and is 
needed to be diluted down. It should contain at least 20 % frui t juice or pulp, 15 % TSS and 
also about 0.3 % acid. It is not  diluted before serving so it i s made in this proportion.  13 
 
 
 
Process flowchart for mango nectar preparation 
The mango is sorted, washed, cleaned, and destoned. The destone d mango was heated and 
pulp was separated then sugar additives and acid etc. are added  and mixed by adjusting the 
material and mass and total sol uble solids and these sugars sho uld be added to ensure the 
proper sweetness, acids and sugar, all these balancing is done.  Then colloidal milling is used 
for uniform homogeneous suspensions to get the smooth product. Degassing is done to 
prevent oxidation, after that it was filled at around 65 °C and  sealed where there should not 
be any gas in the head space of the container. Otherwise it may  create oxidation problem. 
Finally, it is sterilized at 100 °C for 5 to 10 min and then co oled and storage. So, this is the 
process flowchart for th e mango nectar preparation.  14 
 
 
Fruit syrup 
Fruit syrups are made by cooking fruit juice with sugar syrup t o the consistency of syrup. 
Juices from fresh or frozen blueberries, cherries, grapes, rasp berries (black or red), and 
strawberries are easily made into toppings for use on ice balls , ice cream, pancakes and 
pastries. This is the process fl owchart for fruit syrup where j uice and sugar syrup were mixed 
in appropriate proportion, then thi s mixture is boiled to aroun d 90 to 100 °C, filtered, filled 
and cooled, packaged and stored.  
 
Carbonated fruit beverages 
Carbonated soft drinks are thirst quenching and have refreshing  p r o p e r t i e s ,  b u t  t h e y  l a c k  
nutrition. FSSAI in 2016 regularized the use of fruit pulps (mi nimum 5 %) in the carbonated 
beverages to make them carbonated fruit drinks. The purpose of carbonation is the 
enhancement of organoleptic pr operties without affecting the nu tritional value of the fruit 
used. The major challenge is to match the carbonation with frui t taste making them better. 15 
 The taste of the fruits should go side by side, so bitter fruit s like aonla, jamun, lime etc. may 
be better suited for use in the carbonated fruit beverages. Spi ces can also be used to enhance 
the sensory properties. The be verage could contain peel, oil, a nd fruit essence. 
 
Process flowchart of the carbo nated fruit beverage making 
This is a process line of the making of any carbonated soft dri nk. For making carbonated soft 
drink, sugar syrup is taken and synthetic flavors and synthetic  colors and preservatives are 
added. So, a sugar emulsion is made, flavor, color and preserva tive emulsion is made 
separately and added into the sugar syrup and concentrated suga r syrup was developed which 
was diluted using a carbonated water or diluted with water and then carbonation was done 
under pressure of 1 to 5 volume carbon dioxide. But this synthe tic flavors, now as per the 
regulations are replaced with natural fruit flavors i.e. either  fruit syrup/fruit pulp/fruit juice 
and the rest of the process remains unchanged. However, there a re certain challenges i.e. the 
amount of fruit used and there should not be any unwanted react ion with the carbon dioxide 
and the flavoring or coloring co mponents of the fruit juices an d they should have proper shelf 
life i.e. during storage, the pr oblems related to oxidation etc . should be avoided.  16 
 
 
Issues and challenges in RTS/RTD beverages 
There are many issues like settling problem due to improper ina ctivation of enzymes such as 
pectinase or pectin methyl esterase enzymes. These pectinase or  pectin methyl esterase 
during the storage of the juice works on the pectin and demethy lates it. This demethylated 
pectin is becomes insoluble and settles. The other problem may be the conventional heat 
treatment for making beverage. It may have adverse effects on n utritional quality, sensory 
characteristics, and bioactive components. The packaging proble m can lead to oxidation & 
browning if the packaging materi al is not appropriately selecte d.   
There are some appropriate hurdl e technology or other arrangeme nts for activating or 
deactivating the enzyme to make ensure that the product quality  is maintained. Then aseptic 
or vacuum or nitrogen packaging should be encouraged to avoid t he oxidation or browning or 
packaging related problems. In order to have a better bioactive s retention, better nutritional 
characteristics, better sensory characteristics in the product,  the novel techniques such as high 
pressure processing, PEF, ultrasound etc. should be encouraged during the extraction process 
as well as during the subsequent process further that is the st erilization and aseptic system 
and the packaging maybe modified h ere in the case of juices and  beverages.  17 
 
 
Summary 
The fruits and vegetables can be used to develop RTS, RTD bever ages and they are the hub 
of the nutrition. Nowadays, many countries and people are going  towards the healthy 
carbonated drinks instead of the soft drinks which are harmful to health. In this healthy 
carbonated drinks category, minimal processing should be consid ered so as to retain the 
maximum nutrients. A properly processed carbonated drink has su fficient shelf-life to have a 
commercial value. At the same time, it must has a good sensory characteristics and good bio 
actives and health components.  
 18 
 
 
These are the references  for further study. Thank you. 
 