1 
 Post Harvest Operation and Proce ssing of fruits, Vegetables, Sp ices and Plantation 
Crop Products 
Professor H N Mishra 
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
Lecture 39 
Processing of vanilla beans and production of vanilla flavour 
 
(Refer Slide Time: 00:17) 
 
Hello everyone, today we will discuss about processing of vanil la beans and production of 
vanilla flavour. 
(Refer Slide Time:  00:35) 
 
In this the different aspects of vanilla processing, vanilla po ds processing, packaging and the 
storage of processed and cured va nilla beans, extraction of van illa flavor from the cured beans, 
2 
 production of vanilla flavor from other sources, and finally, a pplication of vanilla flavor in 
different food products will be discussed in today's lecture. 
(Refer Slide Time:  00:56) 
 
So, let us see what is vanilla? Its botanical name is Vanilla p lanifolia. The genus vanilla belongs 
to the family Orchidaceae. Vani lla is a climbing orchid indigen ous to Mexico. You can see 
here in the figure, it is a clim bing orchid. In commerce, Vanil la is cultivated in tropical regions 
and is propagated by cuttings. 
Vanilla beans are harvested green, flavourless and they are nex t subjected to a curing process 
for about 3 to 6 months, depending upon the various curing prot ocols in different production 
regions. You see here in the figure, this is the vanilla beans as they are harvested from the 
orchid.  
3 
 (Refer Slide Time:  01:55) 
 
Vanilla pod contains many aroma compounds including vanillins, but they are present in the 
green beans in the form of glyc osides. Mainly precursor of thes e flavors. Vanillins is the most 
abundant aroma compound in the cured beans, it is approximately  at about 2 percent level. 
Other important constituents are para-hydroxybenzaldehyde, para -hydroxybenzyl methylether 
and acetic acid. And some other mi nor components are also prese nt.  
(Refer Slide Time:  02:28) 
 
As far as the processing of vanilla beans is concerned, in the earlier classes, in the coffee, cocoa,  
naturally produced or cultivated beans do not have the characte ristic flavor. Similarly, here also 
in the case of vanilla, that is, the green vanilla beans contai ns very small amounts of vanillin. 
4 
 And it is odorless and flavorless. So, in the commercial practi ce, mature green beans are 
subjected to curing process which allows the characteristic fla vor, aroma and color to develop. 
And also, excess of the moisture is removed which prevents a sp oilage of the bean during the 
storage. So, the curing of the beans has particularly four step s, stages you can say. That is 
scalding or killing, sunning or s weating, then drying and final ly conditioning. Then you can 
see that the completely brown colored beans are obtained after drying and conditioning. Earlier, 
they were green color.  
(Refer Slide Time:  03:52) 
 
So, the curing is a process involving alternative sweating and drying of pods until they lose 
most of their moisture content, that is as much as about approx imately 80 percent of the total 
moisture content is removed in the curing and drying. The proce ss of curing is an important 
stage as the bean undergoes the enzymatic reaction which are re sponsible for the development 
of characteristic aroma and flavor. You can see here in the fig ure that different stages of curing 
are follow in the industry or in the farm level. So, curing bri ngs about physical, biochemical 
and chemical changes which are ne cessary for imparting the desi red attributes in the beans.  
5 
 (Refer Slide Time:  04:41) 
 
So, let us see what ha ppens in the actual curing step, individu al curing steps, i n the killing, the 
first step is the vegetative development of the fresh bean get stopped and enzymatic reaction 
responsible for the production of  aroma and flavor are initiate d. So, this process is called killing 
because it disrupts the respiratory functions by destructing ce ll membranes and cell walls of 
the bean tissues, thus bringing  about their phy siological death . And that is why it is called 
killing process. The method used f or disruption of the cell str ucture or hot water scalding, sun 
and oven wilting, scarification, t reatment with ethylene gas an d freezing. The most common 
methods are sun, oven and hot water killing.  
(Refer Slide Time:  05:43) 
 
6 
 The next step is sw eating. Here, moisture is initially allowed to escape rapidly to attain a level 
which reduces the risk of microbial spoilage during the subsequ ent operation, but sufficient for 
further enzymatic activity. That is, the moisture after this sw eating process become sufficient 
for the enzymatic activity. During this stage Vanilla bean deve lops their distinctive color 
fragrance and fla vouring qualities. 
Improper bean handling at this stage results in significantly i nferior beans. Sweet boxes are the 
enclosed chambers, and in rare ca ses, ovens are even used for t he sweating pro cedure. As you 
can see here, different boxes and chambers and ovens etc. The p rocedures takes about 7 to 10 
days to complete the sweating process. 
(Refer Slide Time:  06:43) 
 
And finally, at the end of this sweating period, the cured bean s which are now brown in color 
and aromatic, they contain about 60 to 70 percent moisture. So,  the beans need further drying 
to reduce their moisture content in order to protect them from microbial spoilage and allow for 
the further beneficial chemical changes to take place. So, the reduced moisture content of the 
beans after drying also minimizes undesirable enzymic activity and biochemical alterations. 
The bean after the drying ha s around 25 to 30 percent moisture content.  
7 
 (Refer Slide Time:  07:26) 
 
Then finally, the dried beans are conditioned. The beans are he ld in tight boxes as you see here 
in the figure, for the conditioning purposes. And this step, la sts from one month to around 
several months depending upon the p rocess environmental and oth er conditions.  
During this process, several chemical and biological events suc h as esterification, 
etherification, oxidative degrada tion and so on occur, which pr oduce diverse aromatic 
compounds and improve the overall flavor quality of cured beans . So, conditioning also is very 
important step.  
(Refer Slide Time:  08:19) 
 
8 
 So, here are the some curing methods in the Mexican process of the curing. Harvested and 
sorted beans are placed in dark  woollen blanket and are exposed  to sun for about  4 to 5 hours, 
where wrapping of hot beans and placing in sweet boxes, and the  sweating is continued for 
about 24 hours, which is followe d by drying in sun  for 4 to 5 h ours, rolling and then sweating.  
Then sunning and sweating is repeated for about 6 to 8 times. A nd finally, it is given shorter 
exposure to sun for about 2 weeks, then slow ambient drying, in  the sun drying or even 
mechanical drying, but normally they do the sun drying and whic h is followed for about a 
month or so. And this is followed by conditioning for about 3 m onths and this conditioned bean 
are then graded, bundled and packag ed. And total curing time in  this process, it takes about 5 
months or so, in the Mexican process.  
(Refer Slide Time:  09:30) 
 
Then there is a Bourbon process in which also the harvested and  sorted beans are scalded at 65 
degrees Celsius for 2 to 3 minutes, which is followed by quick drying and wrapping of hot 
beans, sweeting for 24 hours, then drying in sun for 2 to 3 hou rs, hot rolling and sweating 
repeated and sunning and sweeting repeated for about 6 to 8 tim es. Then, it is followed by slow 
ambient drying for about 2 to 3 months and conditioning for 3 m onths, which is finally, 
conditioned bean, graded bundled and packaged. So, total time i n this process may takes about 
6 months.  
9 
 (Refer Slide Time:  10:09) 
 
Then in the CFTRI process, in fact, the total curing time has b een reduced significantly, it takes 
around one month to 32 days. So, the ha rvested beans are graded  and sorted. They are scalded 
at 65 degrees Celsius for 2 to 3 minutes. And then sweating is allowed for 24 hours, followed 
by drying at 50 degree plus minus 5 degrees Celsius for 4 to 5 hours daily, then hot rolling and 
sweating for 24 hours. Drying, hot rolling and sweating is cont inued for 6 to 8 days, which is 
finally, followed by slow ambient drying for about 6 to 8 days,  conditioning 10 to 12 days. And 
finally, grading bundling and packaging.  
(Refer Slide Time:  11:02) 
 
Regarding packaging and storage aspects of the processed beans,  packaging of the condition 
bean aims at reducing the water exchange with the environment. The bean mass relative to the 
10 
 surface area exposed to the environment should be large to mini mize water exchange and 
packaging environment have no effect on the stored beans.  
(Refer Slide Time:  11:25) 
 
So, in the traditional method of packaging, in Madagascar and M exico, a bundle consisting 
around 50 pods is stored in tin or cardboard boxes which preven t moisture exchange. But it 
does not prevent gas diffusion. So, beans are also kept in loos e state in a cardboard box that 
may be lined with wax paper. It is used for low grade beans des tined for extraction purpose. 
But the improved process is the Vacuum packaging. Here beans ar e packaged under vacuum 
in sealed plastic films. Size of the package may vary from 100 gram to 10 kg, and it prevents 
both the moisture and gas exchange  within the ambient atmospher e.  
(Refer Slide Time:  12:15) 
 
11 
 Now, after it has been processed and packaged and cured, so cur ed vanilla bean, let us see that 
how the vanilla flavor is synthesized produced inside the beans . So, vanillin and precursors, 
are absent in the vanilla pla nt, but they are only found in the  mature vanilla pods. 
There are two process, ripening process, the vanillin level gra dually increases in the form of its 
glucoside reaching a maximum at t he harvest, that is 8 to 9 mon ths post-pollination. And then 
the most of the final, majority of the compounds are developed in the curing process. The 
vanillin glycoside is hydrolyzed  by glucosidase activity during  the curing process at the end. 
And most of the glycosides has been converted into vanillin. 
(Refer Slide Time:  13:11) 
 
So, this is one of the possible routes has been suggested to va nillin biosynthesis in the vanilla 
beans, that is, there is the Fer ulate pathway where aromatic ri ng on C6 to C3 compounds, that 
is trans-Cinnamic acid, para-C oumaric acid undergo hydroxylatio n and methylation to ferulic 
acid which then undergo chain shortening to vanillin. In the Be nzoate pathway chain shortening 
of a phenylpropanoid first metabolic event, which is followed b y hydroxylation and 
methylation of the aromatics. 
12 
 (Refer Slide Time:  13:51) 
 
Then the in the Shikimic acid pathway, the phenylalanine underg oes deamination to a C6 to 
C3 phenylpropanoid, that is para-Coumaric acid, and then this p ara-Coumaric acid is converted 
to para-hydroxybenzaldehyde which i s then reduced to para-hydro xybenzoyl alcohol. Then 
3,4-dihydroxyphenyl alcohol can be eit her methylated to 4-hydro xy-3-methoxybenzyl alcohol 
or it can get oxidized i nto 3,4-dihydroxybenzaldehyde. 
3,4-dihydroxybenzaldehyde can be me thylated to form vanillin or  4-hydroxy-3-
methylbenzylalcohol can be oxidized to vanillin. So, these are the proposed compounds and 
figures. So that is how that these Vanilla, as precursors are c onverted into vanillin or flavour 
compounds. 
(Refer Slide Time:  14:43) 
 
13 
 The components of vanilla flavour, you can see there are about more than 250 compounds 
influenced the vanilla flavour, and the quality of the cured va nilla pods. Vanillin is around 1 to 
2 percent of the cured pod, is the major compound. Other compou nds influencing flavor include 
volatile such as monoterpenes, ses quiterpenes, ethers, arenes, phenolics and lactones.  
Also, there are various precursors, that is putative precursors  of vanillin contributing to the 
aroma and flavor of vanillin a re like para-hydroxybenzaldehyde,  which is normally sweet 
tasting. Vanillic acid, they gi ve this organoleptic property of  chocolate, creamy, grape, nutty, 
wine-like or para-hydroxybenzoi c acid rich. Vanillyl alcohol, t hey are mild sweet, balsamic or 
vanilla-like odor.  
(Refer Slide Time:  15:56) 
 
Now, this natural vanillin may b e extracted from various differ ent agri-horti pr oduces and this 
slide shows one. If the vanilla pod, that is the cloved dried v anilla pod, conditioned vanilla pod 
is used and it is subjected to extraction and we get natural va nillin. So, apart from this even rice 
bran, rice bran has ferulic acid, and through bioconversion by fermentation is converted into 
vanillin.  
Corn, the glucose and this glucose also by de novo biosynthesis  by fermentation process and 
in many countries, European countries, or U.S. country they are  using these raw materials 
agricultural horticulture to produc e natural vanillin. So, this  turmeric, turmeric contains 
curcumin. 
This Curcumin is bio converted  by fermentation into Eugonal, th at is, into natural vanillin. And 
other very important source whic h is used by the industry comme rcially to produce vanillin, 
14 
 other than the vanilla bean, is the clove, there is a clove, Eu gonal, it contains essential oil, 
Eugonal and this Eugonal, either by soft chemistry and fermenta tion or bioconversion by 
fermentation, it is converted into natural vanillin. So, these are the natural sources for getting 
the vanillin.  
(Refer Slide Time:  17:32) 
 
So, as far as the extraction of vanilla from vanilla beans is c oncerned, you know that it is 
available commercially in the form of vanilla essence, its natu ral Vanilla extract is sold as a 
dilute ethanolic extract containing about 1 gram per litre vani llin. So, the commercial extracts 
and techniques include percola tion method or Oleoresin method. 
In the percolation method, a circulating mixture of ethanol and  water containing 35 to 50 
percent alcohol are placed for 48 to 72 hours. And this powdere d vanilla beans are kept. And 
this results in a four-fold stre ngth vanilla extract. In the Ol eoresin method, it consists of 
pulverizing whole parts and then circulating ethanol over the p od under vacuum at around 45 
degrees Celsius. So, the excess ethanol is removed by evaporati on and this process takes about 
8 to 9 days. It results in 10 fol d strength of the vanilla extr act. 
Other methods for extraction, maybe Soxhlet extraction, supercr itical carbon dioxide extracts 
and microwave assisted extract s and ultrasound assisted extract ion or enzymatic extraction, 
solid phase extraction, so, all these various methods, with pri nciple and method of operation, 
have already discussed in earlier classes.  
So, they can also be used for extraction but it is better to go  for the microwave assisted or U.S. 
assisted extraction process or supercritical CO 2 extraction process so that the, atleast flavor 
15 
 compounds, their purity can be re tained and their flavoring pot ential, maximum flavoring 
potential is obtained in the extract.  
(Refer Slide Time:  19:29) 
 
Then, for the production of vanillin from eugenol, eugenol is r eacted with KOH and then it 
converts to iso-eugenol and which is finally oxidized into vani llin. This is a very simple way, 
I have told, but this is a very complex group of reactions. A s eries of complex reactions are 
there by which Eugenol is converted into vanillin. 
So, upon completion of this reaction, an equimolar amount of ni tro benzene is introduced 
slowly into the autoclave and when the resulting oxidation to s odium vanillate is completed, 
t h e  b a t c h  i s  c o o l e d  a n d  t h e  p e r m a n e n t  g a s e s  a r e  b l o w n  o f f .  B y  s olidification of the batch, 
vanillin is precipitated from solution and recovered by filtrat ion. The vanillin yield in industry 
is approximately 80 percent of the  theoretical value of eugenol . 
16 
 (Refer Slide Time:  20:36) 
 
Then, production of synthetic van illa flavor from paper industr y waste, and in the market that 
synthetic vanilla is available a lso for using various products.  So, in fact, synthetic vanilla is 
prepared artificially from kraft lignin, which is a by-product of paper industry. The black liquor 
produced from kraft pulping proce ss consists of organic or inor ganic pods. 
And this kraft lignin is the largest constituent in the organic  part, that is about 30 percent of the 
total dry solids in black liquor. So, this process consists of two sections, one is the reaction 
section where the preparations feeds is prepared, and it is fed  into the reactor output. And then 
separation section, that is van illin product from the reaction section is purified using three 
different methods.  
17 
 (Refer Slide Time:  21:44) 
 
So, in the reaction section, feed  that is lignin, air, sodium h ydroxide and water, they are fed 
into the reaction vessel, then oxidation conditions are given f or oxidation to take place and then 
neutralization of the oxidized f eed is also carried out in the reaction section. And finally, the 
solution moves to the separati on section, after the reaction is  over. 
In the separation section, distil lation of the neutralized solu tion is carried out, it follows 
evaporation, crystallization a nd washing operations. And at las t, the vanillin is recovered after 
drying. Three different types of separation steps are used. Tha t is case 1, liquid-liquid extraction 
is followed by distillation, case  2, two stage liquid extractio n, and finally, vacuum distillation. 
So, these are the very complex chemical reactions and by which these compounds, are 
transformed into vanillin, synthetic vanilla.  
18 
 (Refer Slide Time:  22:56) 
 
Now, let us discuss the applica tion of vanilla flavor in food p roducts. Vanilla is the one, very 
commonly used flavoring materials in various products like dair y products, in beverages, in 
baked goods, confectionery product s or it is also used as a fla vor enhancer in the market. As I 
told you, both vanilla is available in the form essence or vani lla is available in the form of 
flavour. As a vanilla essence, t hat is the natural vanillin ext racted from the vanilla beans are 
from the other natural agricultural or horticultural produces a nd the synthetic vanilla produced 
from the paper industry, liquor waste or so.  
(Refer Slide Time:  23:43) 
 
So, in the dairy products, Vanilla is used as a flavoring, our ice cream and even some other 
product, yogurt etc. The category of vanilla used determines th e labelling of ice cream. 
19 
 Category 1 that is natural vanilla extract, two-fold vanilla is  used and thus ice cream product is 
labeled as vanilla icecream. A nd a category 2, vanilla-vanillin  e x t r a c t  t h e  u s e d  a n d  t h i s  i s  
considered as a natural and artificial (N & A) where the natura l component is the characterizing 
flavor. And icecream products are l abeled as vanilla flavored i ce cream.  
And third category includes natural and artificial vanilla flav ors or artificial vanilla flavors, 
where the artificial component predominates. And icecream produ ct in this category is labeled 
as artificially flavored vanilla  ice cream. So, Vanilla ice cre am, vanilla flavored ice cream or 
artificial flavored vanilla ice cream depending upon the nature  or form, whether synthetic or 
flavored or combination of both is used. 
(Refer Slide Time:  25:01) 
 
In the bakery products, that is pure vanilla extract is not use d for baking, becaus e the aromatic 
components of extract begin to vapourise or volatize at about 1 35 to 150 degrees Celsius, which 
is a temperature that is readily attained in cookie baking. So,  cakes rarely exceed 100 degrees 
Celsius during baking process internally. So, the extract or bl end of extract maybe used, even 
synthetic or natural vanilla or vanilla extract can be used bec ause here the temperature is not 
very high. 
But in the bakery product where t emperature is very high maybe 135 to150 degrees Celsius or 
more, there, a natural extract m ay be avoided. Vanilla-vanillin  extract or artificial flavors are 
recommended in such baking operations. Natural and/or artificia l flavors can be used with 
various flavor notes such as but tery, nutty, brown sugar and so  on.  
(Refer Slide Time:  26:10) 
20 
  
In the beverages, vanilla is an important flavor component in c ola drinks, soft drinks, cream 
soda, root beer, and some fruit beverages also contain vanilla.  Vanillin or vanilla flavors are 
used in many alcoholic beverages  such as even whiskey, cordials  and cocktails. And here, they 
are used to round out and smooth the harsh edges of the alcohol . So for such alcoholic beverage, 
they improve the flavour. 
(Refer Slide Time:  26:52) 
 
Then the vanillin is used as a flavor enhancer in various produ ct like in chocolate or in the food 
or sweet flavors etc. So, in the chocolate, vanilla softens the  round out harsh, bitter notes in 
most of the chocolate applications such as ice cream, where the  bitter chocolate is used in ice 
cream, cakes etc. So, when these bitter chocolate together with  the vanillin or vanilla flavor is 
added, then it improves the, or it reduces the bitterness of th e material. So, in contractions such 
21 
 as chocolate bars, powdered vanillin is used to do the job. The  fruits or sweet flavors, the vanilla 
is used to enhance fruit flavors in many dairy and beverage app lication. It rounds out many 
fruit flavors and takes off some of the tart edges. 
As a power of sweetness, that van illa enhances the sweetness pe rception of foods and especially 
in the bakery product. So, the vanilla is very popular and comm only used flavoring materials 
in various foods.  
(Refer Slide Time:  28:04) 
 
So, I will say now that the major principal component which giv es the flavor of vanilla is the 
vanillin, and this vanillin can be obtained naturally from the vanilla, cured vanilla beans or 
from eugenol, from the clove esse ntial oil from the rice, that is starch or corn starch and glucose 
or even from such other ag ricultural materials.  
It can also be prepared directl y, that it is from paper industr y waste or some synthetic vanillin. 
So, although the consumers like obviously the natural flavor, b ut if you look at the production, 
cost and another things, these s ynthetic flavors, synthetic for m is quite cheaper. 
The natural extractives are  200 times more expensive than its synthetic counterpart because 
cultivating and producing the va nilla beans then curing, and af ter curing the extraction of the 
material it is a costlier process. Novel technology has to be u sed for the extraction, mostly 
supercritical fluids, carbon di oxide as such as the novel metho ds. Obviously it will involve the 
cost, it will have more cost.  
22 
 So, means that is a good harves ting practices should be done an d beans should be properly 
cured, conditioned, and then extr acted using novel technologies , so that you can get a good 
quality, that is vanilla essence. And the temperature humidity and gas compositions are the 
some of the issues which should be taken care. Packaging and st orage of the cured bean as well 
as, even the extracted essence,  this should als o be properly pa ckaged and kept in the container 
suitably so that its volatiles  does not get evaporated. 
(Refer Slide Time: 30:22) 
 
These are the references whic h has been used in this lecture. F inally, thank you very much for 
your patient hearing. Thank you. 
