1 
 Post Harvest Operations and Processing of Fruits, Vegetables, Spices and Plantation Crop 
Products  
Professor H. N. Mishra  
Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture 35  
Dehydrated and Instant Cooking Vegeta bles 
 
Hello everybody , Namaskar .  
 
In this lecture , we will see what are dehydrated vegetables and drying techniques, methods for 
colour retention and improvements in rehydration characteristics, technologies for onion 
dehydration (Flakes and powder), dry ing of okra chips, green peas & cauliflower, osmo -air drying 
of tomato & osmo -freeze drying of carrot flakes, and spinach and amaranth leaves drying.  
2 
  
Dehydrated vegetables  
Most of the vegetables are seasonal crops and abundantly available during peak sea son results             
in spoilage of large quality. Dehydration refers to removal of moisture from vegetables to make it 
shelf -stable product. Processing by dehydration makes the green leafy vegetables light in weight, 
easily transportable and storable p roduct. Dehydrated vegetables can be easily converted into fresh 
like form by rehydration and can be used throughout the year, especially in off season.  
 
Various techniques used for dehydrating vegetables are solar drying , hot air drying , vacuum 
drying , freeze  drying , fluidized bed drying , microwave drying , foam mat  drying , spray drying , 
depending upon the type of the end product  required . The pretreatmen t methods are  very important 
operation before the dehydration of vegetables . Some of the p re-treatment  methods are sorting, 
washing, peeling, cutting into the appropriate form and blanching.  
3 
  
Pre-treatments to retain colour of dried vegetables:  
Thermal blanching  
Widely used method to inactivate the enzymes & microorganisms involved in spoilage, to soften 
tissues for facilitating drying process and eliminate intracellular air to prevent oxidation. 
Decreasing the reducing sugar content in a product by blanching can reduce browning and improve 
product color. Super heated steam impingement blanching inactivate  oxidases rapidly, avoids 
browning.   
Sulphur treatment  
Sulphur treatment can prevent the initial condensation reaction by forming non -reactive hydroxy 
sulphonate sugar derivatives. It is usually performed using SO2 gas or water -soluble sulfide salts 
such as potassium metabisulfite (K2S2O5), sodium metabisulfite (Na2S2O5) and sodium 
hydrogen sulfite (NaHSO3).  
 
4 
  
Acid treatment  
Acids such as citric, malic, phosphoric and ascorbic are employed to lower pH thus reducing the 
rate of enzymatic browning; the opt imum pH of PPO activity is 6.0 - 7.0. PPO activity is inhibited 
when the pH of me dia is lowered to 3.0 or below.  
Osmotic solution  
Dipping in osmotic solution can inhibit enzymatic browning and stabilize the colour of the product. 
Pretreatment of the produc t before drying with NaCl solution at moderate concentration 
significantly reduces the overall colour change. Osmotic treatment lowers  the water content in 
vegetables which subsequently reduces thermal drying time that induces lower colour changes.  
 
5 
 Rehy dration of dried vegetables  
Dehydrated vegetables are soaked in water before cooking, thus rehydration is an important 
property of dried vegetables. Rehydration is the process of moistening a dry material. Factors 
improving rehydration are porosity, capill aries and cavities near the surface and amorphous 
regions whereas factors which create obstacles in rehydration are presence of trapped air bubbles, 
crystalline structures and presence of anions in water.  
 
Rehydration ratio (Rr): It is the ratio of the ma ss of the rehydrated product (Wr) to the mass of the 
dried product (Wd).  
Rehydration coefficient (Rc): If the we ight of the rehydrated product is Wr, weight of the dried 
product is Wd and its moisture content is Wu, and the material before drying had moi sture content 
A%, then the rehydration coefficient (Rc) is  
Rc=Wr (100  −𝐴)
(Wd − W𝑢 𝑥 100) 
6 
  
Traditional pre -treatments to improve rehydration in dried vegetables:  
Sugar solutions:  Soaking of sliced dr y vegetables causes minimum damage, cell rupture and 
disruption of cell walls after drying and improves rehydration.  Acid solution:  Vegetables blanched 
with acids such as citric acid improves porosity of cell structure.  Alkaline ethyl oleate solution:  
Alka line ethyl oleate solution increases  the skin permeability and removes the waxy layer on the 
surface.  Ethanol treatment:  Ethanol treatment increases  the permeability of thinned cell walls 
and modifies the microstructure.  
 
Novel pre -treatment techniques to  improve rehydration in dried vegetables  
Pulsed electric field: PEF improves the cell perforation by electroporation due to introduction of 
short pulses of external electric field. Ultrasonication: US involves material disintegration through 
7 
 reactions such  as acoustic streaming, cavitation , sponge effect and microscopic channel 
formations. High humidity hot air blanching (HHAIB): During HHAIB, the pressure difference 
between the material interior and surface results in the formation of micro  cracks that alt er the 
material tissue and structure.  Microwave -blanching: The volumetric heating process leading to the 
creation of an internal pressure gradient, which drives moisture to the surface of the material. This 
cause cell disruption and formation of porous str ucture which improves rehydration ability.  
 
Onion dehydration  
Onion (Allium cepa) is the most commonly used vegetable in food preparations. It contains 
moderate amounts of protein, fat, fibre and good amounts of Ca, P & K and Vitamins C & B6. The 
pungent  taste of onion is due to the volatile oil allyl -propyl -disulphide. Onions are generally dried 
from an initial moisture content of about 88 -90 % to 6 -7 % (wb) or less for efficient storage and 
processing.  
Indian onion varieties suitable for dehydration  
White flesh onion: Bombay White, No -36-1-3-4, Udaipur -102, S -74, Pb -48, L -131, L -124, L -106, 
Pusa White Round, Pusa White Flat, N -257-9-1, etc.  
Red onion: Ropali, Rangda, Udaipur -101, Pusa Red, VL -1, Punjab Red, Sel -102-1, Arka Niketan, 
N-2-4-1, Agrifound Lig ht Red, Agrifound Dark Red, Arka Kalian, N -53, etc.  
 
8 
  
Onion drying process include harvesting and sorting/grading of medium to large size bulbs, 
peeling (flame peeling), slicing ( 5 mm thickness, 88%wb moisture content ), drying (Cabinet 
drying, 55 -60°C for  10-15 h, 7% wb moisture), bin drying (Warm air circulation to reduce moisture 
to ~4 %wb), screening and packaging of dried onions (Packing in polythene bags). Requirement 
of onions for processing are High total soluble solids high degree of pungency, high  insoluble 
solids, low reducing to non -reducing sugars ratio to avoid caramelization, high yields and good 
storage quality.  
\  
 
 
 
9 
 Case study: Thin layer drying of onion  
Effect of slice thickness on colour changes of dried onion  
The slice thickness between  2 and 6 mm do not cause colour changes, whereas thickness above 6 
mm strongly influences colour of the dried product. To minimize colour changes the thickness of 
onion slices should be selected as small as possible.  
Effect of temperature on pyruvate conte nt (Thickness 2 mm)  
The ability of the dried onion slices to produce pungent components decreased with increasing 
drying temperature. The drying temperature had a more pronounced influence on the pyruvate loss 
than the slice thickness. Drying temperatures above 60 °C should be avoided to achieve better 
flavour.  
 
This is the process flow chart for the onion powder production . Raw onion is taken for grading, 
stem cutting and peeling, slicing (Size reduction 1/8 – 1/4" thickness), blanching (80°C for 5 min), 
osmosis (1 -3% Brine, 30 min), tray drying of onion slices (50 -70°C, 8 -10 h) to prepare the onion 
flakes, pulverizing is done to produce onion powder and Packing of flakes and powder  is done in 
the final step. Dehydrated onion flakes & powder can be used in  soups, sauces, salad sprinkles, 
seasoning, pizza, etc. Vacuum packed onion has increased shelf life and can be used/    consumed 
at later stage.  
 
10 
  
For vacuum packaging of onion flakes onion flakes are placed within the vacuum packing 
machine. The lid is closed and air is removed. Heat sealed inside the chamber. The lid is then 
opened and the product is removed. Finally Transportation & storage is done. Vacuum packaging 
removes air from the package prior to sealing, reduces atmospheric oxygen, limiting gro wth of 
microbes and evaporation of volatile components, extends the shelf life, Flexible packaging forms 
reduce  the volume.   
 
Plant layout for onion processing unit with solar dehydration facility  
The plant layout in the figure includes 1 - Store room, 2-Shelves, 3 -working table, 4 -onion 
grader, 5 -coveyor, 6 -onion peeler, 7 -compressor, 8 -vacuum packaging machine, 10 -liquid filling 
11 
 machine, 11 -colloidal mill, 12 -hammer mill/ball mill, 13 -vegetable slicer, 14 -blancher and 15 -
solar dryer.  
 
Dehydrated okra   
Okra chips are a dehydrated version of okra. It can be consumed as a low -calorie snack. Salt, spices 
and vegetable oils are added to boost its flavour & lengthen shelf life. Okra’s suitability for drying 
is fair to good. Okra chips are a good source of p otassium, magnesium, Vitamin A, calcium and 
folate.  
 
Processing of dehydrated okra include sorting, grading and washing according to size, maturity, 
and soundness, cutting into 0.25 & 0.3 cm slices, blanching in boiling water and treating with 
sulphite so lution (use of sodium or potassium sulphite, bisulphite or metabisulphite and Sulphur 
12 
 dioxide) to retard enzymatic browning, drying in cabinet dryer at 55 -60°C for 6 -8 h, cooling at 
room temperature, packaging at polypropylene pouches and storage in order to protect the product 
against moisture, light, air, dust, microflora, foreign odour, insects, and rodents.  
 
 
Post-dehydration treatments in okra processing  
Sweating: Sweating involve s the holding  the dehydrated product in bins or boxes to equalize the 
moisture content. Screening:  Screening removes dehydrated pieces of unwanted size, usually 
called fines. Inspection: The dried product is inspected to remove foreign materials , discoloured 
pieces, or other imperfections. Instantiation treatments: Instantiat ion treatments are used to 
improve the rehydration rate of the low -moisture product. Packaging: Dehydrated Okra can be 
stored in glass jars, polypropylene pouches, tin jars with air tight lids at 20 -25°C for 6 -8 months.  
13 
  
The machineries involved for proce ssing of okra are Roller brush washer, Universal slicer, 
Blanching tank, Vacuum packaging machine, Impulse heat sealer electric power and Tray dryer.  
 
Frozen -dehydrated peas  
Frozen -dried peas are convenient and can be stored as fresh, and are inexpensiv e. Cleaning: A 
flotation washer is used. Sorting: The peas sorter consists of 3 to 5 rotating clover leaf -shaped, 
perforated drums with a diameter of about 2 m. Blanching: The peas are heated up to 75 to 80 °C 
for 2 to 4 min. Freezing & sublimation: After packing, the sealed packets are fed to freezer for 
rapid freezing at -18 °C which are subsequently freeze dried at -45 to -50 °C. Storage: At -18 to -
23 °C. Only about 5 % of peas sold worldwide are fresh. The processing steps involve harvesting, 
14 
 grading a nd waste separation, peeling, grading, blanching, cooling, bulk packaging, freezing and 
freeze drying, and Storage at ‐18 to -23 °C.  
 
The equipments used in freeze drying of peas are Bubble cleaning machine, Pea sheller, Screw 
blancher, Packaging machine,  and Freeze dryer.  
 
Here is the comparison of drying methods of p ea. There are two graphs, one is  moisture content 
versus time and other is  drying rate versus moisture content . Different drying methods such as 
Microwave vacuum drying (MVD), Hot air convec tive drying (HACD), and                        Multistage 
dryings HP -FB-AFD+MVD, and HP -FB-HACD+MVD have been plotted and shown in the 
graphs.  All these processes were applied in combination  and permutations  to know the affecting 
parameters . The microwave vacuum drying is found better among all the processes . 
15 
  
Rehydration capacity of dried peas   
Rehydration capacity is the ratio of W r  & W d Where, W r  & W d are the weight of  pea after and 
before rehydration (g). The rehydration curves showed an initial hig h rate of water absorption 
followed by a slower absorption rate in the final stages of rehydration. Rehydration capacities of 
the pre -treated samples were higher than those of control samples at all drying temperatures. 
Rehydration capacity of green peas d ried at 55°C employing different pre -treatments such as 
AEEO:  Immersion in 2% ethyl oleate and 3% potassium carbonate, CITRIC : Immersion in 0.5% 
citric acid for 1 min, BLANCH : at 85 °C for 1 min, CONTROL : No pretreatment  have been 
shown in the plot.  
 
Case study: Convective drying of cauliflower (drying time)  
16 
 Drying conditions were temperature: 45, 55, 65 and 75 °C and air velocity: 2 m/s. The samples 
dipped in hot water (blanch) before drying process had a shorter drying time compared to citric 
acid solution and control samples. Hot water contributed to increase the permeability of the cell 
membranes of cauliflower slices, leading to an increase in water diffusivity. Pre -treatments used 
were CITRIC: 0.5% citric acid for 1min at 20°C, BLANCH: at 80°C for 2 min and CONTROL: 
No pretreatment. Drying curves of cauliflower slices with or without pre -treatments at different 
temperatures (A) 45 °C, (B) 55 °C, (C) 65 °C and (D) 75 °C) have been shown in the drying rate 
plots.  
 
Case study: Convective drying o f cauliflower (Rehydration ratio)  
The pre -treated samples had higher rehydration ratio compared to control samples. Blanched 
samples had higher rehydration ratio compared to the samples pre -treated with citric acid solution 
and control samples. The rehydra tion ratio increased within the initial period, but then the rate of 
increase gradually slowed down. Rehydration ratio versus rehydration time at different 
temperatures (A) 20 °C, (B) 40 °C, (C) 60 °C, and (D) 80 °C have been plotted.  
17 
  
Osmo -air drying of tomato  
 The processing involve selection of fully red tomato, washing, Blanching in boiling water 
at 100 °C for 2 min, Osmotic diffusion  4 -5% NaCl at 50 -55 °C for 45 -60 min, Cutting into 
thin slices, Dipping into 2% gelatinized starch solution for 10 min, Cabinet drying I stage 
(55 °C for 2 -3 h), II stage (45 -50 °C for 8 -10 h), Cooling to room temperature, Grinding in 
grinder, Packaging and Storage. Quality attributes are Ascorbic acid (8 -10 mg/100g), 
Lycopene (3 -3.5 mg/100g), Rehydration ratio (1.5 -2.0), a nd Recovery of dried tomato 
powder (2.5 - 3.25%). There is less losses of lycopene under osmotic diffusion due to fewer 
cis-isomers.  
 
 
18 
 Osmo -freeze drying of carrot flakes  
The process flow chart involve the selection  of god carrots, Washing and grating to form flakes, 
Immediate cooling in chilled water for 20 -30 min, Surface moisture drying at room temperature, 
Freeze drying at 0.042 -0.062 mbar and -92 to -98 °C, Cooling and packaging in polypropylene 
pouches, Storage at 20 -25 °C for 6 -7 months. Freeze drie d carrot shreds after rehydration in boiling 
water for 1 -2 min can be used in soup or curry preparation. Changes in quality attributes include 
decrease (10 %) of initial sugar content during storage and decrease (25 %) in red colour intensity.  
 
Process fl ow chart for spinach powder production include collection of fresh spinach leaves, 
washing with water to remove dirt, sodium hypochlorite treatment, cutting into smaller bits, drying 
using tray dryer, grinding and passing through 72 mesh, packaged in metal ized polyester 
polyethylene pouches.  Nutritional and functional characteristics of spinach powder are shown in 
the table.  
19 
  
Drying of Amaranth ( Amaranthus caudatus ) leaves  
Amaranth leaves  are taken for Sorting, grading, cleaning, washing, Blanching with 0 .1% 
magnesium oxide, 0.1% NaHCO3 and 0.5% KMS solution at 100 °C for 15 -20 sec, Osmotic 
diffusion treatment of 1% NaCl solution at 55 -60 °C for 15 -20 min, Drying in cabinet dryer at 50 -
55 °C for 4 - 5 h, Cooling and packaging, and Storage for    8 -10 month s at 20 -25 °C. Quality 
attributes include good overall acceptability after 50 days of storage at 10 - 15°C and moisture 
content varied from 15 - 18 % during storage. Dried amaranth leaves are fried in refined oil along 
with spices followed by addition of w ater for rehydration during curry preparation.  
 
Rehydration behavior and colour attributes of microwave dried amaranth leaves  
20 
 Rehydration of MW dried leaves was successfully done at 35°C. The rehydrated leaves were 
darker than the fresh leaves. Increasin g the temperature to 50 °C improved the rehydration capacity 
and the color of the leaves. Rehydration ratio versus time curve for drying conditions of 700 W 
microwave power and 780 s drying time has been shown in the graph. Color attributes at different 
drying temperatures have been shown in the table.  
 
Dehydrated products can be used during off season and the fresh produce of far off places can be 
saved from decomposition due to severe weather conditions and inefficient transport facilities. 
Proper drying  conditions are important factors in producing quality dehydrated vegetables. Among 
the technologies osmotic dehydration, vacuum drying, freeze drying, and spray drying have great 
scope for the production of quality dried products and powders. Pre -treatmen ts (e.g. blanching) 
before drying showed significant increase in rehydration properti  
 
21 
  
So, these are the references that are used in this lecture . Thank you very much for your patient 
hearing.  
