1 
 Post-Harvest Operations and Pro cessing of Fruits, Vegetables, S pices and Plantation 
Crop Products  
Professor H N Mishra  
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering Department  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur  
 
Lecture 57  
Extraction of Bio-active and Pi gments from Processing Waste 
 
This lecture is about extracti on of bioactives and pigments fro m processing waste.  
 
The concepts covered in this lecture include bioactives, their types and extraction methods, 
extraction of bio-actives from food processing wastes, major  p igments in fruits and vegetables 
and their extraction of pigments from processing wastes, and in  the end, a few case studies 
related to the fruits and vegetables processing by-products and  waste utilization.  
2 
  
Processing waste 
Fruits and vegetables represent the simplest form of functional  foods because they are rich in 
several bio-active components. F ruits containing polyphenols an d carotenoids have been shown 
to have antioxidant activities and they diminish the risk of de veloping certain types of cancer. 
Major processing waste includes t rimmings, peelings, stems, see ds, shells, even residues 
remaining after the extraction of juice, oil, starch and sugar,  etc. These are a huge amount of 
waste and by-products is generated particularly from the fruits  and vegetables processing 
industry. So, these wastes can be used for extraction of bio-ac tive components and pigments, 
etc., because they contain a huge amount of these valuable mate rials. The recovered 
biomolecules and by-products can be used to produce functional foods or in medicinal and 
pharmaceutical preparations. 
 
Utilization of bioactives from waste 
3 
 The fruits and vegetables can b e utilized in various products t hrough processing s uch as juice, 
nectar, sauces, dehydrated products etc. After processing vario us waste by-products like 
pomace, seeds, rind, skin, peel etc. are produced. So, these by -products can be subjected to 
appropriate technologies to extr act bioactives either by conven tional method or by novel 
extraction techniques and the bio-actives like phenolic, anthoc yanins, flavonoids, tannins, etc. 
can be extracted from them.  
These extracted bio-actives can further be encapsulated so as t o increase the stability during 
processing. So, the encapsulation methods such as spray drying,  ultrasonic emulsification, spray 
cooling, fluidized bed coating, and freeze drying. These encaps ulated bio-actives can be used 
in the preparation of various functional foods, as an ingredien t in ice cream, crackers, cookies, 
cheese etc.  
 
Bioactive present in fruits and  vegetables and their function 
The bio-actives present in fruits and vegetables and their func tionality is shown in the table. For 
example, when the tomato is pro cessed for juice or ketchup or s uch other things, then its peels, 
seeds and pomace were emerged as a waste but they contain subst antial amount of lycopene 
and essential lipids and these lycopene, essential lipids, etc.  have very good anti-cancer agent. 
They reduce degenerative dis eases, promote heart health.  
Potato peel contains vanillic acid, gallic acid, caffeic acid, steroids alkaloids etc and have 
various health promoting functions like anti-pathogenic, anti-i nflammatory, immune 
stimulation. Carrot peel and pomace contain phenols, beta-carot ene, pectin which has 
antibacterial activity, they are also anti-cancer agent. Even p umpkin seeds, skins, shells have p-
hydroxybenzoic acid, trans-p-coumaric acid, which are anti-micr obial and used for diabetes 
4 
 treatment. 
 
The apple pomace and peel contai n epicatechin, anthocyanins, qu ercetin or other glycosides 
which helps in the reduction of b lood pressure, has anti-inflam matory properties etc. Grape 
skin, seeds and stem have caffeic acid, ferulic acid, carbonic acid, chlorogenic acid and 
proanthocyanidins and have vari ous health promoting activities like they are cardio protective, 
anti-aging agent, anti-cancer, and have enhancement of gut heal th.  
Pomegranate, citrus fruits, even mango, all their waste i.e. wh ether  seed, peel, pericarp, kernel, 
pulp have good valuable components like mango kernel and peel c ontain anthocyanins, ellagic 
acid, quercetin, tannins, mangife rin etc., which  have hypochol esterolemic, extension of oil 
stability, they have anti-cancer, an ti-microbial activities and  so on. 
 
Bioactive extraction 
5 
 The bioactives from the waste can be extracted either using nov el technologies or conventional 
technologies. Novel technologies i nclude supercritical fluid ex traction, subcritical water 
extraction, ultrasound-assisted, microwave-assisted, and PEF-as sisted techniques. 
Conventional technology include s hydro distillation, solvent ex traction, maceration and so on.  
The details of all these technologies had been discussed in ear lier classes. The adjustment of 
the process parameters might be required, but the same technolo gy can be used and then 
extracted materials can be appl ied used as an ingredient in foo d processing. 
 
Pigments-Natural colors 
Pigments are present in fruits and vegetables, they are very go od source of food color. This 
natural food color is any dye, pi gment or any other substance o btained from fruits, vegetables. 
They are multicolored because of the presence of various organi c compounds which are known 
as pigments and they contribute to the color of this commodity.  The color comes from variety 
of sources like seeds, fruits, their peels, vegetables, even al gae, insect, grass, all these things 
contain these coloring component s and these coloring components  can be extracted i.e. the color 
can be extracted from these components. 
The fruits and vegetables, are naturally colored in the form of  4 major groups of pigments. 
These are either yellow-orange-re d carotenoids, red-blue-purple  anthocyanins, green 
chlorophylls, or red betanins. B etanins is the major group of c olor compounds or pigments 
present in most of the  fruits and vegetables.  
 
6 
  
 
Carotenoids 
The carotenoids are tetraterpene pigments, which exhibit yellow , orange, red, and purple colors.  
Carotenoids typically contain only carbon and hydrogen, so they  are basically hydrocarbons 
and particularly belong to the subclass of unsaturated hydrocar bon, as can be seen in the 
restructure, they have high degree upon saturated bonds and it is these unsaturated  bonds that 
is the compound they have jagged the colors of different intens ity depending on different 
unsaturated bonds and accordingl y, they are color compounds.  
Carotenoids with molecules containing oxygen such as lutein and  zeaxanthin, are called 
xanthophylls. In many fruits, the color is present in the form of xanthophylls. The unoxygenated 
i.e. oxygen free carotenoids, such as beta carotene, alpha caro tene, lycopene, are all known as 
carotenoids or carotenes. The carotenes are a precursor of vita min A also called pro-vitamin A. 
When these carotenoids are present in plant foods, they have th e pro-vitamin A activity like 
7 
 beta carotene, alpha carotene, beta-cryptoxanthin and so on. Wh e n  t h e  p r o - v i t a m i n  A  i s  
consumed in body, these are conver ted into vitamin A. There are  certain carotenoids like lutein, 
zeaxanthin, lycopene etc., lycopene is the color of the tomato.  They do not have any pro-vitamin 
A activity. So, they are known as  non-pro-vitamin A carotenoids .  
 
The carotenoids types and their major sources like alpha-carote ne is found in carrots, pumpkin, 
winter squash, plantains, collard  greens, etc. Beta-carotene ma jor sources include carrot, leafy 
greens, sweet potato, and pumpkin. Lutein and zeaxanthin are fo und in leafy greens, summer / 
winter squash, brussel sprouts, and yellow corn. Beta-cryptoxan thin is found in pumpkin, 
papaya, sweet pepper, orange, carrot and so on.  
Here in the figure, it can be seen that absorbents they have th ese compounds like carotenes, 
they have absorption spectra somewhere around 475 or 480 nm. Ch lorophyll A and chlorophyll 
B, have somewhere around in between 600 to 700 nm. So, these va rious compounds have 
different absorption spectra i.e. at different wavelengths, the y get the peak and that is how they 
are normally characterized.  
Action of carotenoids agai nst chronic diseases 
These carotenoids are very useful  against various chronic disea ses. For example, the carotenoids 
that contains antioxidant, pro- vitamin A activity, and have blu e light absorption effect are 
beneficial against the macular  degeneration, cat aract, retiniti s pigmentosa. Similarly, in the skin 
disease i.e. these antioxidant property or anti-inflammatory pr operty or lower down the UV 
light mediated damages give useful effects on skin sunburn, mel anoma etc. So, these 
carotenoids have their full potential in the whole fruits and v egetables i.e. when we take raw 
fruits and vegetables, we get these carotenoids. If these fruit s & vegetables are bit lukewarm, 
8 
 their potential to fight again st the diseases is improved.  
 
 
Anthocyanins 
Anthocyanins are colored water -soluble pigments belonging to th e phenolic group in 
glycosylated forms. Anthocyanins are responsible for red, purpl e and blue color in fruits and 
vegetables. Berries, currants, grapes, and even some tropical f ruits have high anthocyanin 
content. They have red to purplis h blue color, eve n leafy veget ables, root, tubers are the edible 
sources that contain high level of anthocyanins. Among the anth ocyanin pigment, cyanidin-3-
glucoside is the major compound f ound in most of these plants. 
9 
  
Anthocyanins and their sources 
Anthocyanins are grouped in five  types like cyanidin, delphindi n, malvidin, pelargonidin, and 
peonidin. They have sources lik e malvidin is found in the flowe rs, red wine, blueberry etc. 
Cyanidin is found in grapes, blackberries, blueberries, cranber ries, raspberries, apples and so 
on. The major portion of these color remains are in the peel or  the pomace. So, they can be used 
to extract. The color and stabil ity of these carotenoids are in fluenced by pH, li ght, temperature 
and structure. In acidic conditi on, anthocyanins appear as red,  but turns blue when the pH 
increases. The colored nature of these carotenoids may be influ enced during processing, but the 
health value may of course rem ain intact or it may in some case s may get improved. 
 
Structure of major anthocyanins 
The structure of major anthocyani ns are basically phenolic comp ounds, they have been 
10 
 changing in the structure, and are highly unsaturated. There is  a little difference in the structure, 
compound with each other due which, sometimes have different co lors intensity, a color hue 
and also their health value.  
 
Health benefits of anthocyanins 
The health benefits of anthocyanins include anti-oxidative acti vity, anti-microbial activity, they 
improve visual and neurological health, and protect against var ious non-communicable 
diseases.  
 
Chlorophyll 
Chlorophyll is another major color compound that is green in co lor and found in most of the 
plants. Chlorophylls are porphyrins, which are macrocyclic tetr apyrrole pigments in which the 
pyrrole rings are joined by methyne bridges and the double bond  s y s t e m s  f o r m s  a  c l o s e d ,  
11 
 conjugated loop. There is a centrally located magnesium. These all pyrrole rings  are joined by 
the magnesium atom and coordi nated with the nitrogen.  
There are 2 types of chlorophyll i.e. chlorophyll A as well as chlorophyll B. Chlorophyll A and 
B are both typical green pigments of higher plants. They occur in various proportions, for 
example, they are found in 3:1 ratio in lettuce leave or 1:2 to  1:4 ratio in different varieties of 
tree tomato fruit. Chlorophyll A appears blue-gr een in color wh ereas the chlorophyll B is 
yellow-green. 
 
Chlorophyll A has a methyl group and chlorophyll B has a formyl  group at third carbon (C-3). 
i.e R in the figure. So, R group in the A is methyl and in the B is the formyl group and both 
have a vinyl and ethyl group at C-2 and C-4 position, respectiv ely. There is a carbomethoxy 
group at C-10 position of an isocyclic ring, and a phytol group  esterified to the propionate at 
the C-7 position. When the green chlorophyll containing vegetab les etc. are processed, 
sometimes these phytol group is removed that central magnesium is removed and accordingly 
that chlorophylls are converted  into pheophytins or pheophorbid es and color will change. So, 
particularly the green vegetab les during cooking and processing  undergoes various reactions 
resulted in change in color. 
The green color of vegetables and fruits, due to the presence o f chlorophylls, is affected by 
aging, enzymes, weak acids, oxygen, heat, and light. The degrad ation of the chlorophyll occurs 
during ripening of fruits, sene scence of green vegetables, and thermal processing of foods.  
The chlorophyll B was reported to be thermally more stable than  the chlorophyll A and these 
both form of chlorophylls have im mense health benefits like the y helps in weight loss, smoothen 
the digestive system, acts as an tioxidant, relieves swelling, p rotects DNA against fried foods 
12 
 etc. and they heals the inju ries, wounds and  injuries. 
 
 
Betanins 
Betanin is a red glycosidic food dye obtained from the beet roo ts. It is a betalain pigment 
together with isobetanin, probe tanin, and neobetanin. Other pig ments contained in the beet are 
indicaxanthin and vulgaxanthin. The color of betanin pigment de pends upon the pH. So, when 
the pH is between 4 and 5, it is bright blueish-red in color, i t is blue-violet as the pH increases 
and as the pH reaches alkaline level, it degrades by hydrolysis  to yellow-brown color. 
Sources of betanins 
The sources of betanins include beet juice, opuntia cactus, swi ss chard, amaranth etc. They have 
various health benefits like they are anti-diabetic, they reduc e LDL, they reduce blood pressure 
and many more.  
13 
   
 
 
Application of natural c olors in food systems 
The application of natural colors in the food systems include a nthocyanins, phycocyanins, 
chlorophylls, carotenoids, and be talains. These are the major g roups of coloring compounds 
present in the various plant material and in the waste also. So , they can be accordingly used like 
betalains can be used in the manufacture of yogurt, beverage, i ce cream, confections, cake 
mixes, etc.  
Anthocyanins may be better incorp orated into the bakery product , dairy product, frozen dessert, 
beverages. Phycocyanins in gums,  confections, soft drinks, dair y products etc. Carotenoids can 
be used in meat products, in butter and vegetable oils, cheese,  paste and so on. Chlorophylls 
can be used in the beverage mixtures, yogurt, puddings, ice cre ams. Overall, these colorants can 
14 
 be used or incorporated i nto the various food products. 
 
Utilization of tomato processing by-products 
The tomato, when it is processed for juice, concentrate puree e tc. to get the tomato pomace and 
this tomato pomace can be used for production of bio-methanol o r biopolymers production or 
even hydraulic enzymes production can also be done. These tomat o pomace include tomato 
peels and tomato seeds, this peel can be used for bioactive com pound recovery and these 
bioactives can be used in pharmaceutical industry and from toma to seeds, oil extraction is 
carried out which is used in food and cosmetic industries. The residue from tomato peel and 
tomato seeds can be used for ext raction and then dye removal et c. is done. In fact bio-actives 
phytochemicals like sterols, toc opherols, carotenes, terpenes, they are all present in the tomato 
by-products and they have good an tioxidant po tential. 
 
15 
 Lycopene extraction 
Lycopene is the major color pigment found in the tomato. After the extraction of juice, these 
colors majority of it retains in the peel or in the pulp residu e. After processing of tomato, these 
wastes can be used to extract lycopene or other compounds. The color can be extracted and used 
in nutraceuticals and in the cosmetic products.  
In this figure, the SFE extraction kinetics of oil from tomato waste at 500 bar and at 60 °C 
temperature. So, as S to F ratio i.e. the mass ratio of solvent  to feed increases, extraction 
efficiency or accumulated yield of the lycopene increased. It c an be seen that from 0 to 5 S/F, 
yield increases rapidly and after that it is almost stabilized.  It can be concluded that proper S/F 
ratio is required for  better recovery.  
 
The lycopene extraction process flowchart is shown in the figur e. Tomato industrial by-products 
were collected and pretreatment w as given to get tomato seeds ( TS) and tomato peels (TP). 
These peels were mixed with refined olive oil (ROO) and then ma cerated and extracted were 
carried out in different proporti ons of TP and ROO using Box-Be hnken design. Finally, the 
process parameters were optimized for better recovery and yield  of the lycopene extraction and 
the optimum lycopene extraction was almost 100 %. These are the  structure of lycopene and 
beta carotene, they both have al most similar structure with a l ittle difference in the left benzene 
ring open and closed resulte d in change in color. 
16 
  
Comparison of extraction methods 
Researchers have compared the bio accessibility of lycopene of the supercritical carbon dioxide 
(SC-CO 2) extracted oleoresin from the tomato seed and peel with the he xane extracted 
oleoresin. It was found that SC-CO 2 extraction is more biologically accessible than hexane 
extraction. 
 
The table showed extraction samp le, their extraction method use d and the carotenoid content 
obtained in the sample. For example, for tomato peel, the enzym e assisted extraction got 356 
mg/100 g (dw) of carotenoid content. It can also be seen that n ovel extraction technologies 
probably gives better yield. Di fferent components of tomato wer e used by combinations and 
permutations and even different e xtraction methods were tried t o find the best method for each 
combination or component.   
17 
  
Utilization of orange processing by-products 
These are the technology reported in the literature for the uti lization of orange processing by-
products i.e. for the extraction of pectin and extraction of es sential oil. For pectin, orange peel 
is converted into powder using appropriate technology then it i s treated with 0.05 N HCl, boiled 
at 100 °C for 1 h and cooled to room temperature. After that, i t is filtered and solid is separated. 
The liquid portion is obtained or the residue is obtained. It i s treated with alcohol and precipitate 
is separated which is dried to get the pectin powder. Pectin ca n be further purified and 
characterized.  
For extraction of essential oils , orange peel without the flave do layer is taken. It  is saturated in 
calcium hydroxide solution (1%, 8 h) and then this is removed f rom the solution, dried at 45 °C 
and powdered. This powder is the n distilled using either soxhle t apparatus or such other 
apparatus (80 g powder + 500 ml water + 10 g NaCl) to get oil a nd sodium sulfate is added to 
oil and filtered in which ethyl c hloride is added, concentrated , and stored.  
Utilization of potato processing by-products 
A schematic of the utilization of potato processing by-products  is shown here. When the potato 
is processed for chips or other  products, it give s the peel whi ch is a source of dietary fiber, and 
rich in phytochemicals and various bioactives, it is beneficial  to human health. So, conversion 
of these waste peels into various products can be done. The pot ato peel is dried and powdered, 
then it is extracted and the potato peel extract can be used in  various beverage or other such 
products. 
 
18 
  
 
Extraction of useful compounds f rom potato peel by sequential h ydrothermal treatment 
The potato peel slurry is treated in two stages. In stage1 & 2,  crude extract 1 & 2 are extracted 
and then sugar preci pitation, alkalin e precipitatio n & purifica tion are carried out. During sugar 
precipitation, polysaccharides are separated. In alkaline preci pitation, glycoalkaloids 1 and 
glycoalkaloids 2 are separated, and finally, by purification, n utrients and polyphenols 1 and 
polyphenols 2 are separa ted. Of course, the author has given so  there are some other, if you are 
interested, you can further read t o this paper and get more abo ut it.  
With the appropriate method, processing technology and optimum process parameters, these 
valuable components can be obtaine d from these peels and waste.  
19 
  
Extraction of phenolics from potato peels 
The extraction of phenolics from potato peel by conventional (C onv.), microwave-assisted 
(MAE), and ultrasound-assisted ( UAE) methods has been shown in the figure. Different 
solvents and their combinations were used to identify the best method and combination and it 
was found that conventional method with choline chloride and la ctic (ChLA, 1:1) gives least 
TPC, and combination of ChLA & 5% ethanol increases the TPC. Si milarly, when the same 
solvent is used in combination with either microwave or ultraso und, the yield is substantially 
higher. So, it is better to go for either microwave-assisted ex traction or ultrasound-assistant 
extraction. 
 
Summary 
These fruits and vegetables when they are processed generate a huge amount of waste stream 
20 
 or by-products. All these wastes  and by-products were almost 50  to 60 %, but these waste is a 
very valuable source of bioactiv es and other nutrients. If this  waste is left unattended, this will 
create environmental and many ot her such problems. But, if ther e is a proper mechanism in 
place for their collection especi ally in poor pro cessing indust ries like tomato processing 
industry, it is there responsibility to make some arrangement t hat whatever wastage being 
produced, it is properly treated a nd even if they cannot use, t hey should have some networking 
arrangement with some startup and other companies who can utili ze these into various value-
added products for the extracti on of color pigments or bioactiv es etc. These colorants or 
bioactives can be used in various food industry, cosmetic indus try or pharmaceutical industry 
depending on their usage. So, proper management of organic by-p roducts is required which will 
flourish environmental as well as economic benefits by reducing  the food waste. The 
manufacturer will also get the e conomic advantage along with en vironmental impact. It is 
already a win-win situation but the one has to take care that y es waste foods have a proper 
approach for utilization of these valuable by-products or waste  products of horticultural and  
plantation crop industry. 
 
21 
  
These are the references used in this lecture. 
 
Thank you very much. 
