Post-Harvest Operations and  
Processing Fruits, Vegetables, Spices and Plantation Crop Produ cts 
Professor H. N. Mishra 
Agricultural and Food Engineering Department 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
Lecture – 25 
Cut Fruits and Vegetables: Part II  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:20) 
 
Hello everybody, namaskar. In this lecture, second part of Cut Fruits and  Vegetables, we will 
discuss the equipment for processing of cut produces,  anti-browning treatment, technologies 
for shelf life extension of cut produces and the packaging meth ods and storage of fresh cut 
produces.  
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37) 
 
So, equipment, the operation process we studied in the earlier lecture. So, the various 
equipment that is the pre-cooling. So, you can say that the imm ersion hydrocoolers or shower 
type hydrocooler or vacuum pre-coolers. These are the equipment  used for pre-cooling of the 
produce before it is sent for slicing or cutting operations. 
Even details also, how this system works in earlier classes, we  had discussed that the principle 
of mechanical operations and principles of these equipment. So,  in the immersion cooling, there 
i s  b a s i c a l l y  t h e  f r e s h  p r o d u c e  c o m es  i n  t h e  f o r m  of  s om e s u i t a b le conveyor belts and it is 
immersed in a cooled water which contains some sanitizer, sanit izing agent or even that 
disinfecting agents, ant i-browning agents, etc  
Then for a particular time, depending upon the commodity and it  is taken out. Then the heat 
transfer takes place that is the material get cooled and the wa ter may become warm then water 
goes to the heat exchanger and then it is further cooled out an d it is recirculated. So, in shower 
type hydrocooler that is here, th e cold water is just sprayed, sprinkled on the commodity. And 
in the vacuum pre-cooler, there is a vacuum chamber i.e. commod ity space where product is 
pre-cooled by the  the condenser. 
(Refer Slide Time: 02:27) 
 
Then peelers and cutters, you can see these machines are here. That is one lychee fruit-peeling 
machine is shown which has various components like rollers, gea rbox, engine and collections 
of peels. So, it is basically pr ovided with the conveyor and al so the spiral which is containing 
spiral grooves, so, the material comes with these hoppers comes  inside the spiral groove and 
basically by this rubbing acti on the peels are removed.  
Peels are collected in the belt here. It is conveyed and the pe eled fruit is collected separately. 
This is a sort of very popular commercial vegetable dicing mach ine, where the different types 
of cutting devices are there int ernally. It may cut into differ ent shapes and sizes, cubes, dice 
and so on.  
(Refer Slide Time: 3:22) 
 
This is the process line for wa shing, dipping and dewatering of  fresh cut fruits and vegetables, 
may be a single pass line. Here you can see that the raw produc e comes and it is a portable 
water which containing some appropriate amount of chlorine or a cid etc. So, it is sprinkled here 
and the commodity is washed. And after that it is sent for the cutting operation and cut 
vegetables. It is a basic conve yor. It is inclined spray wash.  
So, the material is going there and then the water is spread he re and after that it comes vibra 
wash. Vibra wash where it is by abrasion, the material is remov ed then produce chute and the 
spent wash water comes. So, this is the single line.  
And then there may be a flume sy stem in which th e raw product c omes conveyor belt, this is a 
cutter and after cutting it comes  a flume A, where a portable w ater and chlorine and acid mixed 
with it. Here, product is dipped t hen it comes to flume B. Here  the same operation is done and 
finally the surface water is removed and the product chute. So,  these are the processing line for 
washing, dipping and dewatering of fresh produces.  
(Refer Slide Time: 04:56) 
 
Anti browning treatment. In the earlier class we discussed in d etail. It is very very important 
aspect. It may be physical treatme nt as well as chemical treatm ents. That is the along with the 
washing, that they should be dipped in various chemicals or by physical treatment by reducing 
the availability of the oxygen or  temperature management. And i t is recommended that fresh 
cut products should be kept at a t emperature of about just abov e its freezing point. So, that to 
avoid any form of enzyma tic action or browning.  
(Refer Slide Time: 05:37) 
 
So, reducing the oxygen availability, physical treatment may be  immersing the product in 
water, brine, syrup to diminish diffusion of oxygen, dense phas e carbon dioxide, applied low 
temperature in a solid-liquid product consisting of fresh cut f ruits in syrup as an alternative to 
the conventional thermal processing. Or even edible coating or modified atmosphere packaging 
is used and which eliminates the contact of the commodity with the oxygen and enzymatic 
activity is reduced. So, these are  the 1 way of reducing the ox ygen availability.  
(Refer Slide Time: 06:17) 
 
And then the chemical treatment like vitamin C, vitamin C is a very well-known antioxidant. 
So, it reduces the oxidative process. Then acidulants, for exam ple, 1 percent citric acid dip. It 
is used to adjust the pH of the product to a lower range and wh ich is not preferable for the 
browning enzymes to be active. Then by citric acid dip, the pH is brought lower and the enzyme 
is not able to act.  
Similarly, aromatic carboxylic acids like benzoic acids and the ir derivatives cinnamic acid, 
sodium metabisulfite etc, they are dipped, so that the enzyme a ctivity is inhibited. Sodium 
chloride very common, even in the case of potato chips making a nd potato slicing where  
sodium is commonly used for brine solution, 1 percent or 2 perc ent brine solution. It is a weak 
inhibitor, thus elevated amount is required to minimize brownin g incidence in fresh cut 
products.  
(Refer Slide Time: 07:19) 
 
These are the some of the fresh cut products that is the anti-b rowning treatment for the fresh 
cut tropical fruits. That is chemical treatment in the raw mang o slices, 2 percent weight by 
volume malic acid treatment is given. In the solution, slices a re dipped and it reduces visual 
browning.  
In the peeled guava cube, the t reatment method is aloe vera coa ting gel with additives. And in 
this coating gel, the peeled gua va cubes are dipped, that is di pping into the coating solution for 
about 5 minutes and then draining the solution and drying at ar ound 30°C for 20 minutes. So, 
it results in less change in lightness and yellowness of the co lor.  
Similarly, in the fresh cut pineapple, the edible coating, that  is the coating based on chitosan, 
pullulan, linseed, nopal cactus and the aloe mucilages and here  layer-by-layer deposition of the 
coating material is done and obviously coated sample reduces th e darkening of pineapple 
pieces.  
(Refer Slide Time: 08:33) 
 
Similarly, in the fresh cut melons and papaya, the controlling atmosphere is a recommended 
method and it maintains the color and extended the shelf life f or 3-4 days. The combination 
method of physical as well as chemical for fresh cut rose apple  is recommended. the 
temperature management, chemical treatment and edible coating, all these three delayed the 
browning for about 72 hours. Fresh mango, the pulsed light and 2-minute dipping in the 
alginate coating solution and ma lic acid about 2 percent weight  by weights solution are the 
combination treatment, it reduces  browning and microbial count in the fresh mango slices.  
(Refer Slide Time: 09:31) 
 
Technology for the shelf-life extension, again, that is the phy sical methods like modified 
atmosphere packaging, pressurized inert gas, then electron beam  irradiation, pulse light, 
ultraviolet light, cold plasma,  irradiation. Chemical technolog ies like acidic electrolyzed water, 
nano technology, ozone treatment. Or biopreservation techniques  like bacteriophages treatment 
with bacteriophages, bacteriocin s or bioprotective microorganis m. These can be used for the 
shelf life extension of fres h cut produces. In fact, many of th ese we had discussed earlier.  
(Refer Slide Time: 10:11) 
 
So, I will take up just that is principle of operation of these  methods. So, you see that some 
product that examples we will show here. UV radiation, when man go cut products treated with 
UV radiation, there is a reported in reduction in chilling inju ry symptoms and deterioration and 
it improve the antioxidant capacity.  
Even melon cubes, UV radiation is  reported to re duce 2 log micr obial counts and compared to 
untreated samples. In case of peaches there is significantly re duce chilling injuries, increase the 
resistance of root deteriorati on. High pressure is reported to reduce the rate of respiration and 
ethylene production in the cut apples and the accordingly the b rowning where rate were 
delayed.  
(Refer Slide Time: 11:11) 
 
Similarly, in the case of carro ts, high pressure is reported to  reduce 1.86-log cycle the aerobic 
bacteria and 1.25 log cycle yeast and moulds. In pineapples, hi gh pressure delayed the 
microbial growth and shelf-life extension was there up to 6 day s. In avocado slices high 
pressure result in the reducti on of respiration r ate and ethyle ne production.  
In pulsed light treatment, in the case of fresh cut apple, it h as been found effective in inhibiting 
the browning and microbial growth. In pulsed light the treatmen t is found effective in 
inactivation of E coli and liste ria innocua, in fresh cut water melon. And it also resulted in 
decrease in the et hylene production.  
(Refer Slide Time: 12:10) 
 
The cold plasma treatment. In the  cherry, tomato it has been fo und although there has been no 
significant effect, there is no significant change in the weigh t loss, pH and firmness. So, the 
cold plasma treatment in the cherry tomato, it maintains his fr eshness, respiration rate and color 
also does not change a fter the treatment.  
The in the case of blueberry, the firmness were reduced signifi cantly after 90- and 120-seconds 
treatment and all treatments synergistically or significantly r educed aerobic plate count from 
0.8 to 1.6 log CFU per gram. Cold plasma, in case of a fresh cu t apple, reduced the ten percent 
of antioxidant activity a nd antioxidant content.  
(Refer Slide Time: 13:09) 
 
So, here, it is shown the effect of a physical treatment that i s the effect of ultraviolet radiation 
control and UV-C radiation on th e appearance and deteriorative index. That is ‘a’ is the effect 
on 0 days and after 21 days. The cont rol sample first and then UV-C treated sample.  
You see that is how it is affecting the appearance and the dete rioration index also. That is, in 
the carambola slices, the deterioration index is reduced, even after 21 days also of the treatment. 
Where in the case of untreated s ample, the deterioration index was high.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:05) 
 
And the other physical treatment like slightly acidic electroly zed water in the fresh cut lettuce, 
it is found significant in deduction of the total aerobic count . In the fresh cut cucumber there is 
a high reduction in aerobic bact eria count, mold count, yeast c ount etc. and it was found more 
effective than the sodium hypochl orite treatment. Even applicat ion of nano technology, nano 
emulsions coating etc has been found very effective in fresh cu t kiwi fruits and pineapple or 
even in fresh cut carrots in cont rolling the microbial growth o r in maintaining the color, 
firmness, etc.  
(Refer Slide Time: 14:50) 
 
Another way of extending the shelf life is applying the bacteri ophages. And there are several 
reports in the literature, for example, in the fresh cut honeyd ew melon and apple, the 
bacteriophage mixture SCPLX-1 and bacteriophage mixture LM-103 and LMP-102, they have 
been found effective against that pathogen like salmonella  and L monocytogenes . In fresh cut 
lettuce and spinach phase cockt ail has been found effective aga inst E coli.   
In fresh cut lettuce that EcoShield that is lytic bacteriophage  has been found again effective 
against E coli . Or in fresh cut melons, apples and pears this Listex P100 bac teriophage, it is 
found effective against L monocytogenes. So, even there were va rious several bacteriophages 
available which can be applied and these b acteriophages, these are basically the viruses which 
eat away the undesirable bacteria and therefore help in increas ing the shelf life of fruits and 
vegetables.  
(Refer Slide Time: 16:10) 
 
Then frozen cut fruits and vegetables, the process technology i nclude the harvesting after that 
preprocessing and handling, clean ing, cutting, slicing, blanchi ng, the freezing, detection of 
metal, packaging and storage at minus 18 degree Celsius. There is freezing operations, at low 
temperature, all the water present in the material in the fresh  cut produce is frozen and 
converted into ice and then this frozen is appropriately packed  and after that it is stored at minus 
18 or minus 23°C. 
So, this freezing technology will discuss with the cold technol ogy of freezing module. So, that 
is an important aspect frozen material and it keeps for the lon ger period of time. So, the 
different packaging material for these frozen products are reco mmended like shrink film, 
cardboard packaging, IQF polyethyl ene, wax coated cardboard, fl exible bags and so on.  
(Refer Slide Time: 17:26) 
 
These are the equipment, possible processing equipment for froz en cut fruits and vegetables. 
In the continual line, these are the minimum equipment we are s uggesting. They are very 
standard. It is being easily available like feeding conveyor, c ontinuous on-line washing 
machine, then appropriate branching system.  
And after that the material can be directly converted to the bl ast freezer for IQF individual cook 
freezing or any other suitable fre ezing system can be used that  from this freezer it comes with 
a packaging, which is again done in the low temperature environ ment. And then the cool 
chamber that is where the minus 18 degree or minus 23 degree ce lsius temperature is 
maintained and the commodity is preserved stored in that.  
(Refer Slide Time: 18:17) 
 
The packaging is very important aspect of the packaging method,  packaging of fresh cut 
produces. Because as I told you in the earlier lecture also we discussed that you are removing 
the natural protective covering to the fruits and vegetables, a t the same time you are increasing 
the surface area, more area is get ting exposed to the environme nt. So, here rate of deterioration, 
it will increase sharply.  
The rate of respiration, even, the contamination with the micro organism, contamination with 
oxidation reaction, very other bi ological reaction, physiologic al reaction. So, very important 
step is that these cut produ ces should be properly packed with proper packaging material.  
They should have appropriate prope rties particularly their barr ier properties, barrier to oxygen, 
barrier to carbon dioxide, barrier to moisture vapor, barrier t o light and they should have proper 
strength, all these things. So t hat, the properties like color,  flavor, texture and shelf life of the 
commodity can be properly maintained.  
So, modified atmosphere packagi ng, active packaging, intelligen t packaging, edible coating, in 
earlier lectures we have discussed details about and even metho dology and equipment for all 
these things. So, the same is applied here but with little more  care. Because here you are having 
more surface area and so and the material is already cut. It is  tender; the soft, so proper care 
has to be taken during this packaging.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:03) 
 
So, the modified atmosphere packaging that is high oxygen modif ied atmosphere packaging or 
control atmosphere modified atm osphere packaging, intelligent m odified atmosphere 
packaging may be done. The main thing is that around the produc e, we control the environment 
like O 2 and CO 2, so that, the deteriorativ e reactions a re stopped.  
(Refer Slide Time: 20:35) 
 
In modified atmosphere packaging, the various produces like for  sliced apple, the temperature 
may be 0 to 5°C and O 2 less than 1 percent and CO 2 is a accordingly adjusted so this is 
recommended for the better prope r shelf life and better quality .  
In the sliced kiwi food, 0 to 5°C  temperature, 2 to 4 percent O 2 and 5 to 10 percent CO 2 are 
maintained. So, in the most of  these fruits’ commodity, you can  see here, whether it is shredded 
tomatoes, shredded cabbage, shredded sticks or that carrots, th e  0  t o  5 ° C  t e m p e r a t u r e  i s  
important and in many cases 1 to 3 percent in exceptional cases , some cases 5 percent O 2 or in 
sliced oranges may be 14 to 21 percent O 2.  
And in other cases, mostly that 10 to 15 percent CO 2. In some cases, sliced tomato 3 percent 
CO 2. In the sliced peach, 5 to 12 percent CO 2. So, this oxygen, carbon dioxide level and 
temperature should be maintained. The packaging material should  be appropriate enough and 
system equipment, so that the d esired quality is obtained. And here you can see, the effect of 
modified atmosphere packaging on the appearance of fresh cut me lons. There is no modified 
atmosphere and here in the modified atmosphere, that is 14 days  of storage at 6 to 8°C and you 
see the appearance here. Even rate of deterioration when there is no modified atmosphere, the 
rate of deterioration is high. In  the case of modified atmosphe re rate of deterioration is much 
less even after 14 days of storage.  
(Refer Slide Time: 22:37) 
 
Active packaging, again, the sam e concept. There are agents lik e antimicrobial, anti-browning 
and all those things in detail s; we have discussed earlier. 
(Refer Slide Time: 22:50) 
 
Similarly, intelligent packagi ng. This fresh produce are the ap propriate packaging technologies 
which should be used to increase their shelf life. The indicato rs are very important like 
temperature indicators, time-temperature indicators, freshness indicator, leakage indicators, pH 
indicators, etc. Because the material inside is very active and  change very fast. 
So, these various ind icators may be put on the packages packets , so that by this indicators will 
indicate where the produce is edible or not, it is safe to cons ume or not, it is good or it is spoiled. 
Because you cannot take a chance by eating this and testing thi s on yourself. So, intelligent 
packaging becomes very important. Even data carrier barcode or RF identification, chemical 
sensors, biosensors, etc can be used.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:02) 
 
Some experimental result reported by some researchers. That is how the color change in the 
fresh cut vegetables is indicated by freshness indicators. You can see different color changes 
in the labels are there. So, they can, these are digital image and then RGB analysis is there. 
That is 1 example. Similarly, various TTI level indicators or f reshness indicator, spoilage 
indicators or other color indicators, one  can design any type o f thing.  
(Refer Slide Time: 24:37) 
 
Similarly, edible coating is also important. It can be applied and then by using a dipping method 
or a spraying method or brushing method but in nutshell that a thin layer of the polymer is 
applied on the commodity i.e. either polysaccharide based coati ng, protein based coating or 
composite coating emulsion or plasticizer.  
But the coating material, it should be appropriate to properly regulate the gaseous composition 
and because it is very delicate and another thing is that becau se it is edible coating, the coating 
material which you are using, it should not interfere. It shoul d match with the color and flavor 
and texture of the eating qualit y, sensory quality of the produ ce. So, these are some of the 
challenges in the case of e dible coating applications.  
(Refer Slide Time: 25:42) 
 
So, effect of edible coating on fresh cut produces, it may affe ct the firmness and weight loss 
retention. It reduces the respira tion rate. It preserves the ph ytonutrients and discoloration 
retention or reduction of the d iscoloration. It reduces the mal ondialdehyde, electrolyte leakage 
and chilling injury.  
It controls the post-harvest decay; antimicrobial and anti-brow ning effects are there and it 
increases the shelf life. So, edible coating has been found eff ective in all these aspects. Here 
you can see that how a fresh cut ready to consume cucumber, it is uncut fruit started degradation 
following the storage, whereas the coating of the fruit is appl ied and then it is kept even further 
for storage also you can see that fresh cut after storage how i t is and the coated material how it 
improves the appearance.  
So, the bioactives, even the nano-based emulsions like carvacro l, lemon grass oil, mandarin 
essential oils, alpha tocopherol,  etc can be used for the appli cation of the coating. But in the 
coating, the type of the coating material, thickness of the mat erials and the gas exchange 
permeability, permeable properties, etc are some of the challen ges which needs to be resolved. 
(Refer Slide Time: 27:21) 
 
Effect of coating on the appear ance of fresh cut cantaloupe, wi th and without the edible coating. 
That is after 0, 9 and 18 days of storage at 4°C. At 0 day, the  first top 3 is the control sample. 
Then the bottom 3 is the chitosan coating, then other is the li nseed mucilage coating and the 
combination, bottom one is the LMCH, combination of linseed muc ilage and the chitosan 
coating. And it has been found e ffective in reducing the juice leakage and softening of the 
product and it preserves the char acteristics of the colour and order. And it is even visible you 
can see, it has been found very effective that combination trea tment, the color is almost similar 
to that of the natural fresh one.  
(Refer Slide Time: 28:23) 
 
Then antimicrobial packaging, again, it is very important. In t he edible coating, the 
antimicrobial or antioxidants can  be added, even in natural ant imicrobial film and in synthetic 
antimicrobial films.  
The various natural antimicrobial s are there. That is either fr om the animal products or from 
the fruits origin sector; they can be infused either in the pac kaging material or the edible coating 
material. So, the antimicrobial and antioxidant packaging syste m becomes very important for 
fresh cut produces. S o, it reduces the tot al microbial and coli form count, minimizes the loss of 
chlorophyll and enhance the st orage life of the produce.  
(Refer Slide Time: 29:28) 
 
So, after the packaging, obviousl y, the storage of the fresh cu t produces is very important. And 
in whole, probably in storage, in the packaging, as far as poss ible less than 4°C refrigerated 
storage, cool temperature, maintaining low temperature during t ransport and storage of fresh 
cut produce is a very critical aspect. Because by this it will able to control enzymatic browning, 
it will able to control shriveling or most of the sensory disor ders in the fresh cut produce. They 
are slowed down by low temperature storage. Storage of produce at adequate refrigeration 
temperature even are reported to limit pathogenic microbial gro wth also, that is particularly 
those, which are of c ourse, psychotropic.  
For example, L monocytogenes  growth will suppress, if the temperature is less than 4°C. In 
fact, L monocytogenes  populations in some experiment remained constant or decreased and 
packaged vegetable when it is stored at less than 4°C. 
Mesophilic pathogens like salmonella  and E coli  are unable to grow where the temperature 
control is adequate that is less than 4°C. Ensuring the tempera tures are kept at or below 4°C 
throughout the cold chain is essential for microbial safety and  it requires considerable attention 
to detail.  
A larger percentage of fresh cut produce are stored and markete d in modified atmosphere 
packaging in conjunction with chilled storage and other prevent ion protocols. Time-
temperature indicators embedded in the packaging may have a sig nificant role in ensuring the 
safe storage temperature are used.  
(Refer Slide Time: 31:47) 
 
So, with this I now will summarize this lecture that considerin g the increasing demand of 
consumers and food industry as well as environmental preservati on. The use of additive-based 
natural compound could be an alte rnative to chemical synthesize d compound in the 
preservation of fresh cut fruits and vegetables. Edible coating , modified atmosphere packaging 
or such other system are effective and they should be followed.   
And even the soft hurdle technology concept which we considered  earlier, so, this should be 
applied a combination of coating, a combination of thermal trea tment like mild heat treatment, 
blanching, adjustment of the pH and proper packaging and storag e at low temperature, this will 
help in maintaining the quality of the fresh cut fruits and veg etables as well as its marketability 
and safety.  
(Refer Slide Time: 33:02) 
 
So, these are the references in this lecture. Thank you very mu ch for your patience and hearing. 
Thank you. 
